FACTSHEET WHAT IS AIDS?
AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome)is a condition caused by a virus called HIV (Human Immuno Deficiency Virus).
This virus affects the body's defence system so that it cannot fight infection.
How is infection transmitted?
through unprotected sexual intercourse with an infected partner.
through infected blood or blood products.
from an infected mother to her baby.
It is not transmitted from:
giving blood/mosquito bites/toilet seats/kissing/from normal day-to-day contact
How does it affect you?
The medical aspects can be cancer, pneumonia, sudden blindness, dementia, dramatic weight loss or any combination of these.
Often infected people are rejected by family and friends, leaving them to face this chronic condition alone.
Did you know?
there is no vaccine or cure currently available.
10 million people worldwide are infected with HIV.
you can be infected for between 10–15 years without realising it.
7 out of 10 people infected are heterosexual.
women are twice as at risk from infection as men.
In the UK
16,000 reported infections (it is probable that there are between 40–60,000 people actually infected).
there are nearly 5,000 reported cases of AIDS, of which nearly 3,000 have already died.
1 in 500 Londoners are believed to be infected.
The Future
The World Health Organisation projects 40 million infections by the year 2000.
‘We are just at the beginning of the worldwide epidemic and the situation is still very unstable.
The major impact is yet to come.’
— Professor Jonathan Mann, former director of the WHO Global AIDS Programme and ACET's International Adviser.
Useful Contacts:
ACET — Practical home care, schools education and training — 081 840 7879
Mildmay Hospital, Hackney Road, London E2 7NA — Hospice care — 071 739 2331
Catholic AIDS Link — Spiritual, practical and financial support — P O Box 646, London E9 6QP
National AIDS Helpline — Counselling and confidential advice — 0800 567 123
Bureau of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine — Overseas development — 071 636 8638
Haemophilia Society — Serving the interests of Haemophiliacs — 071 928 2020
SCODA — HIV and drugs — 071 430 2341
Immunity — HIV and legal issues — 081 968 8909
FACTSHEET PUT THE FUN BACK IN FUNDRAISING!
Raising money for your favourite charity can be fun.
You can do it on your own or you can get together with family and friends.
There is no limit to the number of ways to raise money.
Whether the final total is £5 or £5,000, it is all very much needed.
Below I've listed some ideas which many people have already carried out.
None of them is new and they are all straightforward.
1.
CAR BOOT SALE
— Why not have a clear out?
I did and I was absolutely amazed at how much stuff I sold and the kind of things people bought.
It can be fun as well.
2.
JUMBLE SALE
— A bit like a car boot sale but for clothes and it happens indoors.
You need to involve your friends collecting jumble.
Don't plan on selling too much at more than 10p an item.
3.
SPONSORED RUN
— For the keen fun runner, why not get your next full or half marathon sponsored.
4.
HAVE A DISCO
— At your local club or church why not put on an evening for young people?
It's hard work but very rewarding.
5.
A PARACHUTE JUMP
— Not for the faint-hearted.
But why not pluck up the courage to do what you've always wanted?
It's all in a good cause.
6.
SPONSORED SLIM
7.
HOLD A COFFEE MORNING or BAKE CAKES
to sell to work colleagues.
8.
KIDDIES' SPONSORED SWIM
9.
Organise a SPONSORED WALK OR RAMBLE
for your church or youth club.
10.
SPONSORED DISCO MARATHON or FOOTBALL 5-A-SIDE.
If I can help further please do not hesitate to contact me on 081 840 7879 Peter Fabian Director of Fundraising 
FACTSHEET BECOMING AN ACET HOME CARE VOLUNTEER
About ACET's Home Care
Many people with AIDS have to spend long periods of time in hospital unless there is someone at home who can help and look after them.
ACET volunteers work as part of a team and provide help in many different ways to ensure that people don't spend time in hospital unnecessarily.
What do ACET volunteers do?
Transport clients to and from hospital
Housework
Shopping including collection of prescriptions
Daysitting and nightsitting
How much time to I need to give?
The simple answer is as much or as little as you feel able to give.
Many of our existing volunteers have families and jobs and are often very busy.
You don't have to make a firm commitment but obviously we like you to give us some idea of your availability.
This is so we can respond effectively to the needs of our clients.
Do I need any training?
Yes — but you are not expected to be a nurse.
You will be asked to complete an application form and subsequently to attend an ACET training course one evening a week for six weeks.
The subjects covered will include:
Death and Dying
Grief and Loss
Sex and Sexuality
Medical Aspects of HIV/AIDS
Race and Racism
Practical Issues
What if I find certain issues or situations difficult?
Your course leader will be available to help you.
You are also asked to keep your church leaders informed of your involvement so that they can ensure you are adequately supported.
After every client visit you are asked to call the office so that you can report how the visit went.
We also hold regular meetings of volunteers to discuss issues of concern and encourage one another.
Volunteers visiting an ACET client have immediate access to professional nursing support through our 24 hour on call facility.
I would like to be an ACET volunteer so what do I do now?
Telephone or write to Christine Catlin or Janet Sutton and ask for an application form.
ACET P O Box 1323 London W5 5TF Tel: 081 840 7879
Newsletter AIDS CARE, EDUCATION AND TRAINING Issue No. 7
Cliff is New Patron
CLIFF RICHARD and Head of Salvation Army, General Eva Burrows are the first patrons of ACET.
In the charity's Ealing offices, Cliff, with BBC newsroom South East television cameras in attendance, cut a cake to help celebrate ACET's third birthday during June.
After a short interview with the BBC, Cliff went to meet ACET client Tony Chapman at his home, together with HIV Community Nurse, Sue Lore.
A trip to an ACET AIDS education class at Abbeylands School, Addlestone in Surrey, completed Cliff's visit.
Cliff said, ‘I am pleased to support ACET in the world they are doing.
The care of people in the community, with are ill with HIV infection and AIDS, together with the education of schoolchildren to help prevent the spread of this terrible disease is becoming more and more urgent.’
‘I believe it is especially important that ACET represents the Church working in the front line to provide real and practical support.
So often Christians are criticised for not getting involved.’
Cliff with Dr Patrick Dixon, Director of ACET
Glasgow Home Care
ACET opened its Glasgow Home Care service in late June after receiving confirmation of a grant from the Greater Glasgow Health Board to fund the work.
The Ruchill Hospital Social work team and the AIDS Resource Unit were particularly helpful in identifying the need for this service.
Home care Coordinator, Margaret Gillies, currently has a team of 20 volunteers from a variety of churches providing practical help to a number of clients already referred.
Strathclyde Regional Council may provide further funding and consideration is being given to the possible employment of a part-time nurse.
Margaret Gillies says, ‘We are discovering the extent of the need for the kind of help that ACET offers from other support agencies including Scottish AIDS Monitor and Body Positive as well as hospital contacts and local counselling services.’
Chris Southwick, director of ACET (Scotland), said, ‘With the opening of this office in Glasgow, ACET's volunteer home care is now available to 95% of those infected with the HIV virus in Scotland.’
Most Churches Unprepared for Aids
‘Most churches are completely unprepared for the shock of finding an established member of the congregation is infected with HIV or dying with AIDS, even though this is increasingly common.’
ACET Director, Dr Patrick Dixon, recently told the National Symposium on Teenage Sexuality at Swanwick.
The conference was attended by 300 church youth leaders and school workers from across the UK.
Dr Dixon said, ‘With up to 20 years from infection to illness, we just have to ask how many of our congregation have been added during that time?
Three-quarters of the AIDS problem is in London and much of the rest in Scottish cities.
Churches in these areas particularly need to be informed, involved in community care and supporting Christian workers seeking to prevent new HIV infection in schools.’
The Symposium considered how the Church can communicate more effectively to young people today for the benefit of their safety and emotional health.
‘Many churches are responding.
Those involved with ACET are now helping provide home care for one in four of all those dying with AIDS in the UK and up to 4,000 school pupils a month are now receiving education on the subject.
Both programmes are the largest of their kind in the country.’
ACET is currently offering speakers to inform, motivate, train and support.
Churches wanting a speaker should contact the West London offices on 081 840 7879.
Third Annual Report Published
The third annual report for 1990/91, subtitled ‘Bringing it Home’ was published on 21 June this year.
Official figures suggest that ACET provided care at home for up to one in four of all those who died of AIDS in the UK last year.
24,000 pupils were also seen by ACET educators.
Bulletin Board
ACET will shortly be opening a new office in the east end of London to serve clients in North and East London.
Nurse Kay Hopps will have responsibility for the running of the office.
The numbers of men, women and children covered by home care with 24 hour on call has doubled in a year.
ACET South (based in Portsmouth) will move into its new accommodation during July.
Purchased by the Portsmouth and South East Hampshire Area Health Authority, the building will be home to two other AIDS charities.
The team is caring for growing numbers ill on the South Coast, including Brighton.
The 24-page full colour schools booklet ‘HIV — It's Your Choice’ is now available to members of the public at a price of 50p each.
Last year ACET educators saw 24,500 pupils in face to face presentations.
The ACET Conference in May at the Ealing YMCA was well attended by both staff and volunteers from London, the South East, Northern Ireland, Scotland, Romania and Uganda.
UK Director and organiser of the Conference, Peter Johnson, said, ‘For many, the day provided a reaffirmation of the vision for ACET and a marvellous sense of unity.
It was the first time our national and international network had gathered together in one place and made us all realise just how much the work has grown.’
Three visitors from Frankfurt, Germany, recently visited ACET's offices before returning home to begin a similar service, Christian AIDS Help (CAH).
Interest was expressed in all of the organisational aspects of home care including nursing, equipment loans and the volunteer programme.
Like ACET, CAH will give both medical and practical help to AIDS patients in the home.
Letters to the Editor
Letters would be welcome.
Any contributions may be edited.
Please write to: THE EDITOR, ACET NEWSLETTER, P.O.
BOX 1323, LONDON W5 5TF.
Be an ACET-Link for your Church
Dear Friend
As the number of people ill with AIDS increases so does the need for volunteers to care for them.
Over the last three years, our volunteers have provided much love and care to many hurt and lonely people.
The support our volunteers provide cannot be measured in purely practical terms and their continuing contribution is vital if we are to provide an ongoing service.
In recognition of their importance and the need to train more volunteers, we want to develop links with individual churches.
To do this, we would like to recruit people who are willing to be an ACET-link in their church.
An ACET-link person, possibly an existing volunteer, would keep their church informed about our work and encourage people to consider becoming volunteers, help with fundraising ideas and circulate newsletters.
An ACET-link will play a vital role as our work is growing so rapidly.
If you would like to know more about being an ACET-link, please contact Chris Catlin/Peter Glover on 081 840 7879 or write to ACET, PO Box 1323, LONDON W5 5TF.
Peter Johnson UK Director 
Tear Fund Support Ugandan Work
Anthony Kasozi's work as ACET's Director in uganda has recently received financial support form Tear Fund which has enabled him, together with ACET General Manager, Maurice Adams, to identify a number of church-based projects for the coming year.
These include: pedal cycles for a clinic allowing nurses to get out to outlying villages; health care kits to help with the care of patients in their own homes; training for different agencies; and a variety of education initiatives.
Returning from a visit to Uganda, where he met with patients in the villages and with other agencies, Maurice Adams said, ‘It is a beautiful country which is being devastated by a disease which can be stopped.’
‘The population in general is very well educated about AIDS,’ says Anthony Kasozi, ‘thanks to the commitment of the Ugandan Government who have done well in raising awareness.
The need here is to convince people that they must change their behaviour.
We are seeking to find out what local people want, because they must own the work themselves.
In this way, with a little money but much commitment, a great deal can be done.’
HIV Community Nurse, Sue Lore, takes an education class with the help of patron, Cliff Patron.
Living with AIDS by John Creedy
You can be perfectly well with HIV and at other times chronic debility makes it hard to do even the basic things.
In the early days the stigma of being HIV positive had driven away about 60% of my circle of friends.
Despite the publicity giving the facts surrounding the transmission of the disease, ignorance was such that they became afraid of normal social contact.
It soon became clear that I could no longer rely on friends for help with everyday chores like shopping and housework when I needed it.
While deciding to stay as independent as possible, I contacted ACET who I knew provided practical care at home.
I had previously spent about two years asking local social services and friends for help and not having it happen, so my flat had become pretty run down.
There was also the question of my own exhaustion.
Even a weekly visit by a local authority home help — when it was finally arranged — was not enough.
Help provided by ACET volunteers eventually go the flat ship-shape again and life became easier.
Illnesses, including chronic muscle debility, herpes, tremors and eye infections, have come and gone.
Recently I have experienced serious and potentially fatal fevers.
Basically every day is an effort, that's the reality, and there's a great tendency to want life to be as it was.
I have far fewer friends and I am partially sighted, which makes me a lot more vulnerable; but whatever happens physically, I have always said that it was what happened mentally that mattered.
Being aware of the stress and pressure that many people and their families experience when AIDS or HIV is first diagnosed, I became involved in counselling.
I have also campaigned for the Government to give AIDS greater recognition, not as a disease affecting specific sectors of the community, but as a social problem for which there must be adequate welfare provision.
Organisations like ACET need this support to enable people like myself to retain maximum control and continue to live at home as independently as we can.
I have in recent years edited a self-help journal for people with AIDS, written for the national press and researched a variety of medical material for television.
Without the help of ACET and other direct service organisations and charities, I would not have been able to continue and maintain my independence.
By working co-operatively, long-term, with the people around me, I hope to continue for some time yet.
On Air
Director, Dr Patrick Dixon, was involved in numerous radio broadcasts during June, in addition to his appearance on BBC Newsroom South East's magazine programme as part of our third birthday celebrations.
Pre-recorded broadcasts were made by BBC Radio News for Radio 4's ‘World at One’ and by Independent Radio News (IRN) for broadcast during the week of the 7th International Conference on AIDS in Florence.
Just before leaving to attend the Conference itself, Patrick fitted in a live broadcast on Radio 4's ‘Today Programme’.
During the week the BBC took the opportunity to broadcast part of another pre-recorded interview on Radio 4's ‘File on 4’, while Capital Radio broadcast a four-part feature on AIDS, again including a ‘canned’ interview with Patrick.
Two BBC World Service broadcasts at the end of the week with Patrick giving his assessment of the Conference.
Patrick's attendance at the Florence Conference was sponsored by the pharmaceutical firm, NAPP.
Changes
Congratulations to Brian Harris, former Manager of the Education Department, on his new appointment as Manager of a housing project for the Shaftesbury Society in Kilburn.
Brian was one of the very first members of the ACET team and will be greatly missed.
Denise Jones, responsible for grants and equipment loans, left at the end June to develop her own business, the Belgrave Beauty Clinic in Chiswick, West London.
Maurice Adams, formerly Deputy Director with responsibility for new developments in the UK and overseas, is now General Manager of Acet with responsibility for all ACET operations.
Rev J Powrie, 22 years Minister of Chalmers — Ardler Parish Church, Church of Scotland, has recently been appointed as member of ACET's Advisory Council.
Volunteer Needed
The need for volunteers from churches, particularly in London and Scotland in the day-time, is an ever constant one.
Volunteer Manager, Chris Catlin, says, ‘We have traditionally recruited volunteers from across the denominations including Anglican, Methodist, Baptist, Catholic and House Churches.
After spending some time, often years, with us, people move on to other things and we need to fill the gaps.’
All volunteers are trained in a programme designed to:— give a broad knowledge of HIV and AIDS — equip an individual on an emotional and practical level to enable them to give compassionate and unconditional care — equip them to give practical support
The training programme itself covers key subjects including:— death and dying — sex and sexuality — responses and reactions — medical facts — grief and loss
In London, volunteer training programmes will now take place every September and February and will require an individual's time for one evening a week over a six-week programme.
Programmes for the four London areas will take place as follows;— South West Thames — 9th September North West Thames — 25th September North East Thames — 2nd October South East Thames — Date to be fixed during September/early October All enquiries should be directed to Chris Catlin on 081 840 7879.
Romania
Maurice Adams, ACET General Manager, and Overseas Development Worker, Kate Bristow, have recently returned from Romania.
Kate has been overseeing an AIDS education course in Constanta together with a local representative, Ana Ureche.
A similar course held at the beginning of the year in Brasov, attended by sixty people including teachers, nurses and doctors, was particularly encouraging as much of the material was, in turn, passed on to other colleagues for their use.
The success of the initial pilot programme has been recognised by the Ministry of Health and the Institute of Health Education and led to Maurice, Kate and Ana meeting with Government officials and representatives from UNICEF to establish a long-term training programme in five Romanian regions, starting in November of this year.
The attitude of many Romanian health professionals was summed up recently in the words of one doctor in Constanta who said ‘Health Education is the only ‘vaccine’ we have to fight against HIV.’
Kate Bristow commented, ‘It is a real privilege for ACET to be asked to work with such people as they look for ways to develop an effective strategy.’
International Adviser
Professor Jonathan Mann, former director of the WHO Global AIDS Programme, has given his backing to ACET by joining Dr Everett Koop the former US Surgeon General, as an International Adviser.
Speaking recently at the 7th International AIDS Conference in Florence he said:
‘I am delighted to support ACET's developing international AIDS programme.
Ten years after the discovery of AIDS we are entering into a new era in the global pandemic, with growing concern about our ability to confront it successfully.
New approaches are needed, with close partnerships between local communities, non-government agencies, governments and international organisations.
I believe ACET has an important part to play in this process.’
He added, ‘We are just at the beginning of the worldwide epidemic and the situation is still very unstable.
The major impact is yet to come.
Over the next decade a global approach is going to be essential.’
Superintendent Trobridge of Ealing Police Station hands a cheque for £400 to Karen Russell, ACET Trust Manager.
The money was part of the proceeds from the sale of unclaimed property sold under the Police Property Act.
ACET NEWS AIDS CARE EDUCATION &TRAINING
ACET IN THE COMMUNITY
Issue 1
AIDS In London Changing Fast
MAJOR CHANGES in the pattern of HIV disease occurring in the capital which are not obvious from published statistics.
The biggest changes are in the length of time people ill with the disease are now surviving and in the nature of the illnesses themselves.
Between 1984 and 1986 those with AIDS died on average some ten months after diagnosis.
Between 1987 and 1989, however, the survival period has already doubled to twenty moths.
Patients diagnosed more recently are probably surviving an average of longer than two years.
Cause of death
The ‘cause of death’ figures are also changing beyond all recognition.
The classical pneumocystis pneumonia used to be the final event in the disease process in almost half (46%) of those with AIDS in 1986.
While pneumonia is still a common occurrence, current preventative measures and improved treatment have reduced the numbers dying as a result to only 3% by 1989.
This change has big implications for health planners and for those caring for people with AIDS.
With the pneumonias, the interval between early chest infection and death could be as little as 12 hours in someone outwardly fit and well.
Planning was often difficult or impossible and the need for home care was less.
The commonest cause of death is now advanced Kaposi's Sarcoma (a kind of cancer).
Slowly growing internal lesions can produce great difficulties in the lung and the gut, causing shortness of breath and other problems.
Internal Kaposi's Sarcoma can be very painful.
Surviving longer
Over a year or two, therefore, we have shifted from a population of recently diagnosed AIDS patients, often reasonably well but with lives dominated by a threat of pneumonia, to a population surviving longer and developing a range of further complex problems of a chronic debilitating nature.
As London's largest independent provider of community care for people ill with AIDS, staff at ACET have seen these changes unfold in the home.
While numbers of new AIDS cases reported officially each month have remained relatively steady, there has been a big increase in those needing expert medical and nursing advice at home with a 24-hour on call back up.
The numbers with pain are also higher.
Those at home often need opiates (morphine-like medicines) for pain, while one in five will also need a special battery-operated syringe pump, especially if they are too weak to swallow.
Specialist care
The picture then has changed and we now need to plan for increasing numbers of those with chronic illnesses needing specialist community care — not just volunteers, although volunteers continue to have a vitally important role to play.
Until the numbers of deaths each month has risen to equal or exceed the number of new diagnoses, the numbers needing care will continue to rise fast, even if the number of new cases reported in official figures is relatively constant or falling.
These factors help explain some of the reasons why the total number of ACET clients covered at any one time by our on call service in London has more than doubled from 70 in April 1990 to over 150 by March 1991; and why the nature of the services required has become so much more sophisticated.
Professionally-based community care is here to stay and is increasingly needed, backed by access to respite and long stay hospice beds and acute ward facilities.
Forward planning and good communication are the two foundation stones that must be in place to guarantee that people ill with HIV have the best choices and continue to enjoy the very best quality of life, wherever they choose to be.
‘Members of the London Home Care Team from i. to r. — Kay Hopps, Archie Ferguson, Cedria Clifton, Jackie Sears (Team Manager), Sue Lore and Janet Sutton.’
NOTICE BOARD
Three ACET staff members, Peter Fabian, Director of Resource Development, Sue Lore, a specialist HIV community nurse and Peter Glover, Press and Information Officer, featured on Radio Thamesmead, North Kent, in an hour-long chat show in April, speaking on AIDS and AIDS care in the community.
ACET's Scottish Office was also featured on ‘Songs of Praise’ on BBC1.
Care-link units, designed to provide remote signalling of distress via the telephone systems, are currently on loan with seven clients in London.
Designed originally with the needs of the elderly in mind, those ill with HIV/AIDS at home are also finding them enormously valuable.
Help can be summoned from ACET or other services merely by pressing a button on a pendant worn around the neck.
This can make all the difference to someone who feels unsafe alone at home or to partners or friends.
Referrals to ACET for Home Care in the London area have increased in the last six months by 50%.
At the present rate of referral, numbers are more than set to double during the year.
Around 85% of those cared for in the capital are gay men, with an increasing number of women and children.
Referrals of African men and women infected heterosexually abroad are also increasing.
ACET News aims to — inform Boroughs, Health Authorities, and voluntary agencies of the work of ACET in the community.
For more information about ACET's Home Care Service please call us on 081 840 7879 and ask for Jackie Sears.
UK OPERATIONS DIRECTOR APPOINTED
Peter Johnson, 38, has been appointed UK Operations Director, with responsibility for ACET's existing operations and for new developments within the UK.
The rapid growth of ACET since its inception in 1988 has made the creation of this new post a priority.
‘I was impressed by the care given to our clients in London and elsewhere,’ explained Peter, ‘and the lengths to which ACET staff go to try and meet the needs of clients.
I feel that working in partnership with the client, and with other agencies, is the most effective way of ensuring the needs of our clients are met.’
Peter studied astronomy at University College, London, and worked in accountancy for a short spell before deciding upon a career in nursing.
He spent three years at Charing Cross Hospital School of Nursing before qualifying as a Registered General Nurse in 1983.
Work on a medical ward and as a health visitor followed until in 1988 he became a Neighbourhood Nurse Manager for Wandsworth Health Authority.
‘I basically managed district nurses, health visitors, school and family planning nurses,’ he said.
Kay, an ACET nurse, visits a client to administer Petamadine to help prevent him developing pneumocystis corinii pneumonia (PCP).
CHILDREN WITH HIV
The plight of children infected with HIV was recently highlighted by Princess Diana when she presented a report by the National Children's Bureau to a London conference on the impact of AIDS on family life.
ACET already has experience in caring for children ill with the disease, particularly through its Scottish office.
In the experience of ACET staff and volunteers, practical care in the home not only benefits the HIV infected individual but the whole family, which can often mean three generations.
At least 60%of the individuals being cared for by ACET in Tayside also have children themselves.
Some of these children are infected, but those who are not are still affected by HIV.
ACET believes that specialist and volunteer home care is a vital factor in helping to keep families together and lessening the trauma involved when family members are diagnosed HIV positive.
PORTSMOUTH OFFICE
Portsmouth and South East Hampshire Area Health Authority has recently purchased a building in Portsmouth for the use of AIDS agencies covering the South East Hampshire area.
ACET Home Care, which moves into the building in July, will share the offices with two other AIDS charities, P.A.L.S.
(Portsmouth AIDS Link Support) and the Link Project.
The Health Authority has provided funding for the running of ACET's office including volunteer co-ordinator, Anne Hutchins.
Hampshire County Council has provided £20,000 to furnish the building.
P.A.L.S.
provides counselling and general family support, the Link Project deals with drug-related problems and gives general advice, while ACET provides practical home care not only to the Portsmouth area but also along the South Coast.
Living with AIDS by John Creedy
TWO AND A HALF years ago I was diagnosed as being HIV positive.
It was no particular shock when I found out; I had expected the test to be positive.
I was a very happy gay man.
There was clearly a need to adapt my lifestyle, but playing the role of victim was never among my plans.
You can be perfectly well with HIV and at other times chronic debility makes it hard to do even the basic things.
In the early days the stigma of being HIV positive had driven away about 60% of my circle of friends.
Despite the publicity giving the facts surrounding the transmission of the disease, ignorance was such that they became afraid of normal social interaction.
It soon became clear that I could no longer rely on friends for help with everyday chores like shopping and housework when I needed it.
Whilst resolving to stay at independent as possible, I contacted ACET who I knew provided practical care at home.
I had previously spent about two years asking local social services and friends for help and not having it happen, so my flat had become pretty run down.
There was also the question of my own exhaustion.
Even a weekly visit by a local authority home help when it was finally arranged was not enough.
Help provided by an ACET volunteer eventually got the flat ship-shape again and life became easier.
Illnesses, including chronic muscle debility, herpes, tremors and eye infections, have come and gone.
Recently I have experienced series and potentially fatal fevers.
Basically every day is an effort, that's the reality, and there's a great tendency to want life to be as it was.
I have far few friends and I am partially sighted, which makes me a lot more vulnerable; but whatever happens physically, I have always said that it was what happened mentally that mattered.
Being aware of the stress and pressures that many people and their families experience with AIDS or HIV is first diagnoses, I became involved in counselling.
I have also campaigned for the Government to give AIDS greater recognition, not as a disease affecting specific sectors of the community, but as a social problem for which there must be adequate welfare provision.
Organisations like ACET need this kind of support to enable people like myself to retain maximum control and continue to live at home.
I have in recent years edited a self-help journal for people with AIDS, written for the national press and researched a variety of medical material for television.
Without the help of ACET and other similar organisations I would not have been able to continue and maintain my independence.
By working co-operatively, longterm, with the people around me, I hope to continue for some time yet.
NOTICE BOARD
Maurice Adams, General Manager of ACET, has recently returned form Uganda where he has been discussing planning for future projects with ACET's African Director, Anthony Kasozi.
Next year's work has been partly funded by the charity TEAR Fund.
Following the running of an AIDS educational course for 60 people including doctors, nurses and teachers in Brasov, Romania, earlier this year, a follow-up day was held in April.
ACET's local representative, Ana Ureche, reported that she was ‘greatly encouraged’ that course participants had been lecturing to schools and other groups and had passed much of the literature obtained form the course to other colleagues for their use.
Alison Maunsell, ACET's East Midlands regional co-ordinator based in Northampton, has been invited to join H.I.V. T.E.S.P.I. (Training, Education, Support &Public Initiative), a forum run by the local health authority.
Alison will represent ACET and the interests of clients.
ACET's London Home Care team will shortly be strengthened by the arrival of a new nurse, Catherine Murphy, to help manage the increasing number of referrals.
Catherine qualified in general nursing at Dr Steeven's Hospital, Dublin.
Midwifery training at Epsom &Surrey followed and she has recently completed a course in tropical nursing at the London Hospital for Tropical Diseases.
Catherine, who is on a three-month contract with ACET, is looking forward to caring for people with HIV/AIDS.
Letters to the Editor Letters would be welcome.
Any contributions may be edited.
Please write to: THE EDITOR, ACET NEWS, P.O.
BOX 1323, LONDON, W5 5TF.
Area Profile EALING
IN JANUARY 1988 a small group of 50 would-be volunteers met in the Ealing YMCA to learn about AIDS.
This was the beginning of ACET.
Many of the first group completed a training course to provide practical help in the home for a small number of people ill with HIV/AIDS.
The first referrals came from Ealing, Acton and surrounding areas.
This was coordinated from the living room of a local doctor.
The remit of this fledgling group was to provide the highest standards of unconditional care to men, women and children ill at home with HIV/AIDS.
Within a short space of time referrals were regularly coming in.
In June 1988 ACET was officially launched as a registered charity.
Over the next six months this small group of professionals and volunteers provided practical care for 15 people living in or around the Borough of Ealing.
To date ACET has provided professional nursing care or practical help to over 400 individuals across London,excluding hardship grants and equipment loans.
In Ealing alone we have received over 30 referrals for Home Care.
It has always been ACET's policy to work with and complement statutory and other voluntary organizations.
In Ealing, social workers, H.E.A.R.S (Hounslow &Ealing AIDS Response Service) and the Ealing Home Support team have made referrals to ACET to provide for needs where a single agency cannot give all of the support required.
Likewise ACET has also involved other agencies on behalf of the client.
Both the Borough and Health Authority have supported the work of ACET in Ealing by being among the first to provide financial support.
ACET is currently working with the Health Authority to develop a service level agreement for 1991/92.
A Day in the Life of an ACET Volunteer
Monday 8.55am — I arrive at the office for what looks like a quiet day catching up on necessary office work and telephoning some of our low-dependency clients to see how they are.
There's a message on the answerphone from Tony's brother.
Tony has been unwell over the weekend.
One of the nurses rings back, discusses the situation and says she will ring the hospital and/or his GP to see what can be done.
I am asked if I can be on standby if transport is needed?
9.32am — Diary check — a general discussion of appointments and availability for the week follow with Janet, our Co-ordinator.
This includes nurses and volunteers.
At the moment it looks like my usual stint of ironing on Thursday and shopping on Friday are the main fixtures, but anything can happen before then.
10.10am — Still no decision about Tony.
We are now waiting for the specialist to phone back.
Meanwhile, another cry for help.
Westminster Hospital, say that Andrew, on of their patients, needs to be admitted but they are unable to find transport as no ambulance is available.
No other organisation can help.
We agree to help and perhaps I can combine the two visits.
11.00am — Tony has been given an appointment at the local hospital.
I will be able to take him and continue into London to pick up Andrew.
At least I'll be able to have lunch first and not be munching my sandwich in a traffic jam.
1.04pm — Tony, and his Mum, are still getting ready to arrive.
He is not at all well, very breathless, and by the time we are in the care he is gasping for air.
1.05pm — Having left Tony and his Mum at his appointment, I set off in the direction of the A4.
2.30pm — I arrive at Andrew's house.
Although he is suffering from a type of septicaemia, he is clearly having a good spell.
We make the most of this and scoot off to the hospital.
3.35pm — Arrive back at hospital no.1.
Tony is to be admitted but…wait for it…to yet another hospital!
If I can't take him he will have a two-hour wait for an ambulance.
I've heard of a pub crawl…but a hospital crawl?
4.00pm — We set off again; this time via Tony's home to collect a variety of possessions, finally arriving at hospital no.3.
4.55pm — Tony is ushered into a side ward with three doctors and I stay outside with Mum.
The only problem is, she is Ugandan and speaks very little English, has no idea how to get home and has no money for transport.
I try to explain that, unlike her home country, she will not be staying in with him.
Nobody seems to have explained this to her, but finally she understands.
Her daughters have however been contacted so I agree to keep her company until they arrive.
5.45pm — They finally turn up.
As the doctors are still with Tony, I explain the position to the daughters and hand Mum over to them.
6.30pm — Home at last!
Of course, I still need to catch up on that necessary office work, maybe tomorrow…
Cedria is a full-time volunteer and one of national network of volunteers.
Both full- and part-time work is carefully organised according to the availability and skills of each volunteer.
All volunteers are carefully selected and trained.
What is ACET?
ACET is a national and international AIDS charity with the following objectives:
To develop appropriate local responses to the global problem to HIV/AIDS
To provide professionally-based practical home care to men, women and children at home with HIV/AIDS related illnesses.
To enable people who are ill with HIV/AIDS to live and die at home, if that is their wish, and appropriate to their needs.
To reduce the number of new HIV infections by giving young people the facts about AIDS.
AIDS Care Education and Training is a company limited by guarantee.
Reg.
No. 2245302 and a registered charity No. 299293.
Registered Office 318 St Paul's Road, Duke Street, London N1 2LP.
