HIV IT'S YOUR CHOICE
Every day the virus causing AIDS is infecting more young people.
A friend can infect you without your knowing.
No cure for AIDS
Once you're infected the virus may destroy your natural defences for over 10 years without you realising.
And you an pass on the infection again without knowing.
There is no cure.
Once infected, you will — sooner or later — develop fullblown AIDS.
Friends or partners may soon be ill too.
The truth about AIDS
THE DOCTOR SAYS: ‘HIV IS THE VIRUS THAT CAUSES AIDS.’
HIV spreads between people who have sexual intercourse together, or who share needles when injecting drugs, or from mother to unborn child.
The most common way for the virus to spread is through unprotected sexual intercourse between two people, one of whom is infected.
You can be tested for infection at a special hospital clinic.
But remember you have to wait at least 12 weeks after the possible infection for the test result to be accurate.
THERE IS STILL NO CURE, NO VACCINE, NO WONDER DRUG, FOR HIV INFECTION OR AIDS.
SAFE!
YOU CAN'T CATCH HIV IN ANY OF THESE WAYS:
from a toilet
from mosquito bites
from giving blood
from a swimming pool
from kissing
from day-to-day contact
It's very safe receiving blood transfusions.
The chance of getting infected from a pint of blood is less than 1 in a million.
What is AIDS?
Risky sex or dirty needles send HIV into the blood.
The virus, HIV, enters a ‘soldier’ cell.
The soldier cell is programmed to make up 1000s of new HIV particles.
Then it bursts, dies, and releases all these viruses into the blood.
Over the next 5–15 years, 1000s more soldier cells in the body get infected.
They make millions of viruses, before they too die off.
A new germ enters the body.
Now there aren't enough ‘soldier’ cells to beat the germ, so it multiplies.
The body is seriously infected.
Hospital treatment is needed.
Some die of the infection.
Most recover gradually.
Until the next germ arrives…
Sex and AIDS
‘I've been to fifteen funerals of my friends this year.
They all died through AIDS.
Now it's my turn.’
J.L., London
Tom is a lorry-driver.
He's infected with the virus causing AIDS, but doesn't know.
(He could have been infected by 1 of at least 3 different ways.
What are they? *)
Tom has in turn infected Mary and Sam — he's bisexual.
Still not knowing he's infected, Tom marries Janet.
A year later, she's infected too.
One day Tom is rushed to hospital with an unusual type of pneumonia.
Now the doctor tell shim he has AIDS.
Tom has infected at least 6 people — thought he has never even met Jane, Mark and Alan.
Over a period of time they will all be ill.
When sex can cause disease
Rapid spread
Until recently it was reckoned that men and women on average had sex with 6 different people in their lifetime.
And those 6 partners with 36 more…
So one person could receive sexually-transmitted diseases (STDs) from up to 40,000 other people!
‘But I've only had sex with one person,’ you say.
It only needs one person to pass on an infection.
Sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)
Each year in the UK hospital that more than 500,000 new cases of STDs.
These include gonorrhoea, syphilis, herpes, genital warts, chlamydia, and now, HIV infection.
Some of these diseases are becoming more and more resistant to treatment.
For most of them there is a cure; but as yet not for HIV infection.
Sexually transmitted diseases can prevent women from conceiving children.
It's possible that a sexually-transmitted infection might cause cancer of the cervix — especially if you're under 20.
Tell-tale signs
Soreness in the groin, or a discharge from the genitals, can be a sign of some sexually transmitted diseases.
But often the person infected doesn't notice anything wrong.
What to do
If you're worried that you've recently take a risk, go to the special STD clinic at your local hospital.
They will check you, and treat you if necessary.
They're used to these diseases.
Don't hesitate to go.
Two experts discuss HIV in front of hugely-magnified projection of soldier cells.
Those coloured red are infected.
Sex: It's your choice
SAFE
Close relationships that stop short of sexual intercourse.
Staying a virgin till you meet the right person — also a virgin — and…staying faithful to that one person for the rest of your life.
Also, neither of you ever injecting drugs.
LOW RISK
Sex with a condom that contains nonoxynol spermicide.
HIGHER RISK
Sex without a condom.
(How can you be sure your partner isn't infected?)
VERY HIGH RISK
Injecting drugs with a shared needle and syringe. (20 people can get infected in a single evening this way.)
Why do people get into drugs?
‘It looks cool…’
There's a party.
Stuff is getting passed round.
It can seem hard to say ‘No’!
Particularly if you're not feeling confident.
‘I'm curious…’
People climb mountains ‘because they're there’.
They make parachute drops ‘to see what it's like’.
Why not drugs?
Because shooting your brain to bits isn't worth it!
‘I'm looking for meaning to life…’
Some people think drugs can help you find God, or discover the meaning of life.
OK — when you're in a dazed state, drugs may make you think you understand it all.
But some drugs cause bad, disturbing flashbacks.
‘I can't cope with life…’
Many people who use drugs regularly find it difficult to exist in a drug-free world.
They can become crippled psychologically and hooked physically.
Even after ‘drying out’, they may feel strongly pulled back into the drug world.
Drugs often make people feel they're coping, when they're really not coping at all.
Trading Death
A big problem
Drugs are never cheap.
The effects never last long and you always want more.
A paper round or weekend job doesn't pay enough.
Stealing, cheating and lying become the only way to pay.
It's always on your mind
You can't look your family in the eye.
Your friends begin to wonder what is wrong.
You begin to hate yourself for what you're doing.
Things are always on your mind.
Trying to feel better by using more never seems to work for long.
Drugs and AIDS
Drugs damage your body.
They can kill, and injecting drugs with a shared needle or syringe can be the fastest way to get HIV — even if you only do it once.
Why you should say ‘NO’ to drugs!
Once you've taken the drug, your next decision could be influenced by that drug.
It could ruin your entire life.
Some drugs can hook you almost instantly.
If you say YES — that could be your last free decision.
Drugs are no substitute for real living.
They can't give you a purpose or meaning in life.
No-one has the right to pressure you.
You're always free to say NO!
‘I think I'm in love…’
‘How do I know if I've met the right person?’
Most experts say that the happiest — and longest — relationships are based on close friendship and shared interests, not just strong feelings.
It take s lot more than just physical attraction to make a lasting, happy marriage.
Strong friendship takes time to build.
Many people say that sex is most fulfilling when it expresses the commitment, care, security and understanding of an exclusive friendship.
Friendship takes time.
In most happy marriages, husband and wife continue to make time to be with each other, and to understand each other .
How does AIDS affect you?
We say someone has AIDS when the virus has weakened the body so much that certain new illnesses are developing.
For example, if the ‘soldier’ cells are weakened, the chest can be infected.
It gets harder to breathe — and you may die.
Your gut can get infected, so you can't absorb the goodness in your food.
You lose weight, you feel very weak, and pass motions up to 10 times a day.
This person with the HIV infection has developed a sore mouth
Cancers may grow.
For example, there is a skin cancer called Kaposi's sarcoma.
If you have AIDS, a germ can destroy your eyesight.
You can also find it hard to remember things, because germs are multiplying in your brain.
People with AIDS are often well for long periods between times of illness.
A woman receiving urgent hospital treatment for AIDS.
How to keep healthy
Never share a needle or syringe if you're injecting drugs.
Always use a condom (unless you're absolutely sure your partner is not infected) *.
This reduces the risk of infection — it doesn't eliminate it.
Reduce the number of partners you have sex with.
Aim at having only 1 sexual partner for the rest of your life
If you would like to take to someone about matters covered in this booklet, there is a free and confidential service: National AIDS HELPLINE: Freephone 0800 567 123
Text© Patrick Dixon 1990 Design© Three's Company
First published 1990 by ACET P.O.
Box 1323 London W5 5TF ISBN 0 95 16386 0 2
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission in writing of the publisher.
Photographs by ZEFA UK Illustrations by Kate Taylor Designer P Wyart
Created by Three's Company 12 Flitcroft Street, London WC2 Produced by Angus Hudson Ltd, Mill Hill, London Typeset by Watermark, Cromer Printed in Great Britain 
The cost of this booklet has been met by World in Need.
AIDS a caring response ACET
THE CHALLENGE
The chronic nature of AIDS means that people's needs are many and varied.
For many a stay in hospital is in appropriate but they are often too weak or ill to care for themselves properly.
For some this makes hospitalization inevitable.
When someone is ill with AIDS they are often in pain.
Exhaustion is a permanent feature preventing the completion of even the most simple task.
Friends and family often reject them, leaving them free to face this chronic condition alone.
Without ACET's practical support at home they could spend long periods of time in hospital unnecessarily.
The reality of AIDS is that the person can die at any time.
The person's need to know ‘when and how’ is sometimes overwhelming.
One of the difficulties is that every person's situation is different.
The medical aspects can be dementia, sudden blindness, loss of mobility, thrush, shingles, Kaposi's sarcoma (a type of cancer), weight loss, or any combination of these.
The person's circumstances may change rapidly, from owner occupier to homelessness; from a good income to living on sickness benefit; from young and active to housebound and disabled.
ACET'S HOME CARE SERVICE
ACET provides a dedicated Home Care service using a team of doctors and nurses backed by a trained and active network of over 400 volunteers.
The service includes pain and symptom control and nursing advice.
Volunteers cook, clean, nightsit and carry out DIY and many other tasks.
Our aim is to enable people to live and to die at home if that is their wish and appropriate to their needs.
The stigma still associated with AIDS means that often those who have the disease are isolated.
ACET can't replace family and friends but can provide the practical care and support to enable people with HIV/AIDS related illnesses to stay at home.
EDUCATION
ACET through its schools education programme aims to reduce the number of new infections by giving young people the facts about AIDS.
We have already visited over 90 schools and reached 36,000 pupils.
OVERSEAS
ACET has already been drawn overseas and is working in Romania, Uganda and Tanzania, in partnership with local church-based projects and in conjunction with government programmes.
Our assistance is offered sensitively and in a culturally appropriate way.
THE FUTURE
In the UK we have offices in London, Portsmouth, Northampton, Belfast, Dundee and Edinburgh.
If we are to continue providing unconditional practical care on such a wide level then we need your support today.
It costs about £2,000 to care for someone between referral to ACET and their death.
This works out at the equivalent of just £10 per day.
All our programmes need your continued support.
Despite the fact that we don't hear so much about AIDS these days the problems are increasing.
If you would like to support the work of ACET then please complete the coupon and return it to us today.
Thank you.
AIDS a caring response 
ACET — AIDS Care Education and Training is a national and international church-based charity with offices in the UK, Romania and Uganda.
The charity was launched in June 1988 by Dr Patrick Dixon, a specialist in care for the dying and author or two books on the subject of AIDS.
Initial sponsorship was provided by World in Need, a charity which also helped launch Action Aid and Help the Aged.
ACET is committed to the unconditional care of all those who are ill with HIV/AIDS regardless of race, religion, lifestyle, sex, sexuality or any other factor.
We provide professionally based practical home care to men, women and children who are ill at home with HIV/AIDS related illness.
Since launching our UK service we have received over 1,200 requests for practical help.
This makes us the largest independent provider of practical home care to people with AIDS in the UK.
DONATION
Yes, I would like to make ACET's Home Care service and Education Programmes more widely available and enclose a donation of:
COVENANT
COVENANT
COVENANT GIVING TO ACET?
This leaflet tries to answer some of the questions you might have on giving to ACET by covenant.
Is a covenant the only method of tax-effective giving?
No.
Since 1987 it has been possible to ask your employer to deduct regular sums from your pay through the PAYROLL GIVING SCHEME up to a maximum of £600 per annum(not all employers offer their employees this facility).
From lst October 1990, there is also a new scheme called GIFT AID which allows you to give sums of £600 or more to a charity tax-effectively (with a maximum of £5 million for your total charitable donations in any one tax year).
A separate leaflet gives details of that scheme.
Is a covenant complicated?
Not really.
A Deed of Covenant is a legal document which needs to be correctly drawn up and signed.
The law relating to covenants is quite complex but basically a covenant is a legally-binding document by which you transfer some of your income to a charity for a stated period.
ACET is a charity, registered with the Charity Commission under Registration Number 299293.
As far as you are concerned, a covenant can be exceedingly simple.
There is a simple covenant form attached to this leaflet which is quite sufficient.
All you have to do is to fill in the details, including your name and address and the amount you wish to give, and sign and date the document in front of a witness.
You will also be asked to sign a Certificate of Deduction of Tax once a year confirming that you are a UK taxpayer.
This is all you need do for the tax benefit of covenant giving to work.
The value of your gift then increases by 33.3% in ACET's hands, with the blessing of the Inland Revenue.
How long does a covenant have to last?
At the time you enter a Deed of Covenant, the covenant should be capable of lasting for more than 3 years , and there should be the intention by you that it does so.
This is why the normal period for a charitable covenant is 4 years.
But it is possible to have a covenant which lasts for a longer period, provided that the period is specified in the Deed.
Do I need to go to a lawyer?
No.
It does not need a lawyer either to draw up any document or to advise you although you may wish to consult a professional adviser if a particularly large sum is involved or if there are complicated conditions surrounding the gift.
How should I make my payments?
You can pay by cash or by cheque.
If you pay by cash you will normally obtain a receipt as proof of payment.
If you use the covenant form attached to this leaflet you can make each annual payment at any time, or by any instalments, you wish as long as you make the full annual payment by the end of each 12-month period.
Since you are agreeing to make regular payments over a number of years, it is probably easier for you to pay by Banker's Order or Direct Debit Mandate when the payments will automatically be made from your bank account.
There is a Banker's Order form attached to this leaflet which you can use.
Make sure that the amount of the payment is the net sum mentioned in the Deed of Covenant or the appropriate proportion of that net sum if you wish to pay by quarterly or monthly instalments.
Also make sure that the Banker's Order terminates with the final covenant payment.
Can I increase my covenant payment?
The simple answer is No.
The amount of the annual covenant payment is specified in the Deed, and this is the sum that is payable each year.
If you wish to increase your support, you can simply write a cheque for the additional amount you wish to give.
But this is not tax-effective and ACET will not benefit from the additional 33.3% increase in value.
You can use the GIFT AID scheme if you wish to give another £600 or more.
Or you can enter into a second Deed of Covenant committing yourself to make payments under both the existing and new covenants.
As a further alternative, you can enter into a Supplemental Deed.
This has the effect of cancelling your existing covenant and in return you commit yourself to making payments under the new covenant.
This procedure is perfectly acceptable provided that your new commitments are at least as great as the remaining commitments due under the orignal covenant.
Can I extend my covenant, if I wish to continue making payments over a longer period?
Again the answer is no.
The length of the covenant will have been specified in the Deed, and it will terminate when the last specified annual payment has been made.
At that stage you can enter into a new covenant.
How much can I covenant?
Covenant payments are made out of your income and are not capital payments.
You could covenant all your taxable income if you wished — remember though that a part of your total income will not be subject to tax, because of the various tax allowances you enjoy (personal allowances, mortgage interest relief, etc.)
If you are planning to give a particularly large sum, it is always more advantageous to give out of income by covenant than to give a capital sum.
You can spread the payments over as long a period as you like.
Using the ‘Deposited Covenant’ procedure you can pay over the whole of the donation in one go, and we can give you full details of how to do this.
Alternatively, you could use the GIFT AID scheme (see separate leaflet).
What happens if I do not pay UK Income Tax?
This can cause problems, since you agree under the terms of the covenant to make payments out of income from which tax has been deducted.
If you have not paid tax, then you would not be able to sign a Certificate of Deduction of Tax and ACET would not be able to reclaim tax on the covenant.
If ACET did somehow reclaim tax on the covenant then you would be liable to pay income tax to the Inland Revenue on the amount of your covenant payment.
So if you are not a UK taxpayer you are advised not to enter into Deeds of Covenant, but to make your regular charitable payments by simple Banker's Order without any covenant.
You may in fact find that you do pay some tax in the UK.
If you have dividend or receive bank or building society interest on which tax has been paid, tax will have been deducted at source, and this will enable you to sign a Certificate of Deduction of Tax so that ACET can obtain the advantages of covenant giving.
Which spouse should enter into the covenant?
Since 6th April 1990, married couples have been taxed independently, and each spouse is responsible for paying tax on his/her own income.
If you do not pay income tax, but your spouse does, you should not enter into a Deed of Covenant on your own.
Either you should ask your spouse to enter into the covenant or you could enter into a Joint Deed of Covenant signed by both you and your spouse.
In either event your spouse should actually make the covenant payments, not you.
In the same way, if your spouse pays income tax at the higher rate and you pay tax at only the (lower) basic rate, then in order to obtain Higher Rate Tax Relief, your spouse should enter into the covenant, or into a Joint Deed of Covenant with you, and he/she should actually make the covenant payments.
This Higher Rate Tax Relief will save 20% of the cost of the covenant payments.
COVENANT FORM FOR UK TAX PAYERS
Can I backdate a covenant to cover donations I have already made?
The answer is No.
A covenant is a legally binding document to make regular donations, and such donations must be made under the terms of an existing Deed of Covenant for tax to be reclaimable.
Thus, the first payment should be on or after the date on which the Deed of Covenant is signed.
You cannot simply draw up a covenant (or a Deposited Covenant Agreement) to cover a donation you have already made in the hope that ACET can obtain tax advantage on the sum given.
However, it can be possible for the documents to be signed after you have sent a payment by cheque provided that you arrange for us to hold the cheque and not pay it into the bank until we have received the signed Deed of Covenant.
What happens if I have difficulty in continuing to make payments?
If this unlikely situation arises, you should discuss the problem with us.
Although ACET, like any charity, does not have the power to release you from the agreement it is likely to be sympathetic.
For instance we can suggest ways of rescheduling the payments over a longer period.
Whatever happens, any tax relief obtained on donations you have already made will not be lost.
It is possible to include in the wording of the Deed that the covenant will cease if certain conditions occur — for example, if you become unemployed or your income falls below a certain level.
But, unless you are considering a particularly large donation, it is unlikely that you would need to include any complicated form of wording.
The Inland Revenue will not accept ‘escape’ conditions which would effectively enable you to terminate the covenant of your own volition.
GIFT AID
GIFT AID
GIVING TO ACET BY GIFT AID
This leaflet tries to answer some of the questions you might have on giving to ACET through the Gift Aid scheme.
1.
What is Gift Aid?
Gift Aid is a scheme which gives tax relief for ‘one-off’ contributions to charity and it came into force on 1st October 1990.
Until then an individual could obtain income tax relief for a gift to charity only if the gift was made under a Deed of Covenant.
2.
How does Gift Aid work?
The mechanism of Gift Aid is very simple.
Provided the gift is at least £600 it will be regarded as having been paid net of basic rate tax.
The charity is able to recover the basic rate tax ‘deducted’ and the donor can, if appropriate, obtain higher rate tax relief on his payment.
Say, for example, you pay £750 to ACET under Gift Aid.
The net payment is equivalent to a gross sum of £1,000.
ACET an claim repayment of £250 so it received the full £1,000.
If you pay tax at the higher rate you will personally obtain further relief of 15% on the gross figure, so making the net cost of the payment to you £600.
(The tax rates cited are those in force in 1990/91).
The key to the working of Gift Aid is a certificate which must be signed by the donor.
Without that certificate, the charity cannot obtain the repayment of the basic rate tax and the donor cannot get higher rate relief.
The Inland Revenue form R190(SD) contains the certificate and the form requires the donor to state that he satisfies all the conditions relating to Gift Aid (as to which, see 4 below), including the fact that he has paid, or will pay, tax equal to the basic rate on the gross amount of the gift.
In the above example the gross amount of the gift was £1,000, so the donor would have to certify that he would be paying tax of at least £250.
This last point must not be overlooked and may prevent large capital sums being passed under Gift Aid (but see 6. below).
You also need to bear in mind that you may have other payments under existing deeds of covenant or other payments made under Gift Aid in the same tax year, and you will need to have a taxable income at least equal to the gross amount of all these payment, as well as the Gift Aid payment being contemplated, otherwise you will have to account to the Revenue for some tax.
3.
What are the advantages of Gift Aid over a Deed of Covenant?
There are several differences:
(i)
To be effective for tax purposes a Deed of Covenant has to turn for a period capable to exceeding three years.
The intention of a Gift Aid scheme is to encourage giving without the donor being tied to a particular charity for this length of time.
(ii)
Under Gift Aid there are no formalities at the time of the gift, just a cheque or cash gift to the charity.
The certificate on form R190(SD) must be completed but this can be done at any time and amounts to little more than a claim procedure.
With a payment under covenant, The Deed of Covenant has to be filled in corrected before a payment is made.
(iii)
Since Gift Aids applies to a single gifts it can be a very useful means of making a charitable gift towards the end of the tax year when your taxable income for the year can be estimated with some degree of precision.
This applies particularly to self-employed persons.
But to gain the advantages of the Gift Aid scheme certain conditions have to be complied with.
4.
What are the conditions to Gift Aid?
(i)
Cash only.
Only payments of cash of at least £600 fall within the scope of Gift Aid.
Cash includes cheque payments, bank transfers and credit card payments.
Thus the transfer of an asset to a charity e.g. a work of art, will not qualify (although there are other ways for a charity to obtain tax relief on the gift of an asset).
Nor will it be possible to make a regular contributions below the £600 limit (though see 5. below).
(ii)
No repayment.
A payment only qualifies under Gift Aid if it is a ‘gift’.
Thus it must be made absolutely with no conditions about repayment.
(iii)
No debt cancelled.
Gift Aid may not be used by a donor as a means of writing of a debt or loan owed to him by the charity.
(iv)
No benefit.
Any benefit enjoyed by the donor or a ‘connected person’ as a consequence of making a gift under Gift Aid must not exceed the lower of £250 or 2½% of the value of the gift.
A ‘connected person’ broadly speaking means any close relative.
(v)
Not connected with acquisition of property.
A payment will not qualify under Gift Aid if it is made to enable the charity to purchase a property, or other assets, from the donor or from a ‘connected person’.
(vi)
UK resident.
The donor must be resident in the United Kingdom at the time that the gift is made.
If a nonresident wishes to make a tax effective gift out of UK source income he should use a Deed of Covenant.
(vii)
Minimum and maximum amounts.
The minimum donation which an individual can make under the Gift Aid is £600. the total donations which an individual may make under Gift Aid in any tax year must not exceed £5,000,000.
5.
What if I wish to give small amounts regularly over a period?
Payments qualify for tax relief under gift Aid only if the donation is for £600 or more.
If you wish to give small amounts regularly, e.g. monthly, you could accumulate the money in a separate account and then convert this to a gift to ACET every time the amount reaches £600.
In this way your gift to ACET will qualify for Gift Aid relief even though the monthly payments would be too small to do so.
Thus if you set aside £25 per month it would take two years to accumulate the £600 minimum for the Gift Aid scheme.
If for any reason you wanted to give each monthly payment direct to ACET, we could hold the money in an account in your name until the amount accumulated reaches the £600 threshold.
Care would be needed with the wording used in any such scheme and ACET can give you more details about this.
6.
What if I wish to give a sum of capital or a sum in excess of my annual taxable income?
If you wish to give a capital sum to ACET (e.g. from an inheritance your have received) or an amount of money that exceeds your taxable for the tax year of the gift, ACET can still get tax relief on your gift if you enter into a Deposited Covenant arrangement.
This is quite separate from Gift Aid and details can be supplied on request.
Likewise, if you wished to make a single gift to ACET of less than £600 then — assuming that you are a taxpayer — you can enable ACET to get the benefit of tax relief by the same Deposited Covenant arrangement.
DONATION
7.
What happens if I do not pay UK income tax?
This can cause problems because if you do not pay tax then you will not be able to sign the Certificate on form R190(SD) and ACET would not be able to re-claim basic rate on the payment.
If ACET did somehow reclaim tax on the payment then you would be liable to pay income tax to the Inland Revenue on the amount of your Gift Aid payment.
So if you are not a UK taxpayer you are advised not to make a payment under the Gift Aid scheme but to make a straight payment by cash or cheque.
You may in fact find that you do pay some tax in the UK If you have dividends or receive bank or building society interest on which tax has been paid, tax will have beed deducted at source, and this will enable you to sign a Certificate so that ACET can obtain the advantages of the Gift Aid scheme.
8.
Which spouse should make the Gift Aid payment?
Since 6th April 1990, married couples have been taxed independently, and each spouse is responsible for paying tax on his/her own income.
If you do not pay income tax but your spouse does, then your spouse should make the Gift Aid payment.
Similarly, if your spouse pays income tax at the higher rate and you pay tax at only the (lower) basic rate, then your spouse should make the Gift Aid payment in order to obtain the higher rate relief.
LEGACY
LEAVING A LEGACY TO ACET
Why should I make a Will?
If I don't make a Will, then the distribution of what you possess when you die may not be as you would wish.
Many people wrongly assume that all they have automatically goes to their loved ones.
This isn't necessarily so and by neglecting to make a valid, legal Will families put at risk the security and future of their nearest and dearest.
Also, by making a proper Will you could well save your dependants from paying an unnecessary amount of inheritance tax (death duties).
Moreover, death is a time of great stress to those you love most.
Not to have made a Will can only add to that stress.
How do I make a Will?
There is nothing complicated about it.
A Will is simply a clear statement about how your money and possessions are to be divided when you die.
But do not make one without the advice of a solicitor.
He will help you draw up accurately what you need to say.
He will help you to observe the legal requirements and to name Executors to carry out your instructions, to appoint guardians if necessary and to cancel any previous Wills.
He will advise you on the inheritance tax your estate might incur and ways in which this may be reduced.
He will be able to remind you of beneficiaries you might otherwise forget.
Who will deal with my estate when I die?
It is most important to appoint at least one Executor when you make your Will.
It is in fact advisable to name more than one Executor in case one of them dies before you.
Choose people you know well and trust and with whom you can share the details of your affairs.
A solicitor or accountant can act as an Executor if you so wish.
It doesn't matter if your Executor stands to benefit from the Will.
How can I reduce the amount of inheritance tax payable on my estate?
At present, the first £128,000 of any estate is free of inheritance tax.
Anything over this amount is, basically, liable to inheritance tax at 40%.
There are exemptions for gifts to spouses and to charity.
Of course, taking account of the value of a house and its contents and personal savings and investments it is not surprising that a great many people have estates that exceed the inheritance tax threshold.
However, a gift to ACET is completely free of inheritance tax, due to the fact that ACET is a charity.
Money that is otherwise destined for the Inland Revenue can instead go to ACET.
And £400 of tax can be saved for every £1,000 that you give.
(Figures correct as at Feb. 1991).
An example
Let's say that your estate is worth £140,000, net of liabilities.
As this is over the inheritance tax threshold, it would bring a tax bill of £4,800.
By leaving £5,000 to ACET, however, the taxable value of your estate is reduced to £135,000 and this would give a tax saving of £2,000.
What form of words should I use for a legacy to ACET?
It might be helpful to take to your solicitor a form of words to cover your gift to ACET and we suggest the following: ‘To ACET of Paramount House, 71/75 Uxbridge Road, Ealing, London W5 for its general purposes (one of these alternatives):’
1.
‘…the sum of £’.
2.
‘…all the residue of my estate’.
3.
‘one share of the residue of my estate’.
‘And I declare that the receipt of the Treasurer or other proper officer of ACET shall be a sufficient discharge to my Executors’.
LONDON HOME CARE AIDS CARE EDUCATION &TRAINING 081 840 7879
WHAT IS ACET HOME CARE?
In London we have a team of 4 specialist nurses backed up by 2 doctors.
Whether you need medical or nursing advice or practical support in the home we can help.
Nursing
Our nurses have been extensively trained in symptom control, home care and HIV/AIDS related issues.
If you refer for our service you will be visited by one of the team who will discuss your needs with you.
This means that you can decide on your own care support.
Practical Support
ACET volunteers are available to help whenever you need them, as long as you make arrangements with our volunteer coordinator and give us as much notice as possible.
ACET volunteers carry out the following tasks as well as many others:
•
Housework
•
Transport
•
Collecting Prescriptions
•
Shopping
•
Nightsitting
In an emergency you can reach an ACET doctor or nurse through our 24 hour on call facility.
This means you can get professional help any time of the day or night, and at weekends.
We also have a limited number of Care-link telephones for installation in individual homes.
These enable you to call for help from anywhere in your house or flat.
This can bring security and peace of mind to those who are ill but living on their own.
Medical Equipment ACET can loan specialised medical equipment after consultation with your doctor.
For information about our home care service call Janet Sutton on 081 840 7879 
Janet Sutton
DOES ACET'S SERVICE COST ME ANYTHING?
We are given some financial support from the government but this doe snot cover all our costs and we therefore depend on gifts from trusts, companies and individuals.
If you would like to help us financially why not ask one of our Home Care team for details.
MEETING YOUR NEEDS
ACET recognises that people can have needs in many areas.
We are committed to the practical care of all those who are ill with AIDS/HIV regardless of race, religion, lifestyle, sex, sexuality or any other factor.
Our trained workers find that some of those we care for want to talk through emotional and spiritual issues.
ACET is a church-based organisation whose primary concern is practical care rather than counselling, and so these areas are only covered if they are raised by our clients.
HOW CAN I BENEFIT FROM ACET'S SERVICES
To be eligible for ACET Home Care you must be HIV positive and require assistance because of this.
Once you have decided you would like practical help from ACET just ring 081 840 7879 and ask for Home Care.
If appropriate one of our specialist nurses will then arrange to come and see you to discuss your practical needs and see how ACET can help.
CAN I REFER TO ACET EVEN IF I AM USING OTHER SERVICES?
Yes.
ACET works with partners, family, friends and other voluntary and statutory organisations to ensure that people get all the care they need in the way that they need it.
We work closely with GP's and clinics to ensure co-operation and efficiency for every situation.
IS ACET'S SERVICE CONFIDENTIAL?
Our service is completely confidential and only with your permission do we liaise with others involved in your case.
WHAT DO OTHERS SAY?
‘One of the nurses has been coming in to give me injections every day.
They've liaised with other organisations to make sure I've got somebody coming in, even if it's only to make me something to eat.
I don't know what I'd do with them.’
Tony C London W4
WHAT DO I DO NOW?
Telephone Janet Sutton during office hours if you would like to know more about us, and how we might be able to help you.
The numbers is: Wandsworth Office:
081 840 7879
071 498 7588
ACET HOME CARE TEAM
WHAT IS ACET?
We are a national charity, founded in 1988, dedicated to providing care at home for men, women and children with AIDS/HIV related illnesses.
This leaflet explains how ACET Home Care in London would help you, or someone you know.
A CHRISTIAN RESPONSE TO AIDS AIDS CARE EDUCATION AND TRAINING
Why do we need a Christian response to AIDS?
AIDS is the biggest health challenge we have had to face this century.
Already more children may be dying with AIDS than from famine and 11 million are carrying the virus HIV, 1 in 250 of all adults worldwide.
AIDS touches areas of sickness, death and personal behaviour.
It brings out prejudice and fear, and people with the disease are often isolated and rejected.
Meanwhile health campaigns have largely failed so far to change behaviour.
The church should be able to respond to these urgent needs more effectively than any other group and provide clear leadership.
The church can give care and compassion to those affected by AIDS and help prevent infection.
Volunteers Provide Transport Daysit Nightsit Housework Cook Collect Prescriptions Befriend
ACET Home Care
ACET is a Christian response to AIDS.
We are the largest independent provider of practical home care to people with HIV/AIDS in the U.K. From 7 regional offices we have provided practical care to over 1000 people in the lat 3 years and in the last 12 months we cared for at least 1 in 5 of those who died of AIDS in the U.K.
Our Home Care teams are made up of doctors and nurses backed by a network of trained and active volunteers.
Our staff and volunteers are drawn from churches of all denominations.
Without their commitment we would not be able to provide such an extensive service.
Regional Offices London Edinburgh Glasgow Dundee Portsmouth Northampton Belfast Kampala, Uganda Constanta, Romania
Schools Education
Sexual activity among teenagers is increasing fast — even in our churches.
A recent survey of church youth groups shows that 1 in 4 have had sex by the time they are eighteen years old, 1 in 10 under the age of sixteen.
Outside the church the statistics are higher still.
Prevention of infection is a major part of our response to HIV/AIDS and we are the largest independent provider of schools classes on AIDS.
Our aim is to reduce the number of new HIV infections by giving young people the facts about AIDS and by encouraging them to think about their future.
So far we have visited over 100 schools and talked to more than 50,000 pupils.
Overseas
By the turn of the century 9 out of 10 with HIV will be in developing countries — some 36 million people.
Many churches overseas are struggling to meet the AIDS challenge.
In some countries one third of all adults in towns and cities are already infected.
The effect in the future will be devastating.
ACET's work with the churches in Africa and Romania has been recognised and supported by UNICEF, the World Health Organisation and by TEAR Fund.
We run training programmes in Romania and support care and prevention programmes in Uganda and Tanzania.
What can your church do?
Your church can become a partner with ACET.
If we are to continue to meet the rapidly growing needs of those who look to us for care and prevention, we urgently need you to share the challenge with us.
This is why we are asking your church to link with ACET in a Christian response to AIDS both at home and overseas.
Churches working together
ACET can help your church with
•
Speakers for services, seminars or workshops.
•
Training church members as community volunteers.
•
Information, newsletters and advice.
ACET can help your church with
•
Making members aware of our work.
•
Appointing a member of your church as an ACET-Link representative.
•
Encouraging volunteer involvement.
•
Supporting us financially.
•
Praying regularly.
ACET Aims
•
To provide practical care and support to men, women and children with AIDS, irrespective of race, religion, lifestyle, sexual orientation or any other factor.
•
To reduce the number of new HIV infections by giving young people the facts about AIDS.
•
To help provide a local response to a global problem.
•
To equip the Church to make an effective Christian response to AIDS, respecting the historic teachings of the church and providing unconditional care.
PATRONS:The most Reverend and Right honourable the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury Dr George Carey BD Mth Phd Cliff Richard OBE General Eva Burrows OA Head of Salvation Army
on behalf of a client
‘On behalf of the family of my late brother, Robert, I wish to thank you for the compassion and care shown to him by your organization during his long and difficult illness.
Please convey our gratitude to the volunteers concerned.
Robert found peace and assurance before his death and I believe such was achieved partly by the demonstration of the love of Jesus shown by you.’
on behalf of a client
‘Thank you for all the help you gave to us and to Bob during the last few days of his illness — I only wish we'd been put in touch with ACET sooner.
I was particularly impressed by the way you managed to organise all the available services so efficiently — just at the time when we were beginning to wonder how we'd manage.’
Dr S J Bowcock Former Senior Registrar in Haematology, Hammersmith Hospital
‘I would like to thank you and your Team for all the effort and resources you have put into providing a home care service for our patients.
Your Team has been invaluable in providing psychological as well as practical support for these patients which have been grossly lacking through the conventional channels.
I hope that you might be able to continue to help our patients in this manner.’
Villiers High School
‘I would like once again to thank you for the major contribution you've made to our AIDS education programme this year.
I feel that this is reflected not just in the increased knowledge of the students but also in a change of attitude and a few greater degrees of empathy.’
Roger Stephenson Fairlight Christian Centre
‘If there is to be an effective Christian response to AIDS we need to support organisations like ACET who are in the front line giving practical care and support.’
Peter Ronayne St Lukes, West Norwood, Church of England
‘ACET is working in this field because, like Jesus, they are getting alongside those in need and helping the rest of us to understand and minister to those both infected and affected.’
David Wise Greenford Baptist Church
‘Members of my church have been working with ACET since it started 3 years ago.
I have seen for myself the value of ACET's work in the community and I would whole heartedly recommend other churches get behind the work in any way they can.’
If you would like to know more about us and about our work please telephone or write to:
Peter Glover or Peter Fabian ACET, PO Box 1323, London W5 5TF Tel: 081 840 7879
