ACET AIDS CARE EDUCATION AND TRAINING
ANNUAL REVIEW 1990/91 bringing it home
Contents
Chairman's report
1
Director's report
2–3
London Home Care
4–5
ACET Scotland
6–7
ACET education
8–9
ACET overseas
10–11
Financial report
12
ACET offices and personnel
13
CHAIRMAN'S REPORT ACET — MEETING THE CHALLENGE OF AIDS
The last 12 months have seen further dramatic growth for ACET at home and overseas.
After only three years we are now caring for one in four of those dying with AIDS in the UK.
The growing number of men, women and children with AIDS and the fact that people with the disease now survive longer, have made ever more pressing demands on our Home Care teams.
In the schools the needs for AIDS education has never been greater.
To meet the challenge we have strengthened our management team to provide the foundation for further soundly based growth.
It is now more than ever clear that every section of society needs to be involved in responding to AIDS, including the churches.
ACET is a Christian initiative supported by all denominations.
It is the churches that provide our volunteers; without their support we would not be able to provide a service at all.
The work they do is an inspiring example of what loving community care is all about.
Governmental organisations support us financially.
So do companies and trusts, and churches and individuals.
We thank them.
AIDS is here to stay.
In 1991/92 we shall need support even more.
Every donation does help.
That help makes all the difference to people sick with AIDS who want to stay at home, rather than spend time unnecessarily in hospital.
Please help!
SIR JOHN FORD KCMG MG CHAIRMAN OF TRUSTEES
ACET's mission
To give practical care to men, women and children ill at home with HIV/AIDS.
To prevent new HIV infections through a schools education programme.
DIRECTOR'S REPORT
THE GROWING PROBLEM
Travelling to several countries over the last year, has brought it home to me how disastrous are the effects, worldwide, of the virus causing AIDS.
During the past year at least 1.5 million more men, women and children have become infected with HIV.
AIDS affects over 160 countries and is now taking an increasingly heavy toll.
By the year 2000 the World Health Organisation estimates that up to 40 million people will be infected with HIV .
Despite public perceptions, across the world 7 out of 10 infections are heterosexual.
WHO press release April 1991.
In the UK the spread of infection has slowed down but the numbers ill and needing care are continuing to rise and this is a reflection of levels of infection some years ago.
HOME CARE IN THE UK
The need for a national and international AIDS charity has never been greater.
As the UK's main independent AIDS home care provider, we cared for around 25% of all those who died of AIDS last year .
In London, demand for our Home Care services doubled over the last twelve months.
We are the largest independent provider of professional home care in the capital giving pain control, nursing and medical advice, 24 hour on call, emotional support and practical volunteer help, including nightsitting.
I expect demand for this service to continue to grow over the coming year.
AIDS deaths: April 1990 — March 1991, UK total (CDSC figures — 584 April 1991.)
Our Home Care teams saw 141 AIDS related deaths last year
In Scotland rapidly growing numbers of ill men, women and children at home have stretched our Edinburgh and Dundee teams to the limit.
Complex social problems have to be tackled including homelessness, imprisonment, birth of an infected child and death of one or even both parents.
I am pleased to report further extensions of home care over the last year to meet the growing needs in Glasgow and also to cover a greater area of the South Coast and the East Midlands.
This means that around 70% of all those with AIDS in the UK live in areas served by ACET Home Care.
PREVENTION IN SCHOOLS
Every day more young people are infected with HIV — often completely unaware they have been personally at risk — and risky behaviour is on the increase again.
Effective prevention has never been more urgently needed, especially in schools.
ACET educators see up to 4,000 pupils a month in face-to-face school presentations.
This year a total of 24,000 attended compared with 14,500 in 1989/90.
Every educator has a personal story to tell from working in our home care teams.
Evaluations show these educators  have a high impact and real credibility with 13 to 18 year olds.
School teachers and parents know they need help to make AIDS real.
Our new 24 page full colour schools booklet has been widely acclaimed by teachers and pupils as the best AIDS resource they have ever seen.
In Northern Ireland our work has been warmly received by both communities and their churches.
AFRICA — WHERE DO YOU START?
With possibly one in three of adults in some African towns and cities already HIV infected, it is hard to know how to begin to help.
Whole communities are being shaken by large numbers of deaths among young adults and young children.
Half a million babies have already been born with HIV in Africa.
Ten million children with be AIDS orphans by the year 2000 .
WHO press release April 1991.
We are seeking to provide urgent help to churches and Christian organisations in their prevention campaigns and care programmes, working closely with Tear Fund, the World Health Organisation, UNICEF and governments.
As a result of preparatory work, programmes will be starting in the next few months in Uganda and Tanzania.
CHILDREN IN ROMANIA
Romania has been hit by a major tragedy with hundreds of young children HIV infected through hazardous medical or nursing treatments.
New children are being put at risk every day because many care workers still do not know how to protect people from HIV.
Over the last year we have moved therefore from care support to urgent training of Romanian people who can then become effective educators.
In 1990/91 we carried forward a substantial reserve which allowed us to meet greater than expected demands.
In recognition of the importance of our work, I am pleased to report that our Central Government grant was increased last year to £140,00 with guaranteed funding for the next three years.
In addition, local boroughs and health authorities fund us through grants and service contracts.
The balance of funding has come from trusts, companies, churches and individuals.
Despite these commitments, the last quarter was a difficult time with the recession and the changes in local government financing both having their effects.
However, we are able to enter the 1991/92 financial year with a firm financial base, a strong management team and a greater than ever determination to be an effective caring Christian response to this global epidemic wherever it is most needed.
ACET LONDON: HOME CARE SERVICE
COMMUNITY CARE FOR THOSE DYING WITH AIDS
‘You can be perfectly well with HIV but at other times it's hard to do even basic things.
In the early days the stigma of being HIV positive drove away 60% of my circle of friends.
Despite the publicity on transmission of the disease, ignorance was such that they became afraid to even visit me.
It soon became clear that I could no longer rely on friends for help with everyday chores, like shopping and housework, when I needed it.
I contacted ACET who I knew provided practical care at home.’
‘Illness, including chronic muscle debility, herpes, tremors and eye infections have come and gone.
Recently I have experienced near fatal fevers.
Every day is an effort.
That's the reality; you want life to be as it was.
But without the help of ACET and other voluntary organisations I would not have been able to maintain my independence.’
Three quarters of the nation's entire AIDS problem is to be found in London and the pattern of need is changing fast.
As London's largest independent provider of community care we have seen these changes unfold at first hand .
Between 1984 and 1986, those with AIDS died on average some ten months after diagnosis, but by 1987 to 1989, the survival period had already doubled to twenty months .
Today, each person with AIDS is surviving on average longer than two years, needing more care than ever before.
AIDS deaths: April 1990 — March 1991 totalled 430 in four Thames regions (CDSC figures April 1991) of which 15–20 (estimated) died outside M25 area.
Our London Home Care service saw 103 deaths in the same area.
British Medical Journal (Source: BMJ 1991); 302: 203–7)
The ‘cause of death figures’ are also changing beyond all recognition.
In 1986, the classical pneumocystis pneumonia used to be the final event in the disease process in almost half (46%) of AIDS related deaths.
While pneumonia continues to be a common occurrence, by 1989 improved treatment had reduced the numbers dying as a result to only 3% .
Instead, people are developing other problems are developing other problems such as cancers which give rise to the need for long-term community support.
British Medical Journal (Source: BMJ 1991); 302: 203–7)
These factors help to explain why the total number of clients covered at any one time by our London 24 hour on-call service more than doubled from 70 in April 1990 to 150 by March 1991; and why the provision of service has had to become so much more sophisticated.
For example the numbers needing opiates to control pain are rising and up to one in five will need special battery-operated syringe pumps to deliver medication in the home .
Over the next twelve months we expect a further increase in those needing our Home Care service to enable them to live and die at home.
P. Dixon, Postgraduate Medical Journal (in paper No 17/Napp July 1991).
Help to stay at home:
Nursing and medical advice
Pain and symptom control
24 hour on-call
Practical volunteer help
?
Nightsitting
Specialist equipment loan
Emotional support
The commonest cause of death now is advanced Kaposi's Sarcoma — a painful cancer.
Slowly growing lesions can produce difficulties in the lung and the gut, causing many problems including shortness of breath, and periods of continuous pain.
ACET SCOTLAND: ‘WHO WILL CARE FOR MY CHILDREN WHEN I DIE?’
It is hard to fathom the pain felt at the death of a son or daughter, husband or wife, partner or friend.
But it is a pain that many families are having to live with as the number of those dying of AIDS increases.
We already support over 70 children from the families we visit.
Over the last year ACET's centres in Dundee, Edinburgh and Glasgow have been asked to care for a growing number needing practical help to stay at home.
In addition to illness, homelessness is a key issue.
Often entire families including young children need practical home care, continuing if necessary after mum or dad has died.
CHILDREN WITH HIV
One of the saddest aspects of AIDS is the plight of children infected with HIV.
For many families in Scotland, homecare plays a big part in alleviating some of the huge problems the face.
Two out of five ACET clients in Scotland are women and therefore we anticipate an increase in the number of children needing care.
We already support over 70 children who belong to the families we visit.
Practical support in the home means that family members may not have to spend so long in hospital.
Families can stay together through an extremely difficult period — but this can only happen if organisations like ACET are sufficiently funded.
YOU CAN'T PROVIDE HOMECARE TO THE HOMELESS
In other cases people don't even have homes to lose.
Men and women discharged from hospital with nowhere to live, or released from prison back into the community, are having to sleep rough or doss down wherever they can find a willing friend.
It is hard for those wanting to make a fresh start, maintain good health and stay off drugs.
Although we are often successful in securing accommodation, it is a problem which stretches our resources to the full and we are urgently raising money to buy emergency short term accommodation for people with HIV/AIDS.
PREVENTING NEW INFECTION
In Scotland the AIDS problem is largely drug related with HIV spreading rapidly through the communal use of syringes and needles during the mid 1980s.
As a result there is now a large group who are at a similar stage of HIV infection at any one time.
ACET is in touch with around 300 infected individuals of which about 130 need support to stay at home.
Drug use is an emotive issue.
But for many people, the slide into drug use has been to escape other problems — poor living conditions, no real job prospects and broken relationships at home which all lead to feelings of hopelessness and despair.
People are still injecting and sharing dirty equipment.
ACET's response has been to provide clients with special tubes for the disposal of dirty needles and syringes or help them if they wish to cease injecting.
To help reduce infection, our community care workers also provide clean needles and syringes to those clients who are known injectors — an operation which has full medical supervision.
We also educate young people in schools about the dangers of drug use.
Over the next decade a real challenge will be the effective provision of care for children and families affected by HIV/AIDS.
Ultimately death itself may be seen as a release.
However the process of dying can be marred by guilt and rejection.
On the other hand it can bring about reconciliation between families and friends and a new appreciation of life's true values.
ACET EDUCATION: AIDS IN OUR SCHOOLS
Every day, despite massive health campaigns, thousands of young people are still taking serious risks.
Tragically, more are becoming HIV infected, and many of those we care for with AIDS today were infected as teenagers.
With many sexually active before their sixteenth birthday and with drug taking on the increase, education needs to start young.
AIDS is a sensitive area which many schools are unsure how to tackle.
But if we are to reduce the number of new infections and protect our young people, they must be given the facts about AIDS/HIV and given the opportunity to discuss the issues openly.
ACET is in a unique position to meet the need by carrying a high impact message aimed at changing high risk behaviour.
Videos and literature are not enough.
Official materials and guidelines do not always find favour with parents and governors.
Very often they are pleased to invite ACET in as a church-based agency.
Our educators present a personal message, each one having had experience of caring for those dying with AIDS at home.
Furthermore our work in Uganda and Romania adds a wider perspective.
The content of each lesson is agreed beforehand in consultation with teachers so it can be tailored to the priorities and individual needs of the school or class.
Prejudices are challenged and myths exposed — for example that only homosexual men and drug users are at risk.
Pupils are encouraged to consider how they might feel if they were carrying the virus and how they might care for people with HIV/AIDS, especially those with unfamiliar lifestyles.
Over the last year, 24,000 pupils attended ACET class presentations, as against 14,500 in 1989/90.
The aim of our schools programme is quite simple; to reduce the number of new infections and to encourage positive attitudes towards those with AIDS.
An educator only has to prevent one new HIV infection a year to save the NHS his or her entire salary in future AIDS treatment costs alone.
Our programme has been extended to parts of Scotland and Northern Ireland making it the largest of its kind in the UK.
We hope to be able to increase its reach even further in the coming year.
HIV/AIDS education is placed in the context of lifeskills or health education — the most common slot is ‘personal and social education’.
Our latest schools booklet has been enthusiastically received by many pupils and teachers.
In a follow-up survey, the great majority rated it the best AIDS resource they had seen.
This is one lesson that could save their lives.
ACET OVERSEAS: THE RACE AGAINST TIME
In Constanta, alone, there are over 550 children with AIDS.
By the year 2000, of the 40 million expected to be infected with the virus causing AIDS, 36 million will be in the developing world.
The global dimension of AIDS requires individual organisations and communities to rapidly develop their own local approaches and responses to the problem although often with limited resources.
Seven million are already HIV infected in sub-Saharan Africa, increasing by over one million a year.
Our work in the African continent centres on Uganda and is supported by Tear Fund.
We also have a community care and education programme in Tanzania.
UGANDA
In Uganda, the number of people estimated to be HIV infected is 1.3 million, representing over 1 in 8 of the entire adult population.
Indicates are that this figure is continuing to rise.
There is a great deal of individual suffering with deaths in almost every family in some areas.
ACET aims to be a practical resource to local churches and Christian organisations seeking to prevent new infection and provide basic community care.
Over the next twelve months we will be providing support to a growing number of new and existing local programmes, identified as a result of an extensive survey we have just completed.
There is an urgent need for further prevention work.
Practical help is also needed for those who are dying and for orphans left behind.
Uganda is a developing country with neither the wealth nor the health service infrastructure to cope with the problem adequately.
ROMANIA — CHANGING OLD HABITS
It is well known that many children in Romanian hospitals have been infected with HIV through reused needles, syringes and infected blood transfusions.
In Constanta alone there are over 550 children with AIDS.
Adults are also infected.
Last year ACET provided urgently needed medical supplies to the worst affected areas.
We were also invited by the Chief Inspector of Preventative Medicine in Brasov to hold and HIV/AIDS Health Education course for doctors, nurses and teachers in the Brasov district.
At the same time we appointed a Romanian, Ana Ureche, to coordinate and represent our work.
The aim of the course was primarily to train Health Educators, who in turn can train others in hospitals, schools and communities, reducing the risk of further infection.
Our first and subsequent courses have been a success and are part of a long-term commitment to AIDS prevention.
In the future we hope also to be able to assist further with practical care.
ACET is involved in the planning and implementation of a Mobile Home Care project with the Church of Ireland Missionary Society and Diocese of Mwanza, funded by WHO.
This will help prevent the spread of infection in local Tanzanian villages as well as provide basic community care.
The Romanian Government, WHO and UNICEF have taken a great interest in our education programme and are actively looking for ways to use it as a model for Health Education in Romania.
AUDITORS' REPORT TO THE MEMBERS OF AIDS CARE EDUCATION AND TRAINING
We have audited the above financial statements in accordance with Auditing Standards.
In our opinion the financial statements give a true and fair view of the company's affairs at 31 March 1991 and of its deficit and source and applications of funds for the year then ended and have been properly prepared in accordance with the Companies ACT 1985.
Neville Russell Chartered Accountants, Spencer House, Grove Hill Road, Harrow, Middlesex.
ACET UK has 40 paid staff and relies on volunteers in the office as well as in the community.
A full set of audited accounts is available on request.
ACET OFFICES AND PERSONNEL
Here are some of the people involved in providing ACET's home care and educational services.
