AMNESTY Journal of the British Section of Amnesty International No 51 June/July 1991
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL 30 YEARS OF STRUGGLE FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
CONTENTS
REGULARS
1
International News
8
Home News
18
Prisoner Letter Writing Campaign
30
Group News
32
Letters
FEATURES
10
Global Warning By Norma Johnston
12
Freedom Come
16
Don't Forget to Write
20
Team Work By Michael Crowley
22
US Death Penalty: Back Yard Blues By Piers Bannister
24
Sri Lanka: Paradise in Turmoil By Peter Nicholls
26
Morocco: Speaking in Shadows By Dan Jones
28
South Africa: Righting the Record By Brian Dooley
29
Refugees: Jumping the Hurdles By Jan Shaw
Josef Beran, one of AI's earliest releases.
Page 9
2,300 inmates of America's death row.
Page 22
The Oufkir family, released in February 1991.
Page 26
Billy Connolly and the groups break out!
Page 30
Amnesty International is a worldwide human rights movement which works impartially for the release of prisoners of conscience: men, women and children detained anywhere for their beliefs, colour, ethnic origin, sex, religion or language, provided they have neither used nor advocated the use of violence.
Amnesty International opposes torture and the death penalty in all cases without reservation and advocates fair and prompt trials for all political prisoners.
Amnesty International is independent of all governments, political factions, ideologies, economic interests and religious creeds.
It has formal relations with the United Nations (ECOSOC), UNESCO, the Council of Europe, the Organisation of American States, and the Organisation of African Unity.
Amnesty International was the recipient of the 1977 Nobel Prize for Peace.
CLASSIFIED ADS
NATURAL FRIENDS is a unique friendship/contact agency.
If you seek other sincere people who share your important concerns, there is a very good chance that we can help.
For details please send a stamped addressed envelope to:
PENUMBRA, a new fiction poetry magazine, is now on sale, price 70p from Dave Leggett 
NEWS
AFRICA
Malawi
Two prisoners formerly featured in the Letter Writing Campaign, Thoza Khonje and George Mtafu, were among at least 21 political prisoners released in Malawi between January and March this year — all of them long-term detainees held without charge or trial.
It is not yet clear how many of the almost 80 other prisoners freed at the same time were held for political reasons.
Thoza Khonje, a 43-year-old area sugar company manager, was arrested on 28 February 1989, reportedly after being overheard criticizing policy decisions by Life-President Hastings Kamazu Banda.
George Mtafu, Malawi's only neurosurgeon, was arrested the same month after refusing to apologise for challenging public criticisms of northern Malawians made by Life-President Banda.
Other northern Malawians arrested between February and May 1989 are thought to be among those set free.
Others freed included William Masiku, detained since 1980, Brown Mmpinganjira, detained since 1986, Margaret Marango Banda, detained since 1988, and Blaise Machira, also detained since 1988.
The releases mark the first improvement in the human rights situation in Malawi for several years.
however, other prominent prisoners of conscience remain behind bars.
For example, Goodluck Mhango, a veterinary surgeon arrested in September 1987, has been rejected for release by a committee established to review the cases of political detainees.
Amnesty International has welcomed the releases, but is urging the government to release all remaining prisoners of conscience immediately and unconditionally.
Swaziland
Five prisoners of conscience held in Swaziland since November 1990 under renewable 60-day administrative detention orders were released on 22 March 1991.
The five were previously imprisoned from June until October 1990 for allegedly organizing a political party — all parties are prohibited.
The releases occurred shortly before two AI representatives arrived in Swaziland for talks with the government.
Mauritania
In April AI called on the Mauritanian Government to investigate reports that up to 200 political prisoners had died or been killed in military or police custody — some executed without trial and many others as a result of torture.
The victims were among some 3,000 black Mauritanians arrested late last year.
The authorities claimed they were conspiring to overthrow the government, which is dominated by a different community, the Moors, but offered no evidence to substantiate this claim.
It took AI several months to compile details of the killings, but prisoners released in March 1991 provided information and themselves bore scars from torture.
In a few cases, prisoners are reported to have been deliberately executed without trial.
Most of the reported deaths, however, were due to torture in both military barracks and police stations.
Torture of political detainees in Mauritania has been routine since 1986, but it has never before been used on such a scale.
After the March 1991 releases, over 70 detainees were still held and were apparently due to be brought to trial in April.
However, the trial has been postponed indefinitely.
Mali
Over 150 men, women and children were killed by Mali's security forces in March, after a wave of pro-democracy demonstrations and riots.
In the wake of the killings the government led by President Moussa Traoré was overthrown.
At least 40 people were killed in Bamako on 22 March after a student demonstration was stopped by the security forces and rioting broke out.
A state of emergency was declared but at least another 40 people were killed the following day.
Some were shot dead when thousands of women, protesting against the killings, tried to march on the President's residence.
Up to 65 protesters were reported to have been burned to death when security forces set fire to a shopping centre in which they were seeking refuge.
Soldiers also shot at mourners burying the dead at two cemeteries in Bamako.
Amnesty International called on the Malian Government to halt the killings.
Following a general strike and calls for his resignation, the President was arrested on 26 March by fellow army officers.
Some 50 others associated with the former government were also detained.
The authorities promised early elections, and said the former president and others arrested would be brought to trial.
Rwanda
Amnesty International has received information about nearly 300 Ugandan nationals currently detained for political reasons in Rwanda.
They have not been charged or tried and may be imprisoned because of their nationality, in retaliation for the Ugandan authorities alleged support of the armed opposition group, the Rwandese Patriotic Front.
Relatives and friends of a man shot dead during pro-democracy demonstrations in Bamako, with the body in a hospital morgue.
AMERICAS
Guatemala
In a breakthrough case on 20 March this year, four policemen in Guatemala City were convicted of the murder of a 13-year-old street child and sentenced to between 10 and 15 years' imprisonment.
Nahamán Carmona López was attacked by the four policemen on 4 March 1990 in Guatemala City.
He died in hospital several days later of multiple injuries, including a ruptured liver, six fractured ribs, two broken fingers and severe bruising to 70 per cent of his body.
(See Amnesty Oct/Nov 1990).
The four members of the National Police were arrested in June 1990.
At their trial, the judge is believed to have added 25 per cent to each sentence specifically because the police had carried out the attack while operating in their official capacity.
In April AI learned that warrants had been issued for the arrest of two police officers and a civilian in connection with the killing of 17-year-old Anstraum Aman Villagrán Morales.
Anstraum Villagrán was shot and killed on 25 June 1990 in Guatemala City by two uniformed police officers.
The three are also believed to be implicated in other cases of serious violations against street children.
Thirty-six other lawsuits against 35 National Police officers, three Treasury Police officers, 10 civilians and three judges for a wide range of abuses against street children are reportedly pending in Guatemalan courts.
A BBC1 Everyman programme entitled ‘They Shoot Children Don't They?’ screened in January this year focussed on the plight of the children.
The producers worked closely with an AI researcher and concentrated on the work of Bruce Harris, a human rights worker in Guatemala.
Viewers wishing to help were given the address of AI at the end of the programme: over 1,500 letters were subsequently received at the AI office.
In response, AI sent out information packs on the case of Nahamán and people to write letters to the relevant authorities.
With letters still coming in, AI will be sending out information on other street children's cases in Guatemala — many of Nahamán's friends who witnessed the attack have been subjected to harassment from the police.
Brazil
A proposal for constitutional reform to allow a national plebiscite on the reintroduction of the death penalty in Brazil, for kidnappings, burglaries and rapes resulting in the victim's death, was approved by a Congressional Commission of the House of Deputies in December 1990.
AI has appealed to Brazilian parliamentarians expressing its concern over the moves to reinstate the death penalty.
The death penalty was excluded from the Brazilian Penal Code in 1890 and its abolition is enshrined in the 1988 Constitution.
El Salvador
Death squad killings, ‘disappearances’, illegal arrests and torture persist in spite of the Government and the Farabund Marti National Liberation Front signing the Agreement on Human Rights in July 1990, under the auspices of the United Nations.
At least nine people were killed between November 1990 and January 1991 by death squads linked to the Armed Forces.
Some of the bodies showed signs of torture and in many cases personal documents had been removed to prevent identification.
There have also been some reports of ‘disappearances’ following arrests by the military or police since July 1990.
Of particular concern is the pattern of abductions by armed men in plain clothes in security force style operations, most of which took place at night.
Amnesty has received repeated reports of violation of detention procedures.
Military units have frequently carried out arrests and failed promptly to hand over detainees to the police — a number have been held beyond the 72-hour-limit.
Torture is still being used to intimidate detainees.
Peru
AI has appealed to President Alberto Fujimori for a prompt investigation into a bomb attack on Dr Augusto Zúñiga opened a letter bomb which blew off his left hand and forearm.
At the time, Dr. Zúñiga was working on the case of student Ernesto Castillo Páez, who ‘disappeared’ after he was reportedly detained by police on 21 October 1990 in Lima.
The case received wide publicity when a habeas corpus petition was upheld by two lower courts.
However, the Supreme Court subsequently annulled the habeas corpus on grounds of procedural irregularites .
Dr. Zúñiga was warned that the police might seek reprisals against him, but although he informed the authorities of this, novo specific measures of protection were apparently offered to him.
ASIA
People's Republic of China
As AI launched a campaign in March 1991 against the extensive use of the death penalty in China, a nationwide drive to crack down on crime continued unabated.
AI has recorded a bout 100 death sentences each month since the beginning of 1991.
During 1990 AI recorded almost 1,000 death sentences, of which at least 750 resulted in executions.
In the official press, Chinese politicians, as well as senior members of the judiciary, have repeatedly urged that instructions to ‘punish criminals heavily and rapidly’ be strictly adhered to.
Some prisoners who would not normally have received the death sentence may have fallen victim to political interference in the judicial process.
Increased official emphasis on speedy investigation and sentencing in death penalty cases is likely to have further undermined the rights of defendants to a fair trial.
On 14 March 24-year-old Han Weijun was executed.
He had first been found guilty of setting fire to an armoured personnel carrier commandeered by students and a car during the 19898 pro-democracy demonstrations in Beijing.
His was the first reported execution in several months for an offence related to the ‘counter-revolutionary rebellion’.
A court notice reported the economic loss of the two vehicles, but did not mention any military casualties.
The death penalty is routinely used in China for serious economic crimes which involve no personal violence.
Afghanistan
Hundreds of Afghan political prisoners have reportedly been held without charge or trial for up to nine years in interrogation centres and segregated prison blocks operated by the Ministry of State Security.
In a recent report, AI called on the Afghan Government to end the torture and long-term detention without trial of political prisoners.
The detainees include individuals suspected of involvement in armed opposition or non-violent anti-government activity.
They are initially held in isolation cells for periods lasting as long as several months.
During their isolation, they are reportedly denied access to legal counsel and family visits and are at risk of systematic torture and ill-treatment.
Sri Lanka
Two AI delegates were recently invited as guest speakers to a week-long conference in Colombo on trade unions and human rights.
The delegates met several senior government officials and discussed possibilities for future access by AI to Sri Lanka.
AI was last permitted access to the country in 1982.
Among those the delegates met were the Adviser to the President on International Affairs, the Secretary to the Ministry of Defence, the Inspector General of Police, and the Commissioner General of Rehabilitation.
The government subsequently announced to the press that ‘a research visit to Sri Lanka would be considered favourably if a formal request were made’ by AI.
Taiwan
In the April/May letter writing campaign, there was an error in the appeal on behalf of Taiwanese prisoner Huang Hua.
As there is no Embassy of Taiwan in the UK, please do not copy any appeals to another embassy, as proposed on the letter writing page.
We apologise sincerely for this clerical error, and regret the confusion and inconvenience it has caused.
Indonesia
More than 130 political prisoners from Irian Jaya are currently serving lengthy prison terms for advocating the province's independence from Indonesia.
Most have been convicted since 1988 under Indonesia's sweeping Anti-Subversion Law, accused of attempting to establish an independent state of ‘West Papua’.
Amnesty International believes that their trials were unfair.
The organization has already adopted two of the prisoners as prisoners of conscience and believes that some 80 others may be POCs.
Among the possible prisoners of conscience are 37 people sentenced to up to 20 years' imprisonment for their involvement in a peaceful flag-raising ceremony in the town of Jayapura on 14 December 1988.
A woman alleged to have sewn the flag was sentenced to eight years in prison and her husband, who led the ceremony, to 20 years.
In 1990 a police officer accused of distributing copies of a patriotic song to high-school students was sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment by a military court.
Four men who allegedly planned demonstrations in December 1989 to commemorate the 1988 flag-raising, were sentenced to terms of between six and 12 years.
In addition to imprisonment, those believed to have advocated Irian Jaya's independence, whether through peaceful or violent means, continue to be at risk of torture, ill-treatment, ‘disappearance’, and extrajudicial execution by Indonesian security forces.
This pattern of human rights violations is described in a recent AI report, Indonesia: Continuing Human Rights Violations in Irian Jaya, available from the British Section office.
EUROPE
UN Commission on Human Rights
After two years of taking no action in response to reports of grave and widespread violations in Iraq, the Commission on Human Rights has appointed a Special Rapporteur to investigate the human rights situation there; another special Rapporteur has been appointed to examine violations committed by Iraqi forces in occupied Kuwait.
The Commission also took a stronger stand in respect of two other countries on its agenda: Cuba will not come under special scrutiny by a representative of the UN Secretary-General and the Expert on Equatorial Guinea, a country which receives assistance under the UN Advisory Services Program, has been requested to study the human rights situation there.
Another significant development to emerge from the latest session of the Commission, held in March 1991, was its decision to establish a Working Group on arbitrary detention.
This will be the first UN mechanism with a clear mandate to examine cases of detained prisoners of conscience anywhere in the world.
It will fill an important gap in the framework of protection established by the Commission's existing ‘theme mechanisms’ on ‘disappearances’, torture and summary or arbitrary executions.
However, it was disappointing that a new international instrument on ‘disappearances’ was held over for further study.
Another new instrument that the Commission will be considering next year is a revised draft of the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention against Torture, which would set up an international system of visits to places of detention, aimed at preventing torture and ill-treatment.
The Commission kept under review the human rights situation in Afghanistan, Romania, El Salvador and Iran but sent a clear signal that it may terminate special scrutiny of the latter two countries at its next session.
It decided to transfer Haiti to the Advisory Services Program and also to keep Guatemala under this program for a further year despite AI's appeals for stronger measures.
Turkey
A new ‘Anti-Terror Law’, which combines a number of new provisions for the investigation and trial of persons suspected of acts of political violence or association with violent political opposition groups, was approved by President Ozal on 17 April.
This law includes amendments to the penal code and the conditional release of approximately 38,000 prisoners.
Most of those released are non-political prisoners convicted of criminal offences, but a number of prisoners of conscience will also be released.
Many political prisoners who had been sentenced to death or life imprisonment after unfair trials following the 1980 coup will continue to serve sentences of up to 20 years.
Amnesty warmly welcomed the release of prisoners of conscience and the repeal of certain articles, but has urged that the legislation be extended to include reform or repeal of further articles of the Turkish Penal Code, under which POCs may be held.
The new law may in fact increase the already serious risk of torture facing political detainees.
Suspected torturers are permitted under the new law to continue to interrogate detainees while charges against them are outstanding.
Police officers who have taken statements from detainees will also be exempted from being questioned in court unless they agree to do so, making it difficult for detainees to challenge the validity of any confessions made under torture.
There has been a marked increase in reports of deaths as a result of torture in Turkish police stations.
Nine such cases have been reported to AI since 25 November 1990.
USSR
Statistics on the death penalty in the USSR have been made public for the first time since 1934.
Figures on its use from 1985 to 1989 were announced by the Minister of Justice at a press conference on 16 January 1991.
These show a progressive decrease in death sentences from 770 in 1985, of which 20 were commuted, to 271 in 1988 with 72 commutations.
The 1989 figures indicate a reversal of this trend with 276 death setences passed and a sharp reduction of commutations to 23.
The 1990 figures, provided more recently by the Ministry of Justice, show a dramatic increase to 447 death sentences, mostly for murder under aggravating circumstances.
The same source reports that 190 executions took place last year.
AI welcomes the publication of statistics on the death penalty, as well as current proposals to limit its scope.
However, it remains concerned that there has been no stay on sentences or executions pending the review of existing legislation.
15 villagers including three minors were killed and 19 others, including several children, wounded when soldiers opened fire on a crowd of unarmed people on 2/12/90.
Well-known broadcaster and journalist Richard de Zoysa was abducted and murdered in February 1990.
See pp 24–25
Free at last: after 16 years of wrongful imprisonment the ‘Birmingham Six’ enjoy their first taste of freedom.
Pictured above with UK parliamentarian Chris Mullin (centre) who campaigned for their release, from left to right are John Walker, Patrick Hill, Hugh Callaghan, Richard McIlkenny, Gerard Hunter and William Power.
One of many arrests that occurred on Labour Day when police dispersed a peaceful rally in Istanbul, May 1988.
CLASSIFIED ADS AI member and stamp collector offers free stamp packets (limited number) to AI groups for sale at their book sales, stalls, etc.
SAE appreciated.
MIDDLE EAST
Iraq
In April AI appealed to the Iraqi Government in the strongest possible terms to put an immediate end to the mass deliberate killing of unarmed civilians and the summary execution of government opponents and their suspected supporters.
The appeal followed numerous reports that Iraqi Government forces were committing these and other human rights violations following the recapture of cities and town in the northern Kurdish and southern Shi'a areas of the country.
Many Kurds and Arab Shi'a Muslims were reportedly deliberately killed by Iraqi forces as they fled to Iran, Turkey and the then US-occupied region of southern Iraq.
In its appeal AI also expressed dismay at reports that Iraqi Kurds who returned to Arbil in northern Iraq following a government announcement of an amnesty for Kurds on 5 April were arbitrarily arrested, summarily executed or subjected to forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
AI also sent urgent appeals to the governments of the United States, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia in April, urging them to ensure that Iraqi refugees then under the control of United States-led coalition forces were guaranteed effective and durable protection against human rights violations by Iraqi Government forces.
AI stated that it strongly feared that the refugee population would be at risk of certain torture, ‘disappearance’ or execution if returned to Iraqi Government control.
Kuwait
A public appeal to the Emir of Kuwait to intervene personally to end the wave of arbitrary arrests, torture and killings in the country since the withdrawal of Iraqi forces, was issued on 19 April by Amnesty International.
Reporting back after a two-week visit to Kuwait, an AI fact-finding team said scores of victims had been killed and hundreds more had been arbitrarily arrested, many brutally tortured by Kuwaiti armed forces and members of ‘resistance’ groups since 26 February.
On the highly publicized issue in AI's December report of the baby deaths, Amnesty said that although its team was shown alleged mass graves of babies, it was not established how they had died and the team found no reliable evidence that Iraqi forces had caused the deaths of babies by removing them or ordering their removal from incubators.
The plight of some 600 detainees acknowledged by the authorities was also giving cause for concern.
They had been held in the Military Prison outside Kuwait City, some for over a month, reportedly in deplorable conditions.
Medical care was virtually non-existent, food and water often withheld, and torture rife.
The authorities were not granting full access to detainees by independent bodies, such as the International committee of the Red Cross, and relatives were not being informed of detainees' whereabouts.
As a result, the fate of many victims remained unknown.
Tunisia
Dozens of people are reported to have been tortured while held incommunicado in prolonged garde à vue detention by the Tunisian police since January 1991.
Garde à vue detention allows the police to detain suspects for interrogation for a period of up to 10 days.
Recent information from former detainees, lawyers and human rights activists indicates that suspected political opponents of the government, including boys under 18, have been detained in garde à vue well beyond the maximum 10-day period and without obtaining further authorization after four days as required by Tunisian law.
AI is concerned that the Tunisian Government, by its failure to investigate allegations of torture brought to its notice, appears to be condoning the use of torture.
AI welcomed the formation by the Tunisian Government of an official human rights council on 9 April 1991, although the organization remained concerned at continuing reports of torture and ill-treatment of political detainees in garde à vue detention.
Bahrain
On 9 May AI published Bahrain: Violations of human rights .
The report describes how in recent years hundreds of political activists or suspected activists, including prisoners of conscience, have been subjected to arbitrary arrest and torture and sentenced after unfair trials.
Many are held for months or years in administrative or pretrial detention, usually incommunicado.
It is during this time that torture most commonly occurs.
Some detainees have been held for as long as seven years without charge or trial.
AI has repeatedly called on the Bahraini Government to ratify and implement international human rights treaties as a matter of urgency.
Saudi Arabia
Salih al-'Azzaz, a prominent writer and journalist, was released uncharged on 4 March.
In November 1990 he had been arrested in connection with a protest by women in Riyadh against a ban on women drivers.
He was held in solitary confinement in the General Intelligence headquarters in Riyadh and was reportedly tortured.
He had previously been arrested in May 1982, when he was editor-in-chief of al-Yawm newspaper, and was held without charge or trial until he was released following an amnesty at the end of 1982.
A Kurdish mother and her sick child at Isikveren refugee camp on the Iraq/Turkish border, April 1991.
HOMENEWS
30 years ago on Trinity Sunday, 28 May 1961, the British Lawyer, Peter Beneson (right) started Amnesty International.
This year on Trinity Sunday, a candle-lighting ceremony with music, poetry, banners and balloons was held on the steps of St Martin's-in-the-fields church to mark AI's anniversary.
Special Amnesty forget-me-not badges were worn to commemorate all the prisoners on whose behalf Amnest was founded.
Joseph Beran (right), former Archbishop of Prague, was one of the eight prisoners featured in the original Observer article.
One of Amnesty's earliest releases, in 1964 he came to London to light a candle for Amnesty.
Keep the candle burning in the '90s
Keep the 30th Anniversary log flying around the country for Amnesty's anniversary.
Arnold Rose from Brighton is raising money through being sponsored for a 24-hour pot-throwing marathon.
The Lincolnshire County Council recreational services are organising a concert for Amnesty at Lincoln Castle in aid of Amnesty on 17 August.
The Ealing Group held a ‘Recorder Concert’ in a Sloane Square church, raising £265.00.
The Flesh It Out Theatre Company from East London are doing a show at the Edinburgh Festival on behalf of Amnesty.
MA in human rights
A new MA degree in human rights is being offered by the University of Essex.
Unique in the UK, and probably in the world, the MA is a one-year course beginning in October 1991.
It is intended both for those who want to do practical or legal work for human rights organizations, and for those who would find it an outstanding preparation for research degrees in Law, Philosophy and Politics.
Best Cards in the Biz
Amnesty has been given Greetings Magazine's ‘Best Charity Card of the Year’ award.
This award was presented to Amnesty International following the decision of an independent panel of judges drawn from members of the public nationwide and chaired by a representative from the greetings card industry.
The design itself was commissioned by Trading Officer Craig Methven and painted by Sheila Moxley, who has designed Amnesty's 1992 Human Rights Calendar.
Free at last!
BBC2 TV ‘Prisoners of conscience series Nov/Dec 1990 — update
As in previous years the response to the ‘prisoners of Conscience’ programmes shown on the BBC in November/December 1990 has been tremendous and effective, and we are still answering 10 enquiries a week about prisoners.
In addition we are still receiving enquiries about prisoners featured in the first two series in 1988 and 1989, and we have recently received a copy of a letter from Alattin Sahin, the Turkish prisoner of conscience in the 1988, which someone has received on his release.
The programmes, which this year featured 19 prisoners of conscience or ‘disappearances’, received 15,000 phone calls and letters.
All those who have written to the prisoners will be pleased to know that Henrick Gjoka from Albania, Reverend Lawford Imunde from Kenya and Ernesto Diaz Rodriguez from Cuba have been released.
Hong Song-dam from South Korea has had his prison sentence reduced while Khalid el Kid from Sudan has been moved to Kober Prison, Khartoum, Sudan.
If you have had your letters to Dr Nguyen Dan Que from Vietnam returned, could you please send them to Dr Que's brother, Dr Nguyen Quoc-Quan,.
From the letters we have been receiving this year it appears that the Jehovah's Witness from Greece Andreas Christodoulou has been passing some of the cards on to his colleagues who are also imprisoned Jehovah's witnesses, who want to correspond with people in the U.K. Fortunately we have someone in the office who has been able to translate their letters.
Please continue to write until all the prisoners of conscience in the series are free, or until there have been satisfactory investigations into those who have ‘disappeared’.
Artists for Rochdale
Do you support human rights in Rochdale?
You can — in a positive way — by helping the Rochdale Group make their Auction of Artists' Work a huge success.
The group is inviting artists to contribute paintings, illustrations, sketches — artwork of all kinds — to be auctioned off by the Mayor of Rochdale on Saturday 19 October at 7 pm at the Rochdale Art Gallery.
All contributions should be framed or mounted on board and deposited with Jill Morgan at the Rochdale Art Gallery from Saturday 12 October 1991.
Collection of artwork can be arranged by ringing Trevor Hoyle, on 0706–843677.
Any surplus music?
If AI members have any surplus sheet music, would they consider letting George Jackson have it for his stall?
The music can be of any sort, of any age, and no matter how tattered or torn.
Parcels should be addressed to .
The Anniversary Raffle
When is an item worth over £60,000???…when it's a prize in an Amnesty raffle.
Thinking ahead to our Christmas raffle and prizes.
We have had very generous responses to previous requests to our membership.
Can anyone can offer a holiday cottage?
Persuade their firm to donate a hi-fi system!, a voucher!, bicycle!, yacht! etc. etc. they will receive a mention on the ticket and publicity material and obviously a warm altruistic glow.
Please contact Noreen at the British Section with any possible offer.
Solo show in Tewkesbury
Eric Taylor's sixth annual Exhibition of Oil Paintings in aid of Amnesty and the Medical Foundation is being held in Tewkesbury Abbey, Gloucestershire, from 19–26 June inclusive.
So far Eric Taylor has raised a magnificent £2,900 by donations and profits.
Though supported by the Cheltenham Group, this is an entirely solo effort, and all types of subject are covered.
Please support generously!
Ex-Services Amnesty Group starts!
At a meeting in February, the Ex-Services Group of the British Section of AI was officially launched.
Its members will help Amnesty with specialist knowledge of military experience and expertise (in the same way that the Lawyers' Group and the Medical Groups function in their specialist fields).
The Group will work on behalf of service and ex-service personnel whose human rights are being abused and will be involved in the development of human rights awareness in armed services training.
it has an ex-RAF man as its Secretary and a Major and a Wing Commander among its participants.
If you have served in the armed forces and would be willing to assist in the work of this group, or if you can assist with contacts in ex-service organisations like the British Star Association, please write to:.
GLOBAL WARNING
No matter where in the world human rights violations occur — from India to Iran, Chile to Czechoslovakia — Amnesty International is there to warn the world.
In this, its 300th anniversary year, its role as human rights watchdog is as vital now as ever it was.
By Norma Johnston
Santiago, Chile: On a warm autumn evening in 1990 international rock star Sting dances on stage with a group of Chilean mothers and grandmothers of the ‘disappeared’.
The event, organized by the Chilean Section of Amnesty International, is entitled ‘An Embrace of Hope’.
Moscow, USSR: At the same time, 12,000 miles away, a delegation from Amnesty's International Secretariat is making plans for a fledgling Moscow Group to participate in the Women in the Front Line campaign.
To outsiders, the two events may seem little more than an international organization at work, but for Amnesty members these events are charged with significance.
The Cold War was at its height when Peter Benenson, the British lawyer, founded Amnesty, and three decades later it is hard to believe that the Moscow AI Group finally has permission to become part of Soviet life.
Similarly, the idea that a human rights concert should be held in the very stadium in Santiago where Allende's officers rounded up thousands of Chileans in 1973, prior to committing gross violations, stretches the powers of credulity.
But incredulous, or not, the events happened (millions of television viewers worldwide watched the Chilean concert) and as such they typify the massive changes that Amnesty has undergone in its 30-year history.
Sadly, one thing has not changed in 30 years: certain governments of the world still falsely imprison, torture and execute their citizens, regardless of internationally agreed standards that expressly forbid such abuses.
Around the world today, more than 100 countries still retain the death penalty, and two out of every three human beings live under governments that use torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment against them.
For this reason the campaigning elements of the organization — and that includes many of the 80,000 British members who undertake to be active on Amnesty's behalf — have increased and refined their methods over the years.
In practical terms this means that  although letter-writing to governments regarding prisoners continues to be the cornerstone of the campaign work other methods have been introduced to enhance the effectiveness of the hundreds of thousands of letters that Amnesty members write each year.
The Regional Action Network illustrates how campaigners have refined their methods.
Members working on behalf of a prisoner learn a lot about that country — its culture and political allegiance for example— knowledge that is no longer useful when the case is closed.
Such knowledge could, however, continue to be useful when used in a regional context, which is what the RANs do, enabling members to react to a wider range of human rights violations in any given region.
At group level, the days have gone when three prisoners per group (one from the West, the East and a non-aligned country) were obligatory.
Nowadays, impartiality need not be expressed quite so crudely, and a look at any group's case load will show that a balance is always maintained.
In the 1961 Observer article that launched Amnesty, Benenson listed the aims of the organization.
They included: ‘to enlarge the Right of Asylum and help political refugees to find work.’
Adherence to this stated principle has never faltered, but other areas of concern took precedence and it was not until the late 1970s that this area of work was developed.
In 1985 work on behalf of refugees took its place in the statute of Amnesty.
The British Section refugee office has played a leading role in this area of work, processing some 4,000 cases since 1980.
The public perception of Amnesty has also changed and this has not happened by accident.
For a long time deemed a white, Western organization, the setting up of section sin countries like Tunisia, Algeria and South Korea, are ample illustration of Amnesty's worldwide stature.
As a multi-lingual movement the human rights message can be conveyed via dozens of reports, books and audio-visual materials to audiences from Japan to Nigeria.
Amnesty is global in name and nature.
The very life blood of Amnesty is its research teams — there are currently 40 based at the International Secretariat in London.
Things have changed for them too, says Anne Burley, Head of Europe Region at the IS.
‘I joined Amnesty in 1968 when there weren't any teams or even research regions.
In those days there was a small core of paid research staff who were responsible for a large number of countries — if you did the Soviet Union, you were also responsible for Eastern Europe and half of Western Europe as well!’
Volunteers worked on research alongside their paid counterparts and Burley recalls the hundreds of Spanish and Portuguese POCs on whose behalf Amnesty worked at that time.
Of course, none of the work carried out by Amnesty could continue without money and it is in this respect that sections, particularly the larger sections like the British, have a vital role to play.
The annual budget for 1990 was £11 million, which represents only a third of the money raised worldwide on Amnesty's behalf.
It excludes the contributions made by individuals who finance the sending of telexes and telegrams as well as the funds required to support national sections.
Professional fundraisers utilize the powerful medium of advertising in their national press, an advertisement issued by the British Section in autumn 1990 about Iraq's treatment of Kurds and its human rights record over a decade, was the most successful advertisement ever run by the Section.
It recruited 4,000 new members and raised £70,000.
Add to this the monies raised by new members the length and breadth of the British Isles who contributed to the Section's annual turnover of £2.25 million with their cultural events, sponsored walks and street collections.
From a handful of POCs in the early Sixties, the number of cases taken up by Amnesty now stands at 42,000 of which 38,000 are now closed.
Full-scale Amnesty sections are now operational in 44 countries, with active groups in another 16, and a total membership of more than one million spread across 150 countries.
The list of laws that have been amended, the treaties that have been ratified, and prisoners' conditions that have been improved is a long one.
However, it is not long enough.
In the years since 1961, Eastern European dictators have come and gone, moves afoot in South Africa hold hope for the future, and countries abolishing the death penalty are on the increase.
Globally however, much work lies ahead.
In Benenson's words: ‘The gradual change over the last 30 years in the public perception of the value of human life is a measure of Amnesty's influence.
But we will not have finished until cruelty, be it killing or torture, is seen as obscene and impermissible.’
Above:(top) A historic breakthrough — Amnesty arrives at the Moscow Book Fair in September 1989;(bottom) Kalkini AI Group, Bangladesh, April 1988.
Opposite: A concert crowd in New Delhi, during the Human Rights Now!
Campaign in 1988.
FREEDOM COME
AN UPDATE ON SOME OF THE 92 PRISONERS OF CONSCIENCE FEATURED IN THE LETTER WRITING CAMPAIGN IN 1989 AND 1990 — 39 ARE NOW FREE!
In 1962 AI's first ever journal had good news on its front page.
A prisoner of conscience had been freed in Spain.
A Christmas card sent to him by an AI member in Switzerland had been returned marked ‘Consigned is free’.
Since then, every issue of the journal has published appeals for the release of other prisoners of conscience.
Many of these prisoners are now free.
Some have thanked AI, but we take no credit for anyone's freedom.
We know from experience that many factors — some of which may never be apparent to outside observers — determine whether a prisoner of conscience is released.
Today the terrible injustice done to those prisoners reaches a mass audience.
Amnesty sections all over the world include the Prisoner Letter Writing Campaign cases in the magazines and newssheets they publish in many other languages, from Faroe to Banlga.
In many countries, regional and national newspapers report on these prisoner cases — the Slovenian Catholic weekly Druzina , the French national daily Le Monde , and the Pakistani daily The Muslim , to name but a few.
Year in, year out, the Prisoner Letter Writing Campaign provides a unique window into the harsh and desperate world of the prisoner of conscience.
Hundreds of thousands of people have appealed for their freedom.
And the prisoners themselves know that they are not alone, that the world has not forgotten them.
The 1990s began with a dramatic upturn of the fortunes of thousands of prisoners of conscience across eastern and central Europe.
In Czechoslovakia former prisoner of conscience Vaclav Havel became President of his country.
In many of these countries the new respect for human rights was embodied in the repeal or revision of laws used to imprison prisoners of conscience.
But there are still prisoners of conscience in Europe, and in every other region of the world.
39 of the prisoners featured in the letter writing campaign have been released; about 50 remain in prison.
None of these people should ever have been prisoners of conscience.
Our task today is to increase the international pressure on behalf of the thousands of prisoners of conscience all over the world, to make tomorrow the day their freedom is restored.
Africa
Francisco Bonifacio Mba Nguema remains in prison in Equatorial Guinea.
He is serving a 20-year sentence imposed in 1988 by a military court which found him guilty of attempting to overthrow the government.
Hew was convicted on the basis of confessions he had made under torture and because he had read The Dogs of War , a novel about a coup in an imaginary country widely thought to be based on Equatorial Guinea.
In Kenya Harris Okong'o Arara continues to serve a five-year sentence imposed in 1988 under a law which makes it a criminal offence simply to possess literature critical of the government.
Mulugetta Mosissa, a former civil servant, remains in detention without trial in Ethiopia.
He was arrested in 1980, with hundreds of other members of the Oromo ethnic group who were suspected of links with an Oromo guerilla group.
Although many of these detainees were released in 1989, including Mulugetta's wife and son, he is one of 50 still held.
The Americas
Three Colombian prisoners featured in the Letter Writing Campaign remain ‘disappeared’.
Dr Alirio de Jesús Pedraza Becerra, a 40-year old lawyer and human rights worker, was abducted by eight heavily armed men on the night of 4 July 1990 in Bogotá.
A judicial inquiry has been initiated into his case but to AI's knowledge, no progress has been made.
The police deny its agents were present.
Tarcisio Medina Charry, a 21-year-old student, ‘disappeared’ after being arrested in 1988.
A judicial investigation into his case ordered the arrest of a member of the national police.
However the case was passed to the military courts who revoked the arrest order.
The investigation continues.
Isidro Caballero, a 33-year-old teacher, ‘disappeared’ after being detained on 7 February 1989 by an army patrol.
A judicial investigation implicated three members of the Caldas Battalion of the army.
The Procurator Delegate for the Armed Forces is conducting a separate investigation.
Luis Miguel Solís Pajarito was 25 when he ‘disappeared’ in Guatemala on 3 May 1990.
He was a leader of the National Council for the Displaced.
Despite assurances from government officials that an investigation is in progress, his whereabouts remain unknown.
Elizardo Sánchez Santa Cruz, President of the Cuban Commission of Human Rights and National Reconciliation (CCDHRN), who was sentenced to two years' imprisonment in 1989 for ‘spreading false news with the aim of endangering the prestige or standing of the Cuban state’, is still serving his sentence in Agüica Prison: he is due for release in August 1991.
Asia
Alexander Warouw and Manan Effendi have been imprisoned in Indonesia since 1965.
Both in their 70s, they continue to serve life sentences imposed in connection with an abortive coup in that year which was blamed on the Communist Party of Indonesia (PKI).
Although both were linked to the PKI, there is no evidence that either of them had knowledge of the events leading to the coup.
Their cases were featured in a British Section Christmas card campaign in 1990 and they received 1,704 cards as a result of the appeal.
In early 1991 AI received a letter directly from the two men.
They had copied out the names and addresses of everyone who wrote to them and enclosed the list with a message of thanks and good wishes, asking that it be sent on.
Also in Indonesia, Agil Riyanto bin Darmowiyoto, a law student, continues to serve a 15-year sentence imposed for  subversion in 1987.
He is one of a group of seven young Muslim activists in Brebes, Central Java, convicted on charges arising from their involvement in Muslim groups known as usroh , aiming to deepen awareness of Islamic teachings.
Agil Riyanto bin Darmowiyoto is serving his sentence in an island prison, far away from his home and family.
Another of the seven students, 20-year-old Wahyudi, a prisoner featured in the April/May 1989 issue, is still serving a seven-year sentence in Cilacap, Central Java.
Kayathiri Vino Sangaralinigam was 10 years old when she was arrested in Jaffna District, Sri Lanka, in 1987 with her mother and two older sisters.
They all ‘disappeared’ after being taken into custody by members of the Indian Peace Keeping Force.
No investigation is known to have been carried out either by the Indian or Sri Lankan authorities.
Two prisoners of conscience in Laos have been held for over 15 years for ‘re-education’.
Tiao Sisoumang Sisaleumsak and Houmphanh Norasing, both detained since 1975, are among 33 detainees still held in Laos' northeastern province of Houa Phanh.
Their living conditions are harsh with poor provision of housing, food and medicines.
The South Korean authorities wrote to AI in response to its appeals for imprisoned artist Hong Song-dam and publisher Chang Ui-gyun.
The authorities said that Hong Song-dam was not imprisoned merely for sending his paintings to North Korea and books to Koreans in Germany, but because his paintings and contributions to a magazine Art Movement were aimed at promoting a Marxist-Leninist revolution.
In September 1990 the Supreme Court dismissed the charges of espionage and returned the case to a lower court.
In January 1991 Hong Song-dam was sentenced to three years' imprisonment for producing material benefiting North Korea.
Chang Ui-gyun continues to serve an eight-year sentence for espionage.
The authorities denied that his arrest in 1987 was solely because he had met pro-North Korean people in Japan and claimed that he had acted on North Korean orders to collect documents on South Korean opposition groups, and to infiltrate dissent groups in order to create social unrest.
They also stated that he had received funds from North Korea.
AI had reviewed these accusations, but had found them unsubstantiated.
Father Thadeus Nguyen Van Ly, a Roman Catholic priest in Viet Nam, was arrested in May 1983 after trying to organize an unauthorized pilgrimage.
In December 1983 he was sentenced to 10 years' imprisonment for ‘opposing the revolution’.
He remains detained at Camp ‘Three Stars’ in Ha Nam Ninh province.
Aung Din, a 26-year-old student leader, was arrested by the martial law authorities in Myanmar on 24 April 1989.
AI has received reports that he was sentenced to four years' imprisonment after an unfair trial by a military tribunal.
Naya Min, a lawyer in his 40s, was also arrested under martial law in Myanmar.
He continues to serve a 14-year sentence because of reports he sent to the British Broadcasting Corporation and for ‘possession of anti-government literature’.
The four prisoners from China featured in the Letter Writing Campaign in 1989 and 1990 are still in prison.
Zhang Jingsheng was sentenced to 13 years' imprisonment in December 1989 for ‘counter-revolutionary’ crimes during the 1989 pro-democracy demonstrations.
Xiao Bin, a 42-year-old worker from Dalian, is serving a 10-year sentence for ‘counter-revolutionary incitement’ during the pro-democracy demonstrations.
Song Yude, a 34-year-old Protestant evangelist, was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment in 1986 for carrying out unofficial religious activities.
In Tibet Ngawang Buchung, a monk from the Drepung Monastery in Lhasa, is still serving a 19-year sentence imposed at a mass sentencing rally in November 1989.
Ngawang Buchung was sentenced to long terms of imprisonment for activities in support of Tibetan independence, which included circulating Tibetan translations of the Universal Declaration of  Human Rights.
In the Philippines, there have been some encouraging developments in the case of Zosimo Alpino.
He was one of 25 farmers arrested in November 1987 and accused of membership of the New People's Army (NPA), the armed wing of the outlawed Communist Party.
Zosimo Alpino was released on bail on 13 December 1990.
The previous May, 13 of his co-defendants were acquitted and released unconditionally on the grounds that there was insufficient evidence for prosecution.
Middle East
Abdul-'Aziz al-Faris, ‘Ali Al-Lail, Salah Nisfan, Hussein Subait and Hatim al-Saddiq are Shi'a Muslims in Saudi Arabia.
AI believes they are held because they opposed the government's policy towards the Shi'a community.
Three Moroccan prisoners of conscience remain in prison.
Ali Idrissi Kaitouni was given a 15-year sentence for writing poems about social injustice and political oppression in Morocco, deemed by the state to constitute a crime against internal security.
Mohamed Srifi, a literature student, was sentenced in 1977 to 30 years’ imprisonment for advocating that Morocco become a socialist republic.
Assistant teacher Habib Ben Malek was sentenced in the same trial in 1977 to 20 years' imprisonment.
They are all serving their sentences in Kenitra Central Prison.
Among the hundreds of those held without charge or trial in Syria are the following who have appeared in the Letter Writing Campaign: Hakem Sultan al-Faiz, a 61-year-old Jordanian national and former member of the National Command of the Arab Socialist Ba'th Party, who has been held for almost 20 years; Ahmad ‘Abd al-Rau'uf Roummou, a 55-year-old teacher, arrested in 1975; Muhammad Nabil Salem, an engineer, arrested in the wake of a one-day national strike in 1980 and Mahmud Jalbut, a Palestinian arrested in 1980.
AI has received no new information about six members of the Islamic Liberation Party imprisoned in Libya since 1973 for belonging to an illegal organization.
‘Ali Muhammad al-Akrami, al-Ajili Muhammad ‘Abdul Rahman al-Ashari, ‘Ali Muhammad al-Qajji, Salih Omar al-Qasbi, Muhammad al-Saadiq al-Tarhouni and ‘Abdul Qadir Muhammad al-Ya'qubi are believed to be in Abu Salim Prison in Tripoli, although AI received reports that ‘Abdul Qadir Muhammad al-Ya'qubi had died at the end of 1988.
In Iran Marian Firouz, a writer and translator in her mid-70s, has remained imprisoned since 1983 for her non-violent political activities.
Ali Ardalan, a retired civil servant in his mid 70s arrested in June 1990, remains in prison and there is growing concern over his ill-health.
His ‘crime’ was to sign an open letter to President Rafsanjani criticizing government failures to uphold rights and freedoms guaranteed by the constitution of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Zikri Nafkhosh Mustafa, Nabi Muhammad Shukr, Jabbar Rashid Shifki and Ja'far Tamar Mahmud are four of 315 Kurdish children and youths who ‘disappeared’ after being arrested in Iraq in August 1983.
Appeals on their behalf have been suspended because of the current situation in Iraq.
Europe
Daniel, Panayiotis and Pavlos Xidis, three Jehovah's Witnesses, are still serving four-year sentences in Greece for refusing to perform military service.
They are not due for release until 1992, and are among some 400 young men held in Greek prisons for their refusal on religious grounds to perform military service.
FREE IN AFRICA
Kwame Karikari, Ghana: released December 1988.
Oumarou Aman, Cameroon: released from labour camp in January 1991 after being held for more than six years without charge or trial.
Thoza Khonje, Malawi: released February 1991, having been detained for two years after making remarks which were interpreted as critical of the Life President.
Dr George Mtafu, Malawi: released January 1991.
He is Malawi's only neuro-surgeon.
FREE IN EUROPE
Bohdan Klymchak, USSR: pardoned and released November 1990.
He no longer wishes to emigrate and is planning to write his memoirs.
Ismail Mehmedov Hyuseyinov, Bulgaria: released from exile, May 1989.
FREE IN THE AMERICAS
Manuel González and Lidia González García, Cuba: released on expiry of their sentences, Manuel in January 1990 and Lidia in November 1989.
FREE IN ASIA
Baha bin Mohamed, Brunei: released January 1990 after swearing an oath of allegiance to the Sultan, the Government, and the laws of the state of Brunei Darussalam.
Vincent Cheng and Two Sho Lung, Singapore: conditionally released in June 1990.
FREE IN THE MIDDLE EAST
Photos, opposite page:(top row) Mahamat Abdoulaye; Ismail Mehmedov Hyuseyinov with his wife; Mihai (Creanga;(middle row) Kevin De Souza and friend; Zikri Nafkhosh; Ilkere Demir and his daughter Sinem;(bottom row) Ladji Traoré; Miram Abi Cobas Nunez; Daniel Kokkalis.
Amos Masondo, detained without trial from August 1986 to February 1989.
He was finally released on 19 October 1989.
DON'T FORGET TO WRITE
THE CRIMES THAT GOVERNMENTS COMMIT ARE AN OUTRAGE AGAINST ALL HUMANITY.
BUT EVERY DAY WE HEAR THE SAME EXCUSES FROM GOVERNMENTS.
THE VICTIMS DESERVE IT.
THE END JUSTIFIES THE MEANS.
MIND YOUR OWN BUSINESS.
TWO OUT OF EVERY THREE GOVERNMENTS STILL TORTURE THEIR OWN PEOPLE.
Amnesty International does not want to hear any more excuses, from governments or from anybody else.
The horrors must be stopped everywhere once and for all.
Human rights can be won — even against overwhelming odds.
We have seen it happen.
Change is possible.
Amnesty International is launching its 30th Anniversary appeal for 30 prisoner cases around the world in 1991.
Tens of thousands of Amnesty members and supporters in over 100 countries will be writing letters to governments about these particular cases.
Out of the list we have selected the following five cases for appeals by members of the British Section.
Please write courteous letters to the heads of the governments indicated — and let us know of any replies that you receive.
MOROCCO
MOHAMED SRIFI
Sentenced to 30 years for his peaceful political views
Write to:
Tell the King that you are concerned about the case of Mohamed Srifi, currently in Kenitra Central Prison, Casablanca, who was arrested in 1974, tortured, brought to trial in 1977 and jailed for 30 years after a blatantly unfair trial.
He was accused of calling for the violent overthrow of the monarchy.
Srifi was a member of a banned left wing group Ila'l-Amam (Forward).
Tell the King that Mohamed Srifi's only crime seems to have been the expression of his peaceful political views.
Ask that he is released immediately.
MALAWI
VERA CHIRWA
Jailed for believing that her country should be run differently.
Write to:
Vera Chirwa and her husband Orton are British-trained lawyers, who played a leading role in the struggle for Malawi's independence in 1964.
They went to Tanzania for 17 years following Orton's sacking as a cabinet minister after a dispute with the President, and lived there for 17 years.
Orton Chirwa formed an opposition party in exile.
The couple returned to Malawi in 1981.
The authorities claim they entered to try and overthrow the government.
The Chirwas say they came to see a sick relative.
They were tried, convicted of treason and sentenced to death, later commuted to life imprisonment.
Tell the President that you have read about their case, that their trial was unfair — even the Appeal Court agrees on this — and ask that they are released immediately.
PHILIPPINES
MARIA NONNA SANTA CLARA
‘Disappeared’ with a colleague while 
working for a community organization.
Write to:
Draw her attention to the case of ecumenical community worker Maria N. Santa Clara and her colleague Angelina Llenarasas who were arrested by men in plain clothes in a village near Naga City on 26 April 1989.
Maria was last seen shouting for help inside a military jeep that evening.
Her family heard she had been taken to the Regional Command Military camp in Legaspi City.
She has not been seen since.
Members of her family have received death threats.
Ask the President for prompt government action to establish her whereabouts, and an independent enquiry into the ‘disappearances’ and the death threats.
CHINA
WANG XIZHE
Jailed since 1981 for advocating democracy
Write to:
Wang Xizhe, a factory worker from Guangzhou, was an activist in the pro-democracy movement in China who helped to write and put up a 100-metre newspaper wall in his city in 1974 which attracted worldwide interest.
He was arrested and jailed for two years in 1977.
In April 1981 he was again arrested for articles he had written in association with democracy activist Xu Wenli, tried in May 1982 and sent to prison.
Xishe's wife is allowed to see him for 45 minutes twice a year.
Tell the President that you have not forgotten about Wang Xizhe and other Pro-Democracy Movement activists who are still jail for the peaceful exercise of their right to freedom of expression.
Ask that they are released immediately.
ISRAEL
‘ABD AL-RU'UF GHABIN
Reported being tortured
Please write to:
Bookshop owner Abd Al — Ru'uf was arrested by Israeli security forces in the Beach Refugee Camp in August 1990.
He was accused of distributing leaflets for an outlawed Palestinian organization, the PLFP, which he denies.
He was taken to the Interrogation wing of Gaza Prison.
He was denied access to a lawyer for over three weeks.
He stated that during this period he was interrogated and beaten on a daily basis.
He was denied sleep for five days on end.
His hands were manacled behind his back except when he ate or slept.
Tell the President that you have read about Abd Al-Ru'uf's allegation that he was tortured, and about his lawyer's complaint.
Ask for this claim to be investigated, and find out whether anyone has been found responsible and brought to justice.
PRISONER LETTER WRITING CAMPAIGN
Each of the people whose story follows is a prisoner of conscience.
Each has been arrested because of his or her religious or political beliefs, colour, sex, ethnic origin or language.
None has used or advocated violence.
Their continuing detention is a violation of the United National Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
International appeals can help to secure the release of these prisoners or to improve their detention conditions.
In the prisoners' case, letters to the authorities should be worded carefully and courteously.
You should stress that your concern for human rights is not in any way politically partisan.
In no circumstances should communications be sent to the prisoner.
TUNISIA
Hamadi Jebali: a 51-year-old newspaper editor from Sousse, he was sentenced by the military court in Tunis on 31 January 1991 to one year's imprisonment for publishing an article calling for the abolition of military courts.
The article, entitled ‘When will military courts, serving as special courts, be abolished?’ and written by a Tunisian lawyer, was published in 27 October 1990 in Al-Fajr (Dawn), the official newspaper of the non-recognized Islamic group Hizb al-Nahda (Renaissance).
Hamadi Jebali was charged with defamation of a judicial institution under the Tunisian Press Code, under which prior authorization by the Ministry of Interior is required to publish any newspaper or periodical.
The Press Code further requires that the first printed copy of each issue be submitted to the Ministry of Interior which can then intervene to stop distribution.
The issue of Al-Fajr in which the article appeared was apparently approved by the Ministry of Interior.
However, the Ministry of Defence decided to prosecute Hamadi Jebali.
The Tunisian authorities ordered the newspaper Al-Fajr to close until further notice on 8 February 1991.
Hamadi Jebali's sentence was confirmed on 6 March 1991 by the Cassation court.
This is the only court of appeal for cases tried by the military court, and looks only at points of law and not at facts and findings, thus providing a restricted appeal.
In October 1990, Hamadi Jebali, who is a member of the executive council of Hizb al-Nahda, had received a six month's suspended sentence and a fine of 1500 dinars for publishing an article entitled ‘The people of the State or the State of the people?’ in Al-Fajr in June 1990.
This sentence may be added to the new one-year term.
Please send courteous letters appealing for his immediate and unconditional release to:
MOROCCO
Mohamed Abbad: a 37-year-old student and ex-president of the Union Nationale des Etudiants Marocains (UNEM), National Union of Moroccan Students, he is serving a 15-year prison sentence in Safi Prison.
Mohamed Abbad is one of 31 people tried in May 1984 in Marrakech following demonstrations in January 1984 against price rises and the imposition of an examination fee for the baccalaureate examination.
They were reportedly arrested without warrant several days after the demonstrations, held incommunicado and tortured in garde à vue detention.
Mohamed Abbad was sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment on charges including conspiracy to overthrow the government and possessing leaflets aimed at disturbing internal security.
The prosecution's evidence consisted of statements allegedly extracted under torture, and confiscated literature.
He denied all the charges against him except possession of the literature which he said was either on sale in public bookstores or did not advocate violence.
Mohamed Abbad remains in prison with 17 of the original 31.
He was originally held in Safi Prison, where he developed diabetes in 1988, but was then transferred to Marrakech where his family lives, and so could visit him regularly and provide him with the food necessary for his diabetic diet.
On 26 March 1991 he was returned to Safi Prison and in protest he began a hunger-strike which resulted in his falling into a coma, due to his illness, a few days later.
He is now held in hospital in Safi.
Please send courteous appealing for his release, if possible in French or Arabic to:
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
People's Republic of China Father Jin Dechen: the 71-year-old Catholic Vicar-General of Nanyang diocese, Henan Province, he was sentenced in July 1982 to 15 years' imprisonment for ‘counterrevolutionary’ offences.
Fr Jin was first arrested in the late 1950s, when many Catholics were detained for proclaiming their loyalty to the Vatican.
The detentions followed the formation of an official Patriotic Catholic Association (PCA), independent of the Church of Rome, intended to bring Catholic affairs under the control of the Chinese Government.
Fr Jin was released in 1973, but kept under strict surveillance.
He was arrested again in December 1981.
As well as maintaining his allegiance to Rome, Fr Jin is reported to have spoken out against government policies on contraception and abortion.
The authorities are reportedly prepared to release Fr Jin if he appeals for clemency on grounds such as ill-health.
Fr Jin has apparently refused — he is in good health despite his age — and is not prepared to admit to any criminal activity to secure his release.
He is currently held at the No. 3 provincial prison at Yuxian in Henan.
Please write courteous letters appealing for Fr Jin Dechen's release to:
CUBA
Orlando Azcué Rodriguez: a 33-year-old cigar factory technician, he is serving a three-year sentence for advocating free elections.
Orlando Azcué Rodriguez was arrested on 5 April 1990 in Havana and brought to trial on 12 October on charges of making ‘enemy propaganda’.
He was found guilty and sentenced to three years' imprisonment.
Orlando Azcué was one of 12 political prisoners in Combinado del Este Prison in Havana who signed a letter dated 1 January 1991, calling for peaceful political change and respect for human rights, that was smuggled out of the prison.
The 12 also refused to wear their prison uniform.
As a result, they were transferred to different prisons.
Orlando Azcué and two others were taken to ‘Kilo 7’ Maximum Security Prison in Camaguey where, on 17 January, they went on hunger-strike.
They were said to have been forcibly dressed in the prison uniform and held for at least 17 days with their arms chained to the cell bars to prevent them from removing the uniform.
Orlando Azcué was also said to have been beaten by prison guards on at least three occasions.
In early February he was transferred to Pinar del Río Provincial Prison after agreeing to give up his protest and end his hunger-strike.
However, he again refused to wear his uniform and was forcibly dressed and handcuffed to the cell bars.
On 6 March he was transferred to the prison infirmary suffering from skin problems and a dramatic fall in his blood sugar level resulting from the earlier hunger-strike.
As of mid-April, he remained in the infirmary.
Please send appeals requesting his immediate and unconditional release to:
YUGOSLAVIA
Nijazi Beqa: an ethnic Albanian from Kosovo, aged 29, he is serving a four-year prison sentence in Dubrav prison near Istok.
Nijazi Beqa, a student of physics, married with one child, was one of 10 ethnic Albanians from the area of Urosevac in Kosovo arrested in September 1988.
They were charged with having formed a ‘hostile’ organization aimed at securing republic status for Kosovo province.
Kosovo, a province of the Yugoslav Republic of Serbia, borders on Albania and most of its population are ethnic Albanians.
Nijazi Beqa and his co-defendants were accused of having joined an illegal organization, of having distributed ‘hostile propaganda materials’ and of organizing petitions of a ‘hostile’nature to officials in and outside Yugoslavia.
At their trial in Pristina in February 1989, all were found guilty and sentenced to imprisonment.
The Yugoslav federal criminal law was changed in 1990 and many people convicted for similar non-violent political activity were released.
It is reported that on 22 March Nijazi Beqa and five other political prisoners there went on a hungers-strike against their conditions.
Please write appealing for the immediate and unconditional release of Nijazi Beqa to:
CAMEROON
Olivier Nwaha Binya'a: a Jehovah's Witness, he has been detained without charge or trial since May 2984 because of his religious beliefs.
Olivier Nwaha Binya'a appears to be held in indefinite administrative detention without any opportunity to challenge his imprisonment.
A 1970 presidential decree banning the movement was apparently prompted by the mass abstention by Jehovah's Witnesses from voting in a presidential election.
Since 1970 hundreds of Jehovah's Witnesses have been detained without charge or trial for up to five years.
In 1983 AI learned of the release of a group of Jehovah's Witnesses who had been held without trial since 1978.
In December 1984 at least 80 Jehovah's Witnesses were arrested in Limbé, southwest Cameroon, after holding an unauthorized religious meeting.
which is used mainly f or political prisoners and others held in administrative detention.
His health has deteriorated; the prison diet is poor and medical treatment inadequate.
Please send courteous letters appealing for his immediate release to:
RELEASED!
TEAM WORK
FINDING THE FACTS
HOW DOES AMNESTY SET ABOUT ESTABLISHING WHETHER A PRISONER IS INDEED A PRISONER OF CONSCIENCE?
WHAT ARE OUR SOURCES OF INFORMATION?
BY MICHAEL CROWLEY
Governments, as a rule, do not publicize their human rights violations.
On the contrary, using the tools of censorship, intimidation, disinformation and propaganda, they surround them with walls of silence and lies.
Amnesty's job is to breach these walls, to discover the truth within, and then to act.
The immense task of gathering, analysing and confirming allegations of human rights violations from around the world falls to the Research Department at the International Secretariat, Amnesty's headquarters in London.
‘We are obviously not there when someone is being tortured or killed.
When we hear of such cases, we investigate and draw on as many sources as possible to find out what happened…
In one sense it's very much like good investigative journalism,’ explains Malcolm Smart, Head of Research at the IS.
The information comes to the IS through myriad channels, some of them formal — over 1,100 newspapers, journals, government bulletins and transcripts of radio broadcasts are sifted — and others that are less predictable.
The plight of an Argentinian clerk, Perico Rodriguez, imprisoned and tortured because of his criticisms of the military government, was brought to Amnesty's attention by an English couple who had previously befriended Rodriguez two  years earlier when they were hitch-hiking across Argentina.
Each Amnesty member participating in letter-writing actions and each local group involved in adopting or investigating a prisoner case is a researcher of potential new information: as part of their campaign to free Sudanese POC Bashir Abdelrahim, members of the Leamington and Kenilworth group wrote to the Prison Commander at Shalla Prison, where Bashir was held, in the remote Western Sudan.
No reply was received but the group later heard that Bashir had been released.
Time passed.
Then earlier this year the group received a reply from another prisoner at Shalla who had been given their letter to Bashir by mistake.
AI discovered from his letter the appalling living conditions at Shalla, including a water shortage and rampant diseases.
The letter-writer is an orthopaedic surgeon who was taken off a plane as he was about to make a short visit to the UK where he had been a post-graduate student.
This was in September 1989 and he has been in prison since.
He enclosed a list of the 28 political prisoners still at the prison.
A vital source of first hand information is generated by the many missions and research trips Amnesty sends to countries each year for on-the-spot investigations and to observe trials, meet prisoners and talk to government officials.
During the first 11 months of 1990 AI sent 68 delegates to 50 countries ranging from Jordan to Nepal, from the USA to Romania.
Despite the difficulties of getting into and travelling around many of these countries — due to poor roads, curfews, civil wars, monsoons — researchers often uncover information and testimony they would never otherwise obtain.
In the Philippines last year, an investigation team found two ‘disappeared’ women who had been missing for several months.
The government had not acknowledged their arrest but the team had heard rumours of the women's whereabouts in a military camp and in fact found them there.
When Amnesty International visited Yemen in October 1990 to prepare for government talks, they heard reports of thousands of Yemenis being expelled from Saudi Arabia, some after being tortured.
The delegates went to the border and spent three days there screening hundreds of people and conducting in-depth interviews with many of them.
The organization urgently appealed to the Saudi king to stop the torture and brought the plight of the victims to international attention.
On several occasions, however, delegates have faced obstruction and harassment in carrying out their research.
An AI mission to Argentina in November 1976, led by Lord Avebury, was followed everywhere by twenty plainclothes policemen who questioned, intimidated and even detained a number of people whom they meet.
On one official visit to two refugee hostels, the delegates were accompanied by four pick-up trucks containing sixteen armed men, whose presence did little to reassure the refugees and encourage communications.
In one notorious case in July 1966, Nils Groth, a Danish lawyer on an AI mission to Guinea to enquire about prisoners of conscience became one himself.
He was arrested shortly after his arrival and was detained without trial until September when he was sentenced to ten years' hard labour for alleged espionage.
He was released 22 hours after sentencing under a special amnesty declared by the President, Seku Torre.
AI delegations have been expelled from countries after discovering evidence of human rights abuse and several countries, such as China, have refused Amnesty entry.
However even when frontiers are closed fast to Amnesty, information still gets out — via refugees or victims who have fled in fear, ‘friendly’ foreigners or nationals inside the country, church, trade union and human rights organizations, journalists or travellers, or from letters smuggled across the border.
Even from the jails themselves, the cries of hope, of despair, implorings not to be forgotten escape: Muriel ‘Rucia’ Dockendorff was seized by Chilean security police soon after the bloody coup of 1973 and ‘disappeared’.
The Chilean Government denied all responsibility for her detention.
However in October 1974 this message — addressed to a former inmate — was smuggled out of the infamous prison, Cuatro Alamos, on the inside of a cigarette packet.
Dearest Sandra,
I remember when I first met you at the house of terror; what you gave me, all that you gave me.
In those moments when a light was a dream or a miracle, you were light in that darkness.
We were one in adversity.
Today — a thousand trials later — I see you as before, as I know you are today, somewhere, always looking to the future.
We will meet again one day through the fog that we will clear.
Do not forget me dear comrade.
Rucia.
Of course, all sources of information must be confirmed as credible — sources could be using AI as a propaganda tool.
‘We are well aware of this danger and don't blindly accept what people say,’ states Malcolm Smart.
‘It comes down to applying a judgement based on the background knowledge we've acquired from 30 years of monitoring and reporting human rights’.
Amnesty knows, for example, what the long term pattern of abuse is in a country: the known torture methods, the likely victims, the agencies regularly implicated in violations.
This background experience is coupled with knowledge of a country's laws, constitution and judicial process and political and historical background.
‘When you've done research on a country for years, you also get a sense of which groups have vested interests or political agendas, who can be trusted and who has given us reliable information,’ said Smart.
Amnesty also has its own checks which ensure that all its major reports are passed through several levels of approvals, often up to the Secretary General himself.
It is also AI's practice to give its material to governments before publication for their views and additional information and the organization will publish these in its reports.
‘I'd be delighted if governments could prove all our reports wrong, if that means that human rights aren't being violated,’ Smart said.
‘but invariably, even when we have needed to correct or update details in our reports, the sad fact remains that the overall portrait of horror has been shown to be true and if anything, understated.’
Above: AI staff members in Northern Thailand en route to interview Burmese refugees.
Opposite:(top) AI delegation to Bangladesh, 1988;(left) Secretary General and researchers interview POC Raul Diaz Tejera in Cuba;(right) Queue of people waiting to present testimonies to AI delegation in Guatemala.
US DEATH PENALTY
Back Yard Blues
There are over 2,300 inmates on America's death rows: all have found themselves caught up in the nightmare that is the US capital law system.
By Piers Bannister.
Three years of being a member of the Campaign Team at AI had not prepared me for seeing human rights abuses first hand.
President Bush's recent pronouncements on what is just and moral during the Gulf war left me feeling empty and bitter.
having been in the US's ‘back yard’ I know how little attention is paid to those issues there.
The violence in America is frightening.
Homicides reached 23,000 in 1990, an increase of 15 per cent on the previous year.
Drugs, poverty and the availability of hand guns all play their part.
But rather than address these basic problems, politicians look for the quick ‘fix’— anything that sounds good in a sound-bite will do.
Unfortunately, increased use of the death penalty appears to be the most popular solution.
The definition of capital murder — which carries the death penalty — varies from state to state: in Alabama, a capital murder is one that occurs during the course of a robbery, or where the victim is kidnapped or raped; or, where the perpetrator is on parole or has escaped from custody; or where the crime is particularly cruel.
In practice, however, issues such as the colour and social standing of the victim will also play a major part.
Since 1973, in Columbus, Georgia, a death sentence has been sought for 43.8 per cent of those accused of killing a white female and only 2.6 per cent of those accused of killing a black female.
Also, if the DA is coming to the end of his/her four-year term, seeking the death penalty may improve their chances of re-election.
Once accused of capital murder, the defendant will almost certainly have a problem finding an attorney.
Capital law is much more complicated — but far less lucrative — than ‘ordinary’ criminal law, so attorneys not specialise in defence work and are reluctant to take cases.
Also, attorneys may be putting themselves up for huge amounts of emotional strain, knowing that their clients stand to lose more than their liberty.
Since almost all those on death row come from impoverished backgrounds they lack the funds to hire their own attorney and will be appointed counsel by the Court.
There are numerous examples of the poor quality of court-appointed lawyers; John Young went to his death even though his trial lawyer had signed an affidavit admitting he had been ill-prepared at trial due to drug use, the recent break-up of his marriage and the discovery of his own homosexuality; another attorney had his breath checked by the judge for signs of alcohol, another was found to be in contempt of court after arriving back from lunch drunk…and so I could go on.
When the case comes to trial the inexperienced attorney (a good lawyer may have managed to get the charge reduced to straight murder) will be faced by a prosecutor who may well specialize in capital law.
The first part of proceeding will be the jury selection, known as the vior dire .
The jury will be ‘death qualified’(in the case of Alabama capital law): all jurors have to believe in capital punishment, and be prepared to sentence someone to death.
Since black people in the southern states have suffered more injustices at the hands of the law they tend to be less likely to hand out death sentences.
Therefore the prosecution will strike blacks from the jury.
Although this is technically against the rules, it is still common practice.
If challenged to justify why blacks are struck from the jury, prosecutors offer the most ridiculous reasons —‘he looked dumb’, ‘he lived in the same part of town as the defendant’(most blacks live in the same part of town), ‘he was a mason and I was worried about masonic links’(the prospective juror was a stone mason by profession).
Amazingly enough, all these reasons were found acceptable by the judge.
Open racism in court may continue throughout the trial: one defendant was defended by an attorney who regularly used the term ‘nigger’ to describe  his client and, it later transpired, was the local Grand Wizard for the Ku Klux Klan.
If you are found guilty, the trial enters into its next very complicated part — the sentencing phase.
A good defence lawyer would now be armed with all the mitigating circumstances of your life: mental records, character witnesses,…any reason why your life should be spared.
In reality, most attorneys have made almost no preparation for this phase and do not really understand it.
Jurors in the case of Dalton Prejean were unaware of his long-term mental problems when sentencing him to death.
At least one member of the jury said he would not have given a sentence of death (which must be unanimous) had he known that Prejean had suffered prolonged mental and physical abuse from his guardians.
Once sentenced to death the nightmare gets worse: very little care is taken with the inmate's emotions.
When Roger Collins was sentenced to death aged 18 he had no idea what would happen next.
He recalls, ‘When I was sentenced I thought I'd be killed straight away.
Even when I went to prison it wasn't explained to me.
I sat in my cell expecting to be called out for execution at any moment.
I remember feeling really happy when I was told I had at least six or seven years to live.
That makes me angry now.’
Conditions on most death rows are appalling.
In Alabama's West Jefferson Prison inmates are kept in tiny cells, with the bare minimum of furniture.
There is no outside view of any sort and the only time they leave the cell is for weekend visits from relatives, bi-daily showers or for 45 minutes' daily exercise.
It is not surprising that many inmates want to give up their appeals.
The hardest two hours of my life were spent trying to persuade David Nelson to take up his appeals.
David had decided to seed ‘voluntary’ execution — to drop all appeals and allow his execution to take place.
His attorney had managed to get him to take them up again and I went to the prison to have the necessary papers signed.
During the interim period the prison authorities had taken David's favourite visitor off his visiting list causing him to drift into despair.
After two hours Ii managed to get David to sign the papers knowing full well that, after over 12 years of living in those conditions, I would probably want to die myself.
Those awaiting execution will spend their last days almost entirely alone.
They will be moved to the ‘death house’ into a room that is often adjacent to the electric chair where they may hear the chair being tested at regular intervals.
Some states even go to the trouble of having two switches, one a ‘dummy’, so that everyone can say, ‘it wasn't me who actually killed him’.
It is a separate tragedy altogether that, in a country where there is no nation health service, anything up to three million dollars can be spent killing someone.
While over 2,300 people wait on death rows countrywide to see if they will die or not, we can only hope that the US comes to its senses soon.
Prisoners executed in Arizona during the 1920s.
The gas chamber, Maryland Penitentiary.
A checker game on death row.
SRI LANKA
PARADISE IN TURMOIL
Amnesty's major Sri Lanka (September-December 1990) succeeded, against considerable obstacles, in bringing the tragedy of Sri Lanka to the attention of the world, and helped generate some fresh signs of change.
By Peter Nicholls
The Government of Sri Lanka has shown itself to be increasingly sensitive to the outcry over its appalling human rights record over the last decade.
However, it has yet to take concrete steps to stop atrocities, or bring their perpetrators to justice.
No effort has been made to investigate the tens of thousands of murders and ‘disappearances’ that have occurred over the past three years: in February, Sri Lankan human rights activists estimated that 40,000 people had ‘disappeared’since 1987.
These dreadful events took place in the south of Sri Lanka, which is dominated by the majority Sinhalese population.
From 1987–1990 an uprising by the Sinhalese Janatha Vimukthi Perammuna (JVP) Movement was ruthlessly suppressed by the government.
The repression continues today, albeit on a smaller scale.
At a recent meeting in London on human rights in Sri Lanka, MP Fernando Pulle Jeyaraj gave a graphic description of the torture and detention houses in which JVP ‘suspects’ are held by the security forces.
‘Disappearances’ occur daily in Sinhalese parts of the island and mutilated bodies are still found dumped along road sides.
Along with the thousands of appeal letters sent as a result of Amnesty's campaign, perhaps the clearest direct pressure is being exerted by the Sri Lanka Aid Consortium, made up of donor governments and multi-lateral institutions.
They have made it clear that from October 1991 aid disbursements will be conditional on improvements in the human rights record of the Sri Lankan government.
This aid money — worth US$1 billion per annum— is crucial to the fulfilment of the government's economic policies.
There have been some events which give qualified cause for optimism.
Perhaps most important is the development of a ‘Mothers’ Front’to campaign for investigations into the mass ‘disappearances’.
Modelled on similar organizations  in Argentina and Central America, it consists mainly of mothers whose husbands, sons and daughters have ‘disappeared’ or are known to have been murdered by the government or the JVP.
Although headed by opposition MPs, it has grown independently on a national basis and held its first large scale rally in Colombo in late February 1991.
Based in the Sinhalese south of the island, the Mothers' Front has nonetheless stated its intention to embrace those affected by the thousands of ‘disappearances’ in the Tamil-dominated areas of the north and east of the country.
One of the inspirations behind the Front is Dr Manorani Saravanamuttu whose son, the well-known journalist and broadcaster Richard de Zoysa, was abducted and murdered in a February 1990.
Dr Manorani spoke at a number of Amnesty meetings last autumn.
The Sri Lankan government has moved to try to counter the criticisms of its human rights record.
In November, a Presidential Task Force on human rights was set up, consisting of senior figures close to President Premadasa.
Its main function, however, appears to be to present a better image of Sri Lanka to the outside world.
More promising was the inauguration in January 1991 of a Commission of Enquiry into new cases of ‘disappearance’.
This Commission consists of five senior members of the judiciary and legal profession.
Its 12-month brief is to investigate all new reports of ‘disappearance’.
While falling way short of Amnesty International's request for investigations into all ‘disappearances’, this initiative is welcomed as a modest first step in the right direction.
The government has at last acknowledged that ‘disappearances’ do take place and that it is a problem which needs addressing, and Amnesty International expects to be submitting cases for investigation by the Commission.
Two AI delegates attended a conference in Colombo from 11 to 16 March on trades union and human rights in South Asia as guest speakers.
While there, they also met government officials and discussed possibilities for future access by AI to Sri Lanka.
Amnesty was last permitted access to the country in 1982.
The government subsequently announced that ‘a research visit to Sri Lanka would be considered favourably if a formal request were made’.
This pattern of greater flexibility toward outside investigation of human rights abuses is also shown by the Sri Lankan government's acceptance of visits by both the UN Rapporteur on Extra-Judicial Executions and the UN Working Group on Disappearances.
These are now due to occur in 1991, having been postponed on several occasions over the past few years.
Such developments, along with the continuing work of the International Committee of the Red Cross within the country, are welcome in themselves and also give some evidence that the Sri Lankan Government is responsive to criticism from outside the country.
Unfortunately, even these modest advances apply only to the south of Sri Lanka, the primary focus of Amnesty's campaign last autumn.
While the situation in the south remains a major concern, greater violations of human rights are now occurring in the North and Eastern provinces of the island, where government security forces are engaged in a full-scale civil war with elements of the Tamil-minority population.
The main opposition group in this region is the armed Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) whose political aim is a separate Tamil homeland (Eeelam) in North-East Sri Lanka.
The conflict has continued, with varying degrees of intensity, for over 10 years.
Predictably, the main sufferers since fighting flared once more in June 1990 have been the civilian populations — Tamil, Sinhalese and Moslem.
The population in the north and east are now living in terrible conditions.
With hundreds of thousands of people displaced from their homes by the conflict, the economy of these areas has been devastated and government forces are laying siege to many parts of the north, often involving inaccurate and indiscriminate bombardments of civilian population centres.
The LTTE has also been responsible for massacres, both of Sinhalese and Moslem civilians, since June 1990 and against rival Tamil political groups who, in some cases, have now aligned themselves with the government's forces.
Repression by the Sri Lankan security forces in the eastern province has been savage and widespread.
The rule of law in Sri Lanka has been seriously eroded: in the past three years, over a dozen lawyers have been murdered because of their involvement with human rights cases and at least 20 others have been forced to flee the country after receiving death threats.
Only concerted action and investigation by the government can right these tragic injustices that continue to occur.
Above: A Jaffna schoolboy shows a drawing he made of helicopters strafing his home town.
Left: A hired gunman at a United National Party election rally in late 1989.
Buddhist monk covers his eyes amid tear gas fired by the security forces during a demonstration against the Indo-Sri Lanka accord in Colombo, 1987.
An LTTE leader in Vavuniya, carrying a cyanide capsule around his neck.
The LTTE instructs its cadres to swallow cyanide if captured.
MOROCCO
SPEAKING IN SHADOWS
I had seen her face before, but only in silhouette, anonymous, as she spoke out about the inhuman conditions of political prisoners in Morocco's forgotten dungeons.
By Dan Jones
We met on a wild, windy day near the Ferry in a port on the South Coast.
She is a small, passionate, very striking young woman with deep shining black eyes and a glittering smile, talking ten to the dozen in a strong Moroccan accent.
She told me that she was eight years old, the eldest of six children, when the security men came to the army camp to arrest her father, an officer in the Moroccan army, in 1972.
He was accused of involvement in one of two failed military coups in Morocco which had attempted to overthrow King Hassan II.
Her mother was only about 21 at the time — she had been married when only 13.
The family were then living in the military camp at Harmoumou.
A number of the officers arrested were executed almost immediately.
Her father was sentenced to death.
The young woman remembers how her mother would leave home at 5am day after day, and wait in the Marmoura forest near where the King used to play golf in an effort to plead with him for her husband's life.
Despite being repeatedly arrested and brought back home, bruised and beaten by the police, she finally got to see the King by throwing herself into the road in front of the Royal car.
‘There is nothing I can do,’ said the King, as she was dragged away, ‘I can see those in charge, but it's now in the hands of the Justice people.’
However, the father's sentence was changed to one of life imprisonment.
At first the men were held in Kenitra Central Prison.
The family were able to visit him once or twice a week.
There they would meet many other relatives of the arrested men.
A close relationship developed among the visitors.
One day in August 1973, without warning, visitors were not allowed to enter the prison.
They were told that the prisoners were not there any more.
The relatives of the 61 men who had vanished lobbied ministers and the King's sister and brother.
It was an extremely sensitive matter, they were told.
But there was absolutely no news of the men.
At last, in 1975, the wife of one of the prisoners, a former air force pilot, telephoned the young woman's mother to come to her house quickly.
The woman showed her a bundle of tiny packages, secret notes, from some of the disappeared men, smuggled out of their secret jail by one of the guards.
The guard was still in the house.
The young woman's father was one of the letter-writers.
His note consisted of a few words, impersonal, noncommittal, on a tiny scrap of paper written with a burned matchstick.
But he was alive.
In his note he asked for medical help — some vitamins, eye-drops, ‘as I can't go out’— and for some money.
It seemed that the men pooled their money to help survive.
Her mother tried to persuade the woman who had received the letters to let her talk with this guard; a man who was actually in touch with her husband.
Perhaps he could tell how he was, or where?
She could see him through the shutters — a big man, a Berber, a kind-looking man with bright blue eyes and tattoos.
But the woman said he would simply not risk meeting her — it was too dangerous.
One of the group of relatives, an old woman who walked very slowly, also had a letter.
Her son was very ill.
She decided to try and visit him.
They had a vague idea where the place was.
It was a very long journey right across the Atlas mountains and down to the  edge of the desert.
Long before she reached the place, the car was stopped by the military.
‘There is no prison here.
Turn back!
Who told you there was a prison?’
They were taken away for questioning.
‘Who is spreading these rumours?’ they wanted to know.
The old woman's son was one of the many prisoners who have subsequently died in the prison.
A year later a second note was among another smuggled group of notes that arrived for the relatives.
‘I received the materials that you sent.’
In 1977 another letter came, then a long silence until 1981, then a letter in 1984.
Sadly, the notes referred to money and medicines that had been sent by the family but not received in the prison.
Everything exchanged in the secret correspondence has to be tiny so it can be hidden in the palm of the hand: pills, passport sized pictures of the family.
The little notes are coded.
There is little real information.
You have to read between the lines.
The smuggled letters take three days' journey to Rabat from the prison: some never arrive.
In November 1990, a further letter arrived, saying the young woman's father was ill: he wanted 150,000 Dirham, and his wife should give 100,000 Dirham to the guard.
‘Send me photographs of the children.’
He wrote that he was lying on a concrete floor; he mentioned acute rheumatism, chronic bronchitis; ‘My ribs are tight, I have a lot of fever, I cough all the time.
I am exhausted…
I cannot sleep at night…my heart is weak…my feet are heavy…
I am unable even to say my prayers upright.’
Twenty-nine of the prisoners have already died, Pilot Mohammed El Shamey has lost his mind, one has taken his own life.
Recently, an anonymous note, clearly composed from a dialogue between a prisoner and a sympathetic guard, was smuggled out.
It described where the prisoners were held:; the people of Tazmamert appear to be hardly aware of it or too frightened to talk about it.
It is said that the prison director steals the fuel to warm his own house in Meknes.
The note describes the walk downstairs to visit the cells.
You use a torch to see anything.
This first cell is now empty, and a second, and a third.
In the fourth cell there is a man with long dishevelled hair.
His clothes are in rags, and do not even cover his private parts.
‘they are denied medical care.
They sleep on the floor without mattress or bedcover.
The smell is so terrible you want to throw up.
The men have been locked up in their cells since day one of their imprisonment.’
Clothes are changed once every three years.
They are unshaven, there is no barber.
The food is ‘maigre’; cold coffee in the morning, with half a piece of bread, lunch a thin soup of rotten vegetables, the evening meal boiled pasta and the same stinking soup.
Tazmamert has been the great forbidden subject in Morocco.
The prisoners have been held incommunicado for eighteen years.
The sentences of most of the military prisoners were completed years ago, but nobody is released.
No journalist will risk prison to put an article in the paper.
According to King Hassan II and his government, the prison does not exist — or, even if it does, the people all love the King so much it would be unsafe to release the prisoners — they might be killed by the populace.
We finished our coffee and watched the seagulls whirling and shrieking over the harbour in the spring sunshine.
In some cases of ‘disappearance’ the whole family is held responsible for the ‘crime’of one of its members.
One notable example involved the ‘disappearance’ of eight members of the family of General Mohammed Oufkir.
Following his death in suspicious circumstances in 1972, his widow and six children, together with a female cousin, ‘disappeared’.
Nothing was heard of them for fifteen years.
In February 1991, they were released, but are still subject to restrictions on freedom of movement and association.
Right: A demonstration in the early 1980s by families of political prisoners.
Political prisoners do not receive fair trials in Morocco.
SOUTH AFRICA
RIGHTING THE RECORD
Confidence is the key.
President de Klerk said so in London at the end of April.
By Brian Dooley
If de Klerk can convince the world that South Africa has come far enough in improving its record on human rights, sanctions will be lifted and crucial foreign capital will start flowing into the country.
However, the State President is not as confident as he would like to be.
To coincide with his latest visit to Europe, Amnesty released a document outlining the apparent lack of accountability of the security forces.
Deaths in detention are not phenomena of the distant past: last year two people were reported as having died in custody.
In February this year, the Minister of Law and Order declared that the government would not repeal its most notorious detention law, section 29 of the Internal Security Act, which permits indefinite, incommunicado detention in solitary confinement for the purposes of interrogation.
Those who dies last year were held under this provision.
Detentions under section 29 continue, and the government acknowledged on March 18 that 16 people were then held under that provision.
Even more prisoners, about 60, are currently being held under equivalent provisions in the nominally independent ‘homelands’ of the Transkei and Bophuthatswana.
Two months ago Amnesty submitted testimony to the UN which noted that the de Klerk government ‘was failing to take adequate steps to investigate and bring to justice members of the security forces implicated in the torture and killing of government opponents’.
The death of one 16-year-old under interrogation at a police station in January 1990 has yet to be properly investigated.
A closed hearing held in February this year concluded that no-one could be held responsible for the death.
De Klerk dismissed suggestions that he can't control his security forces by pointing out that he appointed 10,000 police officers last year, and claims that the new influx will go a long way in helping subdue township unrest.
However, with various groups suggesting police complicity in township violence, many blacks will find little security in a larger police force.
Despite the political reforms, many members of the security forces are carrying on business as usual.
In March, a judicial inquest into the death of 42 people in Sebokeng township in September 1990 concluded with the presiding judge finding members of the South African Defence Force criminally responsible for the deaths of four people and rejected claims that the concerned were provoked to shoot in self-defence.
Both Sebokeng inquiries exposed a pattern of unlawful behaviour by members of the security forces and lend weight to allegations of unprovoked use of lethal force by security forces, like in Daveytown on 24 March when 12 members of the ANC were shot dead by the police.
Accusations continue of security force involvement in covert assassinations.
On March 27, in Alexandra township outside Johannesburg, at least 14 people were killed when men armed with automatic weapons opened fire on mourners at a night-time vigil.
The police had been asked by the organizers of the vigil to provide protection after an incident earlier in the evening when about 200 suspicious-looking men appeared outside the house where the vigil was being held.
According to those at the vigil, the police only checked on the hose twice before the massacre occurred at 4am.
The apparent failure of the police to act promptly and effectively, including their failure to apprehend a large group of armed men under conditions of curfew in the township creates the suspicion that police were colluding with the attackers.
Despite the hype over the release of political prisoners, reports of police misconduct do not inspire confidence in the majority of South Africans, or in those all-important foreign investors.
Police attack black workers in Johannesburg.
REFUGEES
JUMPING THE HURDLES
Asylum-seekers attempting to enter the UK encounter many difficulties with our refugee-determination procedures.
By Jan Shaw
‘Please don't send me back.
Kill me here’.
This was the plea of a young Eritrean boy as he was being dragged back to the plane that had just brought him to the UK, when in September 1990, he and his sister were denied access to the asylum procedure.
He was afraid of being sent back to Ethiopia, where close family members had been imprisoned and tortured.
Prior to this incident, in April 1990 three Sri Lankan Tamils attempted to seek asylum in the UK.
Before their arrival at Heathrow, their passports and tickets were confiscated; when the British Airways plane landed, they were separated from the other passengers, put into a van and driven around for several hours before being forced back on the plane and sent out of the UK.
Unfortunately these are not isolated incidents.
Other cases are known to Amnesty International, where asylum seekers travelling without valid travel documents have been prevented by airline personnel, sometimes with the knowledge of Immigration Officers, from applying for political asylum in this country.
Also in April 1990, six Sri Lankan Tamils were prevented by Egyptair staff from disembarking at Heathrow: in August 1990, four Eritreans were prevented from leaving a Czechoslovak Airlines plane.
There can be little doubt that such examples represent the tip of an iceberg.
What has forced airline staff to take on this policing role of checking the travel documents of would-be asylum seekers?
In 1987 the British Government introduced legislation which imposes fines on airlines bringing passengers to the UK without valid documents.
The Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act provides for a fine of £1,000 per passenger lacking such documentation.
It is thought that the Government may soon double this fine.
Since its implementation, fines totalling more than £24 million have been imposed under the Act and clearly some airlines have adopted practices aimed at minimizing the number of penalties incurred.
The fining of airlines plus the fact that the nationals of many refugee-producing countries now need visas to travel to this country, has made it extremely difficult for many people wishing to apply for asylum, to reach the UK.
When people are fleeing from fear of imprisonment, torture or death, they will use any means available to reach a safe country.
For many people attempting to escape from state persecution, it is impossible to apply for a passport to the very authorities who are inflicting the persecution.
The need to obtain an entry visa from an embassy often situated far away could be dangerous and could therefore hinder departure.
Instead of introducing procedures which can be relied upon to identify and protect all those at risk of human rights violations in their own country, Government has introduced a range of measures which create obstacles in the path of those seeking asylum in the UK.
In particular in recent years, the Government's response to large numbers of people fleeing from state oppression is to impose visas on nationals of that country.
During the period of 1984–5, more than 2,800 Sri Lankans sought asylum in the UK and in May 1985, a visa requirement was imposed on the nationals of Sri Lanka, the first time such a requirement was imposed on the nationals of a Commonwealth country.
Subsequently in June 1989 a visa requirement was imposed on Turkish nationals after more than 3,500 Turkish Kurds had sought asylum at UK ports.
In 1989 more than 2,600 Somalis sought asylum in the UK; from August 1990, Somali nationals could no longer transit the UK without visas.
In April 1991 a visa requirement was imposed on nationals of Uganda; from January to September 1990, some 1,960 Ugandan nationals sought asylum in the UK.
As there is no provision in the UK immigration rules for issuing visas to asylum seekers overseas, in an embassy or High Commission, there is a contradiction in the requirement of visas for asylum seekers to enter the country.
It is to be regretted that many of the Government's measures relating to its asylum policy introduced in the past few years, have been to discourage new arrivals.
Amnesty International has asked the Government on many occasions to lift those measures which place obstacles in the path of asylum seekers attempting to gain access to the refugee-determination process.
In November 1990, the Government conceded that the Immigration (Carriers Liability) Act and associated visa requirements ‘do indeed prevent some asylum seekers from coming to the UK’, but further stated that it ‘has no obligation to encourage or assist would-be asylum seekers…to come here and enter our procedures’.
We hope that in line with our recommendations, the Government will amend its procedures which obstruct the access to the refugee-determination process of those escaping from violations of their basic human rights.
Tamil protest at Heathrow in 1987
GROUP NEWS
30 YEARS OF LOCAL GROUPS!
TODAY THERE ARE 4,200 LOCAL AMNESTY GROUPS AROUND THE WORLD.
315 OF THESE ARE IN THE UK, WORKING ON BEHALF OF 318 INDIVIDUALS AND RAISING MORE THAN £260,000 A YEAR TO FURTHER AMNESTY'S WORK.
How did it all begin?
Peter Benenson, in his original article in the Observer in 1961, envisaged a central ‘library’, providing information on prisoners of conscience ‘to any group, existing or new, in any part of the world, which decides to join in a special effort in favour of freedom of opinion or religion.’
The response to this call was and has continued to be overwhelming.
Perhaps this is because, as a member of the Abingdon Group put it: ‘In a group there is the fun and companionship…and the awe at saving a life, supporting a prisoner through years of isolation, getting your prisoner free.’
The first local Amnesty groups (the still-running Eltham and Hampstead among them) were formed only months after the launch in May 1961.
From then on the number grew impressively fast.
By the end of 1961 there were 11 groups, nine in the UK, one in Norway and one in Australia.
In February 1963 there were already 180 groups worldwide.
The increase was even felt to be too great: in 1964, when British groups reached 212, it was decided to slow down the growth in the UK — not to ‘act upon the ephemeral  enthusiasms of an odd individual’, but to go for quality.
There was also concern that groups were growing faster in the UK than in the rest of the world.
The number of UK groups reached 300 in the early 1980s and has remained around that level ever since — groups of very high quality and certainly not based on ‘ephemeral enthusiasms’!
These early groups were called ‘Threes Groups’ because each adopted three prisoners, one from the East, one from the West and one from Afro-Asian countries.
In many cases a group would divide into sub-groups and work on more than three at a time.
At one point Manchester University group was working on 39!
It came as something of a shock in the late 1970s, when developments in the human rights situation around the world and the increase in groups worldwide and the increase in groups worldwide led to fewer prisoner cases being available for UK groups.
This did not mean, unfortunately, that human rights were being respected, but that regimes around the world were using new methods of repression such as‘disappearances’ and extrajudicial executions.
Amnesty groups' work responded to the challenge with new techniques such as networks focusing on abuses in specific areas of the world and campaigns on whole countries or themes.
For example, a ‘Murder by Governments Campaign’ in October 1983 resulted in funeral marches with black ‘coffins’, drumbeats, and candles in Diss, Norwich, Bognor Regis, and London.
How to find the money necessary to carry out Amnesty's work has always been a worry, and from the very beginning the Section Office asked groups for help in this area.
However, in the first few years groups did not appear to consider fundraising a priority.
A newsletter in 1964 complains that ‘it is clear that the requested £10 per annum is more than one group can manage.’
It is extraordinary to consider that nowadays groups manage a contribution of £600 per annum!
The next year, 19675, however, fundraising was already improving — Kensington Group arranged a film show at the Kensington Public Library and raised £81.15.0d.
There are some aspects of group work which never change — the satisfaction felt on receiving a letter such as this, for example:
‘…suddenly I became free by some secret action, and now I am so happy I found your letter concerning my person.
I am thankful and happy that there was a strange and foreign soul caring about the destiny of a political prisoner in East Germany…when we passed the border last night, I just cried.’
(From a student released from an East Berlin jail in 1964)
Anniversaries have also been celebrated before.
In 1971 groups were busy thinking up ways to mark Amnesty's 10th birthday.
The Bristol group collected the signatures of 46 international figures to sell for Amnesty funds.
They tried 60 well-known personalities.
Harold Wilson was the first to reply — by return post.
Groups were still being run by a very small section office.
A 10th Anniversary article in the Observer referred to it as ‘a small back-room in an alley off London's Fleet Street,’ and within days the office was getting letters addressed to ‘Amnesty, Alley Off Fleet Street’.
On 28 May 1986, Amnesty's 25th Anniversary, St Clement Danes Church in the Strand, London, rang 5,000 chimes, roughly one for every POC case Amnesty had worked on during the year.
Groups went in for all kinds of sponsored walks, knit-ins, beard-shavings, and even silence.
The 25th Anniversary campaign had dramatic results: individual membership increased from 25,000 at the end of 1985 to 35,000 at the end of 1986: a full 30 per cent increase in one year.
This year's 30th Anniversary could be our chance to make the 90s the decade in which groups shoot ahead.
Help us achieve this: join your local group!
Write to  
Above top: Putney Group celebrated the release of their POC ‘Slava’ Cherepanov in July 1989.
Below: Procession in 1983 in Trafalgar Square before the Memorial Service in St Martins in the Fields organised by Amnesty International for the victims of political killings by governments.
Opposite: In April 1985 groups all over Britain get together to take part in a sponsored jailbreak from the Tower of London.
Without using any money, some of the escapees got as far as North Wales, Yorkshire, and Scotland.
LETTERS
DISTURBING MEASURES
I have just received David Bull's appeal for funds, with the short version of Amnesty's report on Human Rights Violations in Iraqi Occupied Kuwait (since August 1990) enclosed.
I am afraid that by taking the extraordinary measure of stapling this report ‘because some of the contents are so disturbing’, Amnesty has again given credence to the belief that recent torture in Kuwait has been more terrible than in any other part of the world, whereas the repugnant patterns of pain-infliction described are all too familiar from Iran, from Myanmar, Amin's Uganda, a South America, South Africa etc.
Although we may claim that we simply publish an objective report, the inference that exceptional evil existed during the occupation of Kuwait will naturally be made by those trying to justify the devastating Allied bombardment of Iraq, now retrospectively.
I feel Amnesty has to provide a quiet, more balanced overview of a region in order to maintain its impartiality and credibility, and to operate effectively.
ANGELA MACTAVISH, Bognor Regis
OFFICIAL PRAYERS?
Participating as a group delegate and individual member in the vigorous AGM at Liverpool, I was surprised to see a religious service on the printed agenda, with the order of service available at the official information counter.
As a private activity there could be no objection to Christian members calling their fellow-believers to prayer, and I suppose that I and fellow-members of the British Humanist Association could have similarly organized a non-official meeting.
But the universal character of Amnesty should surely bar the incorporation of any religious observance into its official procedures.
ARTHUR JACOBS, Sevenoaks
GREAT INSIGHT…
I was delighted to see you had chosen a young man and woman with Down's Syndrome to model shirts in the Spring 1991 catalogue.
I have worked for 14 years as a care assistant in a special school, and although the general attitude towards individuals with a mental handicap is gradually changing, it is both reassuring and encouraging to see youngsters such as these becoming a more regular part of ‘everyday life’.
I applaud your decision to employ them, and shall leave your catalogue in the staffroom tomorrow.
Congratulations on your insight.
JEAN MARTIN, Manchester.
…
IS WELCOME
As parents of a four-month-old daughter with Down's Syndrome we have only recently become very aware of how handicapped children and adults are kept to the sidelines…your catalogue makes a very welcome change.
JULIA MARKUS AND PAUL JORDAN, Shaftesbury.
DURING PRISONER OF CONSCIENCE WEEK 1990, SECOND YEAR PUPILS OF PEEBLES HIGH SCHOOL HEARD ABOUT AMNESTY'S LETTER WRITING CAMPAIGN FROM THEIR LOCAL AMNESTY GROUP.
THE PUPILS GOT THE MESSAGE, AND GOT WRITING.
HERE ARE TWO RESULTING LETTERS…
Your Excellency,
I am writing to you about the case of Im Su-Kyong, who was arrested for ten years for attending a peace march from North Korea to South Korea.
The thing is, she was arrested for ten years for going to North Korea without government permission.
I feel that this sentence is far too harsh.
For a woman, Kim Hyun-hui, was arrested and was to receive the death sentence for planting a bomb on a Korean Boeing 707, killing all 115 people.
Yet she was pardoned, because she was an internationally famous actress.
Can you see the point I am trying to make?
I hope so.
I am thirteen years old, and if ten years of my youth were taken over by four plain walls and nothing to do, I know how I would feel.
Try and think how you would feel if that happened to you.
Please, I am begging you, let her free.
Yours respectfully and sincerely, ALISON HENDERSON.
Your Excellency,
I am writing as I'm puzzled as to why you have released Kim Hyun-hui who planted a bomb on a plane and killed 115 people but have imprisoned a girl for taking part in a peace march.
To me this is odd as if I were the president of South Korea I would have imprisoned Kim Hyun-hui and released Im Su Kyong as to me Kim Hyun-hui committed the more serious crime.
I would like this to be explained to me as I just don't understand it.
Yours respectfully and sincerely, CHRISTOPHER SETH.
