NEEDLES IN HAY: IS IT ART CRITICISM?
TWO QUESTIONS
What is art ?
Leo Tolstoy asked the question, and in 1898 his remarkable book with that title gave his reply.
He underlined the need for art to communicate what the artist has felt:
Art is a human activity consisting in this, that one man consciously by means of certain external signs, hands on to others feelings he has lived through, and that others are infected by these feelings and also experience them.
Art is not, as the metaphysicians say, the manifestation of some Idea of beauty or God; it is not, as the aesthetic physiologists say, a game in which man lets off his excess of stored-up energy; it is not the expression of man's emotions by external signs; it is not the production of pleasing objects; and, above all, it is not pleasure but it is a means of union among men joining them together in the same feelings, and indispensable for the life and progress towards wellbeing of individuals and humanity.
There are many more definitions of art besides Tolstoy's own and those which he denounced.
For the purposes of this book, just two assertions will have to content us: first, some works have been intended by their makers to be seen as art; second, there is a consensus today that other works are to be described as art.
Since art critics have these working assumptions in mind, and it is with their writing we shall be mainly concerned, we need to proceed without being distracted.
We shall not  look into the myriad issues springing from problems of definition which are vital for philosophers and aestheticians.
Is it criticism ?
There is a massive amount of writing about art, only some of which can immediately be identified by a reader as criticism.
Writing by the art critic of a newspaper is self-evidently criticism, in parallel with the writing of music and theatre critics; an exhibition can be treated almost in the same way as a performance.
Articles in magazines are less certainly described as criticism, for their main topics may be personalities or history, and art may be only a small part of the writers' account.
Books and catalogues may contain criticism; but their writers may think of themselves as art historians, philosophers, aestheticians, anthropologists, historians or biographers, and there are many other possibilities; their books may never be identified as art criticism.
As the following chapters will show, the useful and helpful functions of art criticism will receive preference in the choice of what is quoted or discussed.
Is the text or part of the text written so that a reader will benefit in a future encounter with a work of art?
Some writing which is called art criticism will be helpful, some will not; other writing will also be valuable, although whether it can be described as art criticism may be disputable.
A REVEALING INSTANCE
A famous passage of art criticism can be cited as one example entirely beyond dispute.
The author spent much of his life as a bachelor Fellow of Brasenose College Oxford; his cloistered life was devoted to writing, notably on classical antiquity and the Italian Renaissance.
Walter Pater was a master of atmosphere; he had been inspired as a young man by Ruskin, and his idealism about art and his fine prose were in turn much admired by a younger generation of aesthetes, among whom Oscar Wilde was a prominent figure.
One of Pater's subjects for a perceptive essay was Leonardo da Vinci; it gave special prominence to the painting now generally known as the Mona Lisa .
The following critical passage comes from this piece, first published in the Fortnightly Review in 1869, and then in 1873 in Pater's book,Studies in the History of the Renaissance .
La Gioconda is, in the truest sense, Leonardo's masterpiece, the revealing instance of his mode of thought and work.
In suggestiveness, only the Melancholia of Dürer is comparable to it; and no crude symbolism disturbs the effect of its subdued and graceful mystery.
We all know the face and hands of the figure, set in its  marble chair, in that circle of fantastic rocks, as in some faint light under sea.
Perhaps of all ancient pictures time has chilled it least.
Pater's measured prose goes on to connect the picture with drawings by Verrocchio, speculate on the artist and the sitter, and wonder about how long the picture was in progress.
Then comes the peroration.
The presence that rose thus so strangely beside the waters, is expressive of what in the ways of a thousand years men had come to desire.
Hers is the head upon which all ‘ends of the world are come’, and the eyelids are a little weary.
It is a beauty wrought out from within upon the flesh, the deposit, little cell by cell, of strange thoughts and fantastic reveries and exquisite passions.
Set it for a moment beside one of those white Greek goddesses of beautiful women of antiquity, and how would they be troubled by this beauty, into which the soul with all its maladies has passed!
All the thoughts and experience of the world had etched and moulded there, in that which they have of power to refine and make expressive the outward form, the animalism of Greece, the lust of Rome, the mysticism of the Middle Ages with its spiritual ambition and imaginative loves, the return of the Pagan world, the sins of the Borgias.
She is older than the rocks among which she sits; like the vampire, she has been dead many times, and learned the secrets of the grave; and has been a diver in deep seas, and keeps their fallen day about her; and trafficked for strange webs with Eastern merchants; and, as Leda, was the mother of Helen of Troy, and, as Saint Anne, the mother of Mary; and all this has been to her but as the sound of lyres and flutes, and lives only in the delicacy with which it has moulded the changing lineaments, and tinged the eyelids and the hands.
The fancy of a perpetual life, sweeping together ten thousand experiences, is an old one; and modern philosophy has conceived the idea of humanity as wrought upon by, and summing up in itself, all modes of thought and life.
Certainly Lady Lisa might stand as the embodiment of the old fancy, the symbol of the modern idea.
Pater's book is a classic, and easy to find in a library.
But if the books are arranged by subject, there is no certainty that The Renaissance will be put under ‘art criticism’.
Several other headings are equally possible, say aesthetics, English literature or Italian history.
The library user who looks for books of art criticism is not necessarily going to have an easy task.
Let us picture a girl entering through the impressive doors of the New York Public Library.
Her interest has been aroused by some new paintings which she has seen in a SoHo gallery, which a friend has compared unfavourably with the work of Lee Krasner.
This comparison has fazed  her, as she only knows about Lee Krasner as the widow of Jackson Pollock; so the library visit is intended to check out reproductions of Lee Krasner's work, to see if she has to concede that her friend may be right.
The resources available to her are excellent; the library has an extensive stock of books, long runs of periodicals, press cuttings, and up-to-date facilities to find relevant material.
Among the sources she will find are critical reviews, articles, catalogues and books about New York painting of the 1940s and 1950s, which will remind her that Pollock died in 1956.
There is no shortage of writing about Pollock; like other star artists, he has an embarrassingly large number of apologists, but fortunately there are select bibliographies which can guide her to key publications.
There may, however, be questions in her mind about the choices open to her: how will the information in a catalogue differ from what is to be found in a monograph?
How much of the books about Pollock will be biography and how much will be about his art?
Among the magazine articles, which are most likely to be interesting to her?
Will she find good reproductions of Lee Krasner's work?
Our American friend's cousin in London is an art student.
Her college library has interesting books, as well as the latest art magazines.
Her course teacher has given her a reading list, and the library staff are good at helping students with all sorts of interests.
As part of the course, she has to choose a subject of her own about which to write a paper; one of her difficulties is to know how to form her own views, not just copy already received opinions.
She is looking for critical views against which to pitch her own; it seems that she may have chosen the wrong sort of topic, since on a holiday in Italy she had been stunned by the newly renovated Michelangelo ceiling in the Sistine Chapel in Rome, and although there were plenty of books about it, many of them went into extravagant detail.
Happily her supervisor has guided more than one student through topics about Michelangelo, and has a route map prepared, including introductory and background books, but also passages from longer scholarly works.
If the two girls compare notes one day, the New Yorker will complain about the useless articles she read; the newspaper articles were almost always short, written maybe by hard-pressed critics who were only allowed short articles, further cut down by sub-editors.
Still, by reading, and looking at Lee Krasner's pictures in New York galleries, she was able to defend an independent liking for her SoHo artist.
In London, it was a rather different story, since the literature available needed discrimination, much of it being historical and iconographic, establishing data of little interest to the art student.
To her surprise, there proved to be perceptive judgements about qualities in Michelangelo's work, almost hidden in catalogue entries; more than one art historian, apparently, was not only learned but had an eye.
ART CRITICISM AND ART HISTORY
Do art historians write about the past, while art critics write about the present?
Things are not so simple, as some art historians write well about the present, with a generosity of feeling and approach enriching to contemporary culture.
They are capable of assessing modern art in its own terms, partly from experience gained through judging work of other periods within quite different terms.
Meyer Schapiro, who had a specialist concern with Romanesque art, was an open-minded historian of this sort.
He wrote enthusiastically about the later work of Arshile Gorky: ‘Gorky's atmosphere, veiling the hard opaque wall of the canvas, evokes a nocturnal void or the vague, unstable image-space of the day-dreaming mind.’
And he remembered the painter:
I used to meet him most often in the museums and galleries fixed in rapt contemplation of pictures with that grave, searching look which was one of the beauties of his face.
As some poets are great readers, Gorky — exceptional among painters — was a fervent scrutinizer of paintings.
No interesting touch or invention of form escaped his eye.
He was equally at home in the Metropolitan Museum and the Museum of Modern Art, keen in discerning what was good in the arts of many ages and styles.
As for working art critics, their newspapers need reviews of every sort of exhibition, whether modern or historical.
Even though critics may not be as learned as their art-historical colleagues, there is no good reason for their practised eyes to cloud over when looking at art of other periods.
Furthermore, artists who are also critics are especially likely to make vivid comments on the methods and techniques of old art.
The guards on the frontiers between art history and art criticism shoot neither intruders nor escapers.
Indeed, there are some who feel that there should be no border, thinking back nostalgically to days when there was only one domain of art.
In some writing today, too, it is possible to find the words critic and historian being used interchangeably.
Art is after all the subject of attention for both critic and historian, even though the functions and methods of the two sorts of writer have drawn apart.
Fifty years ago they were in closer touch.
It was in 1936 that the first American edition of Lionello Venturi's History of Art Criticism was published, containing material which could equally have found a place in a book about art history.
Venturi was a university teacher, son of a famous father, Adolpho Venturi, who had made a substantial contribution to the publication of documents of Italian art.
Venturi's survey started with classical times, the uncertainties of writing by Xenocrates, lists of lost works such as the treatise by Apelles, and settled down to comment on  two fundamental categories of criticism, the lives of artists, and the critic's encounter with the work of art.
For the latter he quoted a sentence by Lucian, the second-century Greek rhetorician: ‘A work of art requires an intelligent spectator who must go beyond the pleasure of the eyes to express a judgement and to argue the reasons for what he sees.’
For Venturi, an important development in art criticism came in the eighteenth century which saw the foundation of aesthetics and the rise of philosophies for which art was an indispensable ingredient.
Writing as he was in the 1930s, he expressed his pleasure at the extensive documentation and reference material available to the student of art, instancing the growth of libraries and art historical teaching.
If he were alive today, he would have even more cause for satisfaction.
Some of the main efforts of historians in the first decades of the twentieth century had been directed to putting order into a mass of material, analysing works and documents, and establishing historical data.
German art historians had begun much more systematically on this task than others.
Several art historians wrote syntheses of art historical information, which became standard works.
Histories of art appeared in sequences of volumes by different authors, there were several series of books about artists and on museum collections, besides which the most comprehensive biographical dictionary of artists by Ulrich Thieme and Felix Becker started its long publication process in 1907.
Roger Fry acknowledged German scholarship as a precursor of serious art historical studies in this century.
Fry was a connoisseur of Renaissance art, but also he defended Post-Impressionism (a term he invented), was a painter, and published a monograph on Cézanne.
In 1933 he wrote as follows in a lecture at Cambridge University:
An enormous amount of work has been done and perhaps still more remains to be done in arranging works of art in exact sequence of time.
It is here that the Germans have done so much pioneer work, and indeed the whole tendency of their art historical studies has been to regard works of art almost entirely from a chronological point of view, as coefficients of a time sequence, without reference to their aesthetic significance.
The title of the lecture in which these words appeared was Art-history as an Academic Study, but those were early days for the subject in the British Isles; only in London was there undergraduate teaching, at the Courtauld Institute which opened in 1933.
His unusual topic gave Fry trouble with the title of his lecture: ‘The mere fact that we have no word to designate that body of studies which the Germans call Kunstforschung —a body of studies of which the actual history of Art is only a part — is significant.
I  am obliged to use the awkward and inadequate word ‘Art-history’ for it.
Critical appreciation was desired by fry as a necessary part of a course in art history;, and is today naturally included.
An English handbook written in 1980 even went so far as to state: ‘The enjoyment of looking (what we call the aesthetic experience) is, in fact, the core of the discipline known as Art History.’
Later in the 1980s an American handbook took a more comprehensive view:
The goal of art history is first to place the work of art in history and then assess it in the light of its unique position.
Modern art historians strive to analyze, interpret, and evaluate works of art by identifying their materials and techniques, makers, time and place of creation, and meaning or function.
They inquire about the who, what, when, where, and why of the art object; often the object itself suggests which of these questions should be pursued.
But the function of art history today is not only to make such identifications, but also to relate an individual work humanistically to other works of the same school, period and culture, while remaining sensitive to its salient aesthetic qualities.
According to this American guide, ‘Art criticism is a many-levelled activity that comprises the historical, the recreative, and the judicial.
In all cases it seeks to pronounce value judgements, an exercise shunned by art history.’
The signs are that the next few years will see some extensive soul-searching about art history; several books have already appeared.
From Germany there is The End of the History of Art ; from Britain a group of essays describe The New Art History ; from the United States has recently come Rethinking Art History: meditations on a coy science ; and from Canada there is a forthright title Art History: its use and abuse .
Art criticism seems more likely to remain in the shadows, out of the spotlight of academic controversy.
WRITINGS ON ART
Apart from art criticism and art history, there exist several other types of writing about art.
There is the theory of art, and there is aesthetics; there is writing about artefacts which may or may not be categorised as art, but are in the hands of the archaeologist or the anthropologist; and there is art appreciation.
A guide to art reference books published in 1969 had 2,500 entries, some of which referred to series; for example, there was a single entry for the series of monographs on individual artists, called Klassiker der Kunst , also published in French as Classiques d'Art , in which there are thirty-eight books.
This guide was extensively revised over nine  years, and was republished in 1980 as a Guide to the Literature of Art History, intended for ‘persons doing serious research in the field of art history’.
Another sort of writing about art is what artists themselves have written, either about their own work or about other artists.
This may be by way of theory, or on more matter-of-fact lines about technique or such questions as composition.
Some writing by artists takes the form of instruction; in every period manuals on how to do it, whether drawing, making sculpture or other technical tasks are found, though their incidence is irregular, and such treatises are often the work of minor artists, rather than the great; Leonardo is an exception.
Teachers of art are more likely to write books of instruction, and in their efforts to educate their students may make comments about the traditions they admire and from which they hope their students will learn.
One lesson for practical students is to analyse works.
A teacher's list for analysing pictures may be something like that of the American educationalist Thomas Munro: first impressions of the picture as a whole, line, light and dark, colour, mass, space, unity of design.
Books on art appreciation will also concern themselves with formal questions, as they have done since the beginning of the century.
In a book called How to Appreciate Pictures by R. C. Witt, written in 1902, the chapter headings are not so different: drawing, colour, light and shade, composition, treatment, methods and materials.
A supplementary approach to school art instruction is to draw attention to the types of subject in art, such as portraiture, narrative, landscape.
This thematic method is combined in many introductory courses with formal analysis which is closer to the way that many artists describe pictures.
An example of an artist acting directly as a critic is Bridget Riley, who selected a show of pictures from the collection at the National Gallery in London, in a series called ‘The Artist's Eye’.
Bridget Riley came to prominence as an artist in the 1960s, when her dazzling patterned paintings were a clear success in British Op Art.
Her National Gallery choices of pictures were examples of problems posed to artists by colour, and in a video talk she demonstrated how these artistic problems had been solved.
Connections with her own practice as a painter were evident, even though her abstract compositions were very different in subject from the works of her chosen artists, who included Veronese and Poussin.
Her argument was that the subjects of the old master paintings could be disregarded by a painter who wished to find lessons for the present in the artistic practice of the past.
Bridget Riley had no intention of either presenting an account of Poussin's aims and procedures, or of demonstrating Veronese's debts to his predecessors in Venetian art, as a historian would have felt a duty to do.
The artist as critic in this case deliberately avoided the historical context  of the pictures she was discussing.
Any art critic may take such a position, but a historian almost never.
Even if historians are specifically interested in form, it is likely to be the history of forms, or the development of styles which will have attracted their attention.
It would be too crude a generalisation, though, to say that critics are concerned with form, while historians are interested in the context of art; both the forms and contexts of art are common ground for the critic and the historian.
The ground has been thoroughly explored over the last 250 years, which is one estimate of the span of art critical and art historical activity.
Some authorities might argue for a shorter span, giving Baudelaire a title as father of modern art criticism or Wölflinn the key part in the development of art history.
It is in the last hundred years or so that theories have been advanced to justify critical or art historical practice, the creation of such theories being made more urgent in the last fifty years by a struggle to establish and then uphold the status of art history as an academic discipline.
The study of Oriental art in the West has fared less well.
A firm basis for the study of Oriental art came more slowly, and as we shall see, some of the differences of approach between East and West still require wider recognition.
Moreover, other cultures, such as those of Africa, have had to wait until even more recent times for recognition.
It is literature within the last three centuries, then, that provides the main choices for a reader.
The advice offered here is that a reader should ignore what category of writing a book or article may come under, since helpful art criticism may be found in all sorts of sources.
There is no need to be intimidated by the formality of a staid institution's catalogue, or to neglect popular magazines; as for writing in various academic disciplines, there ought to be no barrier to learning about an interesting topic.
The reader's question of a book or an article should be what function the writing is able or unable to perform?
Writing of many types may assist a reader who looks forward to an encounter with a work of art.
A RULE OF THUMB
It will by now have become evident that this book takes an unorthodox approach to art criticism.
There will be no attempt to define exactly what art criticism is, or to set out a theory of criticism, beyond the suggestions of some differences in writings on art which have already been made.
Nor will a history of art criticism be attempted.
The stress of the book falls on a viewer's encounter with a work of art, and how a prior reading of a piece of art criticism can improve that encounter.
To put the matter in a slightly different way, reading art criticism is a preparation for an aesthetic event.
James S. Ackerman, the architectural scholar, makes use of this phrase in writing about art and communication: ‘What a work of art communicates can be described only in terms of an interaction between  an object and a subject; it communicates nothing at all unless someone is there to look at it.
In other words, there are no aesthetic objects, only physical objects, which, when observed, are capable of stimulating an aesthetic event.’
We can return for a moment to talk to the girl who went to Italy, and was overwhelmed by Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel ceiling.
Her idea of the value of art criticism was a simple one.
In her mind there was a set of events which includes reading about a work of art and looking at it.
There was a crucial sequence.
Michelangelo painted the ceiling.
Critics have visited the chapel and written about it.
This writing was discovered by her; she read some material before her visit, which prepared her a little for what she would see.
When she came to writing for her college project, she found other material; this will enable her to enjoy the work more fully on a second visit.
In her reading about the Sistine Chapel, we can imagine our friend using a rule of thumb to distinguish what was helpful to her.
According to this, art criticism has three indispensable elements.
These are description, interpretation, and judgement.
Walter Pater's account of the Mona Lisa can be used as an example.
The description is rather slender, but Pater was able to assume some existing knowledge on the part of his reader: ‘We all know the face and hands of the figure, set in its marble chair, in that circle of fantastic rocks, as in some faint light under sea.’
Pater's interpretation is justly celebrated, with its cornucopia of cultural references to Troy, Greece, Rome, the Middle Ages, as well as to Pagan gods and Christianity.
It is a memorable evocation, casting a spell over the reader: ‘She is older than the rocks among which she sits; like the vampire, she has been dead many times, and learned the secrets of the grave; and has been a diver in deep seas, and keeps their fallen day about her…’
Pater's judgement is decisive, that this picture is Leonardo's masterpiece.
Art criticism at its most helpful does not stint the reader of any one of these elements.
As four chapters will demonstrate, there are different places to find art criticism; a monograph will afford the greatest opportunity for full critical treatment, while a brief newspaper article is most likely to omit one or more of the three helpful elements, perhaps through the writer's assuming prior knowledge on the reader's part.
To be aware of the limitations of different forms of publication is an advantage for the reader, who can by this means avoid unnecessary disappointments.
Description, interpretation and judgement are the subjects of separate chapters, where they are considered in more detail.
Without anticipating this fuller discussion, it is worth making two or three points immediately.
Description is a heading which includes both a description of the work itself and of the critic's response to it.
Interpretation is the heading which is the most wide-ranging of the three elements, including questions of  form or style, but perhaps additionally considering the work's historical background, and technical, thematic or other questions, including the artist's biography.
The evaluation is a summing up which places the work in the experience of the critic, and helps the reader to form a judgement.
The plan of the book, then, is simple.
After the first two chapters, it discusses where and how to read art criticism.
While this first chapter has outlined what that criticism is, the next gives sketches of half a dozen critical types.
So, it is to the critics themselves we turn next.
AMUSING AND POETIC: THE BEST CRITICISM
A FATHER OF MODERN CRITICISM
The qualities of a good critic are clear perception, fine sensibility and eloquence.
These same qualities are needed by lecturers, so it is no surprise that some excellent critical writings, such as many of John Ruskin's books, were first read out from a lectern.
An art critic also needs a gift for persuasion, perhaps rather more than a head for exposition and argument.
Evocative description can be an effective weapon in the armoury of a critic, besides which a light touch of wit or some conversational sparkle do no harm.
We can start with Baudelaire, sometimes considered to be a father of modern criticism.
He earned this disputable title by his thoughtful approach to critical issues and the undeniable distinction of his critical practice.
His writings on art include several reviews of the Paris Salons, which were either published in booklets or in journals such as the Revue française .
The custom of writing about the Salons was well established, and had inspired brilliant writing by such an important figure in the eighteenth century as Diderot.
By the 1850s the tradition had declined, so that Baudelaire was seeking to give new life to a decayed literary genre.
He asserted that a modern artist should be in tune with his times, careful to avoid hackneyed subjects.
Typically, a laudatory essay he wrote was called The Painter of Modern Life on the subject of the illustrator Constantin Guys; this gifted if minor artist was accurately targeted by Baudelaire as being in the mainstream of contemporary social and political life.
Guys' drawings appeared in such papers as the Illustrated London News , a very successful venture begun in 1842, the decade which also saw the founding of satirical journals like  Punch or Kladderadatsch .
The illustrated periodical was a phenomenon of a world which Baudelaire saw as reborn on Guys' paper:
Natural and more than natural, beautiful and more than beautiful, strange and endowed with an impulsive life like the soul of its creator…
He is looking for that quality which you must allow me to call ‘modernity’; for I know of no better word to express the idea I have in mind.
He makes it his business to extract from fashion whatever element it may contain of poetry within history, to distil the eternal from the transitory…
By ‘modernity’ I mean the ephemeral, the fugitive, the contingent, the half of art whose other half is the eternal and the immutable.
Modernity also had other manifestations.
In his review for the Salon of 1846, Baudelaire wrote: ‘To say Romanticism is to say modern art — that is spirituality, colour, aspiration towards the infinite, expressed by every means available to the arts.’
The real benefit of reading Baudelaire himself on the art of his contemporaries is the chance of recovering some of the excitement the poet felt.
It is an additional pleasure to recognise his prophetic power of divining where the best art was to be found.
Baudelaire argued for modernity, but he also strongly believed that a critic has the right to be partisan.
He asserted the plain fact of the existence of differences in taste.
In writing about Delacroix, he placed his hero in a pantheon of artists who were acknowledged masters of great decorative painting:
Which is the greatest of these great men who differ so much from one another?
Each must decide as he pleases, according to whether his temperament urges him to prefer the prolific, radiant, almost jovial abundance of Rubens; the mild dignity and eurhythmic order of Raphael; the paradisal — one might almost say the afternoon colour of Veronese; the austere and strained severity of David; or the dramatic and almost literary rhetoric of Lebrun.
The critic, too, according to Baudelaire has a right to be independent, and to work without a system ‘which is a kind of damnation which forces one to a perpetual recantation’.
He wrote:
The best criticism is that which is both amusing and poetic; not a cold, mathematical criticism which, on the pretext of explaining everything, has neither love nor hate, and voluntarily strips itself of every shred of temperament.
But, seeing that a fine picture is nature reflected by an artist, the criticism which I approve will be that picture reflected by an intelligent and sensitive mind.
Thus the best  account of a picture may well be a sonnet or an elegy…as for criticism properly so-called…
To be just, that is to say, to justify its existence, criticism should be partial, passionate and political, that is to say , written from an exclusive point of view that opens up the widest horizons.
THE ADVOCATE
A partial and passionate critic also writing in the middle of the nineteenth century was John Ruskin, as devoted to Turner as Baudelaire was to Delacroix.
He may be taken as an example of a first type of critic, the advocate.
Ruskin was a deeply observant man, a close student of the natural world, and capable of a profound and subtle interpretation of Turner's art.
This is a passage about The Slave Ship , painted by the artist in 1840; it comes from Modern Painters .
It is a sunset on the Atlantic, after a prolonged storm; but the storm is partially lulled, and the torn and streaming rain-clouds are moving in scarlet lines to lose themselves in the hollow of the night.
The whole surface of the sea included in the picture is divided into two ridges of enormous swell, not high, not local, but a low broad heaving of the whole ocean, like the lifting of its bosom by deep-drawn breath after the torture of the storm.
Between these two ridges the fire of the sunset falls along the trough of the sea, dyeing it with an awful but glorious light, the intense and lurid splendour which burns like gold, and bathes like blood.
Along this fiery path and valley, the tossing waves by which the swell of the sea is restlessly divided, lift themselves in dark, indefinite, fantastic forms, each casting a faint and ghastly shadow behind it along the illumined foam…
Purple and blue, the lurid shadows of the hollow breakers are cast upon the mist of night, which gathers cold and low, advancing like the shadow of death upon the guilty ship as it labours amid the lightening of the sea, its thin mast written upon the sky, in lines of blood…
I believe, if I were reduced to rest Turner's immortality upon any single work, I should choose this.
Its daring conception, ideal in the highest sense of the word, is based on the purest truth, and wrought out with the concentrated knowledge of a life, its colour is almost perfect, not one false or morbid hue in any part or line, and so modulated that every square inch of canvas is a perfect composition; its drawing is as accurate as fearless; the ship buoyant, bending, and full of motion; its tones as true as they are wonderful; and the whole picture dedicated to the most sublime of subjects and impressions…the power, majesty and deathfulness of the open, deep, illimitable sea.
Ruskin wrote fluently and seriously, often at length.
He was a successful lecturer, much in demand, and put lectures together to make up books; certainly a book is the ideal medium for a critic's extended advocacy of an artist.
Nowadays appreciations are often condensed, perhaps into a catalogue introduction, or possibly fitted into the preface for a book of illustrations.
These sites of criticism are cramping for persuasive advocacy, even if excellent use is sometimes made of them.
The critic as advocate has been fortunate in twentieth-century France, where a climate of culture has brought art and literature together; also art and philosophy, in the case of Jean-Paul Sartre's advocacy of Giacometti, in whose emaciated figure sculptures the philosopher saw a metaphor of human struggle, even, as he wrote in an article in Les Temps modernes in 1948, ‘the fleshless martyrs of Buchenwald’.
The connections and friendships of Surrealism can also be instanced as opportunities for advocacy.
Parisian cultural life between the wars was close-knit; writers and artists gave each other mutual support.
At the beginning of Surrealism it was argued that there was no Surrealist painting, but this dogma was soon reversed.
Surrealist painting had publicity value, especially when executed by a showman like Salvador Dali, who married the former wife of the poet Paul Éluard.
The internal politics of Surrealism were complicated by rivalries and ideological disputes; in the case of André Breton's association with Dali, his earlier support gave way to a denunciation of the artist, who was expelled from the group.
Another famous figure, Joan Mirö, initially praised by Breton as ‘the most Surrealist’ painter, later described his Surrealist phase as having lasted only for a matter of months.
A personal friend of an artist may have a real advantage in writing criticism, as he may learn about artistic intentions which are not explained to others.
This places a critic in a privileged position, but also with a responsibility to make clear whether views expressed are those of the critic or those of the artist.
This distinction can be limpid if the artist is directly interviewed, and the interview is verbatim; but there are problems of evidence with filming and tape recordings, as well as with interviews, since the viewer or reader is unlikely to know how they have been edited.
THE PROGRESSIVE
A second type of critic may be called the progressive.
The archetype here is Guillaume Apollinaire, special pleader for modernism before the first World War.
Apollinaire has been aptly called a company promoter of the avant-garde, responsible, as it were, for the successful flotations in Paris of Cubism and futurism.
He welcomed the varied responses of artists and writers to modern life, and in his own poetry explored innovations.
He believed that Paris was seeing a forward surge in the arts.
Writing on  were unaffected by French bourgeois taste.
Like Apollinaire, they saw a rift between the old century and the new.
Gertrude Stein later wrote a book on Picasso, in which she put the point like this:
One must never forget that the reality of the twentieth century is not the reality of the nineteenth century, not at all and Picasso was the only one in painting who felt it, the only one.
More and more the struggle to express it intensified.
Matisse and all the others saw the twentieth century with their eyes but they saw the reality of the nineteenth century, Picasso was the only one in painting who saw the twentieth century with his eyes and saw its reality and consequently his struggle was terrifying, terrifying for himself and for the others, because he had nothing to help him, the past did not help him, nor the present, he had to do it all alone and, in spite of much strength he is often very weak, he consoled himself and allowed himself to be seduced by other things which led him more or less astray.
In its slightly earlier day, pointillism had also had a progressive artistic programme.
The critical promoter of the work of Seurat and his friends was Félix Fénéon, a subtle stylist who varied his methods according to the work he was describing; he used expository language for Degas, but he dropped logical connection in language, even verbs when discussing Monet's spontaneous art.
In arguing for pointillism, he quoted the scientific treatises consulted by Seurat and even printed mathematical equations.
Fénéon possessed a dry wit, honed to a sharp edge by journalism; he was a specialist in the sort of notes usually titled as ‘News in brief’, but in France called ‘faits divers’(Sundry facts).
He made these three-liners into sardonic comments which undercut the banalities of the newspaper in which they appeared.
As a critic, his descriptions of paintings were phrased with exceptional care.
For example, this is how he evoked Seurat's scene of the Parisian suburban resort known as La Grande Jatte .
‘Beneath a sultry sky, at four o'clock, the island, boats slipping past its flank, stirring with a casual Sunday crowd enjoying the fresh air among the trees; and these forty or so figures are endowed with a succinct, hieratic line…
The atmosphere is transparent and uncommonly vibrant; the surface seems to flicker or glimmer.’
Fénéon, like other excellent critics, was a valued friend of artists, and so he remained all his life even though he gave up writing criticism after a decade of working on the Revue blanche from 1893 to 1903.
He accepted a position in a dealer's gallery, where Matisse was among the artists who benefited from his judgement.
A thumbnail sketch by a friend brings Fénéon to life: ‘He did not thrust himself upon you.
First of all, he knew how to listen — which is very rare.
But at the same time he was both  transmitter and receiver, so to speak.
He asked questions, and between his questions and the painter's answers, there was a discovery of the painting itself.
Even more, there was a sort of mimesis between Fénéon and the artist.’
A friend to artists in England after the war in which Apollinaire had fought was another combatant, the poet and critic Herbert Read.
In 1933 Read published an even-handed book called Art Now , eclectic in its selection, with discussions of Expressionism, Abstraction and Surrealism.
Art Now had started life as a lecture series, but Read was a frequent reviewer of exhibitions, and a contributor to the Listener , from which some short essays were published under the title The Meaning of Art .
Read was a progressive without being wholly partisan.
He disobeyed Baudelaire's instruction to be partial, or obeyed it only in so far as he took a stand against conservative taste.
He did not take sides against Abstraction, even though he was one of the organisers of a Surrealist exhibition in London in 1937.
This was difficult to understand for impassioned artists who saw Surrealism and Abstraction as struggling for the soul of modern art.
Read's account of the work of Paul Klee is characteristic.
He judged that it would be difficult to persuade readers of the artistry of Klee's art, which appeared similar to children's drawings, so he stressed the work's imaginative content.
This passage was written, incidentally, at a time when he was not well informed about Klee's own ideas.
It stands as a sympathetic appraisal by a critic who is trusting largely to his own intuitive sense of quality:
He wants to suggest the exclusive nature of that subliminal world — to dwell there, and to forget the conscious world.
He wants to escape to the world of memory-residues, of disconnected images, for that is the world of fantasy, the world of fairy-tales and myths…
(Klee's art) denies the reality or sufficiency of normal perception…
The eye of the artist is concentrated on his pencil; the pencil moves and the line dreams.
THE POLITICIAN
A committed critic writes from a social, nationalist or political conviction, which interacts with an aesthetic response to a work of art.
The extreme of critical judgement is to destroy the work concerned, as bulldozers destroyed a Russian exhibition of experimental art in 1974; or to forbid an artist to work, as was the practice in National Socialist Germany, where another form of criticism was used in 1937 by making an exhibition of art to be repudiated by its visitors.
This exhibition of ‘degenerate art’ in Munich showed Abstract and Constructivist paintings which were stated to express ‘total madness’and the ‘height of degeneracy’.
National or political fervour can alternatively be the motor force of remarkable artistic achievements.
The murals of Diego Rivera for the Secretariat of Public Education in Mexico City are admitted by the critic Antonio Rodriguez not to be all of an equally high standard, ‘but what poet could keep up the same lyrical flow for a thousand verses?
Among some of his frescoes there are some which are imprinted on the memory for ever.’
In these 239 murals, covering a surface of 1,585 square metres, there are traces of many influences making up a popular and forceful imagery: ‘The codices, pre-conquest sculpture, popular art, the study of living people, the colour of nature as well as the paintings of the misnamed Italian Primitives, together with the modern artistic tendencies to which Rivera himself had contributed during his stay in France, all went to form his own peculiar style, which is apparent for the first time in these frescoes.’
This is art, as Lenin wished, for the people.
In the USSR itself, art flourished at first in experiments after the 1917 Revolution, but became confined to social utility after 1922.
Art was subordinated to a social theory, and the result was ‘Socialist Realism’, the realistic portrayal of heroic workers and everyday life in a representational style.
‘Socialist Realism’ has been described by Ernst Fischer as implying ‘the artist's or writer's fundamental agreement with the aims of the working class and the emerging socialist world’; in short, this is a stance of political progressivism.
Commentary or criticism of such art within the country concerned necessarily takes the same position.
In modern China an attempt has also been made to create a national art, in this instance by partly discrediting tradition.
In 1942 Lu Hsun was quoted by Mao Tse-tung as asserting that the aim of a modern Chinese artist should be: ‘By selection to accept the historical legacy of Chinese traditional art; to absorb the best style and technique from foreign art; and thus to establish a new national art in accordance with the demands and needs of the masses.’
Mao added: ‘To study the development of this old culture, to reject its feudal dross and assimilate its democratic essence, is a necessary condition of our new national culture.’
The critical distinction between feudal dross and democratic essence subsequently proved difficult to make.
This brief diversion into the cultural and political history of Germany, the USSR and China has been made to emphasise the way that a state may determine artistic production, and thence art criticism.
In other political states during the twentieth century, there has been strong support for the view that art should serve a social purpose.
This took such forms as the praise of regionalism in the United States in the 1930s, Marxist criticism in London or New York, or Communist positions taken by Italian critics after the Second World War.
An English critic who attempted the task of  keeping a balance between his political convictions and his aesthetic responses was John Berger, who wrote in the 1950s for the New Statesman .
He argued against an excessively formalist type of analysis of art, by pointing out how everyday emotions and ideas also affect the viewer of paintings or sculpture.
Many of his readers approved his sensitive and appreciative understanding of paintings, though without sharing his political views.
THE COMPILER
A fourth type of critic can be called the compiler, whose criticism is implied in choices for collections or exhibitions.
The compiler's main critical medium is the catalogue, and rather less often articles or a book.
Alfred Barr, the first director of the Museum of Modern Art, New York, is exemplary.
In 1936, for example, the Museum put on two crucially important exhibitions, on Cubist and Abstract Art , and Fantastic Art, Dada, Surrealism .
For the latter catalogue Barr chose the Surrealist writer Georges Hugnet to write a historical essay, but it was Barr's intelligent advocacy and choice of works that made the show such a significant affair.
In place of the aggressive approach of the early years of Surrealism itself, Barr's commentary is in moderated phrases pointing to similarities between Surrealism and works firmly within the tradition of Western art:
The explanation of the kind of art shown in this exhibition may be sought in the deep-seated and persistent interest which human beings have in the fantastic, the irrational, the spontaneous, the marvellous, the enigmatic, and the dreamlike.
These qualities have always been present in the metaphors and similes of poetry but they have been less frequent in painting, which in the past was largely concerned with reproducing external reality, with decoration, or, as in the more advanced movements of recent years, with the composition of color and line into formal design.
On Dada he wrote: ‘With robust iconoclastic humor the Dadaists mocked what they considered the sorry shams of European culture.
They even attacked art — especially ‘modern art’— but while they made fun of the pre-War Cubists, Expressionists and futurists, they borrowed and transformed many of the principles and techniques of these earlier movements.’
Barr, in what used to be a general policy for museum curators, was not writing a passionate defence of the work his museum exhibited.
Rather, ‘the Museum does not intend to sponsor a particular aspect of modern art, but rather to make a report to the public by offering material for study and comparison’.
Barr's European equivalents flourished in the 1950s rather than the  1930s — Jean Cassou at the Musée d'Art Moderne in Paris, Wilhelm Sandberg at the Stedlijk in Amsterdam, Pontus Hulten at the Modern Museum in Stockholm and then at the Pompidou Centre in Paris.
These men were taste-makers, whose judgements were important; but the time available to them for writing was limited by the demands of negotiation and administration, so that they tended to write essays more than books, catalogue entries rather than articles.
THE TRADITIONALIST
Some stress has been thrown thus far on modernism and its advocacy, but a traditional critic may write as well or better than a modernist.
Our fifth type must therefore be the traditionalist, for whom it is a pleasure to find the past living on in the present.
A traditional critic has the advantage of being able to turn to standards and values inherited from the past.
The highest praise can be given to works which match up and accord with these.
A traditional critic may be a practising artist; if so, there is an excellent chance that any technical assessment included in a piece of criticism will be thorough.
Joshua Reynolds' comparison of Michelangelo with Raphael can serve us as an example:
Michelangelo's works have a strong, peculiar and marked character: they seem to proceed from his own mind entirely, and that mind so rich and abundant, that he never needed, or seems to disdain, to look abroad for foreign help.
Raphael's materials are generally borrowed, though the noble structure is his own.
The excellency of this extraordinary man lay in the propriety, beauty, and majesty of his characters, the judicious contrivance of his composition, his correctness of drawing, purity of taste, and skilful accommodation of other men's conceptions to his own purpose.
Nobody excelled him in that judgement, with which he united his own observations on nature, the energy of Michelangelo, and beauty and simplicity of the antique.
To the question, therefore, which ought to hold the first rank, Raphael or Michelangelo, it must be answered, that if it is to be given to him who possessed a greater combination of the higher qualities of the art than any other man, there is no doubt but Raphael is the first.
But if, as Longinus thinks, the sublime, being the highest excellence that human composition can attain to, abundantly compensates the absence of every other beauty, and atones for all other deficiencies, then Michelangelo demands the preference.
Reynolds was here addressing students at the Royal Academy of Arts in London in 1772.
It was the fifth of those lectures he gave from 1769 to 1790, known as his fifteen discourses.
In them he took ‘every opportunity  of recommending a rational method of study’, and incidentally inculcating his views of sound critical taste; it would have been a brave student who dared to admire Carlo Maratta, after hearing that he had:
no great vigour of mind or strength of original genius.
He rarely seizes the imagination by exhibiting the higher excellencies, nor does he captivate us by that originality which attends the Painter who thinks for himself.
He knew and practised all the rules of art, and from a composition of Raphael, Carracci, and Guido, made up a style, of which the only fault was, that it has no manifest defects and no striking beauties; and that the principles of his composition are never blended together, so as to form one uniform body original in its kind, or excellent in any view.
Reynolds was a notable conversationalist, well able to stand up to his friends, who included Samuel Johnson and Edmund Burke.
It is in this more informal context that his draft for a sixteenth and ironical discourse should be read.
It attacks his constant enemy, the idea of genius:
Gentlemen: It is with great regret that I see so many students labouring day after day in the Academy, as if they imagined that a liberal art, such as ours, was to be acquired like a mechanical trade, by dint of labour, or I may add the absurdity of supposing that it could be acquired by any means whatever.
We know that if you are born with genius, labour is unnecessary; if you have it not, labour is in vain; genius is all in all.
It was wittily said by a bright genius, who observed another to labour in the composition of a discourse he was to deliver in public, that such a painstaker was fitter to make a pulpit than to preach in it.
Genius, as it disdains all assistance, so it defies all obstacles.
The student here may inform himself whether he has been favoured by heaven with this truly divine gift.
If he finds it necessary to copy, to study the work of other painters, or any way to seek for help out of himself, he may be sure that he has received nothing of that inspiration.
Reynolds' weighty irony was wielded with more address than arguments put forward by later traditionalists.
But his views were dismaying to one of the readers of his discourses, the poet and artist William Blake.
‘Having spent the Vigour of my Youth and Genius under the Oppression of Sir Joshua &his Gang of Cunning Hired Knaves Without Employment &as much as could possibly be Without Bread, the Reader must Expect to Read in all my Remarks on these Books Nothing but Indignation and Resentment.’
As to genius, ‘Reynolds’ opinion was that Genius may be  taught &that all Pretense to Inspiration is a Lie &a Deceit, to say the least of it.
For if it is a Deceit, the whole Bible is Madness.
This Opinion originates with the Greeks' calling the Muses Daughters of Memory.’
THE THEORETICIAN
The last type of critic to be distinguished in the present chapter will be the theoretician.
Today, theory is in high fashion at Western universities, and varied in scope.
Literary theory, drawing on other disciplines, including semiotics and linguistics, seeks for underlying structures and meanings in literature.
The medium of an art critic as theoretician is the magazine or journal article, not necessarily in a publication specialising in art.
theories are interdisciplinary, and the specific quality of a painting or a sculpture may not be spotlighted by the theoretician, whose writing is likely to be long on interpretation but short on description.
A theoretician is well prepared to consider what the most apt questions about works of art may be.
There is, after all, a rich plurality of means and intents in a painting.
Paul Valéry wrote that a painter:
has brought together, accumulated and assimilated by means of the physical materials of his art a host of desires, intentions, and conditions coming from all regions of his mind and being.
Sometimes he was thinking of his model, sometimes of the mixing of his pigments, his tone, his oils; sometimes of the flesh itself and sometimes of the absorbent canvas.
But, though independent, these objects of his attention coalesced, inevitably, in the act of painting when all the discrete, scattered moments, followed up, caught on the wing, suspended or elusive, were in process of becoming the picture on the easel.
Even such richness may not be enough for a theoretician.
Victor Burgin explained, for example, in The End of Art Theory that he was unwilling to be limited to an aesthetic response to ‘the art object , which in turn is representative of the sensibility of the artist’.
He described this aesthetic response as the bed-rock of conservative criticism.
For him, critical writing has to take up wider issues than enjoyment of a picture or a sculpture.
A different sort of response to art is to use it as a means of learning more about the society in which it was produced; this may be felt by a theoretician to be more important than to know the artist's intentions, which, it can be argued, are determined by society.
Or, the effect of a painting may be compared with those of other means of communication, such as photography, film or television.
there is every reason to welcome such studies, though a reader hoping for judgements about quality may be disappointed by a theoretical writer's greater stress on interpretation.
Theorists may also be more difficult to follow in their arguments because of a current of polemic with which a reader may not be familiar.
For example, the writing of Rosalind Krauss has mainly been published in two journals, the American October and the French Macuba , both advancing a special interpretation of twentieth-century art.
This stance is partly a reaction against what Krauss saw as a dominant position in American criticism, by which ‘the art of the last hundred and thirty years, the art of modernism, is not being well served by writing that promotes the myths through which it can be consistently misread’.
Her particular target for attack was the formalist interpretation of abstract art by Clement Greenberg.
Post-modernist interpretations evolved in her articles between 1973 and 1983, and were published in The Originality of the Avant-Garde and Other Modernist Myths in 1987.
One of the articles is about the abstract artist Sol LeWitt, who was in Krauss's opinion misinterpreted by three critics as serving ‘as triumphant illustration of the powers of human reason.
And, we might ask, what else could Conceptual Art be?’
How such as Donald Judd and Robert Smithson, was that they saw ‘a false and pious rationality’ as ‘the enemy of art’.
From her knowledge of the artists' attitudes to their work, she pointed to the part that uncertainties played in the process of making their sculpture.
AERIAL VIEW: SURVEYS
CHRONOLOGICAL SURVEYS
‘The White Rabbit had put on his spectacles, but he did not know where to start.
‘Begin at the beginning,’ the King said gravely, ‘and go on till you come to the end: then stop.’?
Many art books follow this plan, especially those aiming to take in a national culture or a whole civilisation.
Art histories often make an attempt to keep to chronology, although the difficulties include the crucial fact that in art there is no clear sequence of events.
Unlike old-fashioned narrative history, art has no decisive battles, no international treaties, and no changes of government.
This is perhaps a more useful analogy than might at first sight appear.
Newer approaches to history can give accounts which do not have landmark events and which tell us about different aspects of the past, such as social conditions.
Deciding where is the beginning can be a trouble for an art historian.
In Europe, classical times are a beginning for historians, but not for archaeologists.
For some art historians, the Renaissance is a new beginning, though medievalists can point out convincingly that no one event divides the Middle Ages from the Renaissance.
In writings about the Renaissance, its beginning may be seen to waver from the thirteenth to the fifteenth century.
One of the major accounts of the Renaissance in Italy was published in 1860 by a Swiss history professor at Basel University.
Jacob Burckhardt sensibly avoids pedantry about a starting date, but stresses the revival of antiquity as a main characteristic of the period.
His book entitled The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy avoids a chronological sequence, since his plan of arrangement was to build up a mosaic of characteristic  material.
As he explained: ‘My starting point has to be a vision, otherwise I cannot do anything.
Vision I call not only optical, but also spiritual realization; for instance, historical vision issuing from the old sources.’
A more mundane project for a survey writer is to scan Western art, which has often been attempted in series of books, many of them, as Roger Fry's comments implied, by German historians.
A few single volumes have had deserved success.
One of the best was made out of lectures at the École du Louvre by the French historian Salomon Reinach, first published in English in 1904 (with 600 illustrations).
An American work on the same lines was first published in 1926 by Helen Gardner.
She called it Art Through the Ages .
Neither of these works, nor two more which are to be discussed, have attempted to integrate Eastern with Western art.
The limitations of surveys can be demonstrated by two examples of well-respected books.
A subtle mind and a firm editorial hand were essential ingredients in the success of The Story of Art by E. H. Gombrich, first published in 1950.
Gombrich's book is a fine example of a survey, ambitious in scope, clear-sighted in its emphasis on the history of styles, and judicious in appraisals of the work of individual artists.
It is relatively brief, as can be seen by comparing it with a more recent competitor for the same market, H. W. Janson's A History of Art , which is more than twice the length and has more illustrations (928 in 1962).
Both surveys contain art criticism; Janson uses his advantage of extra space to include more quotations from artists.
For example, this is a passage of interpretive description of a Van Gogh self-portrait: ‘…his emaciated, luminous head with its burning eyes set off against a whirlpool of darkness.
‘I want to paint men and women with that something of the eternal which the halo used to symbolize,’ Van Gogh had written, groping to define for his brother the human essence that was his aim in pictures such as this.’
In other passages, the reader may find more difficulty in following Janson's judgement.
Here is a passage which shows that a survey can benefit from being used with other books (even though three of the sculptures mentioned are illustrated by Janson).
Antoine Coysevox, a less self-conscious classicist than Girardon, was another sculptor employed by Lebrun at Versailles.
In his large stucco relief in the Salon de Guerre, the victorious Louis XIV retains the pose of Bernini's equestrian statue.
Coysevox's bust of Lebrun repeats — again with a certain restraint — the general outlines of Bernini's bust of Louis XIV.
The face, however, shows a realism and subtlety of characterization that are Coysevox's own.
He is the first of a long line of distinguished French portrait sculptors.
Without comparative material, the reader is in serious difficulty about knowing whether to agree with this three-way discriminative judgement.
Gombrich's scholarly work includes many papers on meaning and interpretation in the visual arts, so that the broad but thin scope of his story of art is instructive; by writing a survey he inevitably limited himself to a narrow range of comment.
His book stresses the history of styles, which he describes in sequence, Baroque for example being followed by Rococo, and Neo-classicism.
An unwary reader might think that the book is a history of the changes in Western art, whereas it is in fact only a selection of some changes.
The Story of Art highlights change and development, sadly at the expense of art which is less varied, of however high a quality.
In other words, stylistic change is at a premium; in Gombrich's book the dramatic innovations of Caravaggio do well, but a distinguished painter, say Bonnard, who is not so bold or challenging an artist was omitted until additions were made to the text in 1971.
As for a varied painter, only one work is likely to appear in a survey.
The imperative for a writer of a chronological survey is that a defined period of time is covered; this may be linked with a theme, such as the history of styles in Gombrich's case, but it is unlikely to be linked solely with a spotlight on quality.
Excellence is not necessarily a criterion for including a picture or a sculpture in a chronological survey.
The author may choose to use a characteristic work, something typical of its time and place.
A work of outstanding quality is a pinnacle; it is not typical.
There are also technical limitations.
A well-known picture book of Italian art alone contains more than 4,000 reproductions, yet histories of art, as we have seen, contain fewer, sometimes much fewer than 1,000 plates.
Of the illustrations in any general book relatively few are in colour; a careful author is bound to consider which works suffer least from being reproduced in black and white.
Again, the need for the deeply interested reader to supplement a survey with other books becomes evident.
The presenter of a television series has some advantage over a writer, since filming is more flexible than book production.
A demonstration of the point is to compare Civilisation by Kenneth Clark in its forms as television and book.
The television series is a much richer visual experience, and filming has a completely decisive advantage in being able to explore architecture, inside and out.
Nevertheless, the limitations of writing a script to accompany images on the screen become clear on the printed page.
The pace of television favours simplifications, generalised statements, witticisms, and short sharp judgements on artists' performances.
A presenter, after all, knows that a viewer has the visual evidence to check on what is being said.
As for planning, drama is relished in television, no doubt an incentive for Clark to describe the precarious survival of Western  civilisation in an episode on the Dark Ages as being saved by ‘the skin of our teeth’.
Some commentators have complained that Clark's title,Civilisation , was misleading, as only Western arts were treated; but even if Clark had been willing to take on world art, costs would no doubt have prevented such a grandiose project.
A single-volume history has recently been courageously and skilfully attempted by Hugh Honour and John Fleming, which inevitably suffers from the problem of compression.
Other civilisations are treated in separate studies.
One parallel to the scope of Janson's book on Western art, Sherman Lee's A History of Far Eastern Art , was first published in 1964.
This contains sixty colour plates and 656 black and white plates.
Lee makes firm judgements, as in this comment on a cave painting from the seventh century: ‘The most famous figure at Ajanta is in Cave 1 and has been often described as the ‘Beautiful Bodhisattva’.
It represents Padmapani holding a blue lotus, and is located at one side of a cell entrance.
the figure is much destroyed from the waist down; but the noble torso, and especially the head, express that compassion and humility which is the great achievement of Buddhist art.’
What is true for general histories also applies to surveys of more limited periods.
A typical decision for planning a survey is to take a century, or the reign of some sovereign to delimit a period; this is a device with no relationship to the artistic activity of the time.
In our rapidly vanishing century, decades are also taken as periods of time to be commemorated.
In a dispassionate view, a century seems to have several advantages, as being more than a lifespan and being an evident but arbitrary division.
Art is not alone in failing to conform contentedly to such chronological schemes, indeed, some might say that poetry or music are even less amenable.
An alternative to dates is to use a term like Romantic, even if its meaning seems to alter from writer to writer.
Who means today what Baudelaire meant?
Attempting to capture the spirit of a period is another planning strategy for a survey, though this philosophical notion of a Zeitgeist is notoriously elusive.
It is perhaps more the stuff of epigrams than analysis.
The idea that there is such a thing as the spirit of a time can be awkwardly challenged by asking, ‘Whose time?’
No prizes can be offered for pointing out that at a given moment there are artists of several generations working and in very different ways.
A further, and rather extreme way of dealing with a chronological survey of art is to eliminate the artists.
‘Art history without names’ was a phrase used by Heinrich Wölflinn, in his introduction to The Principles of Art History first published in 1915.
Wölflinn was Burckhardt's successor as professor at Basel, but his later successful career took him to Berlin, Munich and Zürich, a major art historian whose interests were primarily in the Renaissance and the Baroque.
Wölflinn was naturally not ignorant  of artists, but the famous phrase indicated an interest in the sequence of art seen as forms which develop as if of their own volition.
Wölflinn's writings are strong on observation; this can be understood from his choice of terms to describe tendencies in form; linear as against painterly, plane surface as against recessional depth, closed against open form, composite clarity against fused clarity, or absolute clarity against relative clarity.
Such polarities were evidently valuable aids to several generations of Wölflinn's pupils who could benefit from his personal teaching as well as the rather more rigid theory in his books.
Wölflinn used such terms to distinguish epochs; they are only partly useful as interpretation, since Wölflinn tended to be more interested in art as an independent phenomenon than as having meaning intended by the artist.
Wölflinn wrote Renaissance and Baroque in 1888, which in the preface he described as follows:
The subject of this study is the disintegration of the Renaissance.
It is intended to be a contribution to the history of style rather than of individual artists.
My aim was to investigate the symptoms of decay and perhaps to discover in the ‘capriciousness and the return to chaos’ a law which would vouchsafe one an insight into the intimate workings of art.
This, I confess, is to me the real aim of art history.
In 1964 Peter Murray wrote an introduction to a new edition, in which he made an observation about the passage on Bernini's St Teresa , the sculptural group in Rome which is a key work of the Baroque:
Bernini is evidently attempting to render something quite transcendental and something which had never been attempted by a sculptor before that date.
Indeed, it is possible to argue that St Teresa's mystical ecstasies are themselves something entirely new in the spiritual life of Europe…
Wölflinn himself describes the Bernini statues at some length but at no point does he ever mention the subject…
Wölflinn was trying to isolate a visual denominator which, he claimed, was common to all works produced at the same time.
The history of forms in art has had some distinguished advocates, some of whom have been concerned with the transformation over time of one form to another; others have been more attracted to problems of values, arguing either that styles in art change and decay, or that in a particular period there is an artistic will to produce work in a style of its own.
These are matters which border on philosophy.
Eternal values can also be sought in art, as they were by the French art historian Élie Faure, whose open mind accepted disparate arts, a view which he expressed like this: ‘It is  not paradoxical at all to affirm that an Ivory Coast mask and the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel express the same need to manifest a harmonious rapport which exists between mankind and the universe.’
A reader today can judge the validity of these claims through the means of photography.
Extensive records enable us to visit what André Malraux called a Musée imaginaire , in which the arts of many cultures and civilisations can be compared.
Malraux's books, like thousands of picture books since, emphasise details and similarities across boundaries of time and place.
Photographs can reduce the scale of a monument or enlarge a detail for scrutiny.
The unfriendly comment of Edgar Wind in Art and Anarchy was: ‘What has optimistically been called a ‘museum without walls'’ is in fact a museum on paper — a paper-world of art in which the epic oratory of Malraux proclaims, with the voice of a crier in the market place, that all art is composed in a single key, that huge monuments and small coins have the same plastic eloquence if transferred to the scale of the printed page, that a gouache can equal a fresco.’
GUIDE BOOKS
A tourist may ask many questions about an unfamiliar scene.
The answers include history, perhaps technology and sometimes art criticism.
There is no shortage of guide books in the modern world, nor of travel books which regale readers with accounts of what travellers have seen.
Occasionally a book has almost achieved immortality, like John Ruskin's Stones of Venice , but even more modest books can call up the spirit of a place; and a private letter may illuminate both a person and a work of art.
It is easy to sympathise with a traveller who writes: ‘I have seen a quantity of things here — churches, palaces, statues, fountains and pictures; and my brain is at the moment like the portfolio of an architect, or a print-shop, or a common-place book.’
This is from one of the letters written by Shelley in Italy, which goes on to describe the painting of St Cecilia by Raphael:
You forget that it is a picture as you look at it…
There is a unity and perfection in it of an incommunicable kind.
The central figure, St Cecilia, seems rapt in such inspiration as produced her image in the painter's mind; her deep, dark, eloquent eyes lifted up; her chestnut hair flung back from her forehead — she holds an organ in her hands — her countenance, as it were, calmed by the depth of its passion and rapture, and penetrated throughout with the warm and radiant light of life.
So vivid a response by a great poet must inspire respect and possibly a curiosity to see if the reader can match the experience.
Guide books customarily take a lesser role, informing the traveller and listing things to see.
These functions have been well carried out by Baedeker guides since the foundation of the German firm in the first part of the nineteenth century.
Old copies are now collectors’ items, with their entertaining instructions and hints.
In 1909: ‘The unattached cyclist on entering Italy with his wheel must deposit 42 fr. 60c. with the custom-house authorities, which sum is returned to him (though seldom without difficulties) when he quits the country.’
Baedeker acquired a reputation for serious standards, and the traveller who missed a double-asterisked attraction had clearly journeyed in vain.
Baedeker in 1909, like Reynolds in his fifth discourse, hesitated between two great masters and their works.
‘Whether the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel or the Stanze of Raphael should be regarded as the culminating effort of modern art, has long been the subject of controversy’; but they both received double asterisks.
A star system in guide books is still common practice today.
As art criticism, it has the merit of making a judgement, though description and interpretation may be meagre.
Some rankings have more than the approval of the author of a guide, and are attested by other authorities, local or even national.
In Czechoslovakia works of importance are graded as national treasures, and while the Japanese have a similar system, they also rank places.
For example, the shrine of Miyajima, a temple approached by water through a famous red gateway, ranks number three in Japan.
More informal guidance can be found in books with a personal approach, in which class the Companion Guide to Rome by Georgina Masson is exemplary (first published in 1965).
There is adequate historical data about the Sistine Chapel, but there is also a personal response:
More, probably, has been written about this great hall-like chapel than any other building in the world; but in fact no description, picture or photograph conveys the impact which it makes.
Perhaps the first, and in the end the most lasting, impression that one carries away, is of the contrast between the golden-cream light and space and the exquisite feeling of harmony engendered by the ceiling as opposed to the deep blue darkness and turmoil of the ‘Last Judgment’.
Georgina Masson's special gift was her ability to disentangle and evoke in Rome three different cities, of Classical Antiquity, of the Renaissance, and of the Baroque.
Not every city would be suited to this approach, it must be admitted.
In Rome a visitor can stand in front of a Baroque church, but a few minutes later, having walked only a short distance, may have plunged back in time to Antiquity.
This is not true in Philadelphia, where a new city decisively overwhelms the old.
The Liberty Bell and the  Court House are attractions which repay attention, but have far less power of historical recall.
Guide books are arranged to suit the convenience of the traveller, for whom routes round a city or a site are often suggested.
In an art museum, the works may be described from room to room, whether in a book or on a sound guide.
A sound guide has an edge over the printed page, since the listener is looking at what is being described, interpreted and judged.
However, the limitation of the sound guide is equally evident: only a small number of works can be given such exceptional treatment.
GEOGRAPHICAL SURVEYS
The tourist may find guide books excellent value, but an armchair traveller may be better served in other ways.
A favourite choice is a book selected on geographical lines, say on Egypt, Mexico, or China, to mention three civilisations; France, Australia, or Brazil, to take three nations; and Norwich, the Hudson River, or Tuscany to name three areas.
Books on any of these topics are likely to have a chronological framework, but the first principle of selection is place.
The art discussed may still be in situ , or at least in the country of its origin; hence the immense attraction of travel to the sites of great civilisations such as Egypt or Mexico.
Surveys of art on geographical lines are a commonplace of policy for publishers.
Among recent successes is the notable pelican series, whose titles are varied between civilisations (say, Japan), countries (say, France, 1500 — 1700), and international themes (Ars Sacra , about medieval Christendom).
The art criticism in such books generally has a slant, questioning whether the country or places have had a determining influence on art.
Robert Paine, writing in the Pelican volume on Japan, had an answer:
There can be no doubt that the climate of Japan imposed on her artists a different attitude towards art problems.
The city of Kyoto, the imperial capital, lies surrounded by hills and is frequently bathed in mists.
The visibility, lower than that of the drier climate of many parts of China, has caused the artist in Japan to be more concerned with the strength of outline than with the subtleties of depth sought for by his Chinese neighbour.
The decorative flatness and the higher colour of Japanese art also follow as products of the same climatic necessity.
Similar passages of critical reflection or speculation can be found in many books.
Formal differences in art have been linked to places in varied ways, one of the best-known Renaissance contrasts being the stress on line  evident in Florentine art as against the colourist approach of the Venetians, a city on water.
Does an English liking for watercolour spring from the country's climate?
Does the flat landscape of the Netherlands impose a special sort of vision on Dutch artists?
The reverse of the coin is internationalism, a feature, some might say, of twentieth-century art; not so uncommon either in other periods, where art historians struggle heroically to identify differences between the art of one country and another.
Some of these struggles have been inspired by base motives — desires to appropriate art to a national or a political cause.
But some such efforts can have sympathy, as in those stirrings of national spirit in central Europe before 1914, when literature, language and music were fuel for Czech, Polish or Hungarian aspirations.
Consider Czech art, which might be said to have existed only since the beginning of the Czechoslovak state after the first World War.
The beauty and achievements of Bohemian art can perhaps be called Czech only with an effort, but there is no doubt of the attachment of a people to the heritage that they can rightly claim.
Yet Prague was always an international city, whose culture was dependent on native and external traditions alike.
Let us walk with a visitor through the city, a veteran of the Second World War who values it as one which was almost unscathed from the bombing which devastated so many European cities.
He starts at a medieval Gothic window, a remnant of the first university in central Europe (founded 1348); he pauses at the rebuilt Bethlehem Chapel, the site of where the Mass was first allowed in Czech, and Jan Hus preached before being burnt for heresy in 1413; he pays respects to the relics of the Jewish quarter with its ancient and crowded graveyard; to cross the river he uses the Charles Bridge, lined with Baroque statues (many between 1700 and 1720), and climbs the hill to the Castle where art and architecture of all periods again further embellish the golden city of central Europe.
In the evening our friend has supper in the art nouveau interior of the Hotel Europe, before going to a performance at the National Theatre, built in the 1880s as a monument to the Czech national spirit, pinioned under the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
As he has enjoyed his day, he sleeps soundly without a nightmare about what was specifically Czechoslovak in the sights.
The truth is that nationality in art has limited importance.
At no time will this be more true than in the 1990s, when the art critic confronts an increasingly international community of art.
Of course, surveys will continue to be written about American painting or German art, British sculpture or Australian print-making; this fact of publication does not mean that these activities have an inner coherence.
Any reader is entitled to ask what purpose such national anthologies serve; their best justification is making art more accessible, enabling those living artists represented to find and hold on to audiences for their work.
The reader can beware of an element of self-interest in such anthologies, whether in the form of books or exhibitions.
For one thing, a government agency may have commercial or political aims in commissioning surveys or anthologies.
An international cultural agreement is made in parallel with a trading agreement; trade, it is hoped, will follow the art exhibition.
Not a new situation, for there are ample historical parallels.
For the reader, however, an art defined as national, made as cohesive and marketable as possible, may be less than convincing as an entity; it may be that within a survey or an anthology there are just a limited number of interesting and attractive works.
SURVEYS OF TECHNIQUES
Surveys of technique often include more rewarding art criticism than either chronologically or geographically based books.
The writer is able to measure artists not only against each other but also against standards of technical achievement.
Here is a passage from a classic work on etching and engraving, about Dürer:
He was solid, scientific, conscious in all his creating, learning his art from masters who were still in the youth of artistic development, his whole work shows a progress towards an ideal which the trammels of Gothic tradition never left him free to attain without a struggle.
By the very energy spent in its realisation, his accomplishment is all the more intense in its expression.
He recognised the truest limits of the medium in which he worked, never allowed technical virtuosity to have the better of the central aim of significant composition, and established a balanced style which remains the most perfect model of the line-engraver's art.
The author is the English scholar Arthur Hind.
His working life was spent in the British Museum, whose print collection was his special care.
He first published a short history at the beginning of the century, but the passage quoted comes from the enlarged edition of 1923.
In discussing Dürer, he treated him as the most versatile artist of a triumvirate, whose other members were Marcantonio Raimondi and Lucas van Leyden.
Of the latter he wrote, ‘Lucas van Leyden is an artist of frailer calibre than Dürer, and prone to lose himself in imitation of stronger men, each of his contemporaries in turn dominating his style.’
Another book about the age of Dürer, but on a different topic, is The Limewood Sculptors of Renaissance Germany , by Michael Baxandall, published in 1980.
The author started his career in the Victoria and Albert Museum, where there is an important group of this sculpture; his book had a double origin in a museum exhibition and a series of lectures.
Divisions in the book are unusually clear, separate chapters being given to topics such as function, the market, or the historical and political background of the subject.
He makes a particular point of technique.
In the chapter on technique the author describes the process of carving a figure from a wood with particular properties.
First the hard heartwood was removed, making the intended figure hollow at the back; the sculptor avoided solid masses, unstable in wood (though preferred by sculptors in a material like sandstone); finally in the carving, forms were decided partly to avoid the hazards of the sapwood shrinking and splitting.
Limewood is contrasted with oak, and the chapter finishes:
The properties of the material made limewood sculpture a special medium.
It was a medium of the grand form and of the surface, whether polychrome or monochrome; it was not a positive medium of the middle forms, like oak, or even usually of the assertive instrument, as bronze can be.
The grand form offered a scale of more or less assimilation to the form hidden in the wood, the surface a scale of textures, on both of which the sculptors played, and they are a source of specific qualities of the genre.
A final chapter is devoted to four case studies: Michael Erhart of Ulm, Tilmann Riemenschneider of Wurzburg, Veit Stoss of Nuremberg, and Hans Leinberger of Landshut.
These short studies are in part historical, but partly art criticism; the study of Leinberger is particularly relevant, as it comments both on an encounter with a sculpture and the problems of reading about it.
The best preliminary plan may be for the reader to open the book upright at (the illustration) and then go to the other side of the room, to be imposed on from a distance: it is the nearest the book can offer to the proper first encounter with the figure.
There is no one way of looking at a sculpture by Leinberger and similarly there is no one angle or distance from which we see it anything like whole, but there is something like a normal sequence of approach.
This begins with the figure impinging powerfully from a distance, in this case as one walks into St Martin's at Landshut, more powerfully than other things in the field of view.
What carries most punch here is, of course, the gilt y-shaped motif of the folds offered by the Virgin's mantle…to stretch a phrase, a Leinberger sculpture is a permanent possibility of cumulative sensation.
For, once we have made the first approach to the Landshut Virgin and acquired a first set of impressions, the changeableness of the figure begins to work on us further, now less in the dimension of greater or lesser distance and more in the angle of view.
In comparison, ‘One's relation to Riemenschneider's Altar of the Holy Blood is a little passive: one waits and the shift of light will change its mood and meaning.’
This extended critical evaluation is a rarity in a survey, but very welcome in the way it spells out a connoisseur's response in formal terms to a work of art.
It has the added value of being firmly rooted in a thorough understanding of technique.
Surveys of painting, it has to be admitted, are more fallible in this respect, partly because of the relative simplicity of the means used.
Differences exist between the media of tempera and oil, or oil and acrylic, but they do not have the importance of contrasts in other material processes.
Nevertheless, there is one group of surveys of painting which have a special interest: those which form part of handbooks or, more grandly, treatises on how to paint.
A practitioner's assessment of other artists' work, often in the light of making similar attempts, can make intriguing reading.
Drawings are quite often given survey treatment.
The specialist field of old master drawings has received extremely detailed study; the drawings are interesting both in their own right and as a means of knowing more about artists' practices.
The connoisseur also hopes to have in a drawing an authentic work by an artist's own hand, which in the case of an oil painting may not be so assured.
European studio practice from the Renaissance to the nineteenth century included the master's employment of assistants, and the use of specialists for parts of pictures, such as drapery or landscape.
Watercolours are also treated in surveys.
Here the writer is likely to be a practitioner, and the approach may defer to the popularity of the medium as a pastime for amateurs.
Print-making has had the advantage of some careful scholars, but an excellent book is by a practitioner, Stanley Hayter.
It is modestly titled About Prints .
In it this English master printmaker wrote lucidly and well about the range of possibilities in his profession.
His memories of his Paris studio add spice to his account, for the facilities there were used not only by his students but in addition by such major artists as Miró and Picasso.
The technical survey is above all a category of book in which the writer will have closely observed the material discussed.
This observation has direct bearing on questions of authenticity, since a detail may be the way that the true can be separated from the false.
William J. Ivins was curator of prints at the Metropolitan Museum from 1916 to 1946.
In How Prints Look , first published in 1943, he wrote ‘an elementary introduction to the appearances (the outward and visible signs) of prints’, and cautioned that: ‘Most of the time spent over it should be given to looking at its pictures.’
The caption material under two images reads as follows: ‘In the middle nineteenth century, before photography was in general use, Pilinski of Paris was famous (and notorious) for the deceptiveness of his  copies of old woodcuts.
This is an enlargement from an original fifteenth-century woodcut.
On the opposite page is Pilinski's wood-engraved copy.’
’ Pilinski had to redraw his copy of the old and valuable original because he could not paste the original on his block and engrave through it.
Every line is different — every line is stupid — and the whole character has changed.
In a number of places Pilinski completely misunderstood the ‘indications’ of the original.’
THE SURVEY WITH A THEME
Themes in art have a fascination, since they add a subject interest to a viewer's enjoyment of artistic qualities.
The portrait is an endlessly interesting example, a theme redolent with social connotations and artistic references.
In Dostoevsky's opinion, ‘The portrait painter seeks the moment when the model looks most like himself; in the capacity to find and hold this moment lies also the talent of the portraitist.’
The novelist in search of character thus finds a fellow-worker in the painter.
This hope for a natural quality in portraits, however, is frequently disappointed, since many sitters are eager to be flattered.
A powerful sitter may also impose a requirement that the portrait looks impressive, so that an amused spectator can look for traces of the consequent power struggle in a picture; Queen Elizabeth I of England was as firm as the Emperor Augustus about the principle that a ruler's actual appearance matters less than the imprint of authority.
The artist's self-portrait is a special case in portraiture and deservedly part of the collecting policy of art museums including the Uffizi, Florence.
A successful description of a self-portrait may not be difficult, but an illuminating interpretation may call on many references, especially other artists' pictures of themselves.
What can be deduced from a self-portrait is often controversial; a critic is especially likely to read into a self-portrait some opinion held about the artist.
When, as in the cases of Rembrandt and Van Gogh, there is a whole series of pictures to choose from, books can be written on the self-images of one artist alone.
This theme is a useful one for assessing the quality of a critic's writing, since it tempts the rash into speculation, while an impoverished eye will miss relevant and useful comparisons.
A theme where personal psychology is necessarily absent is the Christian subject of the Madonna and Child.
Again, much interest attaches to interpretation, as an impassive hierarchical image of the Madonna is softened through the centuries into a more human and tender figure.
The multitude of Madonnas for Italian worship in the Renaissance made this a fruitful theme for connoisseurship which has taken on the task of distinguishing authentic works from those by followers or copyists.
An art critic may have difficulty in deciding how far the picture needs  to be considered as devotional imagery, and how far discussion can be limited to artistic merits.
An extremist view expressed by a twentieth-century artist is what Matisse had to say about his responses to murals by Giotto.
‘When I see the Giotto frescoes at Padua I do not trouble to recognise which scene in the life of Christ I have before me, but I perceive instantly the sentiment which radiates from it and which is instinct in the composition in every line and color .
The title will only serve to confirm my impression.’
In a different context, but also on the issue of religion, an American book on the Aztecs by the archaeologist Vaillant commented tartly:
The Aztecs did not have a term for ‘fine arts’, nor did they speculate about aesthetics, nor make objects to be contemplated for their beauty alone.
They had none of the socially sterile attitude towards art which we adopt in our own culture.
Instead, they recognised the value of superior workmanship and used its products to honour the gods who were intermediaries between man and the infinite power of the universe.
The list of themes and their varied fortunes is a long one.
For example, landscape painting had only a gradual success as a theme in European painting.
Kenneth Clark demonstrated this development of an evolving sensibility to nature in his lectures,Landscape into Art , published in 1949.
His introduction remarks, incidentally, that:
anyone who expects this book to be a treatise on the history of landscape painting will be disappointed…in spite of copious rewriting, lectures these pages remain.
One may remove the words ‘next slide please’ from the text, but not from the sequences of thought.
The publication of lectures is a well-known form of literary suicide.
I indulge in it now because the audiences who heard them endured, with much patience, extremes of heat and cold.
I am grateful, and can only show my gratitude by giving them the text to criticise under more agreeable conditions.
A characteristic two pages of the text are given to Corot's landscapes, five pictures being cited, though the reader is less fortunate than the lecture audience, as only two are illustrated.
Here is Clark's description of Corot's late style:
From all his great range of delicate visual experiences Corot came to be satisfied with one — shimmery light reflected from water, and passing through the delicate leaves of birches and willows.
He concentrated on it because he loved it, and he thereby proved  once more his extreme simplicity of character.
For he had revealed one of the eternally popular effects of nature, one which is still quoted by simple people as a standard of visual beauty.
Animals make up a category of painting with an uneven reputation, though the theme is one of obvious importance and interest in sculpture.
Animal Painting in Britain was the title of a book by Basil Taylor, where he explained in his first chapter that the topic had been neglected since it was either assumed to be about sporting pictures, or about pictures of horses by such specialists as Sartorius.
He quoted the dismissive comment of the writer of the volume on British Painting 1530–1790 in the Pelican History of Art : ‘To discuss the Sartorius tribe and such painters is no business of the historian of art, no matter how bitter the accusations of neglect are wont to be from those specialist writers who sometimes confuse the history of art with praising famous horses.’
Such a frank exclusion from the domain of art is not a solitary instance.
Exclusion, though, is rather less general a problem than a low status for some categories of painting.
Academies of art, whether in the West or in the Orient, have had lists of priorities in themes of art, in which there are many similarities.
For example, in twelfth-century China, a catalogue of the Imperial collection had ten headings: Taoist and Buddhist subjects, human affairs, palaces and other buildings, foreign tribes, dragons and fishes, landscapes, animals, flowers and birds, ink bamboos, and finally vegetables and fruit.
This sort of listing is worth knowing by a reader, who may occasionally notice that it underlies the degree of attention being paid to a theme by a critic.
THE SURVEY WITH A THEORY
The last type of survey to be considered has a basis in theory.
If a critic has a very decided political or religious point of view, this can override other considerations in judgements about art; the viewpoint may also give a bias to the description or interpretation made.
A remarkable Marxist interpretation, for example, was made of Florentine painting from Giotto's time to the fifteenth century, by Frederick Antal in the 1940s.
Later writers, even those sympathetic to Antal's thesis, have admitted that the argument about class conflict in the period was exaggerated, but this does not exclude the possibility that an equally unexpected approach may not throw light on some apparently exhausted topic.
Of course, a theorist may damage an argument through bias, perhaps excluding relevant evidence inconvenient to the case being made; but this is not a danger exclusive to theorists.
Omissions are most patent perhaps in surveys made with a political bias.
We have already mentioned in passing the state policies regarding the arts in Germany, the USSR and  China; there have been writers who followed the party lines by giving attention to those artists favoured by patronage, while neglecting others.
A recent survey with a viewpoint is by the American art historian, Whitney Chadwick.
Women, Art and Society is a synthesis of work that has been progressing for twenty years about women and the visual arts.
Some women have acquired status as heroines; Rosalba Carriera, Angelica Kauffmann, Rosa Bonheur, Berthe Morisot, Paula Modersohn-Becker and Käthe Kollwitz have found places in a pantheon of major talent from which there ought never to have been any question of their exclusion.
But Chadwick makes some sensible points about the questions raised by her account which challenge common assumptions about art and society.
Some are connected with writings about literature, philosophy and politics which are called post-modern or post-structural.
Post-structuralist texts expose the role of language in deferring meaning and in constructing a subjectivity which is not fixed but is constantly negotiated through a whole range of forces — economic, social and political.
They have undermined long-cherished views of the writer or artist as a unique individual creating in the image of divine creation (in an unbroken chain that links father and son as in Michelangelo's God reaching towards Adam in the Sistine Chapel frescoes), and the work of art as reducible to a single ‘true meaning’…
Now artistic intention can be seen more clearly as just one of many often overlapping strands — ideological, economic, social, political — that make up the work of art, whether literary text, painting, or sculpture.
The most difficult theoretical surveys are those which seem to promise to answer difficult questions about art in general, perhaps especially in the modern world.
As in books on the philosophy of art, or aesthetics, many do not in fact contain any art criticism, in the sense of description, interpretation and judgement of individual works.
Their strengths are rather in clearing the ground of preconceived ideas about the arts, and putting new points of view.
When works of art are described only those aspects of an image important to the argument are included.
It is in this arena that some of the fiercest intellectual fighting about art is taking place, though the contests range wider than the visual arts to politics and economics.
For example, Chadwick states: ‘There can be no simple category defined as ‘feminist art history’, since the effect of new ideas is that ‘much recent scholarly writing has shifted attention from the categories ‘art’ and ‘artist’to broader issues concerning ideologies of gender, sexuality, and power’.
In short, from some books the reader may gain moral or political  enlightenment, but will be disappointed of developing a personal taste.
David Talbot Rice describes such development of taste as follows:
It is far better to like and admire something that is wrong, or to like and admire for the wrong reason, provided we do so sincerely, than to follow slavishly the dictates or ideas of some other person.
If our admiration be true, genuine, and progressive we will in the end come to admire the good and cease to admire the bad.
We will learn by our own experience what is best, and not by following the dogmatism of another.
But a subtle critic may well save us a great deal of time, pain and trouble in the learning, for he can set us aright at the outset, and by his example rather than by his assertions show us how to avoid admiring that which is unworthy.
ZOOMING IN: THE MONOGRAPHS
Monographs on Painters
Dictionaries describe a monograph as an account of a single subject; by this definition monographs make up one of the most common categories of art publishing.
A book on a single painter, for example, is a monograph.
There is some doubt in a grey area of differences between monographs on the one hand, and catalogues or biographies on the other.
For convenience, biographies will be included in the present chapter, while catalogues will be treated in the next.
There is a boom in publishing books about individual artists, especially those who are already well known.
The potential reader of a monograph on a minor artist may not find a book easily, but there are plenty of publications on Leonardo, Rembrandt or Picasso.
It might be thought that this was a natural consequence of the popularity of great artists, but in fact the economics of publishing result in some bizarre decisions about art books.
The reader with a love of art is not always at the front of a publisher's attention.
Art books are expensive to produce, especially if they contain colour illustrations.
One way for a publisher to finance the publication of an art book is to act with other publishers who will share costs; an alternative is to find a subsidy.
Both these strategies affect choices of subjects for art books.
Other publishing houses in other countries will naturally prefer artists who are already internationally well known.
Subsidies are available from a limited number of sources, such as government agencies, charitable foundations, and, today very rarely, private individuals; there is a factor of prestige to be counted in this sponsorship, mediated by the decisions of committees.
This aside, when the reader has found a monograph, what will it contain?
An older book, that is one published before around 1900, will only have black and white plates, which are unlikely to be photographs.
This applies, for example, to the book on Delacroix published in 1885, selected by A. Robaut and with an essay by Ernest Chesnau.
By the 1920s a characteristic book, as for example Cézanne: a study of his development by Roger Fry, published in 1927, had black and white photographic illustrations only.
In either case, the absence of colour gave an incentive to the authors to provide evocative descriptions.
These descriptions were vital to writing about these two artists in whose work colour plays so important a part.
At the end of the twentieth century, at least some colour illustrations are likely to find places in a monograph.
They may, however, not be exactly what the author would have preferred, as a colour plate which is readily available (perhaps having been used in another publication) is much cheaper to use than a new plate which has to be commissioned.
The reader can thus be aware that a writer may have written round what happens to have been offered.
This may be important in assessing how well a writer illustrates an argument.
The standards which can be obtained in colour reproductions today are high, but not always attained.
Comparison of illustrations of the same picture in several publications will demonstrate this truism, while the best test of looking at a reproduction in front of the picture itself can be a disheartening experience.
A lecture audience looking at a slide projection, incidentally, may also suffer from seeing distorted colours, though art museums take some care to sell transparencies of a satisfactory quality.
Considerations of illustrations aside, the reader will be hoping for enlightenment from the text.
It is probable that this will have much to offer.
Monographs are a main source of considered art critical writing.
The author has had time to consider and reflect, so that descriptions, interpretations and evaluations will have been carefully formulated.
There are many choices of arrangement and treatment available to a monographer.
An art historian may choose to elucidate the social context of the art, or trace its sources in the work of other artists; these choices will be reflected in the illustrations as well as the text, while sketches, other versions of pictures and related material will be available for the reader to make comparisons.
Roger Fry, in writing about Cézanne, took a different route.
A painter himself, he was attracted to the problems he believed that Cézanne had faced and solved in composition and technique.
Fry's opening words are: ‘Those artists among us whose formation took place before the war recognise Cézanne as their tribal deity, and their totem.’
Fry thought that in Cézanne's mature work:
The ultimate synthesis of a design was never revealed in a flash; rather he approached it with infinite precautions, stalking it, as it were, now from one point of view, now from another, and always in fear lest a premature definition might deprive it of something of its total complexity.
For him the synthesis was asymptote towards which he was for ever approaching without ever quite reaching it; it was a reality, incapable of complete realization.
An example of Fry's description of Cézanne's development dealt with colour:
When Cézanne uses colour we note that at each nodal point of the interplay of planes, Cézanne marks this sequence by a series of small washes of various colours, modulating generally from violet to greenish, or bluish grey.
His aim in this was as far as possible to translate changes of tones into changes of colour, feeling that only by this method could the full saturation and pressure of colour be realized.
I cannot doubt that this peculiar method which gave such valuable results in water-colour, influenced Cézanne to apply it at least to the early stages of his oil paintings, and that gradually it grew to be his habitual practice in the succeeding period.
In proportion, then, as we advance in the chronological sequence of his works, we find his material become less and less pastose, his touches more and more liquid and transparent, more like watercolour.
The change is gradual.
Nor is it so regular that we can trust to it altogether to fix the exact date of any given work.
There are returns to the impasto, but thin painting certainly predominates towards the end of the century.
From description to formal interpretation, we can cite part of an analysis of a portrait,Monsieur Geoffroy :
Its success must be partly due to the extraordinary number of sittings to which his admiring and clear-sighted sitter submitted.
The construction here is more erudite than in the Madame Cézanne .
It is less removed from the ordinary conception of a portrait arrangement.
The movements here are more complex, there is a less complete frontality of presentment and symmetry of design.
The equilibrium so consummately achieved results from the counterpoise of a great number of directions.
One has only to imagine what would happen if the books on the shelf behind the sitter's head were upright, like the others, to realize on what delicate adjustments the solidity of this amazing structure depends…
He it was who first, among moderns at all events, conceived this method of organizing the infinite complexity of appearance by referring it to a geometrical scaffolding.
Though it must be remembered that this is no a priori scheme imposed upon the appearances, but rather an interpretation gradually distilled from them by prolonged contemplation.
Whether Fry was justified in his interpretations of Cézanne is not our present question.
What is valuable is to see that here is a critic writing at the top of his bent.
And Fry was straightforward about his own perceptions.
‘The critic, I hold, should be loyal enough to his own impressions to confess to what is probably due to his own defects.
I must admit therefore that there is one passage in this otherwise consummate design (A Fruit Dish ) of which the meaning escapes me.
I cannot see the necessity of the shadow cast by a half-opened drawer in the kitchen table., It is encouraging to find Fry underlining a point about critical writing — that with a description of a work of art it can be useful to be given an explicit account of how the critic responds.
Another point is also made explicitly.: his difficulty is assessing Cézanne's work at the end of the century.
‘It is more difficult to be precise about this than about the earlier phases, partly because the pictures are rarer and less accessible, and have not been adequately photographed, partly because it includes considerable variations.’
Fry's book contains rather little biographical information, the focus being firmly on Cézanne's work.
There is almost nothing about the artist's contemporaries.
This not an invariable pattern for monographs, but readers can usually expect that the central figure of a book will receive prominence at the expense of any other artists.
If comparisons are included they may be with an artist whose work is considered by the author to be inferior to the subject of the monograph.
Biographical information is another issue.
A biography is not a monograph, and, indeed, there are biographies of painters which do little justice to art.
In such books the artists’ incidental activities receive undue emphasis.
the question of what balance can be attained in a book is a familiar problem to literary critics, who are divided in their views into at least two camps, one favouring attention being paid mostly to the text itself, while the other prefers to take other questions into account, including the effect the writer's life may have on the text.
Some see the conflict as having been crystallised by Proust, who wrote an attack on the critic Sainte-Beuve in 1908 (though it was not published until 1954).
Sainte-Beuve, as one of the most widely-read critics of the late nineteenth century, had perfected a conversational essay in which personal anecdotes, quotation, literary judgements and reflections were intermingled.
Proust took the view that writers should be judged by their works alone, rather than be interpreted through biography.
Ironists reflect  with pleasure that nevertheless one of the great literary biographies of the century has subsequently been written about Proust.
How valuable biographical information is to literary or art criticism is a question that will never receive a decisive answer; but a commonplace observation can be made, that circumstances alter cases.
Some artists separate their art from their lives, some are articulate about their aims, others are gruffly evasive.
Cézanne was not forthcoming in his letters or his conversation.
His dealer Ambroise Vollard wrote a book of reminiscences about the painter, including a famous passage about his portrait.
‘After a hundred and fifteen sittings, Cézanne abandoned my portrait to return to Aix.
‘The front of the shirt is not bad’— such were his last words on parting.’
The personal characters of artists cannot be infallibly deduced from their work.
‘Art is a rum business’, thought Turner, and the attentive reader of a book about artists called Born under Saturn cannot avoid thinking that artists are unpredictable while reading through its sections on misers, criminals, celibates, debauchees, suicides, melancholics and eccentrics.
The authors are Rudolph and Margot Wittkower, and their theme is that while some artists succeed in financial and social circumstances without strain, other artists tend to Saturnine temperaments.
‘Saturn is the planet of melancholics, and Renaissance philosophers discovered that the emancipated artists of their time should have the characteristics of the Saturnine temperament; they were contemplative, meditating, brooding, solitary, creative.’
Comparable ideas about artists can be discovered in other cultures, but also very different views.
Even in Europe, Saturn is not the only planet under whose influence it is possible to be born.
‘Mercury is the patron of cheerful, lively men of action.
According to ancient tradition, craftsmen, among others, are born under his sign.’
Beyond which, a disbeliever in astrology can find quite other ways of categorising artists.
A final caution about using monographs about painters is that they can seldom be read alone.
Historical background is only compressed in a monograph; biographical material may be more extensive in other sources; the painter's contemporaries will not receive much attention, and may be slighted.
Even illustrations may not be adequate, details of pictures often being poorly represented, leaving an artist's techniques, materials and handling to be discovered from more specialist studies.
The reader can hope, all the same, that the writer will give an account of the special merits of key pictures, and it is these art critical passages which can be of most help in enjoying or appreciating the chosen artist's achievement.
BIOGRAPHIES
A biography of an artist is a tricky proposition for a writer, since the artist may prefer to be judged through art, not life; the incidentals of an everyday activity, not altogether under the artist's control, are rather unimportant compared to the artist's concentrated effort to create paintings or sculpture.
The biographer may come up against problems of concealment, both written records and works having been destroyed.
Early work is often missing from an artist's oeuvre, while student work or juvenilia may be saved only by chance or possibly by a devoted family.
Lionello Venturi considered lives of artists made up a basic category of art criticism, buttressing his opinion with accounts of writings by Vasari and others.
However, if biographies of artists are carefully examined, it will be found that they do not necessarily contain much art criticism at all; a biographer may prefer not to express personal views about the artist's work; a book's main thrust may be to describe the artist's own aims and ideas.
This will result in the book evading the task of art criticism altogether, though the critical views of the artist may be recorded.
A deferential biographer is especially likely to take this line.
An exception may be illustrated by a passage from a classic biography, that of John Constable by Charles Leslie.
Leslie was himself a painter, and thus comments in his own right on his friend's art, as here on a painting of Hampstead Heath:
I have before noticed that what are commonly called warm colours are not necessary to produce the impression of warmth in landscape; and this picture affords, to me, the strongest possible proof of the truth of this.
The sky is of the blue of an English summer day, with large, but not threatening, clouds of a silvery whiteness.
The distance is of a deep blue, and the near trees and grass of the freshest green; for Constable could never consent to parch up the verdure of nature to obtain warmth.
These tints are balanced by a very little warm colour on a road and gravel pit in the foreground, a single house in the middle distance, and the scarlet jacket of a labourer.
Yet I know of no picture in which the mid-day heat of Midsummer is so admirably expressed; and were not the eye refreshed by the shade thrown over a great part of the foreground by some young trees, that border the road, and the cool blue of water near it, one would wish, in looking at it, for a parasol, as Fuseli wished for an umbrella when standing before one of Constable's showers.
Such a passage is exceptional in Leslie's book, which, in the Victorian manner, was a memoir with extensive quotations from Constable's letters.
Constable's own personality and opinions are thus the main gain of a  reader from Leslie's book.
To borrow a phrase from a biography of Van Gogh, the writer had had the advantage of having the artist as a coauthor.
This phrase comes from Carl Nordenfalk's book,The Life and Work of Van Gogh , first published in 1943 (in English in 1953).
Nordenfalk starts his preface as follows.
Van Gogh's life has so often been made the subject of literary treatment that the art historian is strongly inclined to leave the biographical matter severely alone and concentrate exclusively on the artistic aspect.
But he is soon forced to the conclusion that in this case it is impossible to keep the aesthetic side entirely apart from the biographical.
The reason is that with Van Gogh art and life are not merely conditioned by each other to a greater degree than with any other artist, but actually merge with each other.
In a sense, Van Gogh's life is itself an artistic creation.
Van Gogh as the subject for a biographer is thus a test case.
Nordenfalk's book includes the scrupulous examination of visual evidence always welcome and often found in writing by a museum curator.
Here he describes the impact of Impressionism on Van Gogh's work in the spring of 1887:
He had resolutely abandoned his old palette and the method of mixing complementary colours to dirty intermediate tones of grey.
Instead, he put a rich range of clear rainbow colours on his palette, replacing the dirty ochre colours with light and more luminous chromium colours, with the addition of Veronese green, ultramarine and lacquer colours, and following the Impressionist recipe in not mixing these colours with anything except white or closely allied colours.
Interpretation of the artist's work, however, depends on the artist's own account, since Nordenfalk had ‘the deliberate intention of presenting Van Gogh the writer and thinker’.
The sober intentions of his book were very different from the novels, plays and films which have created a mythical figure in modern culture of the artist as isolated and neglected, recognised only after his death, and whom the phrase ‘genius and madness are near aligned’ seems to fit.
The novel Lust for Life by Irving Stone, published in 1934, is the most famous of these productions, popularising a vein of interpretation established early in the century by some of Van Gogh's first advocates, such as the taste-maker Julius Meier-Graefe, who defended Van Gogh in 1906, and went on to write a book in his praise in 1921 called Vincent .
But this was a drama, the story of the circumstances of Van Gogh's life; ‘No attempt has  been made,’ wrote Meier-Graefe, ‘to make a critical analysis of the pictures, which enter upon the scene only in so far as they concern the drama directly or indirectly.’
ARTISTS’ OWN WRITING
Van Gogh is famous not only for his art, but for his writing.
He did not write an autobiography, but his letters have been a source of fascination to a wide audience, especially artists.
Luckily, he had a correspondent in his brother Theo in whom he could confide and with whom he could explore ideas about art; the letters are thus an invaluable source of interpretation.
From the distance of a century, some of Van Gogh's enthusiastic appraisals of the art of his time look curious; but then, this artist acting as a critic was especially vulnerable to admiring art with a moral purpose, or work from which he was able to draw inspiration.
Private letters are like a conversation overheard, often more revealing than an autobiography, or than a diary which may have been written with more than half an intention of allowing it to be published.
What private letters from an artist can do best is to elucidate what was uppermost in an artist's mind at the time, often artistic aims which would be difficult to discover otherwise.
Besides which, there are some artists whom it is a pleasure to know even a little better from their letters.
Many readers must have sighed with regret that so few of Gainsborough's letters have survived, since the charm of his style is so fresh; it is easy to sympathise with him writing about his professional commitment to portraiture, on behalf of two fine ladies, his daughters:
I'm sick of Portraits and wish very much to take my viol-da-gamba and walk off to some sweet village, where I can paint landskips and enjoy the fag-end of life in quietness and ease.
But these fine ladies and their tea-drinkings, husband-huntings, etc., etc., etc., will job me out of the last ten years, and I fear miss getting husbands too.
But we can say nothing to these things you know Jackson, we must jog on and be content with the jingling of the bells, only d — it, I hate a dust, and kicking up a dust, and being confined in harness while others ride in the waggon, under cover, stretching their legs in the straw at ease, and gazing at green trees and blue skies without half my Taste .
Artists on their travels sometimes write letters which are good value, whether in praise or censure of what they see.
Lawrence, for example, was in Parma in 1820, in ecstasy over the work of Correggio:
Four times I went on long visits to the St Jerome, his finest work.
How beautiful, how devoid of everything like the handicraft of art it is — the largeness, and yet ingenuity of its effect — the purity of its colour — the truth, yet refinement and elegance of the action, particularly of the hands (in which he particularly excels); and then, a lesson to all high-minded slovens, the patient vigilance with which the whole is linked together, by touches, in some instances small almost as a miniature, but like the sparkling of water.
Diaries are perhaps more often a vehicle for complaints.
Here is an American artist writing about his dismay at the work he saw at Paris in 1831:
Although I had been informed that the present French artists were low in merit, I did not expect to find them, with little exception, so totally devoid of it.
I was disgusted in the beginning with their subjects.
Battle, Murder, and Death, Venuses and Psyches, the bloody and voluptuous, are the things in which they seem to delight: and these are portrayed in a cold, hard, and often tawdry style, with an almost universal deficiency of chiaroscuro; the whole artificial,labored and theatrical.
Thomas Cole was not a diarist on the scale or with the range of one of the French painters, surely respected even by him, Eugène Delacroix.
Delacroix's journal is articulate, concerned with other arts as well as painting, besides containing much comment on contemporary life.
A passage of analogies in painting and poetry comes from September 1847.
‘I see in painters prose writers and poets.
Rhyme, measure, and the turning of verses, which is indispensable and which gives them so much vigour , are analogous to the hidden symmetry, to the equilibrium at once wise and inspired, which governs the meeting or separation of lines and spaces, the echoes of color , etc.’ poetic painting was Delacroix's preference, but ‘David's picture of Leonidas at Thermopolae is masculine and vigorous prose, I admit’.
In another passage in 1853, this time about The Bathers , a painting by Courbet, he invokes the aesthetic standards of music.
He did not like Courbet's subject.
‘The commonness and the uselessness of the thought are abominable; and if only his idea, common and useless as it is, were clear…
Oh, Rossini!
Oh, Mozart!
Oh, geniuses inspired in all the arts, who draw from things only such elements of them as are to be shown to the mind!
What would you say before these pictures!’
Artists' writing on art can naturally be more practical or technical, even in defining their own aims.
The virtue of artists' writings for the reader of criticism is that it can often serve as a touchstone for judging the worth of mediators, particularly those presenting views of what the artist intended; what the artist said may be more to the point.
SCULPTURAL MONOGRAPHS
Books about sculpture have problems all of their own.
The first and most obvious difficulty is that a three-dimensional object cannot fit satisfactorily on to a flat page.
Different views of a sculpture can be presented, but you cannot move round a sculpture except with a film camera.
There is also the problem of settings.
Some sculptures are designed for their sites, and the relationship between site and sculpture is difficult to capture in a book.
Sculpture parks are an enjoyable innovation of the late twentieth century, or perhaps it would be better to say a welcome adaptation of an existing practice.
In the seventeenth century Louis XIV had a sculpture park at Versailles, but it surrounded his palace, and was more formally designed by Le Nôtre, who needed sculptures for the focal points of his avenues.
Twentieth-century sculpture parks are less rigidly planned, and intended to accommodate sculpture by artists in many different styles.
The site can be adapted to suit the sculpture, which has a dominant role, unlike sculpture destined for the decoration of palatial gardens.
Commemorative figures in city squares, portrait busts, tomb or cemetery furniture have also been traditionally restricted by the terms of commissions.
A consequence of this tradition is that the sculptor's own personality may receive less prominence in a monograph than a painter's, as the effect of patronage given or withheld can be decisive in a sculptor's career.
The other major role of the sculptor is in the service of religion, where a high degree of interplay between artist and patron is not necessarily so important, making the sculptor's situation into one which is more like the painter's.
Writing on Auguste Rodin can make the point.
According to George Heard Hamilton, Rodin became ‘a figure of international significance, the most admired, prolific, and influential sculptor since Bernini’.
His secretary, the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, wrote with feeling about his work, but during the 1920s Rodin was less regarded, and not until after the Second World War did his reputation revive under the stimulus of exhibitions and increasingly careful cataloguing of his work.
A decline of the sculptor's reputation derived not only from the political discredit into which the regimes of the years before 1914 had fallen, but also from a distaste for allegory, and a revulsion from naturalist sculpture (which the young Brancusi expressed forcefully as a dislike for ‘beefsteak’).
With the rise of modernism, Rodin's reputation fell; with the decline of modernism, Rodin's fame is growing again.
Rodin was a skilful salesman of his work, making careful use of photography in establishing and maintaining his good name.
After 1900, he insisted that no photography of his work was allowed without his permission.
There was a healthy demand for prints and postcards, which  added to his income from the arrangements he had with photographers and agencies.
As Albert Elsen has noted:
We know that with major sculptures such as The Burghers of Calais and the Balzac , Rodin did not claim that they were equally successful from all points of view.
He believed that these monuments succeeded compositionally from five or six angles.
Given Rodin's collaboration with his photographers, these old photographs go far in answering the question from which points of view and from what distances they should be seen.
What was true of Rodin's sculpture is also worth consideration by any reader of a sculptural monograph.
Another aspect of the matter is the question of scale.
Reproduced to a uniform size on the printed page, sculptures which are monumental in size cannot be distinguished from those which are mere studies or maquettes.
There is the possibility of misinterpretation by the reader.
Some compensation may exist in sketches and preliminary drawings, where they exist, and which are easier to study on a page.
These may take either the form of related drawings, or in Rodin's case, a free style of drawing which demonstrates his power of vivid creative improvisation with the human figure.
A further issue is how well sculptures are suited to their sites.
Sculptural monographs often contain little information on this topic, and photographs of sculptures in situ are missing.
Further, public response to works in prominent positions is rarely commented on.
Yet for a work in a public square this is an interesting aspect of art criticism.
Perhaps in the last decade of this century something of a change in attitude to sculpture is becoming evident.
The spaces in a city are more valued, and their enhancing is more a matter of public concern.
Sculptures in cities are a part of cultural history, and can be the symbols by which the cities are known or remembered.
Rome is distinguished by the statue on the Capitoline Hill of Marcus Aurelius; New York, even the United States, is symbolised by the Statue of Liberty; Copenhagen is remembered for its mermaid.
Also, the history of sculpture includes some account of the abortive plans for sculpture, just as the history of architecture is incomplete as a history of ideas without a knowledge of rejected proposals.
Even though the same might be argued for painting, the technical obstacles to be overcome for painting are very much less than for sculpture.
Again, this is where sculpture is closely aligned to social and political history.
MONOGRAPHS ON INDIVIDUAL WORKS
An art monograph need not be about a person, but can be about an individual work or a scheme such as a mural decoration.
This is a fine opportunity for a sustained piece of writing, calling on a range of historical and artistic data, and including the art critical views not only of the author, but also criticism written at other periods.
A recent monograph of Jacob Epstein's memorial sculpture to the naturalist W. H. Hudson at Hyde Park Corner may be used as an example.
Terry Friedman's book contains fourteen chapters, which chart the development of the work and its public reception — a stormy one.
The topics include the first design, the sculptor's aims, the carving of the work, the memorial's defenders and attackers, and a final general reflection on the standing of great art and how it is likely to provoke opposition.
The monograph is accompanied by a facsimile of a sketchbook for the memorial, and documented by letters and printed sources, including articles in the press.
the art criticism of the day is fully described in the monograph, and some of the underlying reasons for its mainly aggressive character are outlined; these include anti-Semitism and the fierce dislike of the monument by some academic sculptors.
A guide to London public sculpture described the monument as ‘A masterpiece by the much-advertised apostle of Ugliness’, a view shared by those who felt that Hudson the nature lover was ill commemorated by a sculpture which showed nature in so raw a state.
Comparisons of the sculpture with other contemporary works are included, and a summary conclusion implies the eventual security of the controversial sculpture in its Hyde Park home.
The Hudson memorial is not widely known, but the scope of this monograph is exemplary.
Similar treatment can be found in works on great monuments and schemes, perhaps especially in the Italian Renaissance, when such projects as the Sistine Chapel or Tintoretto's Scuola di San Rocco achieved a personal artistic unity of the highest standard.
for art historians, incomplete schemes or dismembered works such as altarpieces have the attraction of needing detective work; but a critic takes an interest in a reconstruction only if it throws new light on surviving art.
The main strength of this sort of monograph is its potential for detailed interpretation.
As a book on a single subject, there is a good chance that the need for description will be reduced by extensive illustration, while a favourable judgement on the work has already been implied by the choice of the subject for a monograph.
The interpretation of imagery, the circumstances of production, the place of the work in the artist's career, the historical context, the precise information about the work's appearance and condition, these are things that can be fully discussed in a monograph.
VERSATILE ARTISTS
A monograph on an artist who practises in several fields can be unusually interesting, since the writer's brief is to write with equal competence on different topics.
Occasionally the challenge is too daunting, and teams of writers combine forces rather than one author attempting to rival the knowledge and skills of a Leonardo.
More frequently work in different media is split up into specialist studies, so that although there are general studies of Gauguin's work, there are also specialist monographs on his prints, and on his sculpture and ceramics.
The versatile artist raises the question of relationship between the arts, and how far they can be considered to have the same or similar aims.
In the nineteenth century it was Richard Wagner whose extraordinary ambition it was to make a complete artistic environment, in which the arts would blend.
Historians can point to the philosophical views which underlay this ambition, and artists and sculptors were in various ways affected by the demonstration of its realisation in the theatre built for the composer at Bayreuth.
The collaboration of artists with the stage was also brought to a high point by Serge Diaghilev, in his commissions to artists for the Russian Ballet.
This connection between painting and the theatre was important to earlier European art in religious as well as secular performances.
Critics no less than artists have wide interests in the arts, and may introduce comparisons in their interpretations.
In the nineteenth century to say that a picture was poetic was a common term of praise.
In the present century emphasis on formal qualities in the visual arts have made musical comparisons more frequent, emphasised by the use by artists of musical terminology, as when Kandinsky chose to call his works Improvisations and Compositions.
According to this formalist approach art aspires to the condition of music, a phrase employed by Pater, but deriving from classical Greece.
Clearly artists working in several media have a wide range of references.
The art critic is thus bound to consider with care what standards of comparison should be used.
In the late twentieth century artists working in performance pose difficulties for the critic, though some observers find it refreshing rather than troublesome to consider work beyond the easel picture and the individual sculpture.
In sum, then, the monograph is a major site for art critical writing, and, moreover, the place where the most extended criticism is likely to appear.
The reader may be disappointed by the standard of what is written, but unlike other sites of criticism, this cannot be attributed to the form of publication, only to the limitations of the author.
In a monograph, the author has the best chance of a free hand.
PANNING ANGLES: THE CATALOGUES
CATALOGUES RAISONNÉS
The second half of the nineteenth century saw new standards achieved in art historical scholarship, both through the careful study of documents and by close scrutiny of works of art.
The results of these studies were published extensively in catalogues of private and public collections, and in what in French are termed catalogues raisonnés , that is to say complete lists of artists' works.
Such catalogues were important to scholarship and also to the art market.
If a scholar authenticated a work as by a major artist, then its price was certain to be higher.
A hero of this period was Giovanni Morelli, a remarkable Italian connoisseur who started publishing essays on pictures in public collections in 1874.
His decisive opinions about the correct attributions of authorship in pictures were founded on a personal method, partly inspired by his medical training.
He paid close attention to characteristics in a painting so apparently insignificant as the shape of a nostril or the lobe of an ear, arguing that such details were too unimportant for a follower to copy exactly.
For example, Morelli wrote: ‘In all those works by Raphael in which the execution is entirely his own , the ear, like the hand, is always characteristic, and differs in form from the ears of Timoteo Viti, Perugino, Pinturicchio, and others.’
Typically, Morelli participated in one of the Swiss glacial expeditions organised by Louis Agassiz.
Agassiz later became the foremost zoological teacher in the United States, basing his teaching practice on the observation of nature.
Agassiz discouraged the use of books, except for research work.
One story about his teaching is that a new student would be told to observe a fish in a tank.
After some time the student would return to  report.
‘Look again,’ he would be told.
After a week, Agassiz's object lesson in respect for examining nature had made its impact.
Morelli's insistence on observation was a comparable approach to learning.
Morelli's method was extended by other scholars, and joined to systematic examination of documents.
One of Morelli's youthful students was Bernard Berenson, whom Morelli described in 1890 as ‘an extraordinarily scholarly young man who had already advanced far in the study of art’.
The young Berenson was a polymath, whose brilliant career at Harvard led his friends to pay for him to visit Europe to continue his studies.
It was in Berlin that he first read Morelli's work.
Four years after their meeting he published an account of Venetian painters of the Renaissance, where he acknowledged ‘his indebtedness to the first systematic writers on Italian painting no less than to the perfectors of the new critical method, now adopted by nearly all serious students of Italian art’.
Berenson had found his vocation: ‘to be sure that every Lotto is a Lotto, every Cariani a Cariani, every Santecroce a Santacroce’.
His book on Lorenzo Lotto, published in 1895, was subtitled ‘An Essay in Constructive Art Criticism’.
He spent the rest of his life in expertise, painstakingly cataloguing the pictures and drawings of his favoured period, the Italian Renaissance, and in giving advice, notably to the great Bostonian collector, Mrs Gardner, and the main dealer of the period, Joseph Duveen.
Berenson's decisions on attributions are listed in a reference catalogue,The Italian Paintings of the Renaissance .
The Morellian method had opponents, among them some of the German scholars of whom Morelli made fun by his articles.
His judgements were impressive nevertheless, so that some critics were reduced to agreeing with his conclusions while denying the validity of his system.
Before his day, and after it, there were scholars who relied more on intuition.
Max Friedlander, an outstanding scholar of Northern European art, took the view that accepting a work into an artist's oeuvre was like recognising a friend, not a matter of measurement or detailed scrutiny.
The reader is thus relying on Friedlander's eye.
A difference between Morelli and Friedlander is that the former explains his method, while the latter does not.
More than a hundred years have passed since Morelli started writing; in that time many problems of authorship have been solved, while about others tacit agreement has been reached.
The results of this process can be read in detail in catalogues raisonnés, which often give a blow-by-blow account of the arguments of scholars over the years.
Here is a summary account of Manet's favourite painting by Tintoretto, the self-portrait in the Louvre.
It comes from a book on Tintoretto by Hans Tietze (the references are left out).
On the engraving of the picture made by Gisbert van Geen in 1588, for which Pozzoferrato supplied the ornamental framework and  which Ridolfi reproduced in his biography, Tintoretto is described as being seventy years old.
According to this the picture must have been painted about 1588, with which the style and the age of the sitter agree.
From a letter to Francesco Gonzaga, written in 1622 and published by A. Luzio, in which among others a self-portrait of Tintoretto is offered to him, Pittalunga argues that the Paris picture may have been the one mentioned and which formed part of Rubens's estate.
This sort of reading is only for the dedicated follower of the history of taste, though any reader particularly interested in a picture may find within a single catalogue entry an acutely discriminating judgement or interesting facts; for example, Tietze's entry also points out that Manet so much admired the Tintoretto self-portrait that he made a copy of it.
The catalogue raisonné continues to be a key document for authentication of an artist's work.
As the decades have gone by, scholarly work has piled up, so that this category of book has taken a larger, longer and much more expensive form than before.
Today catalogues raisonnés are often divided into two; one volume is for an introduction and plates, while the other has the detailed catalogue.
Disputes over authorship are fiercely fought, and in the nature of things, frequently impossible to resolve with finality.
However, the reputation of the cataloguer may be in some instances considered decisive; the picture is by Van Gogh if it is in the book by de la faille; a painting by Berthe Morisot needs to be approved by Bataille and Wildenstein; an authentic work by Picasso will be found in Zervos.
Problems of authenticity are not so great or modern art as for other periods, even if a gifted forger like the painter Elmir de Horty can fool some of the people for some of the time.
Catalogues raisonnés of modern artists do not depend on scholarly guesswork at attributions, and thus lack the laconic critical judgements reached by connoisseurs.
In compensation, pictures or sculptures may be accompanied by comments from the artists.
Additionally, the cataloguer will be sure to make comparisons, which will be useful to the reader, for the format is one of the few in which a generous number of illustrations can be included.
Any compiler of a catalogue raisonné will have seen and compared all the works listed, or will scruple to state if some work has proved inaccessible.
At this level of personal and intimate experience there is little competition from other observers; only a handful of people in the world will ever see all the works in a catalogue raisonné.
The scholar who completes such a work thus has an edge on other writers, so a preface can be read with the respect due to a first-hand account of the works concerned and a considered piece of reflective criticism.
EXHIBITION CATALOGUES
Exhibitions are major arenas for spectators of art, as well as for artists' struggles to achieve reputations and recognition.
This section will consider not what the critics write in reviews of exhibitions, but the criticism which is contained within the exhibition catalogues; not the commentary from the box, but the programme of events.
A first broad division between types of exhibitions needs to be made.
There are shows which could be grouped under the heading of historical exhibitions; there are mixed exhibitions and group exhibitions of works by living artists; and there are exhibitions in dealers' galleries, notably solo shows.
The catalogues which accompany these events have rather different characters, for although there are entries for the exhibited works in each sort of catalogue, and usually an introduction, historical catalogues often have additional essays.
Catalogues of major shows have also become bigger and more expensive in recent years, usually through the help of national, industrial or commercial sponsorship.
A characteristic historical exhibition may be called something like ‘The Age of Rembrandt’, or ‘Shock of Recognition; the landscape of English Romanticism and the Dutch seventeenth-century school’; both of these are actual titles.
Such catalogues include accounts of relevant historical research, and may cause new original historical work to be done.
Individual works may be studied more carefully for a catalogue entry than ever before.
In several ways, then, a catalogue may be in advance of any other publications.
The corollary is that some catalogue information has only a limited life, since it may in its turn be overtaken by new research.
In the introduction or other essays there may be some writing which will not date, such as art criticism which documents the personal experience of the writer.
Take, for example, this record of a personal response to Picasso's sculpture The Man with a Sheep by the critic Tim Hilton in the catalogue for ‘Picasso's Picassos, in 1981:
The Man with a Sheep is said to be humanitarian; that is far from one's experience in front of it, and the assertion is not much supported by the iconographical evidence.
Is this a king who is the shepherd of his people?
Or a priest of some unknown religion who strides towards us, implacably set on some atavistic rite?
In the drawings the lamb appears to have bound feet, and the purport of the piece is surely more to do with sacrifice than deliverance.
Some art criticism in a catalogue may be included so as to document the history of taste.
For example, in ‘The Shock of Recognition’ John Constable's love for the work of van Ruisdael is highlit.
Another entry, for  The Ancient Oak by Jan van Goyen (painted in 1642) seeks to explain a later English attitude to a seventeenth-century work:
The ancient, weathered oak is the main motif, a theme as much used and loved by the Romantic poets and painters as the old willow tree.
The execution, however, and this is typical of the 17th century Dutch masters, is more minute; and the composition, completely determined by a diagonal, is stricter than that of the English painters.
According to 18th century principles the painting is ‘sublime’ in the roughness and irregularity of the tree, as well as‘beautiful’in the smoothness of the water.
An instructive and recent example of a historical exhibition is ‘Making Their Mark’, toured in the United States during 1989.
The subtitle of the show was ‘Women artists move into the mainstream, 1970 — 1985’.
The catalogue is 300 pages long with eight essays, as well as artists' biographies.
In this instance the individual exhibited items are unnumbered and put in a check list; the main critical writing is within 136 pages, written in ten sections by Judith E. Stein (six sections) and Ann-Sargent Wooster (four sections on video).
Such a catalogue inevitably tends to describe and characterise artists rather than evaluate them, while interpretation is likely to be left to quotations from the artists.
Here is a passage about a picture by Judy Rifka: ‘In Square Dress , a dancer, seen from above, is set off against an exuberant field of abstract color patches and architecturally evocative lines and circles.
Segments of the athletic composition push forward into the viewer's space because Rifka has affixed additional forms onto the surface plane.’
Elsewhere, Thomas McEvilley writes: ‘One day in 1970 fifty thousand women marched down fifth Avenue in New York.
It is said to have been the biggest women's gathering since suffrage days, a little more than half a century before…
H. W. Janson's History of Art , the standard college textbook, did not at that time mention a single woman artist’; and in discussing the period reviewed by the exhibition, various choices of media made by women artists are chronicled, for, ‘Many women artists eschewed painting — especially abstract painting — as a domain polluted by long saturation with male dominant values, and developed their themes in performance.’
On the central issue raised by the subtitle of the show, art in or out of the mainstream, some statistical study was made of the representation of women artists and the milestones in their careers.
The catalogue as a whole is thus a document in the history of taste, a historical account, and at the same time contains some art criticism, not always explicit in evaluating the works shown.
‘Making Their Mark’ could equally well have been called a mixed exhibition; but this is a term more often used for a show put on by an  exhibiting society, that type of artists' organisation whose importance in Europe was created by the middle classes, who sought in the eighteenth century to buy pictures rather than give commissions, as aristocratic patrons had been accustomed to do.
Mixed exhibitions tend to have rather perfunctory introductions and catalogue entries; the same is often true of exhibitions arranged by groups of artists, though they may have statements of aim or even an artists' manifesto.
Generally, art criticism connected with mixed and group exhibitions is commentary from outside, so that we shall return to them, with only this brief mention here, in the next chapter.
We can consider solo exhibitions instead, in either public or commercial galleries.
Major art museums may devote considerable resources to an individual artist's exhibition, on the same scale as a historical show.
But one feature of a catalogue of an exhibition for a living artist which is different is the likely inclusion of reminiscences from colleagues and members of the artist's family, who may make enlightening comments.
A dealer will have chosen his critic with special care for an introduction, an ideal candidate often being a sympathetic friend, perhaps a curator.
In 1904 Sidney Colvin was Keeper of Prints and Drawings at the British Museum.
Colvin had known Burne-Jones, and was persuaded to write a preface for a London gallery show.
His text preserves a careful balance between deference, quotation and his own selective critical comment:
The nature of Burne-Jones's aims and predilections in art are well-enough known by this time, and have been defined by himself absolutely fitted to this thought: ‘I mean by a picture a beautiful romantic dream of something that never was, never will be — in a light better than any light that ever shone — in a land no one can define or remember, only desire.’
If any one element in his style is to be singled out as predominant, it is that haunting expression of far-away desire never absent from the eyes and lips, and conveyed in every gesture, feature and attitude.
Giacometti was an artist with very different artistic aims, clearly expounded by Valerie J. Fletcher in a catalogue for an exhibition at the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, in 1988.
Writing about a small bust on a column, a thin sculpture in a series of four busts of which the others were fuller in form, she comments that ‘the extremely thin proportions of the head contrast with the solidity of the base.
So delicately modulated are the forms of the head that the human element appears ephemeral.
This tenuous fragility contrasts with the three later busts on a stele, which have substantial anatomical forms.’
The sculptor had decided that he wanted this bust to confront the observer.
‘In these sculptures I tried to make an eye.
I raised the head on a base until the eye  is at eye level.
You see an eye.’
This intention differed from the sculptor's frequent artistic aim to make his small figures appear remote.
The catalogue has the additional interest of a memoir by Silvio Berthoud, who had sat as a boy between five and eight for his uncle:
I have very unpleasant recollections of sitting for him, for it was of utmost importance not to move but to fix him right in the eye and listen to him complain, saying as he always did that he was getting nowhere.
It was not much fun, particularly at my age…
Things would deteriorate rather quickly, for Alberto would return to his hotel in the evening with a sculpture eight to twelve inches tall under his arm and come back the next day with a piece no more than three or four inches high…
I later realized that I had posed during a crucial period, and the tiny bronzes that resulted (for that size prevailed) continue daily to touch me.
Another example from the 1980s allows us to hear a conversation between the critic Norbert Lynton and the painter Ken Kiff.
Kiff set out to make an image of a man writing.
Mayakovsky's poem ‘An Amazing Adventure of Vladimir Mayakovsky’ surfaced as he worked.
It celebrates creativity amid doubt and despondency — creativity as energy but also as a duty, work to be done by man as it is the sun's task to shine.
I have pointed out to him that his picture echoes the medieval and Renaissance formula for St John on Patmos writing the Book of Revelation and for the evangelists writing the Gospels, itself derived from Greco-Roman author portraits.
This was not his intention but iconographical echoes of this sort do not surprise him.
The writer goes on to make further points about the picture's elements.
These examples of catalogues containing helpful art criticism could be contrasted with many others which are limited to lists of exhibitions, details of the artist's career, and entries for the works displayed.
There are other hazards for the readers of catalogues.
Some publications are less impartial than they might appear, erring on the side of generosity.
Museums with exhibitions of art from other countries are especially likely to be respectful in commentaries on works of art which have been borrowed.
All the same, museum curators will have carried out a critical task in selecting the exhibition, in some instances having fended off proposals for inclusions with a political or a particular cultural bias.
In a commercial gallery, the size of the rooms is decisive.
It might make artistic sense for the gallery to borrow some key picture to enhance the look of an exhibition, but a picture which is not for sale is an expensive  use of wall space.
Finally it is safe to predict that in any catalogue there will be more information than art criticism.
AUCTION CATALOGUES
Buying and selling art is at its most dramatic in an auction, a fact that auction houses are quick to exploit.
In the last three decades there has been considerable success for auctioneering, both in terms of money and also in prestige.
The idea that a price at auction is a definitive market price has even become quite generally accepted, although in fact auctions are subject to manipulation like other markets described by some economists as free.
An undeniable attraction of an auction is the possibility that some undervalued item may be for sale.
The auction houses employ considerable skill to ensure that the best possible prices are obtained for their clients, but all the same, a good eye and a well-stocked memory may still outwit their expertise.
An occasional exploit deservedly catches the newspaper headlines, like the case of a picture spotted by a London dealer, David Carritt.
Sothebys were unfortunate enough to misattribute a French eighteenth-century picture, which was in fact by Fragonard.
Carritt bought it, correctly identified it as a lost early work, and magnanimously sold it to the National Gallery, London, far below the market price.
Auction catalogues do not carry critical comments on individual items for sale, but there are sometimes introductions with criticism.
An example is the catalogue of paintings by Noël Coward, which was prefaced by a memoir of the playwright, describing his interest in painting.
In marketing a sale of rather little-known works, too, there may be some explanatory text.
It would be wrong to dismiss this sort of criticism as mere sales talk, particularly in grand auctioneers' catalogues, though there is little danger of such publications being reticent.
Part of the charm of a sale is that the financial result is in itself a sort of critical judgement, reflecting even if not defining the taste and mood of the moment.
But an auction is mainly a bullish market; vendors are trying to improve their prices, and few except dealers are selling on the market's way down, in order to rebuy.
This bearish tactic does not work as well as in a stock market, for art works are widely dispersed, and decisions to buy or sell may be thoroughly unpredictable.
One view of the art market is that it is like a staircase with several landings.
Only dealers sell on the steps, while private owners prefer the more certain floor of a landing of clearly established prices for a category of work.
Correct descriptions are important to auctioneers, as can be exemplified by the coding used to list paintings.
This is the system used by Sothebys:
(a) references to signatures, inscription and dates refer to the present state of the work;(b) the term ‘bears a signature’ and/or ‘date’and/or ‘inscription’means that in our opinion the artist's name and/or ‘date’and/or inscription have been added by another hand;(c) the term ‘signed’and/or ‘dated’and/or ‘inscribed’means that in our opinion the signature and/or date and/or inscription are from the hand of the artist.
Such caution is prudent in a business where errors of judgement can be extremely expensive; at least the reader of an auction catalogue knows clearly what view has been taken by the cataloguer on a number of questions.
The auction catalogue can also quote from other authorities, which will be inevitable in a case where a scholar has written a catalogue raisonné, and advantageous if the context of the work is made clearer by the artist's correspondence or other publications.
Long catalogue entries recall the cynical remark that the price of a painting is in ratio to the length of the bibliography in the sale catalogue.
Besides seeking to establish the authenticity of works in the sale room, auctioneers are also concerned that the title to ownership is secure.
The indirect evidence of critical approval by a succession of owners may be interesting to a reader, though admittedly this demands some special knowledge about the standing of the collectors concerned.
Luckily for the curious, this historical sideline can be followed up in a number of publications, both about individuals and institutions.
The authentication of works of art from other parts of the world can be problematic.
For African art, say, the difficulties are complicated by lack of written or other corroboration, and knowledge that extensive copying has been done.
Thefts of art works are also an international problem, especially poignant in the case of objects with cultural and religious significance.
Occasionally auctions contain items so interesting that critics in newspapers comment on their quality, not just the prices they might fetch.
More often auctions are not reviewed; this is a pity, since the management of markets in art deserves scrutiny.
The visitor to an auction may be caught up in the excitement and drama of the event, but the climate of opinion in which it takes place has been created by scholars and critics as well as businessmen.
MUSEUM CATALOGUES
Casual visitors to art museums generally prefer short guides to the official catalogues.
Some guides are indeed very brief, suggesting visits at breakneck speed where only a few items or rooms will be seen.
Is it Tuesday between eleven o'clock and noon?
This must be the Albertina.
A museum catalogue is an imposing task for a curator, so daunting indeed that some museums never publish one.
Difficulties can be many, at the top of the list being the number of items to be catalogued.
Happy indeed is the curator of a select collection like the Mauritzhuis in The Hague, where one collector's policy was to limit his collection to thirty excellent works, lesser works being discarded to make way for better.
The curator's nightmare is somewhere like the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, where the number of items is like grains of sand on the sea shore.
A model for art museums is the catalogue of the National Gallery, London.
Divided into national schools, in separate publications, the gallery also publishes short guides, souvenir guides, books of details, a complete photographic record of the pictures, specialist publications on conservation, and educational material.
The keystone of the arch of publications must be the catalogue itself, from which the authority of other writing derives.
The catalogue of the earlier Italian schools was written by Martin Davies, and published in 1951. the strength of the gallery's holding of works by Giovanni Bellini made it worth the author's while to write a preliminary note about difficulties of attribution:
A definition of Bellini's oeuvre is one of the hardest problems in the history of painting.
The first difficulty is, despite the destructions, the enormous number of existing pictures, many of them signed, and in one way or another more or less Bellinesque.
It is obvious that Bellini had assistants to help him in his studio; indeed, there is documentary proof of that.
But the question of what pictures are entirely or for practical purposes Bellini's own is answered largely by personal taste; there is therefore a considerable divergence of view.
The catalogue of the German school was published in 1959, and written by Michael Levey.
The entry for number 291, a portrait of a woman, is a fair example of method: ‘The quality of (the picture) seems sufficiently high for it to be acceptable as from Cranach's own hand.
It is associated by Friedlander and Rosenberg with a group of similar female portraits, and shows clear analogies of handling.’
The connoisseurship demonstrated in these two examples is built up from an accumulation of work by many scholars, but in the end, the cataloguer has to make a judgement, which for number 291 is in favour of Cranach's authorship.
Sometimes subjects require considerable explanation or interpretation, and in these cases the museum catalogue can give definitive help.
Interpretation of iconography, the historical context of works, or personal information about sitters for portraits are only a few of the varied topics which can be spelt out in catalogues.
The level of detail may seem much the same as in a catalogue raisonné, but the stress falls in a different way.
In  a catalogue raisonné an individual work is related primarily to other works by the artist, while a museum catalogue entry will extend to other contextual information and comparisons.
Some of the work for a museum catalogue may have already been done before the acquisition of a picture.
It may, for example, have been part of a private collection which itself was catalogued, especially if the collector in question was rich.
In this respect, the scholarly standard of a private collection's catalogue will be very high, and the sort of information which a reader can expect will be the same.
The collection will not, however, be accessible as public collections are.
In an art museum works can be studied at leisure, and will receive attention from scholars and experts of many kinds.
Besides, works can gain by the company they keep in a museum collection, a landscape being in a group of works of similar date and intentions, or a portrait seen among contemporaries.
One of the important features of museum collections is the function they have as touchstones of quality and authenticity.
paradoxically, it is in museums that the market in art is defined, since permanent collections place limits on what is available for collectors to purchase.
Further, on the basis of knowledge about museum collections, artists can find help in choosing ways of developing the art of the present.
The museum is also the place where the closest consideration can be given to the troublesome problems of fakes and other forms of inauthenticity.
Museums are at an advantage in making close examination of works in their own collections showing evidence about a picture, say, which can only be discovered by the newest scientific and technological methods.
A critic walking for the first time into a gallery may describe a colour in a picture as blue; it will have been the scrupulous task of a conservator to have established that the particular colour in question was Prussian blue, and thus cannot date before the eighteenth century.
Old-fashioned amateurs used to admire colours with a golden glow, which conservators have demonstrated were the effect of discoloured varnish.
The shape of a picture may have been altered, and the museum, though not a stray visitor, will know the fact.
In short the pictures in an art museum have been closely monitored, often through decades and in a few cases for centuries, so full descriptions that appear in the catalogues have a thorough-paced authority.
It is also through observation that fakes are unmasked.
Some have been living for a disconcertingly long time in museums; but once doubted, the evidence of inadequacy in a fake is quite often soon in coming.
The Metropolitan Museum in New York, for example, proudly owned an early Greek bronze horse, which a sharp-eyed administrator on the staff noticed one day had a ridge.
This vital fact proved its method of manufacture did not correspond to its supposed date.
The museum made the best of a bad job.
Joseph Noble, the observant administrator, announced to an audience  of eight hundred, ‘It's famous, but it's a fraud.’
More than that, it was ‘one of the most important classical art forgeries ever discovered’.
Some museums have prudently kept a collection of mistaken purchases, and even bought some forgeries deliberately.
CRITICAL PATHS
A climate of artistic opinion is as tricky to predict as the English weather, and also quite as changeable.
Both writers and readers are affected by generally accepted ideas, without necessarily having given them independent thought.
One difficulty in describing a climate of opinion is this fact: that many shared views are not stated openly, but assumed.
A set of assumptions may be challenged by an outsider, and at this moment these shared views come into focus.
To look at the work of an art critic in this way we have to turn to historians of taste for the past and to journalists for the present.
When we do this, we find that a critic's range of activities varies from place to place and period to period.
Let us look at the second half of the twentieth century.
In Paris art critics are often directly associated with particular galleries, and exhibition reviews may be negotiated for a fee between a magazine or a newspaper and the artist's representative.
In London historians and critics are solicited for opinions by the auction houses, sometimes but not always accepting a fee; commissions for articles are independent decisions by editors.
In New York, gifts of pictures by artists to critics may follow a favourable review, though a critic is likely to refuse payment, even for a catalogue introduction, from a dealer.
The variations and exceptions to these brief generalised statements can be found in a number of books, some by investigative outsiders, some in memoirs by dealers and others interested in the market.
For other periods, historians are slowly making studies which document the connections of critics and historians with the markets.
In 1959 Dore Ashton was dismissed by the New York Times , the charges being that her articles were not aimed at a wide newspaper audience, and her articles on work by artist friends gave evidence of bias (her husband, whose work she was forbidden to review, was a painter and print-maker called Adja Yunkers).
John Canaday, the incoming editor of the newspaper's art page and responsible for the dismissal, had made a challenge to a climate of opinion in which Dore Ashton's criticism was valued for its sensitivity, and where the art which she praised was accepted.
Her supporters included Thomas Hess, Meyer Schapiro, Leo Steinberg, Harold Rosenberg, and Peter Selz, and their intervention, asserting that Canaday had offended Ashton's ‘rights and responsibilities as a critic’, resulted in Canaday's being censured by the American art critics' association.
A case of unwitting collusion by a critic in a manoeuvre by an art  dealer occurred in 1961, when Leo Steinberg wrote an article about Jasper Johns.
Johns was a puzzling phenomenon for Steinberg, as one of the artists of Pop Art, then hardly begun.
The article appeared in an Italian magazine Metro , who had intended to pay $300 for an article; but when Johns' dealer, Leo Castelli, knew that Steinberg was considering an article, he arranged for the magazine to offer $1,000, paying the difference of $700 himself.
Steinberg knew nothing about it.
The underlying question for a reader of criticism is what influences are exerted on the critic; but as in this instance, for long it may be impossible to know the truth.
One noticeable feature of American art life is the link between art historical teaching and criticism, not so common elsewhere.
The practice of American art historians reviewing or curating exhibitions, not only historical shows, is a normal feature of art life.
Part of the reason for this is that the American professoriat is the largest in the world, while the American market for current art is unprecedented; it is evident that the turnover of the American art market as a whole is the largest in the world.
The persuasive tax advantages for the rich to contribute works of art to public collections also play a part, contributing a measure of prestige shared between artists and the powerful in society.
Critics can also be invested with a degree of respect deriving partly from their academic connections.
Another sort of authority derives from money, which a reader of art criticism may find it difficult to dissociate from an object.
Historical knowledge is the surest cure for this damaged intellectual condition, as the history of taste will show many examples of the irrelevance of monetary value to artistic quality.
Incidentally, the good art critic should be the reader's friend in refusing to be impressed by art market prices.
The English art critic Peter fuller had an honourable record in this respect; despite Julian Schnabel's financial success, he refused to be intimidated by market values.
Whatever flickerings of potential this young tyro possesses, they cannot cover up the fact that he is a painter with the imagination of a retarded adolescent; no technical mastery; no intuitive feeling for pictorial space; no sensitivity towards, or grasp of, tradition; and a colour sense rather less than that of Congo, the chimpanzee who was taught (among other things) a crude responsiveness to colour harmonies by Desmond Morris in the late 1950s.
However, potentially educable as a painter Schnabel may or may not be, his work is just not worthy of serious attention by anyone with a developed taste in this particular art form.
Readers need also to be wary of the existence of special markets.
The explosive prices for Teddy Bears in the last few years indicate how a  market can be created, in this case by a mix of merit and nostalgia.
What is clearly a dealers' market is often signalled by the invention of a brand name to group together a variety of material, perhaps rather disparate.
Pop Art is an example.
Or a brand name may already exist ready for exploitation by a market-maker; Impressionism, for example, was ready to hand for British dealers to invent a new category of art which they could stretch to calling British Impressionism.
The influence of an international market is not easy to be precise about, though the appearance of work in a Biennale or an art fair can be impressive in itself.
The critic here may be acting as an exhibition organiser or co-ordinator, critical decisions being mainly limited to selection.
Private collections are examples of critical judgement in action, so that both their catalogues and the opinions expressed by collectors are worth consideration.
The collector may have pronounced views.
Albert Barnes, the rich American industrialist who formed an outstanding collection between the wars, certainly promoted his personal theories.
Barnes possessed excellent paintings by Cézanne.
In a combative book,The Art of Cézanne , he expounded a theory of rhythm in art which he advanced as the key to Cézanne's success.
Barnes wrote on scientific principles, he said.
Here is a passage:
The rhythmic movement of volumes and planes in space is so basic in Cézanne's design that it usually extends to the treatment of the background — whether that be sky, wall or drapery — and makes it serve the dual purpose of a screenlike area or space boundary and of a rhythmic sequence of semivoluminous planes which continue the movement of the units in the middleground and foreground; this sequential ordering thus contributes to compositional unity in the widest sense as well as to the expressive movement of the total form.
Another collector with a firm sense of the importance of the pictures he had bought was Douglas Cooper.
He specialised in collecting the work of four artists he considered to be the true Cubists, Picasso, Braque, Leger and Gris.
In 1971 he was asked to organise, at the Tate Gallery, an exhibition which he called The Essential Cubism .
The catalogue amusingly contains some entries with such comments as ‘Compare and contrast this painting with two works of the ‘analytical phase’.
It would be worth knowing how many exhibition visitors obeyed these examination instructions.
Finally, the critic may well face an issue of authenticity.
Here is a description by a French expert of a visit to the painter and etcher, Dunoyer de Segonzac.
The artist was shown a watercolour:
I don't know what to say.
I painted this bit here several times over; that hill too.
But there's a lack of unity.
Is the thing a fake?
I can't be sure.
Perhaps I wasn't on form the day I painted it.
The worrying thing is my signature, which is extremely hard to counterfeit.
But this one looks impeccable.
There's only one solution, and that is to destroy the picture.
It's second rate, in any case (he added smiling), so the artistic loss to the world will be nil.
As for the purchaser, tell him to come to my house and choose another picture — something that both he and I like.
SNAPSHOTS: THE ARTICLES
THE SOLO EXHIBITION
The acid test for art criticism is the solo exhibition.
This is the occasion when a reader can visit the same show and make a personal assessment of how helpful the art critic has been.
At its best, art criticism will enable the reader to enjoy or appreciate an exhibition better.
This fuller appreciation may result from a short or a long article, even occasionally some unexpected insight or well-phrased judgement; but it will not come from a brief comment off the cuff, an item of gossip, or a mere listing.
The only virtue of these latter newspaper techniques is to bring an event to the attention of a reader.
A solo exhibition can vary in scope from the minimum, that is to say a show of recent work, through a more extended selection to the apogee of a retrospective exhibition.
We have already looked at writing in catalogues, and can now turn our attention to the critical responses which appear in articles.
The scope or character of a piece of criticism is naturally related to the magazine or newspaper in which it appears, as we noticed in the case of Dore Ashton's dismissal from the New York Times because it was asserted that her work could not be understood by the paper's readers.
The first rule for a reader of articles is thus to find a sympathetic publication.
Some trial and error should eliminate the laziest papers, whose critics do no more than pillage catalogue introductions, or even press releases.
Some latitude can be allowed to serious critics who write for periodicals which go to press a long time before a show is on view; these critics will not be able to comment on how the exhibition actually looks, as their articles will have been written before the show's installation.
They  nevertheless will have seen some, perhaps all the works included, and can thus comment usefully on the artist's standing, aims and achievements.
The content of an article will tend to be determined by its length; no newspaper article is likely to be more than 1,000 words, which precludes any chance of detailed analysis.
Indeed, an article at this length will frequently avoid mentioning any work of art by name, being limited instead to a generalised description of an artist's work.
For example, this passage in an article on Giacometti by the American critic Hilton Kramer:
shape a figure or a head from the scrutiny of the model who sat before him, was felt to be an ‘impossible’ assault on an objective guaranteed to elude his grasp…
This ‘difficulty’ was the moral center of his art, the very fulcrum of his style.
To it we owe that nervous, spidery line of the drawings — so quick, so attentive, yet so despairing — that alerts us to the elusiveness of the subject at the same time that it perseveres in the attempt to render it.
The article, called ‘Giacometti's moral heroism’, is about a retrospective show of the sculptor's work ten years after his death; it does not include the name of any single work.
Or an article can be centred on a motif, as this passage about Rothko by Harold Rosenberg indicates:
By 1950, Rothko had conceived his conclusive insigne of a disembodied absolute.
This icon consisted of the rectangle of the canvas as a one-colour ground visible along the edge of — and occasionally through an opening between — three or four horizontal blocks of color with brushed surfaces and furry borders.
For the next twenty years, Rothko's work consisted of reanimating this pattern with the substance of his emotional life.
It was as if he had conceived a latterday, visual version of the sonnet or the haiku .
Except that(and this is decisive in regard to the situation of the one-idea painter) his format was private — almost, one might say, the framework of another self, or of himself in another form — and unavailable to others.
A further way of treating an article about an exhibition is to make a comparison with another artist.
The painter Patrick Heron wrote for the New Statesman in London in the 1950s, and used this technique for writing about Braque, whom he compared with Picasso.
The quotation is from an article of 1954, at a time when Picasso's reputation was very high.
Heron was anxious to point out Braque's qualities, so he trailed his coat openly.
To suggest, as I do, that Georges Braque is the greatest living painter is to remind a contemporary audience, fed to satiety on brilliant innovation, frenzied novelty and every sort of spontaneous expression, that, after all, permanence, grandeur, deliberation, lucidity and calm are paramount virtues of the art of painting…
The rival genius of Picasso has proved to the world that our age may be epitomized by works which (show) his unfailing sense of visual drama, his protean invention and his power of investing his creations with a hallucinatory poetry.
Heron shows in his article a deep sympathy with Braque's work, which, incidentally, was a sort of painting he himself was seeking to practise at the time.
He argued that Braque enhanced objects:
He is infinitely kind to all the things that go into his pictures.
Indeed, the kind of life which he bestows on his coffee-pot or coffee-grinder, his table, his chair and window, is just the sort of life we feel these things are really living!
The personality with which Braque invests his jug is something that the jug possesses in its own right.
In other words, Braque divines the essential spirit — one might almost call it the ‘soul’— of each object that he paints.
For this reason we have the feeling that a Braque jug is just as real and valid, just as much a distinct unity, as the jug that comes from the potter's wheel.
PERSONALITY PROFILES
A profile of the artist is another form in which to review an exhibition.
When such an article rises above the level of a gossip column, the artist's profile can be a valuable format.
One source of interest can be a description of where the interview has taken place, perhaps a studio, or maybe the artist's home.
After the Second World War, for example, the photographer Alexander Liberman decided to visit the studios of artists who had contributed to a century of painting in France, painters and sculptors closely connected with the School of Paris.
He commented on his project: ‘The more I explored, the more I became absorbed with the mystery of the environment.
Why should France have become the focal center of painting and sculpture at this particular time?
What relationship exists between the painting and the vision of reality that the artist has before his eyes?
At no time have I believed that environment is a complete explanation of art.
I am sure, however, that it plays an important role.’
The photographs were taken over a period of ten years, and eventually they were brought together in a book in 1960; ten of the book's essays originally appeared in Vogue , where the appealing mix of an artist's conversation along with Liberman's descriptions and commentary  succeeded well.
Here is one of the descriptions from the profile on Georges Braque:
He insisted that I visit the church and marine cemetery at Varengeville.
The small twelfth-century edifice, built right above the steep cliffs that dominate the northern beaches of France, and the cemetery with its hundred tombs and crosses are in harmony with Braque's colors .
The church is gray; the cemetery crosses are of white marble.
The stained-glass windows inside, and the black wrought iron and living or artificial flowers outside, contribute vivid accents.
The steel-gray expanse of the northern pebbled beach, overcast with the shadows of the high cliffs, creates the dominant black of Braque's marines.
I understood how much Braque had absorbed the countryside around him.
The New Yorker has a good record of commissioning articles.
Braque was profiled by Janet Flanner, who also wrote evocatively about Picasso and Matisse.
Flanner is rather sparing about details of Picasso's personal life, knowing it to be so extensively documented.
But her selected information has a welcome sharpness:
Even the opening report of him comes from an unusual source — his own vivid memory of how he learned to walk.
More than sixty years after the event, while watching a child of his own try out his first steps, he suddenly stated in reminiscence and satisfaction to his most intimate Spanish friend, ‘I remember that I learned to walk by pushing a big tin box of sweet biscuits in front of me because I knew what was inside.’
What must have distinguished him as being beyond normal was his unconventionally high state of consciousness.
Magazine profiles may be carefully written and prepared, though their facts are unlikely to be as thoroughly checked as in books.
Newspaper profiles are quite likely to be based on interviews, which have an immediate attraction, though a reader will naturally be wary about how accurately the interview may have been recorded.
Even taped interviews can only be read with caution, since they may have been edited, and the reader will not be told how.
Besides, it is an everyday experience that people are sometimes wrong in conversation, and may not remember events well.
Where personal profiles have a strength, however, is in what the critic says about personal reactions to artist and work.
One incidental advantage of personality pieces is that the magazines in which they appear may be able to afford good-quality colour reproductions.
Unluckily, this may be of little help to the reader if the pictures  illustrated are used as mere decoration, and not the subject of critical discussion.
This is as unsatisfactory as reading about a picture which is not illustrated.
The crux of a personality article is that it aims to satisfy a reader's curiosity.
An editor's directions to the writer of an article may be to take a populist approach, suitable for a wide audience.
The article written to this brief is likely to have an element of sensationalism; curiosity about sex or money may be deliberately aroused; conflicts in an artist's life are likely to be dramatised.
An amusing parallel in the film business is an account given by the director Ken Russell of how he sold the idea of making a film about Tchaikowsky; he described it to his potential backers as the story of a homosexual who fell in love with a nymphomaniac.
Similarly, the personal lives of artists may be believed by editors to sell more newspapers than reflective criticism.
GROUP SHOWS
Reviews of group shows make hard reading.
The critic may choose to write about common features in the work of the artists exhibiting; this may lead to generalisations about the group which take little account of the individual qualities of the artists.
Indeed, the assumption that they have characteristics in common may be mistaken or misleading.
The alternative, of choosing between artists, is also hazardous, since it refutes the idea that they have a reason for exhibiting together, even if what the critic writes is favourable.
A hostile article is even less likely to be satisfactory to a reader.
There is no problem for an antagonistic critic to find incoherence and inconsistency in a group exhibition.
To begin with, the reasons for which artists show together are varied.
An obvious reason is financial, since to share costs of a show is easier for the participants.
Another financial incentive is that sales may be generated by the naming of a group.
At the end of the twentieth century group exhibitions perhaps do not have the importance that they have had earlier in the century.
There are many galleries through the world, and it is no longer so difficult for an artist to show work independently.
Solo shows and mixed exhibitions are more common, with the group show playing a less important role in the market.
Artists who group together for financial reasons may choose a name which is no more explanatory than a number or numbers.
Thus in London at different times there have been groups which have called themselves the Society of Twelve , the Seven and Five , and One/Four .
It could be argued that these groups were formed as much for sociability as for making money, being made up of friends or acquaintances, but at any event their reasons fell short of promoting definite artistic programmes.
A word of caution is in order, though, about the names of exhibiting  groups.
Sometimes a number conceals a genuinely significant programme, such as the Group of Seven had in Canada.
This distinguished alliance of landscape artists sought to invigorate their country's artistic life by bold treatment of wild Canadian subjects.
Tom Taylor, mentor and leader, had died before the group had its first exhibition, but remains classed with his friends.
They subsequently developed individual styles and separate interests, as is true of most groups of artists, but their initial appearance was defined by a programme.
Another sort of title for a group is exemplified by Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider).
Forty-three works by fourteen painters were shown in 1911 at the ‘First Exhibition by the Editorial Board of The Blue Rider ’, the publication concerned being an almanac which appeared in 1912 with a drawing of a horseman by Kandinsky on the cover.
The second exhibition included thirty-one artists.
The main need of these artists was for good opportunities to exhibit their work; unlike the equally celebrated group Die Brücke (The Bridge) they did not work closely together.
Nor did they plan portfolios of prints, as Die Brücke did; a practice, by the way, followed by a variety of artists' organisations including the Senefelder Group in England, which has sold its members' lithographs from the nineteenth century to the present day.
Impressionism is the most familiar group with an artistic programme in the nineteenth century.
Several features of its history are worth notice.
for one thing, the group did not choose the name, which came from a reviewer's description of a painting by Monet.
Then, the artistic aims of members of the group were quite varied, and some personal animosities caused the alliance to break up.
Further, the name was partly kept alive by dealing, primarily by the man most heavily committed, Durand-Ruel.
What was perhaps most crucial to the success of Impressionism in financial terms was its modern stance, as closely identified with contemporary life at the turn of the century as Romanticism had been fifty years before.
In artistic terms, this modern stance inevitably attracted competition.
Seurat and his colleagues argued that Pointillism was a scientifically modern style, while the Symbolists asserted that spiritual values were preferable to artistic programmes of perception.
The unfavourable reception of Impressionism by the French critics is notorious; but Impressionism was not the only group to gain a name from a review — the Fauves and Cubism share this.
From a critic's point of view, a label, whether ending in ‘ism’ or not, is convenient.
The critic writing in a newspaper with very limited space needs such a label to give the reader a general idea of what is on display.
Using such a shorthand description leaves space for other topics.
Another consequence of the labelling of Impressionism and other groups by critics was that some artists naturally decided that they themselves could do the same job better than the critics.
In Western art there  had been artistic programmes and manifestos before Impressionism, but in the twentieth century they proliferated.
Part of the critic's task in the nineteenth century, as now, was to interpret art for the lay public; but what, artists asked themselves, if we interpreted our own work? from such a thought sprang statements of artistic aims and manifestos, some using the new device of naming a group with a progressive title, such as futurism.
De Stijl is an especially bold assertion of identity, the Dutch word for style implying that there is no other style worth considering.
The reader in this situation has a choice: the work in an exhibition can be measured against the artists' manifesto; or the critic's interpretation and assessment can be used.
The critic necessarily has to take a manifesto into account.
Indeed, there is an implicit struggle between critic and artist; an artist's manifesto can be seen as a deliberate attempt to pre-empt critical comment and evaluation.
One puzzling decision for a critic to make is to decide whether to isolate any one artist as the leading figure of the group.
When this is done, there is a tendency for other artists to be compared with the leader to their disadvantage.
It is a nice matter of judgement to decide how to treat the various personalities with justice.
Sometimes the teacher is absent from the group, as Gustave Moreau was absent from the painting exhibited by the Fauves; or, like Tom Taylor of the Group of Seven , he may be dead.
Only time and scholarship eventually sort out the various relationships of artists who worked together.
Artists can be at a disadvantage in group exhibitions as only a small part of their activity can be seen.
A small gallery may have space to show work in only one medium; this may have a distorting effect on the activity of the group as a whole or of versatile individuals.
It may also give a misleading impression: for example, the work of German Expressionist painters under the banner of the name Die Brücke , Kirchner, Nolde and Pechstein was affected by their practice as print-makers, where some motifs and treatment originated.
A show of their painting tells only part of their story.
The knowledge of a critic is useful here for filling in relevant background information.
The critic is also likely to spot the gaps in a group show, when the best works are not being shown, say perhaps because they are in private collections.
The politicising of Western art gives the existence of a manifesto special relevance.
If the aim of an exhibition is political, the evaluation of art on purely aesthetic grounds is possible, but considered an irrelevance by the exhibitors.
In the longer term, it may be something aesthetic will be seen in what was intended as pure politics.
The prime example is the Dada movement, whose nihilistic work is now admired for qualities of imagination.
It was originally reviled, as the artists intended, for its rejection of conventional values of art and society.
MIXED EXHIBITIONS
Mixed exhibitions are ideal for spotting talent ahead of the market, as well as being a significant source of income for many artists.
The most common sort of mixed exhibition is the exhibiting society, whose history is entwined with the development of art in Europe since the eighteenth century.
The shows put on in Paris at the Salon, and in London at the Royal Academy, were a means of creating sales for artists at a turning point in the history of patronage; as there developed a middle-class market for literature, so there developed a comparable market for art.
Denis Diderot gained lasting fame as the energetic editor of the French Encyclopaedia , but he is also rightly celebrated as an art critic.
It was in 1761, that he first wrote an account of one of the Salons, which was circulated with his other correspondence in the fashion of the time by his friend Grimm.
Diderot's standards were those primarily of a moralist, questioning how morality might be fashioned through painting, but he was sensitive to artistic aims; his essay on painting was admired both by Goethe and Baudelaire.
Here is a description by Diderot of a Russian country scene by Le Prince, from criticism of the Salon in 1767.
An old man has been playing the guitar, but he has left off playing to listen to a young shepherd piping.
The old man is sitting under a tree, and a young girl is near him; I think he is blind — at least, he ought to be.
The youth is sitting at a little distance, his shepherd's pipe in his mouth; there is a charming simplicity in his dress and appearance; he has a fine head.
The old man and the girl are listening attentively.
On the right are some rocks, and at the foot of them the sheep are feeding.
This picture goes straight to my heart; I should like to lean against that tree between the old man and the girl and listen while the youth played.
And when he had left off playing I would go and sit by him, and a little later we would all lead the good old man to his cottage.
A picture that affects one thus cannot be a bad picture.
You may say that it is feeble in colour and monotonous in tone — it may be so, but it touches the heart, it arrests the attention; and what is the use of all your correct drawing and pure tints, and skill in light and shade, if your subject leaves me cold and unaffected.
Painting is the art of reaching the soul through the eyes, but if the picture appeals to the eyes and never reaches the soul, the painter has fallen far short of his aim.
In person, incidentally, Diderot was an encouraging critic.
Sainte-Beuve tells us that David  always spoke of Diderot with gratitude.
It seems that David had at first great difficulty in making his way with the public, and was several times unsuccessful in his efforts after fame.
It was at this time that Diderot, who often strolled into the artists' studios, paid a visit to David, and saw a picture which the artist was just finishing.
He admired it and talked about the artist's meaning, and the noble ideas he attributed to him.
David listened and frankly avowed that he had not been conscious of all these grand ideas.
‘What,’ said Diderot, ‘you did it from instinct without knowing what you were doing!
That is better still!’
David was greatly encouraged by this warm admiration expressed by a celebrated man, and it helped to develop his talent.
Reviews of exhibiting societies' shows have constantly presented difficulties to critics, as it is only possible to give brief comments on some of the artists' work; how could it be otherwise when an exhibiting society shows several thousand works?
During the nineteenth century to be noticed was good fortune, while to be praised was a professional advantage.
Exhibiting societies, once established, bred rivals; the most remarkable rivalry in the nineteenth century was in Paris, where the choice of pictures for the Salon in 1866 was so generally considered to be unfair that the rejected pictures were shown in a Salon of their own.
This enabled some major figures to show work for the first time.
By the end of the century, a pattern emerged through Europe of societies of artists breaking away from official organisations, creating seceding groups, of which one in Austria adopted the word as a title,Sezession .
The problem of criticising the work in exhibiting societies' shows is how little space is made available in newspapers for its coverage; the critic has time to mention a painter or a sculptor, make a brief observation, and then passes on.
In this case selection is all, or almost all, as space does not allow for extensive description or interpretation.
Nor is there much point in attempting to give a general impression of a show, as there is nothing to hold it together, unlike a group show with a programme or a manifesto to consider.
The only possible general comment is limited to a comparison of one year with another, or of one exhibition with some comparable one.
The phrase-maker is thus king.
An apt combination of noun and adjective, a bon mot , an evocative phrase, is as much as an artist can hope for and a reader can expect.
The reader's only remedy is to go to the exhibition.
In Victorian Britain or France during the Second Empire the critic had some influence over taste.
It is doubtful how much influence a critic has today, though high claims are made for Clement Greenberg as the promoter of American Abstract Expressionism.
A cynic will remember that research into the opinion-forming powers of newspapers has tended  to conclude that readers expect to have their existing views confirmed.
If so, the power of critics may be no more than the listings services offered in the papers or on posters, while real power can be found in the organisation of the art market.
A different sort of exhibition which has had some success in attracting attention, and thus newspaper coverage, is the prize competition.
Here the critic is absolved from making judgements of his own by the need to report what a jury has decided about prizes.
The critic's standing is thereby reduced, and the description or evaluation of the prize works is less than likely to be uninfluenced by their new position.
How then is the reader of art criticism best advised to use criticism to follow the fortunes of artists?
One policy is to try to see more than one review of any exhibition.
The notice board at a show where notices are pinned up will give the general idea of what sort of reviews have been written.
It is a usual feature of such a comparison that there is a basic level of information which is common to most of the reviews, and it is the mark of a skilful critic to have worked in some personal assessment of works, or some individual response to the show as a whole.
The data common to all reviews can be discounted as being neither criticism nor evaluation.
The nuggets of real criticism are those views which are evidently based on personal reactions and responses.
THEMES AND ARGUMENTS
Articles on exhibitions sometimes glide away into topics which have little to do with the art on display.
This will be disappointing for a reader who expects at the least some evaluation of the shows.
The arguments put forward can be interesting in themselves, but their drift is often towards making the context of the art shown more understandable.
Art politics or cultural history are favourite themes for such reviewers, apart from the spectrum of cognate disciplines which may be the specialities of writers who are only occasionally concerned with art.
Thematic articles are likely to be found in two sorts of periodicals, general magazines and academic journals, either interdisciplinary or of specialist disciplines.
Valuable interpretive ideas may be found in journals of psychology, aesthetics, philosophy, history, religion, sociology, anthropology, even medicine and biology, although these may not be matched up with descriptions and evaluations of art.
Such articles may not start with art; as Rudolf Arnheim said about his book,Art and Visual Perception , he applied principles of visual perception to examples taken from the arts.
Only in his more recent work The Power of the Center , published in 1988, has he been looking from art to the resources offered by psychology.
One of the intriguing questions about any thematic article is what  motivated the writer?
Some articles are clearly written as a by-product of teaching, perhaps adapted from lectures or intended to form part of a book.
Others are contributions to a current debate, using art as a theme, in discussing political issues, for example.
Some thoughtful articles aim to make connections, perhaps across national and language frontiers, or between disciplines.
The reader's criteria for judging articles will vary accordingly.
Art politics can prove a rewarding topic for a journalist.
Tom Wolfe's book The Painted Word is a witty example of the genre; it originally appeared in Harper's Magazine , before being made into a book in 1975.
There are good satirical illustrations by the author, paralleled by a text which makes fun of American criticism, Abstract Expressionism and Pop Art.
Wolfe puts his argument as follows: ‘What I saw before me was the critic-in-chief of the New York Times saying: In looking at a painting today, ‘to lack a persuasive theory is to lack something crucial’.
I read it again.
It didn't say ‘something helpful’ or ‘enriching’or even ‘extremely valuable’.
No, the word was crucial .
In short: frankly, these days, without a theory to go with it, I can't see a painting.’
This overpraise of criticism justifies the book's title,The Painted Word ; elsewhere, the book has racy descriptions of New York art life, and a headcount by the author of those he considers care about art.
A diagram of the art world, according to Wolfe, would be made up, in addition to the artists, of ‘about 750 culturati in Rome, 500 in Milan, 1,750 in Paris, 1,250 in London, 2,000 in Berlin, Munich, and Düsseldorf, 3,000 in New York, and perhaps 1,000 scattered about the rest of the world.
That is the art world — a mere hamlet — restricted to les beaux mondes of eight cities.’
What Wolfe provides is art criticism in a sardonic mode, created by parodying others.
One of Wolfe's targets is the critic Greenberg, about whom an apologist has gravely asserted: ‘The significance of Clement Greenberg cannot be overestimated.
He is the designer and subtle manipulator of modernism, which is the single most important and influential theory of modern art.’
Greenberg wrote exhibition reviews for The Nation during the 1940s, but his lasting reputation comes from a collection of his articles, including some more thematic pieces for Partisan Review , in a book published in 1961 with the title Art and Culture .
Greenberg's name has a special glamour because of his successful advocacy of Abstract Expressionist artists against ‘the dominance of the School of Paris’, as Barbara Reise wrote.
Moreover, ‘His role shifted easily from the alienated critic writing art columns for intellectual magazines to an impresario in the New York art-world judged by his commitment to a specific type of art and respected for its ultimate (commercial and influential) success.’
Greenberg's articles are marked by a confident authority, as in the following passage.
Looser paint-handling, combined with what remained an essentially Cubist sense of design, drawing, layout, was what artists as different as Gorky and Pollock had in common during the mid-1940s.
If the term ‘Abstract Expressionist’ means anything verifiable, it means painterliness: loose, rapid handling, or the look of it; masses that blot and fuse instead of shapes that stay distinct; large, conspicuous rhythms; broken color ; uneven saturations or densities of paint; exhibited brush, knife, finger or rag marks — in short a constellation of physical features like those defined by Wölflinn when he extracted his notion of the Malerische from Baroque art.
As we can now see, the displacing of the ‘linear’ and quasi-geometrical as the dominant mode in New York (and Parisian) abstract art after 1943 offers another instance of that cyclical alternation of non-painterly, or linear, and painterly which has marked the evolution of Western art since the sixteenth century.
A more political theme for an article is the issue of subsidies for the arts.
The sticking point is, generally, who should get this encouragement?
The National Endowment for the Arts in the United States has been under heavy fire for its choices, as is usual for Ministries, whether in nineteenth-century France or the present-day USSR.
Choices for subsidies are in themselves art critical judgements, just as commissions are, and public debate can become enflamed over commissions.
The art critic has no decisive voice in such controversies, though arguments can be made by analogy from existing art to what may be done.
Another form of article which can include art criticism is a theoretical paper.
For example, the cultural theory of the 1970s, according to an article by Victor Burgin on The End of Art Theory , drew predominantly on feminism, Marxism, psychoanalysis and semiotics.
In his view the independence of modernism in art has been ‘further subverted by the demonstration of the necessarily ‘intertextual’ nature of the production of meaning’.
Cultural history and theory, it has to be said, have very extensive agenda, and art criticism is perhaps only a sub-paragraph under a secondary heading.
The reader may be doomed to disappointment in reading through an article with wide contextual terms of reference if looking for something as simple as descriptions of works of art, their interpretation and evaluation.
Articles of synthesis between art and other subjects may include important art criticism.
Literary theory is at present in demand as a point of reference for writing on the visual arts.
Articles on this sort of theme may appear in art periodicals, but are just as likely to be found in other  journals, on literature, say, or history.
What is most likely to be useful in such material is the chance that inferences can be drawn by the reader, seeing a similarity in a problem elsewhere with a question in the visual arts.
AS THINGS ARE: DESCRIPTION
THE OBJECT OF ATTENTION
The description of an object is not a simple task.
An art object is especially difficult for the critic, as there are many ways in which its description can be approached.
Let us take a sculpture, depicting a girl's nude figure, of bronze, sixty-three inches high, called The Dance Step , by the Italian sculptor Giacomo Manzù.
The girl's slim figure, small breasts, and pony tail haircut are those of an adolescent, while her pose, one foot at right angles to the other, is just a little away from the third position in classical Western ballet.
Eduard Trier chose to illustrate this figure in Form and Space , in which he limits himself to two observations: it is a product of refined artificiality (in comparison with the elemental force of Marino Marini's sculpture), and the girl (in comparison with a figure by Marcello Mascherini) is ‘more reserved, displays a leisurely elegance in her arrested dance step’.
Manzù's girl is thus described by Trier first as an artefact, and then as a person; his terms of reference are the characteristics of two other sculptors.
This skimpy description is not unusual in a survey, and the missing positive evaluation he might have made is only implied in his choice of the sculpture for inclusion in his book.
No other information is given about the work itself, although there is a brief biographical note about the sculptor.
There are a number of other ways in which the work could
The pose, expression and figure of the girl could have been more fully interpreted in several ways beyond the comparisons with the work of two of Manzù's Italian colleagues.
Who is she?
We do not know her name, though it is unlikely that the sculptor did not have a model.
The girl is anonymous, just as are the models for some religious scenes described by Giorgio Vasari.
He wrote about the famous frescoes by Giotto in the church of St Francis of Assisi:
In truth the work exhibits great variety, not only in the gestures and postures of the different figures, but in the composition of each subject, besides which it is very interesting to see the various costumes of those times and certain imitations and observations of Nature.
One of the most beautiful of these represents a thirsty man, whose desire for water is represented in the most lively manner as he kneels on the ground to drink from a spring, with such wonderful reality that one might imagine him to be a real person.
Vasari praised Giotto's ability to represent things visible, a highly usual expectation in the tradition of Western art.
Paintings which describe the natural world are indeed easiest for the critic to describe, since any observer can compare an object seen with the same thing depicted.
This comparison may form the crucial part of a description; later on, using comparison as a criterion, that a portrait should look like the sitter, that landscape should look natural, and the objects in a still life should be identifiable, a critic can use it as part of an evaluation.
A still life is in some ways an ideal picture to describe, as a firm basis can be found in a catalogue of its components.
A list can even rise to evoking the mood of a picture, as in this description by the Goncourt brothers of Chardin's subjects; ‘He introduces into his pictures his wash-basin, his mastiff puppy, the objects and the creatures to which he is accustomed in his home…the pure simple features of the working middle class, happy in its tranquillity, its labour and its obscurity.
The genius of the painter is the genius of the home.’
People in pictures can be more problematic to describe, since they may not be identifiable, a special difficulty with portraits.
The activities of people in pictures can be equally puzzling.
Indeed, if the story enacted in a picture is not known, quite wrong inferences can be drawn from what is perceived.
The reader of a description needs therefore to be careful about accepting as a description anything more than is actually visible on the canvas or in the sculpture.
Within a particular culture, a description can naturally go further in identifying a devout picture of a Virgin and Child, or a dancing figure with six arms as Siva.
The Christian painting may be at once a holy picture and a convincing representation of a woman tenderly cradling her son, seen in front of a north Italian landscape.
The Siva statue has no such direct representational reference.
A critic unfamiliar with a culture will have trouble in formulating a description of a work.
Take African sculpture, much admired by European  artists in the twentieth century for its bold forms, not representational of the human figure in a Western sense.
Frank Willett in African Art comments:
African sculpture has been commonly described as frontal, i.e. the figures are symmetrically disposed about a vertical axis.
There are, of course, exceptions to this, but asymmetrical pieces are uncommon.
Because of their frontality African figure sculptures are commonly photographed or drawn full face, concealing the fact that the sculptor has paid a great deal of attention to the profile view.
Then he says something about the formal appeal of this sculpture to twentieth-century Western taste, because of its freedom from the canon of realism:
It is easy enough to analyse the formal characteristics of African sculpture in terms of vertical, horizontal or diagonal emphases; of relative naturalism or abstraction; of rounded, angular or cubic elements; or in terms of tensions, rhythm and movement, and this is certainly an enjoyable and satisfying experience, since African sculptors have achieved a remarkable level of expression in what has been called ‘purely sculptural’ form.
This account raises two significant issues about description; one is parallel to comments on photography which have already been made.
In seeing African sculpture reproduced, the reader can remember that this art is to an extent being misrepresented by photography.
Secondly, the formal analysis which is second nature to a Western critic can be fruitful, even though it could be argued that this is a way of interpreting the objects of an unfamiliar culture rather than a description.
A further type of difficulty arises in descriptions of works produced in far Eastern cultures.
While a Western eye is familiar with the process of looking, as it were, through an image to what it represents or means, an Eastern critic looks also at the surface of a painting or a drawing, in which a poem or other calligraphic element may form an integral part of the work.
Chinese painting and calligraphy are visual arts on much of an equal footing.
A Japanese example is the surimono , a friendly greeting for the New Year through a drawing and a message which complement each other.
Here a measure of interpretation is integral to the work itself.
The long-standing popularity of Japanese woodcut prints in the West has somewhat disguised differences in approach.
The undeniable and striking formal qualities of composition in works by such masters as Hokusai and Hiroshige have had demonstrable effects on late-nineteenth-and twentieth-century European art.
Nevertheless, such prints are not  justly reduced even in description to mere compositional terms.
The materials used, for example, merit attention rarely given to paintings in the West whose science is intended to create an illusion.
What the reader of criticism deserves, in sum, is an appropriate description.
There are some aspects of a work of art which can be measured, for example its size, natural or chemical composition, and some facts can be discovered about works through specialist techniques such as infra-red photography.
These may or may not have significance; what needs to be certain is that descriptions are accurate, for if they are wrong, deductions from them will be valueless.
A fragment from an altarpiece cannot be appraised in just the same way as an independent portrait; and a craftsman's skill is esteemed more accurately when the materials used are rightly identified.
PERCEPTION
How a spectator views an object is also not a simple matter, despite this century's increased knowledge of the psychology of perception.
A difficulty is that psychology has narrow terms of reference which can give only a few useful results, for example on the question of illusion.
A classic example of exposition, though not uncontroversial, is E. H. Gombrich's Art of Illusion .
This usefully explores some of the resolvable questions, in particular those of crucial interest to students of landscape and the human figure.
One aspect of illusion is perspective, much valued in the Western tradition.
Three sorts of perspective are identified by Leonardo da Vinci in his treatise on painting, as follows:
The first deals with the reasons of the (apparent) diminution of objects as they recede from the eye, and is known as Perspective of Diminution: the second contains the way colours vary as they recede from the eye: the third and last explains how objects should appear less distinct in proportion as they are more remote.
And the names are as follows: Linear perspective, the perspective of colour, the perspective of disappearance.
The Renaissance became enamoured of perspective, indeed Vasari thought that Paolo Uccello took it too seriously.
He wrote:
Paolo Uccello would have been the most delightful and imaginative genius since Giotto that had adorned the art of painting, if he had devoted as much pains to figures and animals as he did to questions of perspective, for, although these are ingenious and good in their way, yet an immoderate devotion to them causes an infinite waste of  time, fatigues nature, clogs the mind with difficulties, and frequently renders it sterile where it had previously been fertile and facile.
But when Uccello died in his eighties, ‘He left a daughter who could design, and a wife who used to say that Paolo would remain the night long in his study to work out the lines of his perspective, and that when she called him to come to rest, he replied, ‘Oh what a sweet thing this perspective is!’
Mathematical perspective of a Renaissance sort had not been used in European medieval art, where the size of a figure often derives from the person's importance, God the father never being small.
A perspective may be used which reverses the convergence of lines in the distance; instead, lines of perspective converge in front of the viewer, an unexpected phenomenon for a twentieth-century spectator used to photographs.
Again, in Chinese art perspective is different from its treatment in the West.
There is one sort of Chinese perspective, seen as in the West from a level viewpoint, but this is only one of three treatments of space representation.
It can be identified with p'ing yuan , when one is able to see ‘from the near parts to the furthest parts’.
In this, as in Western perspective, the horizon line is somewhere below the middle of the picture.
One alternative Chinese perspective is shen yuan , in which the viewer is placed as if on a hill, and the horizon line is thus high up, almost a bird's eye view.
The third perspective is Kao yuan , in which the viewer is looking up towards a mountain scene, as William Willetts puts it, ‘through successively receding heights represented by flat parallel planes, each with its own horizon’.
The point of making these comparisons is that artistic practices affect how a critic should describe a landscape.
Suppose a scene is said to be in correct perspective?
This description could mean several different things.
Yet such a comment may need to be made, nevertheless, to point out the quality of a picture.
The critic who pays little notice to perspective or other means of representing the natural world will deprive a reader of help in enjoying the exceptional beauty of the natural appearance of Impressionist pictures, whose qualities are inspired by scientific understanding of light and its effects.
In a different sort of context, what appears to be an abstract design, devoid of reference to the natural world, may in fact be a stylisation of a person, an animal or an imagined figure.
The totems of American Indians, the carvings of Inouk, ancient bronze ritual vessels from China, and many more examples can be found through the world and the centuries.
Most African sculpture is not in this category, as characteristically the masks and ritual objects of Africa are more evidently human or animal in appearance.
Care has to be taken by a critic in any of these cases to describe works as definitely as possible.
A totem, for example, can be described  first as it appears, then as an object which has stylised figures in the sculpture.
A further example of abstract form which is not mere pattern is Tantric art.
A Tantric painting or drawing has a spiritual purpose, to assist the user in meditation.
As a sound is a mantra, so an image is a yantra, the two used together making a powerful combination for spiritual exercises.
A description of a Tantric painting as a linear diagram may seem uninteresting, but then the effect of such a picture is not meant to be pleasure for the eye alone, but for religious use.
WAYS OF DESCRIBING
We have thought so far mainly about verbal descriptions, the stock in trade of the art critic.
There are other ways of description, which may incidentally be employed by a critic, or can be useful to a reader as a check on the validity of a verbal description.
In chapter 4, on monographs, there were some comments on the photography of art as a complement to criticism; there are some other issues about how accurate or misleading photographs can be.
Perhaps this is the more important in the late twentieth century now that this means of image-making is so familiar that some people actually imagine that a photograph shows the world as it is.
In truth, the camera is a ruthless editor of visual information; this can be made plain by looking at a picture, say of the eighteenth century, and comparing it with a contemporary print, perhaps an aquatint, and a modern photograph.
The images carry different information.
The physical make-up of dots in a photograph differs from the lines and granular surface of the aquatint; the aquatint's variations describe the picture more eloquently.
The art of civilisations other than that of the West are now more readily visible through photography, and within the limitations of the medium, usefully so.
But what do tourists actually see during a visit to India?
Are they able to look without too dominant a preconception coming from the Western tradition?
There are amusing archaeological records in the nineteenth century of the inability of even trained artists to record what they saw; Assyrian figure sculptures, for example, were recorded as having unmistakably classical Greek features by an artist in the employ of the archaeologist Sir Henry Layard.
A different sort of description is an artist's copy of a work.
Copying was a well-paid occupation in nineteenth-century France, since private collectors and travellers were happy to have copies of pictures in famous collections like the Louvre.
Copying was also part of an artist's training, practised by Delacroix and Géricault, Cézanne and Renoir.
At the age of sixty-eight Ingres made copies of masterpieces.
Accurate copies might be made, but there is in addition a category of interpretive copy, where the  artist copies those elements which most appeal to him.
This sort of copy is at the same time description and interpretation, the salient points being brought out by the copyist, who gains greater understanding of a masterpiece by his work.
It is not altogether satisfactory to call a print by an artist on the same theme as one of his paintings a description.
After all, it is an original work in itself.
Nevertheless, the differences between painting and print may be instructive, and help the interpretation of both.
By other forms of reproduction an image may be more or less degraded, so that nothing can be learnt from them.
There remains the courtesy paid by one art to another, as in the poem which Baudelaire suggested might be a high form of critical writing.
Or it may be music, as in Mussorgsky's composition which he entitled ‘Pictures from an Exhibition’.
These forms of art, however, can generally be believed to have only a friendly connection with their inspiration, which, indeed, is normally only the starting point for the exercise of the talent of the musician or the poet.
It was a Romantic notion that there were resonances in the natural world and art; and it was Schiller who argued that music, the visual arts and poetry ‘always become…similar in their action on the mind’.
THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE
Describing the object is not the only sort of description that a reader can expect from a critic.
The critic may be willing to share an experience with the reader, sometimes only of the circumstances in which a work was seen, as might be included in a personality article; but on other occasions the critic may give a fuller account of a personal response to a work of art.
This then becomes not a description of the object itself, but of the critical appreciation or dislike that the work gives rise to.
A hairline distinction exists between this description of personal experience and the evaluation of a work.
In an evaluation the critic may put personal feeling aside.
What is an aesthetic experience?
The question has puzzled generations of Western historians, critics and philosophers for at least two centuries because of the difficulty of disentangling the aesthetic from other responses.
A pragmatic view is that an aesthetic experience is what is described as such, and as there are varieties of religious experience, so there may be varieties of aesthetic experience.
Let us join an American educationalist talking to children about their understanding of art.
Michael J. Parsons describes his work in How We Understand Art .
He can introduce us to some American girls and boys who spoke up about what they noticed and liked.
If Andy thought a drawing by Paul Klee looked ‘sort of funny’, he said so.
Parsons has some  sensible reflections about how the children's comments can be connected with psychological theory.
Parsons outlines five stages of cognition, which he has based on the scientific work of Kohlberg.
Other writers have used different theories, for example those of Piaget.
Herbert Read in his book Education through Art took up the categories of types put forward by Jung.
But for our present purpose, Parsons' young friends will be good witnesses for us.
At first, Parsons tells us, ‘young children rarely find fault with paintings, no matter what their subject or style…they allow associations and memories freely to enter their response.
The common characteristic is the happy acceptance of whatever comes to mind…paintings are a stimulus to pleasant experience.’
This personal and inner satisfaction gives way at the next stage to taking account of the viewpoints of others, and the experience of others.
Following this, the children come to realise that pictures are part of a tradition; finally, children may be prepared to make a judgement going beyond an individual culture.
This subtle scheme has advantages over simpler divisions.
Picasso's Guernica is ‘OK for some but I don't like it’, as a young boy put it.
The first stage starts with a simple liking, ‘I love blue’, ‘My favourite colour is yellow’.
In the next stages there is pleasure to be found in identifying subjects, and in discovering that pictures can convey messages expressively.
The idea that art is part of a tradition is a further step.
Whereas in stage two, detail is a pleasure, in stage four the refinement of imagery and simplicity may be enjoyed.
Comparisons between cultures become possible in the last stage.
This theory of stages in understanding art is helpful, and it will immediately be realised that the first two stages fit in with description, the next two with interpretation, while the final stage is judgement.
The theory is not so useful in defining the quality or strength of responses, and is no help in analysing the interactions of responses.
The theory is nevertheless of a sort which can be of real use in a classroom.
Perhaps the most usual description of aesthetic experience in the last hundred years has occurred when the critic has been faced with the need to react to one isolated work of art.
It was Roger Fry's contention that an object, say a bunch of carrots on a market stall, could be viewed in a practical way as something to eat for supper, or aesthetically.
This distinction can be backed up by philosophy and aesthetics, and descriptions can be found of the resultant moments of vision or epiphanies.
Our concern, however, is not with the difficulties of aesthetics, but only with what a critic writes of aesthetic experience, and how useful such an account may be.
This is an aspect of description, while it can be suggested that other religious, political or social concerns are more properly matters of interpretation.
Unfortunately it is often the case that writers do not allow themselves  to be so free in autobiographical disclosures as to say exactly how they felt on seeing some work of art.
While they may describe the work, they avoid describing their own responses to it.
Two honest critics can be given as exceptions, the first a Japanese who recorded a negative reaction to a picture which did not come up to his standards of meaningful symbolism.
He is Toru Torada, and the picture,Blue , by Kumai Sugai.
‘Suddenly I was confronted by a huge and altogether indescribable blue figure wearing a red hat.
But the painting said nothing at all to me as I stood gazing at it.
It fulfilled none of my expectations and seemed to be merely trying to make me laugh at the fact that it had left me standing there grasping at nothing.
And that was all there was to it.’
By contrast, here is a comment by an anthropologist who went to see the work of Mark Rothko.
‘At the end of the exhibition, looking at a painting entitled Black on Grey , and dated 1970, I tried to pay attention, ‘bare attention’, to its visual forms.
But what I knew and felt kept interfering.’
What the anthropologist Jacques Maquet knew was that a few weeks after finishing this sombre painting, Rothko committed suicide.
Questions and comments, feelings and comparisons kept interrupting his attempt at contemplating the work.
Then, ‘Instead of struggling in vain to prevent them from reaching my consciousness, I stepped back, as it were, and let thoughts and feelings come and go.
I noticed their appearance and also noticed that, left alone, they disappeared too.
My previous attempts at getting rid of them had had the effect of reactivating them.
I was still overwhelmed by the painting, but I was now aware that I was overwhelmed, and this, somehow, seemed to establish a distance between this emotion and me.’
