BACKWATERS
IN the course of the 1970s V. S. Naipaul published two novels —Guerrillas in 1975 and A Bend in the River in 1979 — which address the theme of alienation, marginality.
The orphan modes apparent in the novels are those, respectively, of vengeance and flight.
And there are also orphan countries there — poor places, backwaters, as it might seem, at opposite ends of the earth.
Early in 1972, two corpses were found in graves dug in the garden of a house near Port of Spain, Trinidad.
The house belonged to a hustler called Michael de Freitas, latterly known by his Black Muslim names, Michael X and Michael Abdul Malik.
In London, where he spent a number of years, he had gained a reputation as a crook and as a threatener of whites and defender of the coloured-immigrant population.
One of the corpses was that of a local youth, the other that of an English girl, Gail Benson, who had come to the West Indies as the slavish lover of an American Negro, Hakim Jamal, ‘God’ to his friends, who was eventually to be shot dead in Boston.
It turned out that Gail Benson had been stabbed and buried alive.
De Freitas was tried, with others, for the Trinidad killings.
Kate Millett and William Kunstler went about the world protesting against the trial on the grounds that it was ‘political’.
In May 1975, De Freitas was executed.
With these events in mind, Naipaul wrote a novel.
He is of Hindu stock, grew up amid the elaborate racial estrangements of Trinidad, and now lives in England.
He is a writer of rare gifts, and among his gifts is a capacity to wound.
He had previously written a journalistic piece about the killings, in which De Freitas figured as shabby and contemptible, and Gail Benson as a silly upper-class woman whose accessibility to the knife might almost have been construed as a last desperate act of Sixties modishness: an antic exported from Swinging London.
In a second article on the killings, Naipaul's wife Patricia used the word ‘antics’ to characterise the behaviour of the De Freitas set, which she firmly separated from the serious politics of the Caribbean.
I knew Gail Benson slightly when she was a schoolgirl, and remember a pretty moon face, big eyes, a freckled complexion deepening to russet, dark hair parted down the middle — a nut-brown maid and modern miss who must have wanted to be away from the French Lycée in South Kensington, shy, uneasy, wound-up.
I was curious to see what shrift she would receive in Naipaul's novel: the work of a man who has been spoken of by an old friend, the novelist Paul Theroux, as having in earlier times been ‘merciless, solitary, and (one of his favourite words) unassailable’.
Well, it can be said that he does not allow his mercilessness to go undetected on this occasion.
And yet the treatment of his characters is not exactly what that prefatory article of his might have led one to expect.
Guerrillas is set in an imaginary Caribbean country, whose capital city is by the sea.
There are mountains nearby.
Inland, a great plain.
The landscape yields three centres of activity.
First of all, outside the city, next to a growth of forest, there is Thrushcross Grange.
Named after the mansion in Wuthering Heights , this is a desolate agricultural commune run by Jimmy Ahmed, back from London, where he has been in some vague way a celebrity.
He has extracted land and money from business interests, but his revolutionary experiment has foundered from the start.
Nathaniel Hawthorne spoke of the ‘phantasmagorical antics’ he had played in describing the socialist community which appears in The Blithedale Romance : the antics played in the commune conceived by Ahmed could also be called phantasmagorical.
A nut-brown man by South Kensington standards, he is light-skinned in the West Indies: he is a Chinese Negro, who thinks of himself as a hakwai Chinee —hakwai , he explains, being ‘Chinese for nigger’— and who has not failed to notice that Emily Brontë's Heathcliff is rumoured to be the Emperor of China.
He is also a self-styled haji, or Muslim holy man.
He has gathered about him a defecting company of slum boys, with one of whom, Bryant, of the distorted face, his hair done up in small Medusa pigtails, he sometimes makes love.
The polluted landscape, and the heat in which it languishes, are important to the novel.
The heat, and the drought, have set this country on fire.
The hills smoke, mounds of rubbish smoulder, the verges of the roads are charred.
All this is felt to  testify, not just to a general rankness and decay, but to a conflagration of another kind — to what will happen if the political and racial tensions of the island can no longer be contained.
Gangs and guerrillas are talked of Wealthy people are talking of escape from a Caribbean version of James Baldwin's ‘the fire next time’.
A white woman named Jane has come here from London, drawn by the glamour of the Third World, supposing herself to have arrived where the action is, where the ‘doers’ are.
She is, as she acknowledges, ‘playing with fire’.
For a while she believes that Peter Roche is a doer.
Tortured by the regime in South Africa, Roche has written a book about it, and now, in the Caribbean, has joined the firm of Sablich's as a welfare worker, whose job is to define and to publicise the firm's good intentions toward the community.
It does not take long, however, for Jane to become disillusioned.
She ‘knew’ that ‘she had come to a place at the end of the world’, a backwater where there was no action at all.
She lives with Roche above the city in a ‘Californian’ company house on the Ridge: this suburb, barricaded, fireproof perhaps, but lived in by prospective quitters of the country, supplies a further scene for the events of the novel.
Every so often, wild disordered men, with matted hair and ‘unseeing red eyes’, are glimpsed ‘tramping along old paths, across gardens, between houses, and through what remained of woodland, like aborigines recognising only an ancestral landscape and insisting on some ancient right of way’.
One of them has taken up residence in a hut in Roche's garden.
When Jane has Roche inspect the hut, the wild man, with his black face and his pigtails, has gone, leaving behind him ‘only a vague warm smell of old clothes, dead animals, grease and marijuana’.
Perhaps he will be back — next time.
The novel's third scene or zone is the city itself.
The automobile has turned the city inside out, ranging new communities around the periphery and letting the centre rot: not far from the centre is an old slum district where the gangs operate.
They are a reality, whereas the guerrillas are only a dream — phantasmagorical.
But they are a reality which Naipaul treats in such a way that they, too, can at times seem phantasmagorical.
Everywhere, transistors give off the Reggae beat, making the place a party that never stops, and that might catch fire.
A sense of mystery and futility is imparted by events at the Grange and on the Ridge, and that sense is heightened by what takes place in the city when the party catches fire and rioting breaks out.
Politicians rush to the airport with their loot.
Then American military helicopters drift about the sky: a show of strength which is meant to secure American interests on the island, to make it safe for the bauxite investment.
Ahmed does not lead this revolution.
No one does.
It is not a revolution.
It is a mystery.
A journalist politician, Meredith Herbert, is made a minister — perhaps in order that he should be damaged by having to deal with the people on the streets; he is, perhaps, physically beaten up.
His role in relation to the disturbances is never really clarified, nor is that of Stephens, an intelligent boy who deserts the Grange, is in touch with the gangs, and is murdered.
The gangs exist as intimations of a power which cancels Ahmed's claim to be a revolutionary leader.
That power is located in the slums, in the kinship and solidarity which prevail there, in sanctions which welfare workers will not be able to comprehend.
The angle from which the riots are studied makes them appear distant and unimportant, while also worrying.
The same angle was conspicuous in the title story of Naipaul's previous book,In a Free State , where a coup in a new African country was studied, as it were, out of the corner of an eye; and it also occurs elsewhere in his work.
On these occasions the eye discerns a kind of visibility in ‘an area of darkness’: this, in fact, is the title of the book which records Naipaul's ‘experience of India’.
Enthusiasts for explanation, however, might want to explain that this ‘darkness visible’ tends to obscure and diminish what deserves to be understood, and that, for him, there are important countries and unimportant countries, and that the coups and riots of the latter are severely diminishable.
Here, he surrounds the politics of his imaginary country with darkness, distinguishes between its politics and what might be seen as the antics of bystanders, and concentrates on these bystanders.
At the same time, the reader can be made to feel that, on closer inspection, the country's politics might prove to be antics too.
Naipaul may in consequence be open to the charge of trying to diminish both the Michael X murders and the politics of the  Caribbean.
It can be said in his favour that the Michael X set seemed very like a fraud and a circus, and that these people had no deep connection with the politics of Trinidad.
In that last respect, however, they were like practically everyone else on the island, which may in itself be a reason why we should not be quick to decide that their behaviour lacked political significance, and consisted of antics.
Guerrillas , then, is shaped in order to accommodate its three zones, and in accordance with a distinction between the political and the phantasmagorical, though there are moments when phantasmagoria, futility, threatens to envelop the island — Grange, Ridge, gangs, government, politics and all.
It is shaped, besides, in accordance with a dramatic momentum which reaches successive peaks with the two sexual encounters between Jane and Jimmy Ahmed.
The encounters are separated by the riots and the second is followed by Jane's death.
Jane is a disgruntled, mean and worldly woman who presents herself as the victim of the men she sets out to attract and soon sees through and rejects.
For all her action-seeking, caring cosmopolitanism, she is imperial-insular in outlook, and soon sees through the Third World.
When she goes to bed with Ahmed, it is a fiasco.
He looks at her in fear: ‘the cleft was like a dumb, stupid mouth.’
Her kiss is hard and wild; it goes with her ‘screaming’ eyes.
The later encounter is prefaced by advice from Jimmy, whose leadership pretensions are by now in ashes: ‘Be calm.
You're too greedy.
You give yourself away when you kiss like that.
A woman's whole life is in her kiss.’
Whereupon he calmly buggers her.
In Argentina, according to Naipaul's journalism, such an act belongs to the fantasies of machismo: here, at the end of the world, and of Ahmed's tether, it bears the mark of defeat.
Sodomy is then compounded by a somnambulistic, almost involuntary murder, in which Bryant deals the blows.
The novel breathes a certain animus against Jane.
In contrast, the portrait of Ahmed has none of the disdain which could be observed in the writer's article about Michael X. Ahmed's bluffs are called, but they are understood, and carefully related to his earlier life on the island.
His words about kissing are worth hearing.
The airmail letters which he exchanges with his liberal friends in England tell a worse story of them than they  do of him, and hark back in fine style to that golden time when such friends used to kneel in London mosques with Michael X and other celebrities, squinting up at the Heavyweight Champion of the World's effulgent arse.
Jane is unlikely to earn much sympathy by virtue of the attention given to the environment which produced her dabbling in eventfulness and her poor kiss, and yet the two environments have more in common than would once have been thought possible.
It is a quite Caribbean Britain that has made her: a Britain at the end of the world which it used to rule.
Ahmed's revulsion from Jane sometimes seems to be shared by the writer.
It is possible to think that this plebeian has been lent some part of Naipaul's aristocratic fastidiousness, some part of his hostility, while also suffering the consequences of an exposure to these qualities, and to recall that both Ahmed and the author of An Area of Darkness are preoccupied with the hanks of human shit that litter certain landscapes.
Ahmed's revenge is too bad to be condemned by the writer, who condemns his taste in furniture, and who condemns Jane.
The tragedies of miscegenation have never been simple — ever since Othello did what he had to do to Desdemona.
But it seems clear that this one bears the marks of defeat and despair, and of a reprisal directed at the liberal England which has let the violator down.
Naipaul's Caribbean country has been looted and exploited in the past, and it is still being looted and exploited.
Together with its stultifying racial enmities, this seems to have brought it to a halt, and placed it beyond history.
The behaviour of Naipaul's hustler-hero, his greedy white woman, his pseudo-guerrillas and mysterious gangs, his grafting emergent politicians with their State of Emergency, can be divided into the phantasmagorical and the political.
But these dimensions, as I have said, often appear to coincide.
His leading characters are seen to be, in some sense, petty and peripheral: but peripheral to what?
To standards of conduct attained in other countries, metropolitan standards, or to something on the island?
The island's public affairs and significant politics can occasionally be seen, out of the corner of an eye, to be no less invaded by contingency and incomprehensibility and futility than the life and times of Jimmy Ahmed, to have the status of rumour, to be little more than a remote and indecipherable response to a  random outbreak of violence.
There may be readers who object that the novel makes a mystique of darkness and futility in the course of saying that the whole island is peripheral, arrested.
This is a possibility to which an admirer of the novel keeps having to revert.
Times have changed since Naipaul began to write about the societies of the Caribbean: these are now less apt to seem, to the outsider, petty and remote.
His early comedies might have been taken to represent an unheard-of civility from the back of beyond.
Then, in 1961, came A House for Mr Biswaf : a rich, spacious novel of emergence from backwardness, indeed from slavery, an emergence which is invested with irony.
Since then, he has written, among other things,The Mimic Men : while relatively unsuccessful, this is the novel which most resembles Guerrillas , and it undoubtedly ‘diminishes’ the politics of emergent countries by raising doubts about the character of their independence and the motives of their leaders.
Over the intervening years, however, the West may be thought to have let him down by declining, diminishing, to the condition of the West Indies: by becoming a backwater, with its Watergate and Ulster, its economic arrests and somnambulistic states of emergency.
Naipaul's readers could well have become inclined to ask why it is that his novels seem to say that there is nothing to be done in, or with, the countries of their concern.
What are other countries doing?
Naipaul has long been a reader of Conrad, and Guerrillas can make you think of Nostromo .
The geographies are similar.
Conrad's novel is about a fire-prone seaside South American republic, with foreign investors and their concessions: its silver has its lightly rendered counterpart in Naipaul's bauxite.
And the Conrad cry of ‘Inconceivable!’ may be weighed against Naipaul's insistence upon areas of darkness.
Compared with what we find in Naipaul's novel, however, Conrad's Costaguana is a country of the mind: it has the air of having been built to accommodate his meanings.
What we find in Guerrillas is a narrative of unfailing fascination which delivers to the senses of the reader a country very like the countries he knows in the real world: equally, his experience of that country is very like his experience of Naipaul's India, in being rarely subdued by an awareness of the writer's more deliberate meanings.
It is  characteristic of the novel that climate and vegetation should count for no less than its comedy of manners, in which the Jewish businessman Harry de Tunja plays an enjoyable part, and that neither of these two elements, so far as they can be distinguished from the rest of the novel, should count for less than the opinions which they help to convey.
This is a very different work from Biswas .
It is brief and fast: it moves to the rhythms of a single drama, and the pace is perfectly judged.
Either book could be considered the masterpiece of someone whom I think of as among the most gifted authors now at work in England.
It might appear that the whole life of the later novel is in its sting, but there is more to it than sting.
Conrad said of The Secret Agent , another book about revolutionaries, cranks, crooks, somnambulists, peripherals and phantasmagoricals, that it was written ‘in scorn as well as in pity’, and the same could be said of Guerrillas .
But in passing, as they may be thought to have done, from journalism to fiction, Naipaul's feelings, and their objects, underwent a change.
There is less scorn in the novel than there had been in the article, and a pity that must have come as surprise to readers of his work.
Some readers were upset by the hostility shown towards the murdered woman, and by the sympathy shown towards Jimmy — the sympathy of an author noted for his sceptical attitude towards revolutionaries, who had been hostile, in print, to all of the participants in the historical events which supplied part of his plot.
There must also have been readers who were led to reflect on Othello's self-righteous murder of Desdemona, and to reflect that Shakespeare's play expresses a view of mixed marriages which is both encouraging and discouraging.
In both Guerrillas and A Bend in the River the description of a coup, of an emergent country's state of emergency, is put together with the description of a sexual relationship between people of different races: an affinity is suggested, also apparent in the novella In a Free State .
In Guerrillas , the rebellion is mysterious, cryptic, while the sexual relationship is fully lit: a contrast also apparent, but somewhat different, in A Bend in the River .
Both novels see the world in colonial colours — as determined by empires, in the furtherance of which races have defeated and enslaved each other, in which they have met and married, in which a black mercenary might marry a daughter  of Venice.
For much of its course, the later novel takes all this for granted.
It is what is likely to occur.
Races insult each other, and make war, and make love, and they may mix these activities up.
At the same time, the novel finds more to object to in the less objectionable aspects of these activities than many readers might anticipate.
It is the work of a writer for whom, in successive fictions, the theme of sexual dealings between people of different races has necessitated the representation of violence.
Rapes and murders occur in this area, and may, of course, have to be treated.
And the theme is obviously of high consequence for the portrayal of any society where race is a trouble and where one race has subdued another.
The society may be symbolised by such dealings, and experienced through them.
Hardship and discontent may declare themselves there, in a victim's revenge.
In addressing itself to such possibilities, however,A Bend in the River , for all its air of simplicity, is never simple.
Its narrator and chief human presence is by no means straightforwardly a victim, and the difference between oppressor and oppressed can be hard to identify.
The novel is narrated by a Moslem of Indian origin, whose family has been settled on the east coast of Africa, as traders.
Salim leaves them, takes off on the first of a series of ‘flights’, and treks to the interior, to a country which appears to be compounded of the Congo and of Uganda, in order to earn a living from a store which he has acquired from a man whose daughter he is expected to marry one day.
Reading Salim's palm, the man points out that he is ‘faithful’.
Salim can be designated a Kenya Asian: the name we give to those hard-working aliens who have been driven out of African countries, and who include the shopkeepers and merchants expropriated in Uganda by Amin.
Kenya Asians are now working hard in the darkness and grime of British cities, where Patel is among the commonest names in the telephone directory.
Salim is bound by certain of the rules and assumptions of kinship.
His kin are entrepreneurs, a wandering bourgeoisie: they have known what it is to be strangers in tight corners, as he himself is a stranger in this tight African town.
At the same time, he has wandered some distance from his kin, in spirit.
So he is both doubly an outcast and no outcast at all.
Unlike many of the towns through which he has bribed his way in his Peugeot  from the coast, this one isn't ‘full of blood’.
But it is between coups, or unrests, and has lately been smashed and looted.
It is the sort of place which will always revive and rebuild, and in such a place Salim's part is to make good, carry on.
The country, formerly a colony, now ‘independent’, is controlled by a black ‘big man’ in the capital down-river.
An atavistic, tribal, magical resistance spreads about the bush: starveling rebels are hunted by an army, but magic bends the army's guns.
There is far less of the mystification which can be attributed to the account of the troubles in Guerrillas : what we get is the mysterious politics of forest and township as observed by an outsider, by an African Asian who understands a good deal of what is going on.
Salim buries his valuables — from another point of view, his ill-gotten gains — and an ominous silence descends on the town:
Sometimes I thought I could hear the noise of the rapids.
It was the eternal noise at that bend in the river, but on a normal day it couldn't be heard here.
Now it seemed to come and go on the wind.
At midday, when we shut the shop for lunch, and I drove through the streets, it was only the river, glittering in the hard light, that seemed alive.
No dugouts, though; only the water hyacinths travelling up from the south, and floating away to the west, clump after clump, with the thick-stalked lilac flowers like masts.
Outside the town, a polytechnic and seminar centre has been planted by Presidential fiat.
It is headed by the big man's white man, the Belgian scholar Raymond, who has lost favour with his patron and is sinking into ceremonies of highly-placed sagacity, Salim has an affair with the white man's white woman, his stylish wife Yvette: radical chic persuades him that he ‘never wanted to be ordinary again'.
Hitherto a shameful brothel man, Salim is uplifted by their meetings in his flat: ‘My wish for an adventure with Yvette was a wish to be taken up to the skies.’
Blood flows within the town; Raymond's work on a collection of the President's speeches, which could restore him to favour, languishes.
Presently the affair ends in insult: Salim beats Yvette and spits on her, and flies to London, where he gets to know his intended bride.
When he returns to the town, he is arrested, but is set free by Ferdinand, an African promoted from the bush whose patron he has once been.
Salim makes  good his escape on the steamer — bound, we take it, for his bride.
The family slave boy, Metty (the name means half-caste), who had come to live with him, is firmly left behind.
Salim is now homeless in the sense that he has shed an old tendency to nostalgia: ‘the idea of going home, of leaving, the idea of the other place’, he takes to be weakening and destructive.
This feeling is added to a previous illumination, to a stoicism which believes in ‘the unity of experience and the illusion of pain'.’
Salim tells Salim's story.
It is not Naipaul's; it does not constitute the author's testament or confession on the subject of race relations and the rest of it.
The novel (or so I hope) signals a separation between author and narrator with its very first sentence: ‘The World is what it is; men who are nothing, who allow themselves to become nothing, have no place in it.’
An early passage separates this man, who does not want to be nothing, from the trading elders of his family — pessimists who could take risks, and were consoled by their religion.
I could never rise so high.
My own pessimism, my insecurity, was a more terrestrial affair.
I was without the religious sense of my family.
The insecurity I felt was due to my lack of true religion, and was like the small change of the exalted pessimism of our faith, the pessimism that can drive men on to do wonders.
It was the price for my more materialist attitude, my seeking to occupy the middle ground, between absorption in life and soaring above the cares of the earth.
Elsewhere Salim separates himself from the doers and makers of the big world beyond him, of whom it is said: ‘They're making cars that will run on water.’
Such people are ‘impartial, up in the clouds, like good gods’.
The men in the bush are watched by gods who are barely a jump above their heads: these white gods are more remote.
Salim reads about their doings in his magazines of popular science, and letting Ferdinand into the secret of his interest, he feels he is revealing his ‘true self’.
But if his ‘true nature’ is to be romantically on the rise, and to have ‘ideas’, it is also his nature to occupy the middle ground.
It isn't lost on him that his reading matter — popular science, pornography — is ‘junk’.
For much of the time, he is the achiever who tries for a reasonable percentage return.
Salim presents himself in a light which requires the reader to be told that, although he himself has been making good, he is grieved, or affects to be, by the discovery that the slavish Metty has been getting on: ‘You've been very much getting on as though you're your own man.’
Their relationship has tenderness in it, and treachery.
Metty betrays his master and is then left in the lurch, predicting a future whose likelihood the novel does not lead us to discount: ‘They're going to kill and kill.’
Metty is a misfit, as Golding's Matty is in Darkness Visible , a novel which appeared at the same time as Naipaul's.
English fiction loves such people; it never tires of the lurch, of such areas of darkness.
Salim's outlook incorporates a version of that of his friend Indar, who teaches in the polytechnic for a while, and lends himself to the philanthropic white-liberal cultivation of the African experience, where some of the best comedy in the book is located.
At one point Indar recounts his struggles and illuminations.
‘Raised’ from the ruck, originally, by his family's wealth, he doesn't want to ‘sink’, and rejects ‘the idea of defeat’that prevails in the Third World: ‘I'm tired of being on the losing side.
I don't want to pass.
I know exactly who I am and where I stand in the world.
But now I want to win and win and win., Salim, too, wants to win, and his affair with Yvette is a victory: All my energy and mind were devoted to that new end of winning the person.’
In possessing her, he is both taken out of, and placed in possession of , himself: ‘She gave me the idea of my manliness I had grown to need.’
When the friendship begins to fail, he says: ‘What she drew out of me remained extraordinary to me.’
The affair seems to him to belong to the town, to have no future, and they are parted when the town comes under fear and hazard.
He finds himself ‘considering the idea of flight’, and the idea of defeat: ‘1 suppose that, thinking of my own harassment and Raymond's defeat, I had begun to consider Yvette a defeated person as well, trapped in the town, as sick of herself and the wasting asset of her body as I was sick of myself and my anxieties.’
But the fit of jealousy in which he beats her would appear to mean something more than these words of explanation enable one to understand.
This jealousy may be felt to be like Othello's in having more to do with difference of race, and with the jealousies of race, than  the jealous man, or than the work he belongs to, seems disposed to state.
Three of literature's myths underlie the narrative.
They are myths of the foreign woman, which bring together achievement and betrayal, achievement and desertion.
Of the stories I have in mind, Othello and Desdemona, Samson and Delilah, Dido and Aeneas, only the third is spoken of, and it is spoken of oracularly.
The town has two Classical mottoes, one of which consists of
Latin words carved on the ruined monument near the dock gates:Miscerique probat populos, et foedera jungi .
‘He approves of the mingling of the peoples and their bonds of union’: that was what the words meant, and again they were very old words, from the days of ancient Rome.
They came from a poem about the founding of Rome.
The very first Roman hero, travelling to Italy to found his city, lands on the coast of Africa.
The local queen falls in love with him, and it seems that the journey to Italy might be called off.
But then the watching gods take a hand; and one of them says that the great Roman god might not approve of a settlement in Africa, of a mingling of peoples there, of treaties of union between Africans and Romans.
That was how the words occurred in the old Latin poem.
In the motto, though, three words were altered to reverse the meaning.
According to the motto, the words carved in granite outside our dock gates, a settlement in Africa raises no doubts: the great Roman god approves of the mingling of peoples and the making of treaties in Africa.
There is irony here.
We are made to feel that the reversed meaning is wrong.
This is a book which takes for granted, and which has doubts about, the mingling of peoples, and it is a book which takes pride in its chosen people — Salim's people and, in some measure, Naipaul's.
Virgil's Aeneas leaves a burning Troy to go on his adventures, effect his betrayal, and arrive at the Tiber, where an empire is to rise.
Salim is an Aeneas who makes it to London, where those of his blood are founding a way of life, and he has his Dido both in Yvette and in Metty.
Perhaps this much can be said without suggesting that the book is an epic for Kenya Asians, which tells of a people threatened by nobodies, nothings, and managing to survive.
Nor is it a one-sided account of the injustices suffered by this people, or a defence of the energetic stranger.
The myths are not all equally available to the novel, and they are not enough to explain it.
This lucid and candid prose, strong in the detail of a particular time and place, often ignores, and can on occasion seem to depart from, the sense of the literature it embodies.
The offended looks of the muzzy black citoyen who is put in to own Salim's store when trade is politicised are funny, and important, and owe nothing to the Aeneid .
But those who would prefer to explain the book as a comedy of manners, or as current affairs, might have difficulty in explaining the prominence given to the love affair.
The plot states that an attachment to a strange woman, a woman who does not belong to this community of strangers, is succeeded by a return to the community, and by the dispersal, and survival, of the community.
Salim states that he was having a rough time, and was tired and suspicious of Yvette: he does not say that a tribal god commanded him to leave her.
It may be that neither statement need be held to subtract from the other, but there could well be some dispute as to which of the two is the more deeply entrenched in the novel.
Salim gets out of Africa, and as he does so, there seem to be allusions to the journey upriver in Conrad's Heart of Darkness , which also ends (though by no means hopefully) with an Intended.
When his steamer quits the town, it is attacked by rebels, but manages to fight clear.
Meanwhile, in this closing scene, the water hyacinths proceed towards the sea, as they have been doing throughout the action.
They keep coming, like immigrants, or refugees, like the South-East Asian boat people subsequent to the novel.
Salim's flight to whatever is to become of him can be compared to the movement of these flowers, and to the Romeward journey in Virgil.
His fortunes are those of a solitary who is due to return to his people and to chance it with them in a further foreign place.
And they are those of a hero, as well as a drifting hyacinth.
He is a hero, with a hero's faults: an achiever and an adventurer who is also a victim and an outcast, a shameful man and a faithful family man.
Subtly mythic and ethnocentric, the novel is one of Naipaul's most rewarding.
It speaks of the separation of races, and of a world which mixes them up.
But if it sometimes seems to be saying, on Salim's behalf, that race or kinship wins, it is also the case that it is full of losers, that it has a lively feeling for the Africans of market  and bush, and for their African troubles, and for the situation of Salim as someone evolved or emerged from a tribal narrowness to an experience of sexual love which is liberating and dramatic, and that it does justice to Metty's last state, left behind in the dangerous town at the bend in the river.
Poor Boys
RONALD Fraser's In Search of a Past was published in 1984, and Ralph Glasser's Growing up in the Gorbals in 1986.
These are books by middle-aged semi-Scots who have chosen to publish accounts of their early lives which lay stress on the troubles they experienced, on the troubles inflicted, within their respective environments, by poverty and servitude, and on the responsibility of relatives for some of what the writers had to suffer.
The question could be thought to arise of whether they are seeking revenge.
Authors are not supposed to avenge themselves in their writings, but they do, and if they were to be prevented, there would be far fewer books.
I am not confident that either book may be said to be well-written; that question, too, could be thought to arise.
In Search of a Past affects not to be written at all— so much as researched, recorded and compiled.
But the editorial method which is applied to the data has much to display that is well-spoken.
They are both interesting books because they tell interesting stories, and are arranged to dramatic effect in interesting ways.
Juliet Mitchell has called Fraser's book ‘a miniature masterpiece’, while, according to Chatto, Glasser's ‘may well become a classic of modern autobiography’.
Both men made for the Mediterranean eventually, for reasons which may have involved a respite from British miseries and injustice.
These were located, in Fraser's early life, amid the flatlands, and the privileged high ground, of Southern England, and, in Glasser's, amid the antique squalor and grimness of the Gorbals district of Glasgow, now erased by developers and replaced by the squalor of the high-rise estate.
Fraser was to be the author of Blood of Spain , an oral history of the Civil War.
Glasser was to be the author of a study of a Calabrian village, and the Spanish war bears a bleak meaning in the story he tells here.
His adult life has been spent as a psychologist and economist, engaged on problems of development in the Third World.
He has published a second volume of autobiography, in which he deals with his years as a student at  Oxford before and after the world war, and is now bursar of one of the colleges there.
Ronald Fraser's book arranges a marriage between Freud and Marx.
One law for the rich and another for the poor, as the two systems can be made to seem, are laid down together in a book which commemorates a desertion, on the author's part, of the rich for the poor.
He had hit on the ‘aim of combining two different modes of enquiry — oral history and psychoanalysis — to uncover the past in as many of its layers as possible’.
He is saying this — outlining the aim — to his analyst in the course of the therapeutic sessions whose speech forms part of the oral record that constitutes almost all of the book.
He is to learn about the troubles of his early life by interviewing the servants of the family and by submitting to the interviews of psychoanalysis.
The analyst had previously referred to their sessions as a ‘voyage of inner discovery’: Fraser thinks that his tape-recordings make possible a ‘voyage into the social past’.
The latter trip may enable him to discover the ‘external objects’, the analyst thinks: ‘now, through analysis, you're seeking the internal objects.’
‘And the two don't always coincide’, Fraser replies: ‘That's my split vision.
Formed by the past, a person is also deformed by it.’
The exchange has roused the analyst to contributions that are firmer and more energy-consuming than those he generally vouchsafes: ‘it's not the past but what we make of the past that shapes our future and present.’
Fraser observes that ‘analysis is more limiting because it recreates the past only in the forms in which it was internalised or repressed.,
Not every reader of his book can have come to it believing the chauvinistic claims that have sometimes been issued on behalf both of psychoanalysis and of oral history, or prepared to believe that these pursuits could be successfully combined.
But it does not take long to decide that the experiment is being conducted with skill, and that the pursuits have at least a little in common.
A piece of oral history may be meant to do without a presiding historian in much the same way in which an analytic session may be meant to do without a presiding analyst; theoretical presuppositions are subject in each case to a show of suspension, though it is clear that the theories of Freud and others will be present in the consulting-room, and that oral historians may be sympathetic to socialism and to the methods of  Marxist historiography.
Fraser's book is not without its evident presuppositions, and not every reader will feel that this autobiographer, having perused and digested his tape-recordings, talked to his analyst and completed his inner and outer voyages, knew something radically different about his past from what he had known before: that something had been found, or proved.
He had lived with his past for the best part of fifty years, and his book tells what he had come to know of it over that interval of time, with help from the theories of Marx and Freud.
And in so doing it can often convey that a past is not a thing to be discovered.
As the analyst said, it is not discovered but made.
Ronald Fraser was not trying to determine, like certain historians of former times, what his past ‘really was’.
But there is some question of a pathogenic secret, of the recovery of material hitherto repressed which influenced his perception of his mother: and his understanding of the past would certainly appear to have been enlarged by his researches.
He talks of himself as ‘split’, and as implicated in splits of a wider incidence.
A split appears to be spoken of in the conversation from which I have just quoted: formed by the past, he is also deformed by it.
But this is only one aspect of the bifurcation he describes.
Fraser's fork took several forms, as I say: or one might prefer to say that there was more than one fork to reckon with.
Born in Hamburg, he was transferred to the Manor House at Amnersfield, the son of a remote German-American mother and of a sour, withdrawn, irritable Anglo-Scottish father, who would retreat behind the Times and spend the evening in lonely state, smoking his pipe in his kilt.
He was never to say hello to you, and he once said that he would not be interested in his child ‘until he can go out shooting with me’.
(Elsewhere, another angry gentleman of the period, Evelyn Waugh, had waited for his children to be of an age to converse with him, before taking an interest.)
The household shot, and it rode, to hounds and in all directions, but Ronald Fraser had no love for horses.
The poor little rich boy was looked after by a second mother in the person of strict Ilse, from Germany: this did a great deal, but not enough, to relieve the isolation he felt — which, as his researches disclosed, was to be a factor in the isolation and rejection suffered in turn by his younger brother, who also left for the Mediterranean.
When friendships finally became possible for him they were with children of the lower orders.
His parents did not get on and parted during the war, which put an end to the old hierarchic world of Amnersfield, where you were not to look at your masters when they came up the drive, but to hoe on regardless.
Mrs Fraser was suspected in the neighbourhood of being an enemy spy; presently she remarried — her new husband a jolly, but for the son disturbing wing-commander.
The testimonies in the book were obtained mostly from the underlings of the house, led by sly, supportive Bert, a man who was able to take and to give pleasure — a fine portrait, which is also a self-portrait, of a second father.
Bert's testimony, and Ilse's, are probably paramount.
‘The image you give’, Fraser tells Ilse, meaning the image she gives of himself as a boy, ‘is one of dependency, extreme docility.
It was my natural character, you think, evident from birth…
’. Ilse had been trained in an orphanage, and he then tells her, with a smile: ‘I wouldn't claim any privilege that an orphan wasn't entitled to.’
He reverts to the point with the analyst: ‘Supposing I didn't have what a child objectively should be entitled to…’.
In coping with the unsaid and unsayable, oral history is impelled towards aposiopesis.
The analyst's response is apt to consist of an ‘…’
But if the work is oral history, it is literature too — a disclosure of predicament and bereavement.
The enigmatic three dots to which it is impelled are those of a romantic orphan, as well as those of his reticent doctor.
A romantic orphan, though, who was able to accept that he had caused his brother to suffer.
In all this there was plenty of scope for an awareness and endurance of contradiction.
Contradictions, splits, can readily be perceived, by those minded to perceive them; pursuits that can be married, like oral history and psychoanalysis, can be found to separate.
What matters is what happens when the individual, who incorporates his past, incorporates and transforms the divisions which are part of that past.
Fraser reflects: ‘Two mothers and I'm torn between them…’.
Torn between ‘the distant star and the cold, close moon’.
And neither of the women was to prove ‘sufficient’.
‘You split them’, prompts the analyst, ‘into the good and the bad mother.’
The analyst proceeds: 'All mothers have to be frustrating as well as loving.
But  being consoled by another mother who seems unfrustrating makes it harder to reconcile the two…’.
This appears to be a key point, but it is one that is left controversial.
It is possible to imagine that for some people such consolation might make it easier to reconcile the two, and to wonder what it was that made the difference in Fraser's case.
There were other things that had to be reconciled, and we hear presently of ‘a role of inherent superiority which came to me from outside, from the servants among others.
Inside, however, I felt inherently inferior, inadequate to fill the role.
That was the split…’
(Fraser's dots).
He asks the daughter of the refugee cook, remembering the days when he made love with this daughter, if she had known two different boys.
Later in the book Mr Fraser recognises that he has talked both of rubbing out the past and of preserving it: ‘The aims seem contradictory, don't they?
But they're the same.
I kept the past alive out of a desire for revenge.
One day I would write it — and them — off the face of the earth…’.
He is referring to his parents, I think.
Later still, the analyst suggests that Fraser may want to offer reparation, by writing this book, for the guilt he had felt in relation to his father, and Fraser asks: ‘For wanting to destroy him so I could have my mother to myself?’
‘Uh-huh…’.
‘And for wanting’, Fraser adds, ‘to destroy her…’.
Is the book, then, a ‘monument to destruction’?
The servants, who did much of the living which is commemorated here, and his parents, who did so little of it, are placed well within reach of an impartial sympathy in a work which nowhere feels vindictive, and which declines to settle for any final understanding of what went on.
Despite its title, and for all Fraser's grave and civil investigative demeanour, the book does not exhibit this past as something to be searched for, uncovered, so much as something which is unfindable, interminable.
Understanding is deferred, rather as it is in certain recent theoretical accounts of the way literature works.
But this does not diminish the importance of the provisional discoveries which it contains, which the writer has moved to incorporate.
From the point of view of the people of the Gorbals in the Thirties, fox-hunting and psychoanalysis would have been practically indistinguishable concerns of the rich in the Sassenach South, of the ‘high heid yins’ of the world — an expression of  the poor in Scotland then, which Ralph Glasser uses.
And there is a point of view from which Ronald Fraser might be seen as a man of Marxist leanings who paid a professional adviser what may have been a fair whack of a working man's wages to enquire with him into the deficiencies of his affective life.
This is a split that can rarely have been witnessed in Glasgow — which does not indicate that he was at fault in consulting his analyst, but does indicate that these autobiographies are sited in very different places.
Nail on the Banister by R. Stornaway, alias R. Scott, is an eloquent Scots joke of the Thirties, and it allows one to say that Glasser's banister was a bed of nails, but that his slides may have been less painful than Fraser's.
He could well have been called a victim, and his book consigns itself, as Fraser's does, to that large literature in which the sufferings of victims are recounted: but he does not see himself as a romantic orphan.
He belonged to a family of immigrant Jews which had fled to a Glasgow tenement and a community of Yiddish-speakers within the city.
Round the corner was Dixon's Blazes, a blast furnace, and the Workers' Circle, where dreams of socialist emancipation were debated — dreams which were soon to fade for Glasser.
Nor was he able to believe in the religion of his community.
Anti-Semitism was not, it appears, a major threat in an environment where many kinds of threat and affliction — such as its gangster debt-collectors, the ‘menodge men’— competed for consciousness.
His mother died early, worn out by making ends meet and by her husband's gambling.
Glasser still stands in awe of this formidable, feckless man.
His sisters were to flee the family, precipitating an ordeal of severance which compounded others and marked him to the quick.
He wants to go to university, turns up to listen to Einstein, studies hard; but his father won't have it, and at the age of 14 he becomes a soap boy in a barber's and then a presser in a garment shop.
The Gorbals comes across, in careful descriptions, as a ferocious place.
It should be seen for what it was, and especially by those who feel like regretting its erasure, and alleging that its replacement has made an environment which may be even worse — of tower blocks filled with heroin and despair.
The trouble is that the allegation has begun to seem convincing.
‘The hovels and the vennels’ of the nineteenth-century Scottish  city have been projected into the sky; the lower depths of the Thirties have not gone from urban Britain.
And we have a government which has been slow to worry whether the people there die of Aids.
At one stage Glasser is invited to look at a tenement close — by Bernard, a Communist who was to fight in Spain and return with an altered mind.
In Spain Bernard questioned the principle that the end justifies the means —‘the human price was too high’— and it had almost ‘cost him his life’.
(But can this be said to have been what happened?
The book has explained that, having been a murderer of unreliables for the Republicans, he was shot at by a rival and went straight back to Glasgow.)
At this earlier stage Ralph goes into the close and takes a look at the human price of capitalism.
Nearly all the stone steps in the first flight up to the half-landing were broken, with jagged edges where bits of tread had fallen away.
Some had almost no tread left.
Plaster had come away from the walls from ceiling to floor, and along the lower part the bared cement, originally grey, was stained yellow and smelt of urine.
On a patch where the rough surface of brickwork was exposed, someone had vomited, probably a passing drunk whose sense of propriety, demanding privacy, had deterred him from being sick in the street; or a returning resident who could not wait to climb the few steps to the communal toilet on the first half-landing.
The detritus had stuck to the pitted surface in a wide streaky band as it slid lumpily from chest height to the floor.
Judging by the strength or its smell, a mixture of beer and fish and chips, the vomit was recent.
Another powerful smell, of decaying rubbish, came mainly from the ash-pits at the far end of the corridor, but also from a deposit scattered over the floor.
Despite the cold wet wind blowing in hard from the street, the cloud of mephitic vapours lingered stupefyingly about our heads.
‘Mephitic’ might be compared with Fraser's ‘ulcerous’in ‘Resentment wells up like an ulcerous vapour’.
Glasser's vapours are different from Fraser's.
They stink, while Fraser's are mental.
Both men lived through the Depression, but Fraser's depressions were only indirectly linked with the hardships of people he knew.
At the same time, these hardships are a focus of his attention.
The two words carry a note of declamation — a note otherwise absent from Fraser's account.
Glasser's prose is sometimes  declamatory and sententious in an old-fashioned sort of way, and sometimes awkward (‘Hidden in the near future, he was to be proved right’).
But it rises to many of its ferocious and grievous occasions.
We are in the Scotland of TB, pneumonia and drink, in which sex is spoken of as a matter of men attacking women.
At the end of the corridor which he describes, before you get to the rubbish, is the place where the young make love.
Their elders make it upstairs in the flats, attended by small children — brothers and sisters who grow up in the Gorbals, Glasser says, to try it with each other.
About these matters it seems to me that he writes really well, in a manner that might suggest the intent translation of a Latin author anxious to tell the truth.
Afterwards she parted the curtains and came out naked to lift the unsleeping, finely aware child back into bed, to lie between her and the man lying open-mouthed in post-coital sleep.
And then mother and child might lie awake for a while, locked in unique perplexities.
She, her body prompting her still, with no finality in her, turned her world over and over again in her mind's restless fingers.
The child, possessed by wonder and nameless hauntings, tried to join together the heavings and creakings and groans and gasps and little cries he had heard as he lay on the floor, his mother's disturbed concentration now, his father's stillness as if felled, and the sticky warmth in which he lay between them, something more than the sweat that was there before, a substance he divined as elemental, mysterious, newly decanted, that touched his flesh and his senses with profound, unattainable meaning.
At the beginning of the book a dear friend, Charlie, another immigrant boy, leaves for Russia with his family — for the land, they hope, of the free.
Ralph strives to address ‘the high heid yins of Russia’ to solicit news of the family, and receives his letter back from the Embassy in London, stamped: ‘Communication not permitted.’
And the family was never heard of again.
Glasser orders his events thematically, while also wanting to tell a story and to spring surprises.
Charlie's departure is the first of several, and this event is succeeded by the announcement of a further theme when the rabbi's thunderings pass over the heads of his congregation and the writer notes: ‘in later years I would wonder how different my life might have been if a few people, those closest to me,had been frightened — just  a little.’
Among those closest who should have been frightened was Annie, his girl for a while.
Annie left him, and then, pregnant, offered herself in order to saddle him with someone else's child — and this when he had just received a telegram awarding him a scholarship to Oxford.
Just when his ship was coming in she might have set fire to it.
He condemns her for trying this trick, which is followed by a terrible fall downstairs in the course of an attempt to end her pregnancy.
She had known that his love for her would remain, and ‘for her to have acted on that knowledge’ in resorting to the deception ‘made her deed unforgivable’.
Those closest to him who should have been too frightened to behave as they did include his father, but they also include his sisters, who struck out for themselves in a fashion which has him siding with his father.
Lilian, the older sister, errs by studying hard to become a money-minded businesswoman with a grudge and a smart flat, and by blackmailing her employer, also her lover, by means of an abortion.
Glasser talks of her as if , in walking out, she had gone on to walk the streets.
She is seen to suffer for what she did, and Mary, the other sister, likewise ‘paid heavily’: let down by an Indian student with whom she had been having a long affair.
‘She set higher store by emotional security’ than her sister, ‘and thought she would find it with a man soft-hearted and caring and pliant, far removed, as she thought, from father's toughness and uncontrollability.’
Glasser thunders on: ‘Both Lilian and Mary invested too much emotional capital in their opposition to father, whose influence naturally remained dominant, try as they might to escape; and this imbalance distorted their view of relationships and of the world.’
This is a male view of the matter, in which women are attacked, and which had me admiring these ugly sisters.
It is made clear that the boy was exposed to serious danger by his father's irresponsibility and by his sisters' departure: but his sisters had been exposed to this father too, and had had to defend themselves.
A father's influence which has been revealed as destructive and all but disastrous is thought to have remained dominant — as was only natural — until the women broke away for good.
An author is taking his revenge in setting down these judgements, begrudging the grudges of  others — while uttering, this once, the cry of the deserted child.
Neither of these books, however, could be said to be intent on revenge.
Glasser presents a full picture of the behaviour, good and bad, which he encountered in an area of maximum difficulty, and it is not often that such a picture has been presented.
The familiar and approved accounts of Scottish life have long favoured a country of hills and fields and firesides, where braw lads and bonny lasses dance reels and go on, after early struggles, to better things; where the best thing of all is the kind landed family that comes up from London to visit them, famous for its stables, castles and ceremonies.
Another fallacious account comes to mind.
The literary naturalism of the last century went to the poor and itemised their way of life, producing for adversity truthful, distressing inventories and interiors — as in George Moore's novel of the Nineties,Esther Waters , which starts with a manor-house, servants and horses, and travels to Soho for compulsive gambling and a fatal cough.
In Glasser's book, and in Fraser's, the activities of the poor can be seen as activities which had been performed, and written about, in the past: but these are books which intimate that the lists and specifications of a caring naturalism — features by which they have indeed been influenced — were never exhaustive: that the truth-tellers did not tell it, and that the omissions were systematic.
The sexuality of the past, and the extent of the intimidatory violence, were only very faintly registered.
Esther had quite as hard a time of it as Annie, one might feel, but even so, Moore's spirited novel can be thought to settle for an anodyne poverty.
To say this is not the same as complaining of his acknowledgement that poor people can have a good time.
No lie in that.
There were pleasures for both boys in the course of their growing-up.
For Glasser, there was Annie, study, socialist hikes and camp-fires in the hills outside the city; for Fraser, there were model aeroplanes, and a mute attraction shared with a boy of lower status, and there was Bert and Ilse.
But what is most striking about both books is the sense they give of how desolate and enclosed an adolescence could be, at opposite ends of the society.
The better things presumed to be in store for Glasser when he went off as a scholarship boy to a glamorous university in  the South of England are, in a sense, the subject of Gorbals Boy at Oxford , his second volume of autobiography.
The refugee from Glasgow saw through, and stood up to, some famous middle-class progressives, was asked to spy on student Communists, was asked, by a girl at a party, to ‘do something!
Julian's got a knife.’
At another party, in the South of France, a reefer is placed between his lips by a girl whose trousers fall down.
‘I had scaled magic heights and found obscurantism, absence of hope, a world infinitely darker than I had ever imagined possible from where I had stood in the Gorbals.’
I can only hope that the bursar now inhabits a wholly healthy Oxford.
Long live pastiche
PETER Ackroyd's novels Hawksmoor and Chatterton do much to explain one another.
Both books mingle old times and new times, and both give expression to fantasies of replication, with Hawksmoor a hard act to follow.
Its old times are brilliantly rendered, and its appeal is in part generic.
The biographer of T. S. Eliot, who was himself to speak of the ‘dark’ experience, of the ‘rude unknown psychic material’, incorporated in his poem The Waste Land , can be seen in Hawksmoor to contribute to the tradition of romantic fabulation which began with the Gothic novel — a tradition in which darkness is privileged, in which a paranoid distrust is evident, in which can be read the evergreen message that the deprived may turn out to be depraved, and in which there can be two of someone.
Hawksmoor speaks the words of romantic duality, and is in a number of ways a double book.
It consists of two alternating narratives, one of which is set in the eighteenth century and the other in the present, with the earlier delivered in the first person.
Each of the two principal actors glimpses his double in passing, as a reflection in a glass, and each stands to the other in the same relation — a relation which presupposes, as in many other Gothic texts, some sort of metempsychosis or rebirth.
Both of these men are disturbed or mad.
Nicholas Dyer is imagined as the builder of Nicholas Hawksmoor's churches in the East End of London; the enlightened edifices of a rational Christianity are thereby ascribed to a devil-worshipper, while the name ‘Hawksmoor’ is assigned to the Detective Chief Superintendent who, in the later narrative, frets himself into a delirium over a series of stranglings which takes place in the vicinity of the churches.
The later crimes duplicate those committed by Dyer, who has wished to baptise his churches with the blood of young victims.
Dyer thinks of himself as ‘a stranger to mankind’; his life is led apart, ‘in a Corner’.
He has grown up as one of ‘the orphans of the plague’ who roam the streets of the city in the aftermath  of the plague and of the fire that followed it.
The romantic equation of orphan and monster makes a Satanist of this forlorn Dyer: ‘nor can we but by doing Evil avoid the rage of evil Spirits.’
His is a theology in which Adam is unredeemed, and life itself a plague.
London is a necropolis, its every corner the site of a murder, its soil a pudding of blood and tears.
Out of this soil soar elegant churches, each of which encodes the symbols of an alien religion.
The St So-and-So's which Dyer has been commissioned to build are so many secret temples of Moloch.
The experiments, proofs and improvements espoused by such scientists as Christopher Wren, Dyer's patron in the building trade, Dyer pisses on.
The homicides and postmortems in the book permit the new religion of science to exercise its power: but they also occasion the necrophile broodings which exude from Dyer.
Much of this material — this archaic London, the Hawksmoor churches, their magical meaning, and the tramps who haunt them — comes from the striking poem Lud Heat by Iain Sinclair, where the churches are taken to be geometrically interrelated in the form of a pentacle, the sorcerer's five-pointed star.
The poem is dark, dense and learned — Yeatsian, and maybe also Yatesian, in inspiration, amid much else.
It is hard to be sure how much of this dark stuff Sinclair believes — as it is hard to be sure how much Eliot believed of the lore which accompanies the dark stuff of The Waste Land , another London poem.
The two poems could be thought to occupy a common ground which goes some way beyond topography, and includes a stretch of the common ground occupied by imitation.
Sinclair's, at all events, is the work of a Modernist, and is unlikely to be that of an occultist.
This makes it, in a sense, compatible with Hawksmoor .
But Hawksmoor is a different beast.
The novel suggests itself as the work of a novelist intent on a gruesome entertainment.
Both works, however, may be thought to share a secret, and a set of clues, which bear witness to the recrudescence of a hippy magic.
Peter Ackroyd is all of the formidable pasticheur that he is praised for being, and Dyer's tale, which affects to be that of someone who lived in the eighteenth century, and in which the element of imitation, present in writing of every kind, is more obtrusive than it is in the other tale, is the livelier of the two.
Pastiche is a dualistic activity, and it is an activity which can lend itself to the expression of paranoid feelings and unacted desires.
A writer is copied by ‘someone other’ than himself, and that ‘someone other’can in a manner of speaking become the writer he copies: the biter bit.
The expression I am quoting is uttered by Dyer, and it is an expression which Ackroyd is given to using in his books.
In pretending here to be someone other than himself who keeps murdering people, he does a tremendous job: this is a more than serviceable argot for the age in question and for the wizard in question.
The suffering and self-conscious first-person singular manifested in Dyer could be considered a creation of the Gothic novel that came after him, and Dyer can also bring to mind the magus of a time before.
But there is no nagging sense of anachronism.
How could there be? the novel seems to be saying.
There is no such thing as anachronism.
All ages are one.
The later stranglings look like a copy of what happened, at the hands of a sorcerer, in the loamy past, and Peter Ackroyd is very interested in copies.
As is usual in such cases, the copy is not exact.
Dyer's doings are the same as but also different from those investigated by the fretful man he resembles, just as Hawksmoor's investigative Scotland Yard is the same as but also different from the architects' department of that name attended by Dyer.
Ackroyd has given some readers the impression that the modern narrative, the paler of the two, is paler on purpose — in obedience, presumably, to the doctrine of time, of its runnings-down and recurrences, which figures in the novel.
The pale Hawksmoor is an inhabitant of the present day who reminds one not only of Dyer but of P. D. James's character Inspector Dalgliesh — one of her novels,A Taste for Death , published a few months after Hawksmoor , has a church murder in London, draped in the poses of this sensitive, cultivated policeman, and it also has, like Hawksmoor , a suspected tramp.
Both inspectors are presented as more interesting than the colleagues and suspects they move among.
With the James, we are told who did it; in the Ackroyd, the matted fellow who is the chief suspect is never very securely identified as the author of the crimes — it is almost as if the inspector could have done it: so that Ackroyd's is an authorially uncertain work in which the authorship of its crimes is uncertain too.
Meanwhile the  interesting Hawksmoor is less interesting than Dyer, and may be meant to be.
‘Time will tell, sir’, a colleague remarks, and Hawksmoor replies: ‘Time will not tell.
Time never tells.’
Once more he raised his arm involuntarily, as if in greeting.’
It is hard to think that the novelist intended the reader to find this even more gnomic and exasperating than the colleague seems to find it.
But there may indeed be some such aim.
Can the author be detected in this novel — come upon in his dark corner?
The attitude to time might tell us what he thinks, but it is the most inscrutable aspect of the novel.
Hora e sempre — this motto is inscribed on the front of Hawksmoor's, the real Hawksmoor's, Classical house at Easton Neston in Northamptonshire: Easton Neston has been reputed or imagined to be the original of Mansfield Park, which may be described as a house imagined by an opponent of the Gothic novel.
The motto refers to a dynastic permanence; but it could be stolen for this novel, where a ‘now and always’ is on show.
We may be meant to think that time is simultaneous, in a way that may owe something to the simultaneity propounded, ‘perhaps’, in Eliot's Four Quartets , where ‘History is now and England’; or that it is cyclical, a turning wheel, with human depravity paling into insignificance as the wheel turns into modern times.
Interpretation is allowed to copy what it finds, and to distort it, and it may be that the novel can be interpreted as an entertainment which conveys that doctrines of science and improvement can't encompass what happens in a frightening world, where motive is dark and ill-will ubiquitous.
The Gothic novel was shaped to take account of such a world, and to do so, very often, in the guise of entertainment.
Since its arrival in the eighteenth century, this is a literary mode which has recurrently been pronounced dead but which has been capable of renewal, and now Ackroyd has given a further turn to the wheel.
Once again, a sufferer is seen to be mad, and his fearful sense of what he is up to can be seen to dominate the book in which it is in the end defeated or controverted.
Such a book has to be divided — between hope and fear, improvement and depravity.
It will be the work both of one hand and of the other.
And one of these hands may wield the instrument of pastiche.
Hawksmoor , which came out in 1985, was preceded by the Eliot biography of 1984, which was preceded by The Last Testament of Oscar Wilde of the year before, and in 1987 these annual events were pressed upon by Chatterton .
All four books reveal a steady concern with imitation and interpretation, and to read them together is to be clearer about what it is that the writer intends us to think that he thinks about things.
He would appear to believe in an invented truth, an invented reality — a Rortyan reality, one might be inclined to call it at times.
He believes that a writer will often find himself through exposure to some other writer.
And it is apparent that Ackroyd has found himself in this manner — through exposure to Wilde, Eliot, and now Chatterton.
This brings with it the corollary that it is not always apparent whether the beliefs he expresses are Ackroyd's or those of the writer to whom he is exposed, or both.
Interpreters must therefore beware, a little, in doing what they are generally allowed to do.
All four books speak of a ‘someone other’.
In Hawksmoor Ned the tramp encounters a ‘someone other’ in his double, and in Chatterton Charles Wychwood's double is another ‘someone other’.
Eliot was able to ‘recognise himself through someone other’— a changeable other, but at one point it was the Frenchman Laforgue.
‘The first law of the imagination’, states Ackroyd's Wilde, is that ‘in his work the artist is someone other than himself.’
Greek love is virtuous, Wilde is also represented as saying, because ‘men can live in perfect equality, each finding in the other the image of his own soul’.
It is plain that there are many ways of being and of imagining a someone other.
Art may imagine one, and Greek love may.
Paranoia imagines one, and so does pastiche.
And Ackroyd comes to vivid life as a pasticheur.
‘The truest Plagiarism is the truest Poetry’, claims Thomas Chatterton, warming to Ackroyd's theme, and perhaps overdoing it, along with Ackroyd's Wilde, who had been able to believe that ‘almost all the methods and conventions of art and life found their highest expression in parody’.
Still, such claims do seem to have force when fitted to the case of the writer who is making or mediating them.
Ackroyd's truest prose occurs when he applies himself to the imitation of ancient and recent writers — a repertoire of others.
This, of course, is what Chatterton, Wordsworth's ‘marvellous boy’, did in the plagiaristic eighteenth century.
Like Chatterton, Peter Ackroyd is, in the words of his novel  about Chatterton a ‘great Parodist’, a ‘great Plagiarist’.
It is deemed to follow from such claims that human history is ‘a succession of interpretations’, a piling-up of imitations, an accumulation of metaphor which will be perceived as reality.
And literature will amount to the same thing: all writers are copycats.
Those who prefer to believe in an indivisible single self capable of originality will be sceptical of the Ackroyd scepticism.
They will make less than he does of that part of Eliot which was a ‘good ventriloquist’.
And they will undoubtedly object to the more unbridled formulations that enter the three fictions; the biography of Eliot has plenty to say on the subject, too, while maintaining a comparative, and suitable, reserve.
They won't accept with Charles Wychwood that ‘everything is copied’, and won't accept his opinion of Chatterton: ‘Thomas Chatterton believed that he could explain the entire material and spiritual world in terms of imitation and forgery, and so sure was he of his own genius that he allowed it to flourish under other names.’
The second half of this can be seen to coincide with the opinion of Chatterton which is expressed by Ackroyd's Wilde: ‘a strange, slight boy who was so prodigal of his genius that he attached the names of others to it.’
Peter Ackroyd has here performed the not impossible feat of plagiarising himself — while leaving the reader in doubt as to whether the writer shares this implausible estimate of Chatterton's marvellous buoyancy.
As Ackroyd's ventriloquised Wilde makes clear, Wilde was a great exaggerator and, like his friend Whitman, a great contradictor of himself; and he is certainly a great source of dualistic formulations, in all their slippery bliss.
He is the artist's friend, and a friend of the mimic and poseur, in a world of masks, multiplicities, contraries and successive interpretations.
The Wilde apocrypha contains a joke which says it all — or a fair part of it.
Some good thing had been voiced, and Wilde had remarked that he wished that he had said it — and was then told:.
‘You will, Oscar, you will.’
The Marquis of Queensberry may be judged, in this context, to have made an involuntary and uncharacteristic joke in accusing Wilde of ‘posing as a somdomite ’: a phrase that smells of the multiple self, and of the uncertainty of interpretation — and indeed spelling (Ackroyd, as it happens, interprets him as something other than a sodomite).
Ackroyd's  Wilde complains of the ‘sordid’ interpretations of his conduct which had influenced the outcome of his trial, while himself, on other occasions, interpreting his conduct as sordid.
He also confounds his own dualistic zeal by recalling the wise words (as one may truly think them) of the dualistic mage Paracelsus: ‘Be not another, if thou canst be thyself.’
In the literature of duality it is the outcast or victim who has dealings with a double, and in the second of the two novels Charles Wychwood is an outcast whose condition copies that of Thomas Chatterton, who committed suicide in 1770 at the age of 17, having invented a medieval monk, Rowley, and written poems for him.
Romantic poets were keen to vindicate Chatterton, and to cherish his untimely death as that of a sacrificial victim: here was a spilling of young blood that might have watered the purlieus of a church.
Charles belongs, moreover, to a cast of outcasts, monsters, hustlers and impostors which composes a literary London reminiscent of the early novels of Muriel Spark, and far from brutally inauthentic.
The queen of the authors is Harriet Scrope, novelist, plot-stealer, and ferocious egotist, whose war against the world she inhabits extends to her best friend and her cat.
As a comic portrait of the artist, Harriet scores high.
She is estranged and she is hostile.
She is a bit like Dyer.
‘Tho’ I was young Thomas Chatterton to those I met, I was a very Proteus to those who read my Works': Chatterton's story is mostly told by himself, and with a felicity of cadence and of reference which can be caught in the sentence I have just quoted.
His story is interwoven with, and is replicated by, a modern tale, in which Charles Wychwood's comet-like career is featured.
He too, dies the early death of romance —en poète , as the poet Burns put it with reference to his own fate — and his end is enveloped in the consequences of his supposing that he has lit upon some Chatterton manuscripts.
Charles is touchingly done — a frail unpublished poet kept going by his wife and son (the wife is called Vivien, presumably by design, though she is no copy of the first Mrs Eliot), their household a breath of fresh air in the conniving, phrase-making milieu to which Charles clings.
Then there is a third story.
Chatterton is as much as anything the famous painting of his death in a Holborn attic done in the 1850s by Henry Wallis — with the poet lying across  the bed in a kind of frozen entrechat .
It looks like an enlargement of the postcard which, in an age of mechanical reproduction, it was to become, commemorating the tourist attraction which it was also to become.
The third narrative tells how George Meredith modelled for the corpse in the painting and how his wife then ran away with the painter (see also the sonnets in Meredith's Modern Love ).
The three tales are deftly assembled and get on very well together.
Chatterton is represented in the novel as an accidental suicide — slain by a cocktail of arsenic and laudanum swallowed for a venereal infection.
Poor Charles brings him to life again, however, for some further plagiarisms: a nest of antique-dealers, of antic disposition, in Chatterton's native Bristol, have passed to Charles a cache of papers which, together with the discovery of what seems to be the portrait of an adult Chatterton, persuades him that the poet lived on.
The portraits of Chatterton have something of the importance to the novel that the living and ageing likeness has in The Picture of Dorian Gray .
Like Hawksmoor and The Last Testament of Oscar Wilde , this novel is a tour de force .
And it could be said that not only is it about imitation — it is also, as are other tours de force , itself an imitation of something.
Like other tours de force , it is done in a spirit of play and of emulation.
It is a contender: a colleague of Ackroyd's on The Times announced that it was a ‘sure contender’ for the Booker Prize of 1987 (which it didn't receive).
It observes one of Wilde's principles of literature in responding to the importance of not being ‘serious’.
It shows what the writer can do rather than what he thinks.
In order to find out more of what this writer thinks about imitation, we are in a position to consult a work by him where a treatise on the subject is developed at intervals and where he writes in propria persona .
In Ackroyd's life of Eliot we read about a major poet who was a good ventriloquist; a man of multiple personality who swore by a principle of impersonality in art which he was later to unswear by locating The Waste Land in the stresses of a domestic life, and whose art bears the indelible signature of that distinctive protean character of his; a man who was often miserable and tormented.
The book says that Eliot's truest poetry was a form of plagiarism, in the benign sense that ‘it was only in response to other poetry that Eliot  could express his own deepest feelings’.
A little earlier, a view of Eliot's has been paraphrased: that ‘there is no ‘truth’ to be found’in the world, ‘only a number of styles and interpretations — one laid upon the other in an endless and apparently meaningless process’.
Ackroyd notices that the Eliot who had once called poetry a ‘mug's game’ was eventually, in his play The Elder Statesman , to use the same expression for forgery.
Ackroyd warns us not to jump to a conflation here, but he is intrigued by the coincidence, and it might almost serve as an emblem of his concern throughout the biography with the connection between poetry and feigning, and with the potency of parody.
The biography suggests that Eliot was never to lose the divided sense of his youth that human life is futile and meaningless — that man is ‘a finite piece of reasonable misery’, in the words of William Drummond of Hawthornden, a good poet who was also a great plagiarist, and a great seeker of shelter in books — but that an eternal order might be felt for, or invented.
That order was eventually discovered in the teachings of Christianity.
When he turned to God it was to someone other: he was surrendering to ‘something outside oneself’.
The book depicts Eliot as a parodist, a plagiarist, a responder to other people's poems, and as a seeker of shelter.
And yet in its closing passages we learn that as a poet he had ‘no real predecessors’.
He was his own man, after all.
The book is cursory in its treatment of Eliot's literary background: there is no mention, for instance, of Wallace Stevens, Ivy Compton-Burnett, of Empson or Leavis, and no adequate picture of what Eliot meant to later generations of intellectuals in Britain.
In other respects, however, this is a cogent and sensible account (which was constrained by a barbarous embargo on quotation).
I don't think that its readers can have had much trouble in finding in the life and work the responsiveness Ackroyd finds in them.
But perhaps it is the paradox conveyed by that closing glimpse of a parodic but unprecedented Eliot which carries the sharpest conviction of any feature of the book.
Eliot comes across as the sad man who sees double, as a living embodiment of the proposition that the double has to do with pain and with relief from pain, with the search, in such circumstances, for someone other.
From the ordeal of his first  marriage to the late happiness of the second, the book locks, at one level, into a recital of misfortunes and a medical record.
Influenza after influenza.
Constant debilitating ‘work’, in publishing and public life, and a constant invocation of the claims of such work.
Lecture after lecture, accompanied by complaints about the futility of lectures and his reluctance to give them.
The book makes one conscious of Eliot in the sarcophagus of his upper-class eminence; of a sad face of clerical cut — once the face of a delightful shy child — bleakly sprouting from a sartorial apparatus that resembles the mourning clothes of a cabinet minister; of a masterly poseur, an honoured invalid and recluse, of someone snobbish and sometimes selfish and inhumane, who sought relief in literature and in imitation, and who also embodied the opposite of these qualities.
It is almost as if we are confronted here by a replication of the poor Tom described in Ackroyd's novel by another poor Tom of later times.
And perhaps we might imagine that they are the same but different.
Eliot was to tell the poet F. T. Prince: ‘Not everything you write is very interesting .’
This could be said with some emphasis of Chatterton, but not of Eliot himself, who moreover survived, who grew to be famous, who did not kill himself, though he was to wonder how one might set about dying.
Chatterton died the romantic and traditional early death of the divided, the invaded man, while Eliot did not.
It isn't that Ackroyd asks us to compare these two poor Toms, in pursuit of a theory alleging the importance of imitation.
But they are brought together, in successive books, by the force of this preoccupation, and the reader has to make what he can of the resemblance between two figures quite remote from one another in any coarser understanding of the matter, to do this while adjusting his sight to a vista of copycats, impostors and successive interpretations — a vista which is far from unfamiliar now and can be caught, for instance, in the productions and reproductions of contemporary literary theory.
Imposture is shown in Ackroyd's novel, in this burlesque of the literary life, to be an interesting business, but it is unlikely to cause Chatterton's reputation to inch back towards what it was in the retrospects of the Romantic period.
He was worshipped then for his talent and untimely death — perhaps a little as Eliot was to be worshipped, in the 1940s and '50s, for his  saintly abstention from the world.
Keats placed him among the stars, where Keats himself, for similar reasons, was to be placed by Shelley.
Chatterton became a topos, and the numbers lisped: ‘O Chatterton, how very sad thy fate’, ‘Flow gently, sweet Chatterton’, ‘Good for you, Chatterton’.
Readers can be expected to spot which of these quotations are forgeries, and they must also have doubted in their time whether this writer was as good as the early tributes made out.
It seems clear, however, that Chatterton needn't have had prodigious talent for the talent expended in the novel to take effect.
It is a novel which communicates the notion that talented and untalented meet in that country of the mind where everyone copies and steals from everyone else, where everything is reproductive or reminiscent of everything else, where one thing leads to another and this person passes into that.
It plays with such ideas, to a Shavian pitch of exaggeration: but it is not a novel of ideas, any more than it is a heartless game.
It has people in it, with lives to live.
It has Charles in it, whose plight is more touching than anything in the nineteenth-century retrospects of Chatterton.
It has its predecessors in the romantic tradition — a tradition which includes the self-important single self nevertheless prone to dispersal and division, invasion and impersonation, which includes the victim and his alter ego.
At the same time, both here and in Hawksmoor , Ackroyd, too, is his own man.
For all his standard procedures, I don't think he is actually imitating anybody.
Ariel goes to the police
REVOLUTION, literature and love, and the roads and side-roads which join them together, are concerns which join together the Czech writers Milan Kundera and Ivan Klima, whose name is used by Kundera for the uxorious philanderer of his novel The Farewell Party .
They are writers who have parted company, but who are in some ways at one.
There is a sense in which the hero of Kundera's novel Life is elsewhere , published in Britain in 1986, is also the hero of Klima's collection of stories My First Loves , published here in the same month of the same year.
These are portraits of the artist who grows up in an age of revolutionary socialism and who has to make what he can of it.
Revolution, and its betrayal by a regime which both prescribes and proscribes literature, are described in both works.
Both men are interested in the subject of remembering and forgetting.
In the books they write, music is heard in country places — trumpets, fiddles, the cimbalom — and love shows its face in country hotels, pleasant places, set down beside a stretch of water.
Klima may perhaps be a common name in Czechoslovakia, and Kundera has become a common name in the conversation of Western readers, who are drawn to these reciprocal concerns of his.
In the days before glasnost — which his fictions may be thought to have rehearsed and predicted, but which could well mean that his fictions will no longer be for the West what they have been so far, when the thing that they deplore was still there in its entirety to be deplored — Kundera was forced into exile in the ‘free world’ of the time.
So far, the free world has liked him both for having been, and for having ceased to be, a communist of a sort, for the freedoms he seeks in matters of literary form, for the modern inventiveness and manipulation of the literary games he plays, games that none the less commemorate, as he acknowledges, Cervantes, Sterne and Diderot, and for the sexual games which he plays in an age when, as he once put it, sexuality has ceased to be taboo.
We have liked him for being into free speech and free love, and for what he  has to say about convergences of the two, and about the curbs which revolution and its regimes has placed on them.
The West has been grateful to Kundera, extravagantly so at times, and has shown an impulse to beat itself with his playful fictions.
Heads have been turned, and have begun to swim, amid the flow of invention, delivered in works which have been Englished in rapid succession and which are not always easy to tell apart.
Which is the one that has litost — a form of self-pity — and what does he mean by ‘unbearable lightness of being’?
Which of these two conceptions, for that matter, we may even sometimes wonder, is which?
But it seems safe to say that there are circumstances in which litost and glasnost can be recognised as enemies, and that this enmity can be recognised in the novel Life is elsewhere .
His fertility, narrative gift, gift for experiments and impromptus, are such as to bewilder the attempt to form a judgement of any particular work.
Not that he can mind that.
What he does seem to mind — and what even the most arbitrary-seeming, the most ludic, of his ironic and erotic diversions and excursions show that he minds — is the regime that came to power in his native country after the revolution of 1948.
Many of his most memorable literary effects attest to this.
In The Unbearable Lightness of Being , the Czech exile Sabina disturbs her French friends by being unable to last out a parade held to protest against the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968: ‘She would have liked to tell them that behind Communism, Fascism, behind all occupations and invasions lurks a more basic, pervasive evil and that the image of that evil was a parade of people marching by with raised fists and shouting identical syllables in unison.’
The British reader, who is likely to have been spared certain of the varieties of suffering which are spoken of in the writings of Kundera and Klima, where a joke, or no joke, or nothing whatever, can sequester you for years from the people you grew up with, is in a position, for all that, to know what Sabina means here.
The British reader has only to listen to the sounds that protest makes in his own streets, to the cruel, brutal voices that bellow over loudhailers about injustice and the disadvantaged.
In thinking about what Stalinism brought to his country, Kundera thinks of the support this despotism has received from the writers of his country, and of other countries.
Literature, with its store of memories, is suspected by the state: and yet the state is served by certain writers.
In books and interviews he has reminded the world that the French Surrealist poet Aragon, having praised Kundera's excellent novel The Joke in 1968, and having fulminated against the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia — his legs would ‘refuse’ to take him to Russia any more — made it to Moscow four years later; and that another French poet, Eluard, abandoned his Prague friend, the Surrealist Kalandra, to the executioner.
Nowadays, people all over the world unequivocally reject the idea of gulags, yet they are still willing to let themselves be hypnotised by totalitarian poesy and to march to new gulags to the tune of the same lyrical song piped by Eluard when he soared over Prague like the great archangel of the lyre, while the smoke of Kalandra's body rose to the sky from the crematory chimney.
Tyranny is a force which locks writers up and which self-serving lyrical writers may assist.
Eluard's soaring ‘lyricism’ helped to perpetuate a tyranny, and is the kind of thing which led Kundera to employ the title The Lyric Age for the work which first came to him in the mid-Fifties, and which his publishers prevailed on him to retitle Life is elsewhere when it was completed in 1969.
It was published in America in 1974, translated by Peter Kussi, who has revised his translation for the new edition of 1986 which I am discussing here.
The provisional title referred to the life-span of Jaromil, who dies young, as lyric poets will, but also to the enforced, mass-produced, writer-proclaimed revolutionary ardours which ensued in 1948.
At the outset, Jaromil's lyricism is a Modern affair in which biological compulsion and biographical reference — peeps at the maid Magda in her bath, for instance— are enveloped and disguised in a poetry which his doting and self-pitying mother finds inscrutable.
His first loves — to make use of Klima's title — prove to be his last, but prove as engrossing to him as the lyrics in which his emotional development is encoded.
Jaromil is not so much a character as a type, and is not unlike the Shelleyan poet in Shaw's Candida , Eugene Marchbanks.
Aerial creatures, these, ineffectual angels.
Eugene, ‘so uncommon as to be almost unearthly’, wants to go ‘up into the  sky’.
His brow is ‘lined with pity’.
He speaks with ‘lyric rapture’.
But he is all right when you get to know him.
‘Don't say that Jaromil is a bad poet!’
Kundera's 1986 Postscript implores.
He is a ‘sensitive young man’— a monster too, but the same monster is in you and me.
And the same monster was in Shelley, and Rimbaud, and Victor Hugo.
Jaromil and his mother are portrayed, we learn from the Postscript, quite without any satirical intention.
In that respect, Kundera could have fooled at least one of his readers; but I do see that it belongs to the point of it all that the uncommon Jaromil should be thought humanly representative.
By a painter who befriends him, and who sleeps for a while with his mother, Jaromil, already self-perceived as exceptional, original, is introduced to modern art, which ‘had not yet become the shopworn property of the bourgeois masses and retained the fascinating aura of a sect, a magical exclusivity fascinating to childhood — an age always daydreaming about the romanticism of secret societies, fraternities and tribes’.
Soon he is writing modern poems.
‘This verse described a boy who had been trembling in front of the bathroom door, but at the same time this boy was swallowed up by the verse; it surmounted and survived him.
Alas, my aquatic love , said another line, and Jaromil knew that the aquatic love was Magda; but he also knew that nobody else could find her in that line…’.
These lines are short and do not rhyme.
They are free.
Magda was lost in a poem which was ‘as independent and unintelligible as reality itself.
Reality does not discuss, it simply is.
The independence of the poem provided Jaromil with a marvellous world of concealment, the possibility of a second existence.’
Jaromil has discovered that writing can be what reading has familiarly been for the ordinary person: an escape, a shelter, a door to the alternative self.
Much later we read:
Everything seemed to indicate that Jaromil's enormous yearning for newness (the religion of the New) was only the disguised longing of a virginal youth for the unimaginable experience of the sex act.
When he first reached the blissful shore of the redhead's body, a peculiar idea occurred to him: he now knew at last what it meant to be absolutely modern; it meant to lie on the shore of the redhead's body.
By now he has also reached ‘the realm of real life’— by which he ‘understood a whirling world of parading throngs, physical love and revolutionary slogans’.
It turns out that real life rhymes, that the revolution wishes its poetry to do so.
There is a magical power in rhyme and rhythm.
‘Can a revolution dispense with repeated affirmation of the new order?
Can a revolution dispense with rhyme?’
By now free verse has been exposed as decadent, and modern art as the shopworn property of the bourgeois masses.
Lyricism, then, is the poetry which sings along with the triumph of the proletariat, and with the repressions which accompany its triumph.
What is required is a poetry which does not analyse or criticise, and is suitable for throngs and parades: we are in a situation where the self-portraits of the lyric author can be displayed like placards.
Lyricism is inexperience, and it is the desire for glory.
Such poems ‘need not be stimulated by real-life events’ such as the plight of the Marseilles dock-workers, which has effaced the sight — darkly limned in Jaromil's juvenilia — of Magda in her bath; and if the poet who displays his ignorant, indifferent self-portrait is hoping for applause, there is a chance for him to do well in the new world of revolution, which rings with applause, and with blame.
By the end of the novel Jaromil has forsworn his artist friend, who is under the ban of the regime and compelled to paint by candlelight: ‘The whole world of his pictures has been dead for years.
Real life is elsewhere!’
We are told that these last four words are Rimbaud's and the Surrealist André Breton's, and that in 1968 they were a slogan of the protesting Sorbonne students.
They are words that can be made to mean different things, and are applicable as such to the story of Jaromil's poetic progress from private to public, which can also be recognised as a simultaneity of the two, based on an enduring self-engrossment.
Kundera asks us to join together two things that are often kept apart: lyrical effusions and public poetry.
The quoted words point back to the privileged second existence which poetry had once promised Jaromil, and they point ahead: the old meaning has been reversed, with the claim that real life resides in a revolutionary solidarity.
Just before this snarl about real life, he has betrayed his redhead to the police, by swallowing a lying excuse of hers concerning a subversive brother.
The poets Czeslaw Milosz and Donald Davie have been bothered by the insufficiency and irresponsibility of the lyric genre, and it could be felt that Kundera goes further than they do in denouncing the lyric, and fares worse.
The lyricism that sells out to a state-ordained reality and solidarity is not the only lyricism we know, and it is the opposite of much of what we know by that name.
Youthful as some of them are, the lyrics of Heaney do not embody the genius of inexperience, whatever some of Shelley's may do.
In other words, Kundera's novel isolates certain tendencies in the behaviour of poets (and others) in order to prosecute an attack on Stalinist Czechoslovakia.
It will be clear to most people here that the attack is deserved, and that writers sold out.
Jaromil's adventures, moreover, are shrewdly observed.
Lyricism can indeed be very like this description of it.
Poetry has often been a form of self-pity and a means of self-advancement, and it has often pretended otherwise: Kundera's book rumbles such pretence, as in the comedy he stages of an embassy of poets to a college of policemen and a debate there about the aesthetic of the socialist love-poem.
But he does all this at the cost of suspending a due sense of the tendency there has also been for poets to see further than their noses, and to speak out, and to go to the wall for it.
His Postscript evokes the aim of a white-coated Doctor Kundera ‘to solve an aesthetic problem: how to write a novel which would be a ‘critique of poetry’ and yet at the same time would itself be poetry’.
This aim has a sweepingness and a suspendingness which are apparent, too, in the novel to which it relates.
Many poems contain a critique of poetry, just as many contain a critique of the self-portrayed poet, and of his intention to serve a social or doctrinal system, or of his claim to be a special case.
The lyric is not generically debarred from standing out against the state, or from taking a generous interest in what goes on in the world.
Mandelstam's lyric about the ‘Kremlin mountaineer’— Klima's ‘great Generalissimo’, Stalin — sent him to the camps.
Ivan Klima could be called a lyric author, and the notion of what it is to be such an author is examined in My First Loves , whose gentle and deliberate stories read as if they have been grown and stored before being made public.
The boy poet  Klima loves literature, and pities himself, in a work which pities those around him.
There is a lot to pity them for — the stories touch on ghetto hardships, on murders and deportations.
His father, devoutly socialist, is jailed by the socialist regime whose discipline replaces that of the SS.
Klima's first loves have a way of not working out; and what may have been his longest affair is the one about which least is said.
In the opening story Miriam distributes milk to the tenement building and favours the boy with an extra helping: but he never gets to tell her that he is the lyric author of poems ‘about love.
About suicide.’
The second story is set in and around a country hotel, where the wife of a coarse doctor takes a more than kindly interest in a Klima wide-awake to the sights and sounds of this paradise.
The story ends at a funeral, hovered over by a surreal balloon, from which hangs a fancied female acrobat.
The boy's hand is squeezed by the weeping wife.
He is in two minds.
‘I was able to soar up, to fly, I could rock in the air like that balloon, I could fly away with it, choose any of the four points of the compass, but I remained where I was, I stopped above this small, painful, blessed piece of earth.’
Then there is the tale of a lying girl, as she may be, with whom he makes love, and who alarms him with word of a threatening German — a former SS man, perhaps.
He has her report the matter to the police.
This is a lapse on his part, but is hardly comparable with Jaromil's treatment of his mendacious redhead.
Klima's girl disappears into the Prague bars, leaving him with an imaginary address.
She is rather like a lyric author herself, a bit of a lyre.
The last story has to do with the girlfriend of a friend.
Literary, second-sighted, sick, she holds out a hand to him: he clasps it, but then decides he can't go on.
Is Klima, as the angry friend alleges on this occasion, a flirt, who goes from girl to girl?
The stories do well to return an uncertain answer.
Through them, somewhat in the spirit of Chagall, runs the aerial preoccupation of romantic escapism.
Balloons float, a high-wire circus act teeters.
In the last story Klima comes to see ‘the connection between heights and vertigo, ecstasy and ruin, soaring and falling’.
The literary girl waxes lyrical.
A person who accepted love was like a passenger.
Maybe on a boat, at  night, on some vast lake.
Whichever way you looked there was nothing but calm black water.
It was true that the water might rise and swamp you.
But to love someone meant to fly, to rise above the earth yourself.
So high that you could see everything.
Even if the world looked different from that height, even if it looked changed, even if what on the ground seemed important was transformed into insignificance.
She'd say, moreover, that you could always get out of a boat and go ashore, but from that height you could only crash.
The blessed piece of earth over which float these balloons, over which are poised these acrobats, is a corner of painful Czechoslovakia.
Klima's stories breathe a delicate patriotism — which is not absent, either, from Kundera's accounts of a country which is harder to inhabit, or remain in, or return to.
For both men, Czechoslovakia is both painful and blissful.
It is not surprising that the Czech novelist Josef Skvorecky should be keen on My First Loves .
Skvorecky left his country to teach in North America — as did the Dubcekite Klima — and has improved the shining hours of a Canadian exile.
But Klima has gone back.
It has been said of him that he would rather live in his native country, and not be allowed to publish, than go elsewhere and be free to do so.
Reality is in Czechoslovakia?
A challenging attitude on his part, if the story in question is correct.
It should not persuade us that this writer has yielded or sold out, any more than it should persuade us that the boy poet Klima is in every sense the boy poet Jaromil.
It is possible to suggest that the two poets resemble one another.
Each is inexperienced, youthful.
Each fancies a second existence, wants to float free.
Each feels sorry for himself.
Each is lyrical.
But the lyricism of the character ‘Klima’ can be considered an element in the lyricism of Ivan Klima, and be thought to encounter there its own critique.
As for that business of going to the police, I am sorry I mentioned it.
There is nothing in the stories to suggest that either of these lyrical Klimas has the makings of the hero of the state imagined by Kundera.
Kapuschinski
WE live at a time when reporters go to foreign countries where there is trouble and come back to write books in which they say that it was hard to make out what was going on.
When they say this, they are apt to be called writers.
Writers don't know what is going on.
But they can be good at conveying what it was like for them to be there, and to be writing it down.
The journalists to whom I am referring can more solemnly be said to be practising a modern art of indirection, of the unintelligible and the interminable.
It is as if the war, crisis, living hell or chaotic backwater can never be known and will never end.
After a while you fly out.
A leading exponent of these mysteries is the novelist and journalist V. S. Naipaul, whose foreign countries are, as we have already seen, areas of darkness, where coups and crises are glimpsed but may remain enigmatic.
Another is Ryszard Kapuscinski, an expert in what he calls ‘confusion’, who has attended twenty-seven revolutions in the Third World.
These revolutions, he believably reports, have been confusions.
There he sat in his writer's hotel room, venturing out into a series of tight corners, filing his copy, then leaving for Warsaw to compose his short books — objects physically slight but charged with these confusions.
They are marvellously done, and they have caused a stir of approval in this country, while also raising doubts.
In the New Left Review , Benedict Anderson has made sharp criticisms of the work of the journalist and poet James Fenton which compare it with that of Kapuscinski and Naipaul.
These three writers are tagged as representatives of two hardly very different types or crisis-fancying, Third Worldly literary tourist.
Kapuscinski exercises a personal charm which must have helped him to establish friendly relations with the people he met, and to gather material, and which can seem to befriend the Western reader.
Born in 1932, he retired as a foreign correspondent for the Polish Press Agency in 1981, by which time his three books had started to come out.
They describe  three falls: that of the Emperor Haile Selassie, that of the Shah and that of the colonial masters of Angola.
No fall from power within the Eastern bloc of nations is mentioned in any of the books.
The Ethiopian book, published in Britain in 1983, showed him to be a writer interested in ‘autocrats’— in absolute power and in the transformation of that power into its indistinguishable opposite.
He says that it is ‘difficult to say when omnipotence becomes powerlessness’.
Not that the stories of Haile Selassie and the Shah are any great advertisement for the omnipotence of omnipotence.
Both rulers had reason to fear.
Both of them, though, were rulers whom Western journalists used to admire: they were jewels in the crown of freedom, and yet endearingly autocratic.
Kapuscinski's first two books will serve to deter any cult of the dear dead kings in question.
In The Emperor he writes:
For the starvelings it had to suffice that His Munificent Highness personally attached the greatest importance to their fate, which was a very special kind of attachment, of an order higher than the highest.
It provided the subjects with a soothing and uplifting hope that whenever there appeared in their lives an oppressive mischance, some tormenting difficulty, His Most Unrivalled Highness would hearten them — by attaching the greatest importance to that mischance or difficulty.
The Emperor has something of the technique of comic and fantastic exaggeration that we associate with Dickens, and something of the manner, too, of Dickens's reader, Kafka:
In the courtyard where the Emperor s retinue awaited him, there were tens, no, I say it without exaggeration, hundreds eager to push their faces forward.
Face rubbed against face, the taller ones squelching down the shorter ones, the darker ones overshadowing the lighter ones.
Face despised face, the older ones moving in front of the younger ones, the weaker ones giving way to the stronger ones.
Face hated face, the common ones clashing with the noble ones, the grasping ones against the weaklings.
Face crushed face, but even the humiliated ones, the ones pushed away, the third-raters and the defeated ones, even those — from a certain distance imposed by the law of hierarchy, it's true — still moved toward the front, showing here and there from behind the first-rate, titled ones, if only as  fragments: an ear, a piece of temple, a cheek or a jaw…just to be closer to the Emperor's eye!
It is not easy to know how far Kafka's fictions can be thought to answer descriptively to the historical realities of his time, let alone to those which his fictions are often thought to have predicted.
And it is not easy to know how far Kapuscinski's book is a book about a bygone Ethiopia.
Is it a book about Poland?
It purports to be based on the recollections of courtiers and retainers hunted up after the fall: but I have heard it suggested that the author did not take to the Picador edition's cover display of a picture of Haile Selassie, perhaps on the grounds of a misleading particularity.
The reader who believes he is learning things about Imperial Ethiopia may be equally inclined to tell himself that this is a country of the mind, constructed on principles not very different from those of the Samuel Johnson who devised, for the Abyssinia of Rasselas , just representations of general truths and of a common humanity.
From Abyssinia Kapuscinski passed to Persia.
From Rasselas, as it were, to Ozymandias.
Present in the second book as the occupant of an Iranian hotel room sifting through his papers, photographs and cassettes, Kapuscinski recites the history of the region, which has thrust the Shah of Shahs into the sand in the posture of the statue of the ‘King of Kings’ in Shelley's tyrannophobe poem.
The Shah had made a showplace of his country with his colossal purchasing of weapons, and look what it had all come to: ‘If you drive from Shiraz to Isfahan even today you'll see hundreds of helicopters parked off to the right of the highway.
Sand is gradually covering the inert machines.’
Shortly after the point at which the recital ends, sand was to cover some more helicopters — those sent by President Carter to liberate the American hostages seized in Teheran, where Kapuscinski catches a glimpse not of them but of their place of confinement.
At this palace, as at the other, servility shows its face and performs its tricks.
Foreign statesmen revere an oil-rich omnipotence: ‘Now the whole world was at his feet.
Before him were bowed heads, inclined necks and outstretched hands.’
Kapuscinski speaks of the liberals who lost out when the Shah was expelled, but Bakhtiar is not particularised.
Bani Sadr he  does mention, with sympathy.
He says of the liberals that they were placed in a predicament by the fall: ‘A democracy cannot be imposed by force, the majority must favour it, yet the majority wanted what Khomeini wanted — an Islamic republic.’
The suggestion that democracy cannot be imposed by force has the force of a generalisation.
Kapuscinski is a seeker of general truths who is sparing with his generalisations, and who likes certain kinds of particularity but not others.
The kind he likes he calls ‘detail’, as opposed to‘long shots’— the equivalent, that is , of the long shots over-used by cameramen of the Iranian Revolution: ‘it is through details that everything can be shown’— that truth can be shown.
But in The Emperor no detail is adduced that might bring out what differences there could have been between the courtiers and petitioners of Ethiopia and their counterparts elsewhere in the world.
Kapuscinski's courtiers and petitioners are about as black as Johnson's Prince Rasselas, who is about as black as he is white.
In the second book, a photograph is spoken of which ‘shows the pulling down of a monument to one of the Shahs (father or son) in Teheran or some other Iranian city.
It is hard to be sure about the year the photograph was taken, since the monuments of both Pahlavis were pulled down several times, whenever the occasion presented itself to the people.’
Here the confusions or uncertainties are the point of the passage: it doesn't matter that the particulars of the caption are missing since this sort of thing was always happening.
It matters less and less as we move into an enjoyable account derived from a vocational puller-down of statues of the Shah and his father.
The Shah was equal to these demolitions: ‘If we pulled one down, he set up three.’
The wrecker explains that, one way or another, ‘it's not easy to pull down monuments’.
Kapuscinski then generalises.
The Shah's regime was a transplant that the system had rejected: ‘The rejection of a transplant — once it begins, the process is irreversible.
All it takes is for society to accept the conviction that the imposed form of existence does more harm than good.’
I am not sure how much work these last words are doing, and if there is tautology here, it is compounded by what follows.
Rejecting the Shah was
A great experience, an adventure of the heart.
Look at the people who  are taking part in a revolt.
They are stimulated, excited, ready to make sacrifices.
At that moment they are living in a monothematic world limited to one thought: to attain the goal they are fighting for.
Everything will be subjugated to that goal…
Kapuscinski's way with words entails adding, repeating piling up, for the space of a slim volume.
But the ‘and's’ and ‘or's’and the more and more rarely irritate, and are triumphant in the great set-pieces which mean so much to all three books — like that palimpsest of faces in Addis Ababa.
In 1975, the year after the fall of Haile Selassie, and four years before the fall of the Shah, the witness of revolutions turned up in Angola for the abandonment of their colony by the Portuguese: the subject of the third of these books of his.
Agostinho Neto, politician and poet, the leader of the MPLA, is about to preside over the new state, but two enemy armies are converging on the capital, Luanda: the FNLA under Holden Roberto and Unita under Jonas Savimbi.
All three have international sponsors, and Kapuscinski is to find out that the South Africans have invaded in the south of the country, having fallen in love with Savimbi.
As in the earlier books, the bravura set-piece dominates, and the most memorable concerns the crates in which the Portuguese have packed up their belongings, and which were eventually shipped out of Africa — Kapuscinski was to stumble on a few of them in Portugal, sunk, as it were, in the sand.
He writes of them as they stay for waftage:
Some crates were as big as vacation cottages, because a hierarchy of crate status had suddenly come into being.
The richer the people, the bigger the crates they erected.
Crates belonging to millionaires were impressive: beamed and lined with sailcloth, they had solid, elegant walls made of the most expensive grades of tropical wood, with the rings and knots cut and polished like antiques.
The passage takes off thereafter in ecstatic inventory.
At the start of the book there are false notes, those of a Hemingway war correspondent: ‘Every knock at the door could mean the end for me.
I tried not to think about it, which is the only thing to do in such a situation.’
But matters are mended with the arrival of the crates — antiques that epitomised an antique land, brief monuments to the old Angola.
Benguela, in the south, is one of Kapuscinski's ghost towns.
A deserted European quarter is twinned with an African settlement out in a desert ‘white and glimmering like a salt spill, without a blade of grass’.
These Africans have not moved into the houses of the Portuguese.
They are passive, we are told; moral scruples don't come into it.
Kapuscinski generalises: ‘the degree of consciousness that drives one to demand justice or do something about obtaining it hasn't yet been reached.’
From Benguela, Kapuscinski and a film crew travel to a scene of carnage, guided by Carlotta, a heroine of the MPLA.
When the Europeans decide to return, their guide decides to stay, and is immediately killed.
‘We are all culpable in Carlotta's death, since we agreed to let her stay behind; we could have ordered her to return.’
A colonial ‘could’.
Kapuscinski is soon in a still hairier place, further south, where he is told of the South African intervention.
This is a scoop, and he fights his way back through wildernesses, road-blocks, threats of ambush, to inform Warsaw.
The last Portuguese leave Luanda.
Independence is declared, and Neto's position as head of the hard-pressed MPLA improves.
By now Kapuscinski is on his ‘last legs’, and he telexes Warsaw to say that he wants to leave and that it is ‘more or less clear’ that ‘the Angolans will win’.
Neto's, and Castro's, Angolans, presumably.
On the following page we read that ‘things were going badly’ for Neto.
Since then, for the thirteen years since Kapuscinski's departure, things have gone badly for the Angolans, and they are still suffering terribly.
But at last, in the summer of 1988, negotiations are in hand which may end the war.
It is a war which has begun to embarrass the interveners.
According to the Guardian , the New Year's Honours list of 1988 in Britain contained a knighthood for ‘Professor Albert Maillard, the Oxford historian’.
Two of the several names owned by another recipient had strayed into someone's word-processor to create a further deserving don, the knowing reference to whom must have ruined the new year for more than one senior scholar.
I feel that Albert Maillard, if he existed, would have no time for Kapuscinski's impressionism, for his absence of dates, figures and state papers, and that Albert Maillard would be wrong.
There is history in the  accounts Kapuscinski gives of the confusions and uncertainties which he has experienced and which he has tried to interpret.
All is not dark in these accounts, and indeed they can be said to gleam with a quality of reflected light.
I think of him as an artist who writes history, and I take it that the history he writes includes the history he has principally suffered — that of Poland.
An autocrat falls in the first two books; but the only one in the third is the author-autocrat of the hotel room who sallies into the bush, as if on impulse, to visit the mysterious, moveable ‘front’.
At the same time, he is a shrewd observer who writes compellingly about the people and the landscapes he encounters.
A benevolent despot.
The same description would not, in my view, be grossly inapplicable to the present ruler of Poland — which has, as it happens, a smaller population than the Ethiopia of chronic famine.
General Jaruzelski bears no obvious resemblance to the Third World autocrats discussed in the first two books.
But it can scarcely be in doubt that these books have in them home truths, and an ironic obliquity or duplicity, which richly relate to the world of Jaruzelski's predecessors, and indeed to the experience of other countries where literature and opinion have been repressed.
Their writing coincided with the rise of Solidarity.
They are books which bring together all three of the worlds we inhabit, and they are books which appear to thrive on being seen through — on the transparency of their suggestion that tyrannies, that sycophancy, conspiracy and repression, courts and courtiers, are all on the royal right, and in the bush, and running into the sand.
Heroine of Our Time
SUICIDE was thought damnable in the Middle Ages, and I expect there are those who have been brought to feel by a book called The Monument that the Middle Ages had a point.
T. Behrens's book commemorates a young couple who lived together for seventeen years in a solitude à deux and who then took their own lives — incompetently and lingeringly.
Representatives of the few people they had come to know in the course of their wanderings round the world were left to clear up.
Suicide tends now to command sympathy, even when the reasons for it are hard to understand.
Not everyone who reads the book will be able to sympathise with Justin and Ursula, or to believe that they understand them.
But there will also be those who will stay with it for its relish of damnation.
This is one of the many books which address the snobbery of the English, which flash at their readers the lawns of country houses, the baize of gambling-tables, which tell tales of those virtuosos of ostentation and disregard who have in common a contempt for commonness, for the middle class; and it could be said of such books that their chief resource is the eccentricity which has long amounted to a convention of upper-class life.
Literary careers can be founded on the impersonation and adulation of privileged behaviour; but the literary works which have been written and inspired by English snobs and sports are by no means all boastful or complicit.
The supreme text of recent years is James Fox's account of Lord Lucan and his set, with their boffes de politesse .
Patrician insolence has quite often appeared to express a perception of the activities of the levelling Labour governments which have come and gone since 1945.
Behrens's book, however, pays no attention to politics or to public matters.
His story begins at a time when, as at other times in this century, the patriciate, and the merely rich, had slipped down into marked collusion with the smart, with upstarts and bohemians.
The well-born and the well-off have been apt at such times to turn, for diversion and instruction, to foreigners and to  members of the working class.
These strangers have been sexual, artistic.
Theirs was the charm of not being bourgeois, and the foreigners among them could be, or could come across as, princes, pretenders to a throne, descendants of a khan.
What survived, in the late Fifties, of the Chelsea set welcomed a refugee from Hungary, after the Soviet invasion of that country.
This was Ursula of the long blonde hair and double-barrelled baronial-barbaric surname (withheld by Behrens), who had fled what survived of ancestral estates — on one view of the matter — and had made her courageous way across Europe, shot at and winged by border guards, to Vienna, and on to London, where she fell among art historians and was counselled by Anthony Blunt.
As did the author of the book, who is a painter and who was then at the Slade, she discovered, he tells us, that ‘the people with the beautiful faces were also, mysteriously, the ones it was most fun to be with’.
The self-proclaimed ‘honesty’ of the wild, well-born stranger was doubted, but her fascination prevailed.
She married an art dealer, Kenelm, understood to be seriously ill, and conducted daring affairs, one of them on the Metro with her friend Monique's friend Gianni:
Gianni and Ursula leapt on just as the doors were closing, but Monique, who was now a few yards behind them and whose movements were hampered anyway by her arthritis, was left standing there as the train moved out.
Ursula and Gianni got off at the next station but one, having brought their growing mutual admiration to a startling climax wedged solid among the rocking mass of sober commuters.
After a quick tidy-up they took the next train back to the Gare de Lyon where Monique had only twenty minutes to wait.
Were the other passengers all sober?
Startling the commuter is a game in which it is best to think so.
Chapter Five opens with the information: ‘Ursula and Kenelm had known my parents for some time, having been introduced originally by a mutual friend.
Kenelm had then sold my father a pair of eighteenth-century cupboards.’
And so it was that Ursula met Justin, the writer's moody adolescent brother, and ran away with him.
Away!
They were off on their seventeen years of Tristan and Isolde.
Justin, who would appear to have lost some of his old  charisma, became the straight man of the act — always mending things.
They lived frugally but in style.
They rented a flat in Rome and built a house in Greece.
Here they are, unisex and colour-supplement-magnetic in an Italian ‘working-class’ restaurant: ‘Justin and Ursula, with their measured dignity and impeccable, interchangeable clothes — perhaps soft leather waistcoats over silk shirts and linen trousers in colours that rarely overstepped the narrow arc of the spectrum between cream and ochre — were immediately noticeable.’
They turned nomadic and mingled with the nomads of the Sudan, where they were to consider building a further house and perhaps settling down.
They swam, they talked, they wrote their diaries and stories, and were at ease in a succession of remote and sticky places.
Ursula's bad back was religiously exposed to unmanageable African horses and jolting lorry rides.
England's wealthy and wonderful — their scams and scrapes, their portfolios, clubs, night-clubs, champagne and cocaine, the Cockney accents of their young ones, their gossip-columnists and their art historians, their Lucan-like zombies and their zoos and safaris — were avoided.
T. Behrens kept up with the fleeing lovers, at intervals.
He visited them in Egypt, accompanied by a girl he'd met in a bar, who proved to be a lesbian.
His own vicissitudes in love are a feature of the story he tells, as is his attempt to understand his disconcerting brother and to produce reflections on the meaning of it all.
Ursula's diary is reflective too, but is at its best in its evocations of place — of the nothingness of the desert, especially.
She can, against the odds, be funny: ‘Dinkas in the market have long, brass-bound pipes.
One of these smokers wears a T-shirt with the words ‘ever ready’.
He looks less ready than anyone I've ever seen.’
One of her sententious entries reads: ‘Tactlessness is often taken for sincerity, and sincerity is in turn often taken for a compliment.
Let no one ever be sincere with me — it is a failure of respect, and respect is a thing one can never get enough of.
And the only kind of respect worth having is the insincere kind.’
Another reads: ‘Where would we be without that much-maligned virtue, vanity!’
These upper-class pensées lighten the load of an odyssey whose ports of call, for all her evocations, are barely distinguishable  from one another.
Struggling with his maps, the writer is forced into sheer itinerary:
They drove directly south-west into Algeria through Guelma, Bou Saada, Ain Sefra, Colomb Béchar near the Moroccan frontier, Tindouf, into Mauritania through Chinguetta, and reached the Atlantic coast at Nouakshott.
Then down the coast to St Louis in Senegal.
At Dakar they cut sharply back into Mauritania through Kiffa, then south again to Kayes in Mali.
On to Bamako, then eastward into Upper Volta through Bobo Djoulasso and Ouagadougou.
But this, too, is upper-class, this recital of exotic place-names — so often the spoor of the doughty, ascetic, astringent English traveller who has left his privileges behind.
As the years go by, Ursula's body becomes a bore, and she experiences a fear of ageing: ‘I shall have to die fairly young, because I won't be able to live with the infirmities of old age.’
She is indeed ready to die, and it is a difficulty that Justin may feel that he has to do the same.
In the Sudan she declares: ‘My time is up.’
She is infatuated with a handsome police chief, goes rather grimly to bed with him in the time he can spare from gambling sessions, and then kills herself.
Justin goes back to England for a while, and then, having broken some hearts, arrives in the Sudan to perform his own suicide.
They now lie together in a single lot in a local cemetery.
The headstone is inscribed with the words: ‘Ursula and Justin — One’.
‘One’ was a word of the Chelsea set for the first person singular, and one might perhaps venture the thought of a pun in the words of the inscription.
These two people had enacted what we have long been accustomed to think of as a romantic programme, whereby love and death converge, and dying young is the thing to do, whereby other people, and common life, are a thing to be escaped from, and a tension develops between the duty to a partner and a cultivation of the self, between the dictates of an amour fou and an amour de soi .
‘Most people addicted to romancing are their own heroes’: when a second person enters the solitude in question, Louisa Stuart's maxim becomes harder to apply.
But I have the impression that Ursula was very much her own heroine.
T. Behrens is considerably baffled by this strange case, by the question of what it was that determined Ursula's adherence  to this programme, and of what it was that caused her to bring to an end her loving friendship with Justin.
Guesses are hazarded, and are quoted from interviews he conducted.
A hint of child abuse may seem to be imparted by his account of a Gothic moment which came about during a walk with her father, at nightfall, in a setting of peasants and forests.
Ursula figures as ‘some sort of Hungarian countess’ whose parents were estranged and who was to be estranged from her ominous father.
There she once sat in some sort of castle, or not, reading, for sure, the literature of Romanticism, and growing up to resemble — in the opinion of the writer's aunt, the historian C. B. A. Behrens — a character out of Lermontov.
Lermontov, for his part, was a character out of Byron, and so was Pechorin, the ‘hero of our time’ in Lermontov's novel of 1839, one of those people ‘who are fated to attract all kinds of unusual things’.
Pechorin is a cold-hearted, stylish fatalist, experimentalist, existentialist and divided man, a traveller, gambler, heart-breaker and forgetter of old friends, who loves to ride ‘a spirited horse through the long grass against a desert wind’.
Blond and beautiful in his leg-ribbons, his high-heeled shoes, ‘fitted with the greatest possible exactitude’, his ‘long white tunic’ and ‘dark-brown Circassian coat’.
Byron's is not the only ghost to be detected here: the cold hearts of his precursors Lovelace and Laclos's Valmont are present in Pechorin, who has succeeded in attracting a certain princess.
I'll tell you the whole truth,’ I answered the Princess.
‘I won't excuse or explain my conduct.
I don't love you.’
The colour faded from her lips.
‘Leave me alone,’ she said, barely audibly.
I shrugged my shoulders, turned, and walked away.
The shrugger doesn't care whether he lives or dies — and the designer duel arranged for himself by this divided and indifferent man is a form of Russian roulette.
The duel in which Lermontov was soon to die is said to have been patterned, so far as its arrangements went, on the one in the novel: the outcome, however, was perceptibly different.
V. G. Kiernan's recent book on the history of duelling — the work of a historian who is able to grasp, as many historians now are not, that the literature of the past is evidence of the  past — discusses Lermontov's real and imaginary duels.
The book indicates that duelling and gambling have been co-ordinate activities: both, we may feel, are poised on a knife-edge between accident and intention.
If there is an element of design on Pechorin's part in the duel he fights, an element which incorporates a knowledge of the loaded dice to be employed by his opponent in the form of an unloaded pistol, the outcome can still be ascribed to chance, in a sense that must be meant to characterise the hero's fine indifference.
Kiernan reports suggestions that Lermontov's own death (like Pushkin's in another duel a few months before) may have been murder, a murder planned by court reactionaries.
Outcomes are uncertain, games of chance can be rigged — but this is not what we are conscious of in reading about Ursula.
We read that she intended, in Hamlet's words, to ‘leave betimes’, and that she did what she intended.
That there was a pattern for her in Lermontov's novel is conceivable: but it can't be claimed that it fits her with exactitude, or that it provides an explanation of her conduct.
It is clear enough, none the less, that the hero of that time is like the hero of some other times, including Hamlet's.
Shakespeare's play has an arranged duel which miscarries, and which takes off a divided, gambling man who has wondered whether or not it might be better to end his life.
Here, too, the uncertainty of a duel utters the uncertainty of internal division.
Those who pursue comparisons of the kind I am referring to are likely to be impressed by the staying-power of a literary preoccupation to which a variety of temperaments and compulsions has been attracted, and could well be inclined to believe that Pechorin's duel and indifference may have been among the precedents that weighed, a century later, with a woman bent on contriving her appointment with destiny.
Not much is made, however, in the book she has become, of the cultural provenance of this Russian-style belle dame sans merci .
She is present in the book as narcissistic, driven and depressive, with the fascination of such people, as the enigma of an exceptional vitality drawn towards ‘laziness’ and extinction, as a suicidal survivor, her life a chapter of escapes.
But she was also, among other literary things, the wonderful and baleful orphan or isolate who is seen to advantage in the books  she read: and it may be that cultural history is especially worth attending to in cases such as hers, where the subject is a dedicated reader, and the basis for a directly psychological account is even more than usually insecure.
Not that T. Behrens sets up as a psychologist.
To read about her here is like being shown someone's snaps or scrapbook — perhaps an underrated pleasure.
It is like an evening spent in a restaurant — let's say Olwen's French Club, mentioned on page one, a latter-day refuge of the Chelsea set — listening to a story of mutual friends.
And it is a trip in its own right, on the teller's part.
T. Behrens gives the impression that he has more to say about himself than the progress of this mad love — to which he did not stand all that close at the time, brother as he was — has allowed him to come up with.
It is also possible to feel, and to be told in London, that there was more to be said about the mad love than he allowed himself, or was in a position, to come up with.
And it may be that Justin, too, has more to say, from beyond the grave.
Waiting in the wings is a book by him about Ursula, entitled Style , which, according to Graham Greene, who was sent the manuscript, could be edited for publication.
There may be a cult in the making — and one could imagine a film by Antonioni, whose script-writer, Mark Peploe, was intrigued by J. Behrens in his last days.
Kingsley and the Woman
A RECENT photograph of Kingsley Amis shows him with a cat, which is standing beside his typewriter.
The author's face wears a witch's smile of appreciation.
He is clearly familiar with and fond of that cat.
The smile may have come as a surprise to connoisseurs of the pictures of him which have been issued to the world.
These pictures, rarely cordial, have become more and more baleful: it is as if he is holding himself back from physical assault on a reader supposed to be a trendy and a lefty, which is, indeed, what many of his readers have always been.
The smile contrasts, moreover, with the expression to be imagined on the face of the male lead, Patrick Standish, in Amis's novel of 1988,Difficulties with girls , when the cat in Patrick's life pays him a visit.
You feel at first that on a bad day (there are quite a few) Patrick might give it one of the kicks that the novelist seems about to direct at his readers.
Then it turns out that Patrick rather likes it after all.
But then it turns out that the female lead, his wife Jenny Standish (née Bunn), unreservedly cherishes their cat.
All this could suggest that Kingsley Amis isn't altogether sold on Patrick Standish.
Readers of Amis can be expected to remember Patrick and Jenny from the past.
They appeared in his novel of 1960,Take a girl like you , in which Patrick gives freezing looks, and a group of children wears the ‘expression of being proud of being serious, like some famous author photographed in the Radio Times ’.
The new novel has married the pair and moved them on into the mid-Sixties and from the provinces to London, where Patrick works misgivingly in a fashionable publishing-house.
And there are other reappearances from the earlier novel.
Each of the novels has an alluring Wendy.
Graham McClintoch of ‘the indefensible ginger-coloured suit’ has returned, and there are commemorative mentions of a ginger this and a ginger that.
Patrick is still having difficulties with girls: the married man keeps going to bed with them, not liking it very much and not liking the distress it brings to a wife whom he does like and who is carefully crafted to be likeable.
I reviewed Take a girl like you when it came out, and took pains to convey how much I enjoyed and admired its incendiariness.
The review seemed to think that the swinging Sixties contained a readership, among others, that would be shocked by the novel's candour and scabrousness about sex —‘no doubt he has touched himself on the raw.
He will touch everyone on the raw’— while the young would receive it as an account of what they were up to.
But it was clear, and is clearer still in retrospect, that on a number of occasions an old decorum had been deferred to, or embraced.
Jenny's Jack the Lad is addressed by her as ‘my lad’, and she firmly refuses to rush into bed with him.
The narrator may not wholly be in jest when he refers to sexual intercourse with a certain girl, 17 or thereabouts, as ‘the ultimate indecorum’, and rereaders of the novel are likely to be mindful of the survival here of an old England lived in by people like the middle-aged T. S. Eliot, exponents of a disgusted chastity.
It seems appropriate that the language of Four Quartets should enter the novel at one point — appropriate, too, of course, that it should be mocked.
So the piece was solicitous in trying to alleviate the shocks by explaining that the novelist himself was shocked.
And I think it was right to argue that the book has its ‘strict disclaimers’ and that goodness of heart, chiefly Jenny's, is defensively displayed amid a welter of misconduct.
There is a bleakness which centres on Patrick's infidelities: but it may also be true that the rudeness and aggression with which Jenny, their sex object, is treated by various chuntering males has grown grimmer with the years than it was reckoned to be, by the author, by me and by many of his readers, at the time.
The review predicted that ‘any eventual mating’ between Patrick and Jenny ‘will have something permanently bitter and irresolute about it’.
A linguistic point was made in the course of the review — that Julian Ormerod's lounge-bar slang is ‘continuous, in a way, with Patrick's cool utterance’— and the review also made out that Ormerod's overdone good heart is continuous, in a way, with Jenny's.
‘No wonder we like them’, said a poem of Amis's once.
The poem says that women are ‘much nicer than men’.
But the novels were soon to exhibit an interest in misogyny, and to see a connection between ‘the old hoo-ha’ and ‘the old last end’— expressions used by Ormerod and Standish respectively, in Take a girl like you , for sexual intercourse and death.
Thinking about women is a way of avoiding the thought of death — and yet women may be the end of you.
No wonder we fear them.
A paranoid reproach is aimed at all females by an Amis-like figure, who then reproaches himself, or is reproached by some other Amis agent detectable in the novel.
At times a golden girl is present in the vicinity of the discussions of the subject that keep happening, and is felt to restore a balance.
Fairly early in Take a girl like you , Patrick delivers himself of an unqualified condemnation of women, which is followed by a sentence from the narrator concerning and presumably condemning Patrick's attitude to Jenny at that stage, as a girl to be taken and left: ‘He wanted more than his share of her before anybody else had any.’
These ‘Jenny-dealings’ have now, after nearly thirty years, incurred a sequel, in which the discussion, and the former comedy and bleakness, are resumed, and in which the question of continuity of utterance within the novel once again arises.
The beauty of the earlier prose is, in part, a beauty of grace notes, the pointing of sentences, charged elegance and buoyant, intelligent wit.
In Take a girl like you a great sentence falls like the dew from heaven during one of the scenes in Amis when a terminally drunk man endures a sexual turmoil and fiasco, is stunned by a stunning but not very nice girl.
This particular girl, a model, is putting Patrick in his place by going on about cars: ‘Most of my friends have them on the firm,’ she said, with the sort of lift of the old proud head that he could hardly believe had not accompanied a limiting judgment on Villiers de l'Isle Adam.’
In Difficulties with girls there are passages which recall that lift of the old proud head.
‘In silence, the two almost bowed almost stiffly to each other, behaving rather like two — well, two somethings-or-other, thought Patrick.
Two climatological dendrologists or career torturers, pre-eminent in their respective domains but divided on some technical points.’
The new prose, however, is in general less embellished, more elliptical, even quite taxingly so on occasion, and yet more colloquial too.
There is less style, of the kind known to Villiers de l'Isle Adam.
Fewer jewels.
Excellent use is made of the text of Tom Jones , but it is now less detectable that this is a writer who has  done his stint of teaching English literature at university level.
The voice of the novelist is heard continually in the speech of his characters.
Patrick is a lord of language, as he was in the previous novel.
But this novel has not just one but two barmen who could also at a pinch be hailed as lords of language.
Even school-teaching Graham, who is meant to be amusingly boring, is good with words, in one of the ways that teachers sometimes are.
And even Jenny, who is meant to be a mistress of plain speech, is allowed, in this comparatively austere book, a quiet felicity of phrase based on the justice of her perceptions.
The lordship in question is the novelist's, not only in the usual sense, often forgotten, that every word of the novel is his, but also because the speech of its characters can be like that of the narrator, and indeed like that of the writer of Kingsley Amis's discursive prose.
This is not the first time that such considerations have arisen for readers of his fiction.
Readers of The Old Devils have asked: are its Welsh Welsh?
Its characters have been said to sound English.
(Northern Jenny Bunn, incidentally, sounds, to me, Welsh.)
There may be a matter of principle here for some of those who wish their authors to be concealed: such authors should not sound like the characters they invent, any more than they should express opinions.
But the raconteurs of the extra-literary world are permitted to shape and turn the speech of the characters in their stories, and to play the pervasive evident author.
And anyone who doubts whether the method can safely be transferred to literature should consult one of Amis's best novels,Ending up .
Raconteur and raisonneur , in his art as in his personal life, he is a concealed author who is evident enough in his hotly opinionated fiction: he is not given to expounding his own passionate opinions there, but can be recognised without difficulty in almost every aspect of every one of his novels, including the speech assigned to his often disputatious characters.
There is a sense in which each novel of his is an opinion of his, coextensive with the work itself and rather hard, as a rule, to read off in summary.
These considerations affect the difficulties which attend Difficulties with girls , and which come to the fore with the most Amis-sounding of its characters, the male lead.
Amis's novels have always been full of opinions, and have, I think, become  prone to a marked ambiguity of effect, especially with regard to questions of gender and race.
Patrick has plenty to say on such subjects, and he says it in the lordly way which does much to furnish the book with its presiding idiom.
But are we meant to sympathise with what he says?
Here and elsewhere, the method, for all that Amis would hate to hear it, is dialectical.
In the novels I am thinking of he attributes certain ideas to certain characters and utters them in the prevailing manner of the novel, while also submitting them to question within it.
He can appear in so doing to have his opinions and to eat them too.
And he can also appear to place the novel in a state of suspension.
If the state was not present in his novels from the first, it is there in One Fat Englishman , and in Jake's Thing .
It is there in Stanley and the Women , which persuaded Marilyn Butler — somewhat against the odds, but none the less intelligibly — to interpret it in the London Review as a critique of male supremacy, but which has left a very different impression on others.
It is compatible with the canon of artistic detachment, but it can cause controversy.
Heirs to the freedoms which, on the threshold of the Sixties,Take a girl like you may be thought to have assisted in inaugurating, but which it also contrived to criticise, young people now seem to feel that the old Patrick belonged to a sexist work, and they may well feel that the old Adam has surfaced again in the new Patrick.
But a solicitous critic (Amis has had his share, for all the faces he makes) could perhaps be counted on to demonstrate that the novelist is sorry that Patrick is sexist.
Take, for example, the Jewish question as it arises in the novel.
Patrick has been hired by an obnoxiously trendy mismated publisher.
He labours scornfully for this Simon Giles, faintly comforted by a corner in Classical studies which has been granted him for reasons to do with the firm's image.
Between Patrick and Mrs Giles there flows, or gutters, a current of dreary sexual electricity.
He fancies that Simon is Jewish, and that he gives off ‘a slight hot smell’.
We are later tolerantly informed — in the presiding idiom of the book, by a narrator keen, as ever, to monitor Patrick's impressions — that the smell was not atrocious: ‘not strong but easily perceptible, like a large zoo passed at a distance.’
By then, however, Patrick  has been informed, by an office placeman and fuddy-duddy who believes that trendiness has ruined everything, that smelly Simon, though he may be obnoxious, is not Jewish.
This is a bad day for Patrick, who had volunteered that Simon was ‘one of a certain…persuasion’.
According to the narrator, Patrick is ‘so far from being anti-semitic that a couple of his best friends really were Jews’(but who can these two best friends be — can Ormerod, unmentioned in the later novel, be one?).
And now he has been put down, made to seem anti-Semitic, by a probable anti-Semite.
The encounter could be read as establishing that he has been silly, while clearing him of a certain…imputation.
But it could also be read very differently.
For some, it may serve as a reminder of the Kingsley Amis who once unambiguously remarked, in the course of a berating of Philip Roth, that ‘Jewish jokes are not funny’.
Then there is the woman question, which arises in the novel in a fashion which sets us wondering, as in the past and as in the case of the above encounter, which parts of the bad behaviour on display Amis quite or largely likes.
The woman question is treated together with the homosexual question.
This is the mid-Sixties, and homosexuals are being released from the closet by a law enacted by Parliament late in the novel.
Patrick is far from anti-homosexual, though not entirely patient with the relevant practices and pretensions.
This standpoint is gathered up with others in a book which is free with descriptions of creditable and discreditable dealings on the part of those of that persuasion.
Two, or three, of them are in, or moving into, the far from populous row of flats, just over the river in South London, which is inhabited by Patrick and Jenny, and by a stunning, boring wife who affords Patrick one of the novelist's turmoils in a vulgarly-appointed borrowed flat some miles to the north.
Among the few Standish neighbours on the row is Eric, long gone from the closet and married to Stevie, a he-man former semi-film-star, whom he eventually stabs.
Eric is represented as sympathetic, and the counsel he imparts to Patrick on the subject of gender might almost have been imparted by Patrick:
You and I are by nature, by our respective natures, males who are irresistibly attracted by a non-male principle.
In your case, straight-forward, women; in my case not straightforward, not women —but , non-male, except anatomically.
And it's the clash between male and non-male that causes all the trouble.
They're different from us.
More like children.
Crying when things go wrong.
Making difficulties just so as to be a person.
But when Patrick says that sort of thing to Jenny, he adds that she is an exception to this law of nature.
She is not, as he puts it, ‘that sort’ of woman.
Meanwhile the also sympathetic but Grahamly maddening Tim is struggling to move into a flat on the row, while supposing himself to be struggling to come out of the closet.
A third homosexual on the row?
What he has to come out with is not initially clear, but it becomes clearer when a taste of gay night-life turns him off, and he trails back to his dull wife.
This could be termed an uncomely version of what happens to Patrick, whose wife discovers that, at long last, she is pregnant.
She is sure that this will settle them for the foreseeable future.
Their relationship is still unresolved, as wise heads had foreseen in 1960: but their marriage has gained a lease of life.
The woe that is in marriage is not all that bad really.
Jenny has urgently advised Tim to return to his dull wife, telling him that her dullness is the ‘whole point’.
Those who think that Jenny herself is a little dull at times might conclude that Patrick has impaled himself on that point, like one of those Romans whose language he used to teach.
He is to do a lot less swinging.
‘She was going to have him all to herself for at least three years, probably more like five, and a part of him for ever…’.
The novel is no persuasive advertisement for marriage, or for Jews and gays.
But it isn't plain sailing either to claim it as racist and sexist.
There is a difficulty with Jenny, of a kind that came with the innocent of the previous novel.
She now knows more, but the iron has not entered her soul.
Amid the general ventriloquism she does often manage to speak for herself.
The novelist is less inward, less collusive, with her than he is with her husband — a relation fully consonant with Eric's law of nature — but he wants her view to be respected, and works it too hard as a purchase on wrong thinking.
Amis is still soft on her, a sentiment which is likely to strike most of his readers as natural too.
She is entrusted, on one occasion, with what might seem a  rudimentary version of one of his own opinions.
On this occasion she is at a posh party, where she has taken a glass of champagne, but only ‘to be sociable’— a motive which in anyone else would have driven Patrick to contemplate another of the umpteen blows he feels like unleashing — when the novelist unleashes one of his phonological jokes, which play on vagaries of pronunciation.
A man, back from Spain, addresses her in tones that approximate to what the Independent thought was the ‘well-educated voice’, and to what the Guardian thought was the ‘assured accent’, transmitted by the Intelligence chief responsible for the shooting of the IRA bombers in Gibraltar which preceded the arrival of the novel.
Jenny understands him to say that he has had trouble on his travels ‘with the Reds’.
‘Oh, I thought they'd taken care of them,’ said Jenny.
‘Since that war they had there.’
‘They haven't, believe me.
Well, not up anything you could call a’
‘No, I suppose that's where they would tend to hole up.’
Where can Jenny have been, in the course of her adolescence, to be willing, if only out of nervousness, to accept that the Reds in Spain have been swept out from under the bed and up into mountain caves?
It's a very funny joke, but it works at the expense of treating her like a child, which is not at all what the novel usually intends.
Amis writes here, as he has written in other books, about the distance between men and women; here, too, is the trouble that awaits the rational hedonist who deceives the woman he lives with and loves.
It isn't every comic genius who would undertake to send his talent into such painful places.
Both this novel and the one which it resumes are ‘hung’ books, in the sense that Parliaments are said to be hung.
Adultery has been a hanging matter — both in this and in the usual sense of the phrase — for the literature of the past, and perhaps it could be suggested that both senses may at times be presented to the mind by what Amis does with the subject, and that there is no striking difference in this respect between what he did in the Sixties and what he has done in the Eighties.
I don't think this means that there is no saying what he is getting at in these  works; opinions can and will be formed, and for the extent of the present discussion I have been attempting to express one.
Any such attempt has to look closely at their chastened but ultimately unchastenable hero, at his hostility, at his stylistic authority and command of the books he belongs to.
Maybe there will one day be a novel from Amis which portrays the Patrick Standish of the Eighties — more baleful, no doubt, on certain subjects, nicer to his cat, surrounded by the monuments of the New Right and by the debris of the swinging past to which he had once been a contributor.
The two Patrick books are stations in a progress — what Amis has encouraged us to call Lucky Jim's turn to the right.
This is a progress which has found its haven in the achievements of Mrs Thatcher, and the Patrick of the Eighties will have to deal with that.
It will be difficult for him to be baleful about the Millennium.
I would like to say a last word about Amis's voices, and about the long words which have been or might be laid on his confident art — a terminology for which he is unlikely to be grateful.
There is a poem by his friend Philip Larkin, entitled ‘Letter to a Friend about Girls’, which was never published during Larkin's lifetime but was retrieved for the Collected Poems of 1988.
It is dated December 1959, and may therefore have been written at the time that Take a girl like you was being completed.
And it might almost be the work of Graham McClintoch.
To imagine this is to be aware that the aggressive term which I have applied to Amis's novelistic method, ‘ventriloquism’, has the drawback of suggesting that when an author throws his voice, the character who receives it will necessarily be found to be inanimate, a dummy.
This is not, of course, the case.
Dummies can come to life in books, as it seems they can do for their masters on the stage: and this miracle depends, not only on the author, but also on the people he knows, who may indeed be thought to participate in what he is, and who are likely to participate in his ventriloquism.
It may be that Larkin's poem and the person we meet there participate in the ventriloquism of Amis's novel.
At a mid-point in the novel there occurs McClintoch's complaint that people are divided into the ‘attractive’ and the ‘unattractive’, rather as, according to Disraeli, as Graham  duly notes, Victorian England was divided into the two nations' of rich and poor.
There is a ‘barrier’ between the attractive and the unattractive — between, as Graham puts it on a later occasion, the ‘beggars’and ‘choosers’of the sexual life.
Convinced of his own plainness, Graham is here engaged in taking Jenny out and making a mess of kissing her.
Jenny is nice about the mess, but disturbed by what he tells her — in words that call to mind the language, and the drift, of this poem and others by Larkin, and of passages in Larkin's fiction where Jack is denied his Jill.
You can't imagine what it's like not to know what it is to meet an attractive person who's also attracted to you, can you?
Because unattractive men don't want unattractive girls, you see.
They want attractive girls.
They merely get unattractive girls.
I think a lot of people feel vaguely when they see two duffers marrying that the duffers must prefer it that way.
Which is rather like saying that slum-dwellers would rather live in the slums than anywhere else — there they are in the slums, aren't they?
Larkin's poem complains in concert; it takes up the question of what it is to be sexually debarred.
The letter it sends is to an attractive friend who goes about ‘bagging birds’, and who belongs to a world in which the beautiful say yes to the beautiful and wildly misbehave, a world which is said to be ‘described on Sundays only’, in papers like the News of the World — but which is also described in Take a girl like you .
The poem begins:
After comparing lives with you for years
I see how I've been losing: all the while
I've met a different gauge of girl from yours.
Grant that, and all the rest makes sense as well…
As for the different ‘sort’ of girl known to the loser:
They have their world, not much compared with yours,
But where they work, and age, and put off men
By being unattractive, or too shy,
Or having morals — anyhow none give in…
By now, the reader may be on his way to deciding that this is the better world of the two, and to wondering if the poet is trying to get his own back.
The poem might be thought self-pitying if it were more believable.
Can this ever have been the trouble with Larkin?
But then I'll be told that it's not about him at all, in that silly sense.
Whether it is or not, the poem can be called distinctive — distinctive both of Larkin and of Amis.
The mutualities of their friendship have been incorporated in the two worlds in question as they figure in Amis's novel, where unattractiveness is a category as definite as mumps and the unattractive are absolutely and permanently unattractive to one another.
These two worlds, moreover, are like the two worlds of men and women in Amis.
Between men and women, too, there is said to be a barrier.
And there are, in fact, several barriers in his writings: that between Jenny and the Reds could be considered another.
In all this sharp distinguishing, in all this enemy thing that Amis has, there are elements of anxiety, and of misrepresentation.
Many of the actions performed by many women, according to the misogynists he likes to write about, are performed by many men, and many ugly people would appear to be just as happy, and just as emotionally fulfilled, as many lovely ones.
Amis also likes to write, as Larkin liked to write, about the fear of death, and it may be that this fear can be detected in the failure to notice here that both sorts of people are subject to it, as to other unavoidable misfortunes, and that both sorts die.
Amis and Larkin are the same but different.
The poem and novel I have attributed to them respectively can also, for certain purposes, be attributed to them both.
They are pieces of writing which are distinct in law; the author of the one could not be sued for the other, or for collaborating in it.
Nevertheless a togetherness is apparent, of a kind that characterises colluders — or friends — rather than collaborators.
It can be said of these strong-minded and independently gifted accomplices that their work shows a dimension of reciprocity and replication, of the production unit, which stands at an appreciable remove from parody and plagiarism, and from the mimicry of other people's voices which is comprehended in the term ‘ventriloquism’, which Amis goes in for in private, among friends, and which is also a pleasure of the novels he writes.
Their work bears witness both to the power of partnership and to the powers of expression which we feel able to attribute to groups, to some circle of friends or literary ‘school’— in this case, the group which was  at one time drunkenly designated the scholarship boys, angry young men or hypergamists of the Fifties.
I have applied the term ‘ventriloquism’, in this book, to the fictions of Peter Ackroyd and Kingsley Amis.
Elsewhere, Frank Kermode has applied it to the fictions of Evelyn Waugh and Muriel Spark (‘no matter what the characters say they all speak in some version of her voice’), while linking it with Bakhtin's distinction, well-known now both in Russia and in the West, between the ‘monologic’ and the ‘dialogic’imagination.
The former is ventriloquial; the latter gives ‘a carnival sense of the world’, and is the more hopeful.
True art, or the best art, has a dialogic structure, many voices, and so has the good society.
This is an author who has contributed to the Russia which has come after him — to the emergence there, at the present time, of the demand for a lawful Opposition, for the duality of democracy.
The difference yields a political meaning, in other words, and it would also appear to relate to the old theory of the difference between an author who tells and an author who shows, and who employs a medley of voices in order to do so.
It is a distinction which may in the end prove more suggestive than serviceable: the author who tells, and who can be accounted something of a ventriloquist, may well, for instance, be more than capable of carnival, and may even be every bit as plural in his works as his dialogic counterpart.
But it is possible to believe that the idea of ventriloquism which lies at the heart of it may be successfully applied both to some sorts of contemporary author and to some of what went before.
The status of comedy is crucial to the debate, and we can at least be sure that Kingsley Amis would not object to having his practice compared with Waugh's, or to being placed with him among the monologists of the Right.
Against this monologic Amis can be set, by way of alter ego, the modernistic Amis of Barbara Everett's discussion of Difficulties with girls , which occurred in the course of an essay on Hugh Kenner's fantasy of a British betrayal of Modernism, and which springs the surprise of conveying that Amis, so often supposed an enemy of Modernism, is really a Modernist.
She begins by recalling a remark made to her a long time ago by Larkin, about difficulties encountered in his private life — a  remark which consisted of a joke to do with ‘the impossibility of relations between men and women’, followed by the notion that ‘women ought really to marry each other’, followed by ‘but that would be wrong, wouldn't it?’
And she notes that the same remark, or the same sentences, can be found in Amis's novel.
What interests her, apparently, is not the remark itself, but ‘the degree to which the piece of recall’— her piece of recall, presumably —‘failed to affect the novel in any way’.
The novel was left ‘curiously unaffected’ by this discovery.
It is as if the discovery could have no meaning for anyone experiencing the novel — which would certainly be curious.
Barbara Everett's subtle and disconcerting essay proceeds to say that ‘Difficulties with girls is much more like The Waste Land than Kenner leaves room for guessing it is’, in the book by him which she is examining.
‘This theoretically realistic and humorous novel is not unlike The Waste Land , the showpiece of Modernism and Impersonality’— which gives the impression that the realistic and humorous can only be deemed compatible with impersonality if they can also be deemed theoretical, and that the novel may not be very funny.
Soon afterwards, though, she writes: ‘I don't want to suggest that Difficulties with girls and The Waste Land really have much to do with each other.’
So the two works are said to be both like one another and unlike.
What they have in common is that each escapes ‘the limitations of the personal’.
Everett explains:
All knowledge of life and lives, and indeed of history, is a good in itself, and seems likely to inform literary intelligence; and in addition Amis's novels would rather confuse if thought to be the work of an early Tudor writer.
Beyond this, the use of biography, its actual ability to throw light (rather than just to be entertaining and nice to have around), seems to be a fantasy.
Kenner's fantasy is being discussed in terms of the view — with which Kenner can be expected to be very familiar — that the goals of a biographically-minded criticism are in some measure fantastic.
‘Beyond this’, however, leaves indefinite the point at which, or frequency with which, the use of biography deserves to be called by that name.
She is saying that this good thing, this knowledge, can be used — to tell us, for example, that Amis  is not a Tudor writer: but she is rather more moved to say at the same time that it can't or can hardly be used, devoted as she is to the thought of a separation between, in this case, Amis's friendships and politics, his life — and his art.
His novel is art all right.
It has the sui generis of art.
It has art's power to translate, to abstract from the circumstances in which it originates.
There is no biographical key with which it can be unlocked — and I have not been trying to turn one in this essay of mine, which does not believe it, for that matter, to be locked.
Nevertheless it is an utterance of the Amis who has made himself known on other occasions, and it can be none the worse for being read by those who are able and disposed to pay intelligent attention to this range of information — which is not to imply that the information may not be disastrously misunderstood.
The choice here may in a sense be one between knowing more and knowing less.
Should Amis's friendship with Larkin — which goes unstated in Amis's fiction, but which is not absent from it — matter to the reader of that fiction?
Why should it not, if there are grounds for thinking that it matters to the fiction?
The report that Eliot was eventually to say of The Waste Land that ‘to me it was only the relief of a personal and wholly insignificant grouse against life’ is no more a licence to treat the poem as totally and unreservedly autobiographical than it is a conclusive estimate of its significance.
But the report is worth knowing by those who want to know the poem.
Both Amis and Eliot can be considered seasoned disapprovers, and it is probable that Amis shares the other writer's distaste for the biographical critic, whose activities may be responsibly conducted, and are generally acknowledged to have been successful at times, but have often been reckoned to fail.
But if this is so, it can be seen to make possible biographical connections of a usable kind.
It connects the two writers, and it connects each one of them with their works.
The two works of theirs which Barbara Everett compares are neither of them an escape from the spacious confines of the personal.
In this respect they are alike, and like all other works of art.
But in many respects they are very different, and they come from different times: they are separated from one another by three-quarters of a century.
It would take someone who was very much intent on a punishment of biography to think of pointing  the way to Difficulties with girls by mentioning its proximity to The Waste Land .
Polymorphous Roth
AUTHORSHIP can be called, if anything or anyone can, dual, equivocal.
The works of authors are replicas, and they are unique.
They are and are not autobiographical.
An author is and is not his book.
In the later years of the Eighties a series of events and episodes has served to direct the attention of British readers to the issue of authorship and its autobiographical character or constituent.
I am thinking of the death of Primo Levi, an autobiographer, and by certain standards an amateur; of the threatened death of the novelist Salman Rushdie; and of the discovery of the fascist sympathies formerly exhibited by the literary theorist Paul de Man.
And I am also thinking of the identification of Rahila Khan — a novelist supposedly Asian and female — as an Anglican vicar; and of the attempt to thwart a biography by the Englishman Ian Hamilton of the American J. D. Salinger, whose novels tell the story of his life, but who does not want anyone else to do so, preferring to keep his facts to himself.
Soon after Hamilton's battle-scarred book came out, moreover, in the spring of 1988, there appeared in Britain a kind of memoir entitled The Facts-A Novelist's Autobiography in which the issue was addressed in some passages of exceptional interest — the gaze and forehead of Olympian Zeus after the outcries and the special and professional pleading which had surrounded all but one of these other events.
The novelist was Philip Roth, no stranger to outcries himself, whose fictions reveal a multiple self which corresponds to the multiple self of Philip Roth.
They can be said to determine and to indetermine, both to record, and to distort and desert, the facts of his life.
He has now told the same story ‘straight’— or comparatively straight.
‘On the pendulum of self-exposure that oscillates between aggressively exhibitionistic Mailerism and sequestered Salingerism, I'd say that I occupy a midway position’, explains Roth in The Facts — in a prefatory letter to his alter ego of earlier books, the novelist Nathan Zuckerman, who is granted a letter of reply at the end of this one and a perusal of the intervening  narrative.
Roth also explains that he was ‘educated to believe that the independent reality of the fiction is all there is of importance and that writers should remain in the shadows’.
As the world knows, Roth grew up in Newark, New Jersey, a second-generation American Jew, and he was to turn into a citizen of the world, a famous cosmopolitan author.
In middle age he has experienced a breakdown, an identity crisis, which followed a long illness and an operation.
He felt a need to discover who he was, and to write directly about that, and about his books, to step out of the shadows.
His first book, the collection of stories entitled Goodbye, Columbus , fixed him in the popular mind, from 1959, as an ‘enemy of the Jews’— a condition aggravated by the onanistic bravura and scandalous mad success of the grotesquely imaginative Portnoy's Complaint (1969), and not much improved in recent years by The Counterlife (1987), in which various escapes from Jewish America, including an escape to Israel, are projected, and in which Zuckerman and his dentist brother Henry are both imagined to have ailing hearts and to undertake gruesome surgery in order to restore the sexual potency suspended by their medication.
Defenders of the Jewish American pieties and proprieties, and those in Israel for whom the Diaspora Jew is a rootless cosmopolitan, had marked Roth as a bad man, and in their eyes he has yet to turn into a good one.
In the fine and fairly straight title-story of the first collection, a well-to-do Jewish family expels a poor boy to whom they feel they have been ‘nice’ and who has repaid them by sleeping with their daughter.
The poor boy, who resembles Philip Roth, tells the story in which he takes part, and does so in a manner that can be considered uncontroversial.
In the fictions that lay ahead, however, the relationship between the author and his characters is subjected to an intense elaboration.
It became, in a sense, the story Roth now had to tell.
A dance ensues in which he and his characters exchange identities.
The poor boy continued to fight with propriety in these fictions.
But now there's the possibility of a truce.
The Facts shows signs of a wish to be ‘reconciled with the tribe’, and indeed to be a ‘nice fellow’.
At the same time, though less abrasive, the book is only intermittently less sophisticated than those that preceded it.
The ‘distrustful fellow’ of the past is present, and not just as a  commemorative item.
A multiple Roth is once again in evidence.
He knows how important to the power of his writings had been his fight with the Jews and the outrageous candour of his sexual descriptions, and in the recent writings this knowledge is conveyed by the proximity of an imagined truce to an imagined impotence.
Nathan Zuckerman is a persona's persona: Roth begat Peter Tarnopol — who begat Nathan Zuckerman — in the novel of 1974,My Life as a Man .
Zuckerman has enabled Roth to deal with the question of the offence he has given to righteous Jews, and to come to terms with the rebellious, psychedelic, philo-Semitic Sixties, when Roth's writing went, with the times, derisive and fantastic.
The Zuckerman books are a medley of differences and affinities between what we are able to infer about Roth's life and what he has made of it in art.
In propria persona , Roth discourses in The Facts about his relationship with his younger brother, Sandy.
The tone is judicious and kind.
This is a nice fellow speaking.
Because Sandy was embarked on a marriage and a career pointing him in a more conventional direction than mine, planning the sort of life that looked to me to have more obviously evolved from the background I'd put behind me, it didn't seem to me that he would have had the wherewithal —‘morally’, as I would have been quick to say then — to help me through my predicament or, if he did, that it was possible for me with my values , to solicit his assistance.
This was hubris, pure and simple…
Zuckerman's relationship with his brother Henry is, in contrast, often sanguinary, as gruesome as their respective operations.
Zuckerman Unbound (1981) reaches its climax at one of Roth's frequent funerals — in this case, that of Zuckerman's father — after which Henry charges Nathan with killing their parent by writing ‘that book’, the liberated Carnovsky , and with believing like the bastard he is that fiction doesn't have consequences.
Nathan is a swinger, who is blamed for whoring after and mistreating gentile women.
‘Even your shiksas go down the drain when they don't tickle your fancy anymore.’
Meanwhile The Counterlife attributes to Henry the verdict that ‘exploiting and distorting family secrets was my brother's livelihood’.
Philip Roth's contribution to The Facts is (as distinct from Nathan Zuckerman's) significantly milder, in relation to family matters, than what we get in these abrasive comic fictions: but then the fictions can be nice too.
The conversation in Zuckerman Unbound between the novelist and his mother, in which he tenderly instructs her in how to field the intrusions that arise from the Carnovsky outrage, reads authentically, autobiographically, enough, while showing a good Jewish son.
The Zuckerman books help one to imagine how Roth has faced the reproach that he has derided his family and sold their secrets.
But perhaps it is not too simple to suggest that we are also conscious of Zuckerman as a deflection of the wrath over Roth which works by making Zuckerman responsible for the outrage.
We are conscious of what Zuckerman does for Roth: when he helps a man to gather his spilt heart pills, it is Roth helping himself by assigning a small mercy.
In The Facts , the tough guy with his shiksas, the supposedly ‘self-hating’ Diaspora Jew, can be ‘tenderised’— a word Roth likes, for all the awkwardness it imparts to the operations to which it refers — into a sort of uxorious submission where his parents are concerned.
This is a state which Zuckerman experiences and which he sends up.
In the fictional conversation about adverse publicity a good mother meets a son anxious to reassure her, while alive to the comedy of it.
‘As long as you know what you're doing’, she ventures, adding: ‘And as long as you know that it is right.’
‘I do’ and ‘It is’, replies Zuckerman.
The Facts is the more filial book of the two.
The facts show a good son, one who is less quick to see the jokes.
Shiksas were to promise an escape from Jewish America, as the promised land of Israel was eventually to be evoked as doing for Henry Zuckerman.
The Facts is preoccupied with one shiksa in particular: the deadly Josie, whom Roth marries, who forces his hand in the matter by faking an abortion, who comes near to destroying him, and who may have been, according to the Zuckerman letter at the end of the book, an alcoholic.
When Josie dies in a car crash Roth feels relief.
Her death delivers him from the ordeal of divorce, as frequent as funerals are in his books.
He had left her and gone to live with an upper-class woman, had soared to the opposite end of the scale from Josie, whose attraction for him had been that of a splenetic  victim from the lower depths of the goyim: but Josie had refused a divorce and the ordeal had dragged on.
At one stage no less a person than Bobby Kennedy, soon to accompany Josie to the grave, had offered to help Roth gain his freedom.
In the liberated world of radical chic, we may be intended to think, favours could be done for the right person.
The Facts says that the ‘crack-up’ of 1987 had induced ‘fiction fatigue’, a need to ‘demythologise myself and play it straight’.
Leaving off with the ‘imaginative fury’ might make it possible to ‘unlock meanings that fictionalising has obscured, distended, or even inverted’.
At the same time, he accepts the ‘obvious’ fact that ‘facts are never just coming at you but are incorporated by an imagination that is formed by your previous experience’.
At the end of the book, though, Zuckerman confronts Roth with the opinion that the latter has made a mistake in trying to tame or to shed his imagination in the foregoing text, that fiction is superior to fact, and that the factuality of The Facts is specious.
Roth would appear to believe both the claim and the counter-claim as to the value of the text, and to believe, too, both that the Roth part of the book does not represent an exercise of the imagination and that it does.
It seems reasonable to think that The Facts is imagined, and that it could promote a benevolent view of the literal or faithful — as opposed to the fantastically transgressive — imagination, which may or may not, in any given case, be directly concerned with the facts of the author's own life.
It is a work which might well shed a tender light on the novella ‘Goodbye, Columbus’.
Later in the present book there is a discussion of Roth's regard for the literalism of Primo Levi, who is at his most imaginative when least imaginary, who was not all that successful at imagining things in the style commended in the Zuckerman letter: and in The Facts a related meaning is apparent.
Portnoy's Complaint is a work of the furious imagination spoken of, and rendered debatable, in The Facts .
It is seen in The Facts to belong to the times in which the writer lived when he wrote the novel, when opposition to the Vietnam War, and to a President Johnson perceived as monstrous, took to the street-wisdom of a farcical obscenity.
The Facts is able to treat the historical conditioning of Portnoy's Complaint in a way in which the novel itself was not in a position to do.
It has the  benefit of hindsight.
But it would also appear to know its own place in history in a way which an exercise of the furious imagination in art can sometimes seem to prevent.
Different genres, different imaginations.
Roth has left off with his mythologising fury — and his memoir lets us know that the benefits that come to the writer who tries, or even seems, to stick to the facts may amount to something more than those of hindsight.
It informs us of the ‘forces’ which shaped Roth's tours de force of the Sixties and early Seventies, and it informs us of how he came to be where he is now.
He has travelled from the liberated past, when imagination took power, to the liberation of an interest in fact — a state which may or may not prove to have been, for Roth, partial or provisional, and which The Facts , in its totality, manages to enclose in an ironised uncertainty.
He can look here at times a little like a man who has taken the first steps in a descent from the high ground of Self-consciousness, impersonality,fantastication and ironic indirection — not that this has lately been, or has ever been, literature's only ground.
But perhaps it will come to be thought by his readers that these successive attitudes to the autobiographical, and to plain speaking, in art are equally valid, equally reversible.
This is a view which would accord with the dualistic tradition to which his novels predominantly belong.
The Facts presents, among its various dualities, the reminder that the one and only Philip Roth is like Saul Bellow.
Bellow supported Roth's early work, and Roth's work was to bear a resemblance to Bellow's.
They are two of a kind, it seems to me, authors of a paranoid comedy of the dualistic imagination, while also different.
Roth got to know Bellow in Chicago, where Roth worked as a university teacher, finding it a lively place.
It was lively enough to marry Bellow to a ‘stylish Radcliffe graduate’ of whom Roth had been ‘enamoured’— if we are to assume that The Facts has not imagined the connection.
It is a connection not unlike some of those made in the fiction of both authors.
The memoir sets us asking if Philip Roth knows who he is.
He is angry, suspicious, overbearing; he can be very like the Zuckerman berated in the fiction as ‘this unsatisfiable, suspect, quarrelsome novelist’.
And yet he is nice.
He is tough and he is tender, wrathful and ruthful.
This mixed condition he shares  with many others, not all of them writers; it is a condition we are entitled to call traditional.
And it is a condition which can be recognised in the reception of his work.
There are readers whom, as Zuckerman is the first (or second) to acknowledge, he can drive to the complaint that he has sex, and family matters, and Jewish matters, on the brain: ‘I want him to take his manuscript and mail it to his mother’, as I have heard them cry.
There are times when his world can appear to consist of Jews and of those to whom a Jew might wish to escape — such as America's well-heeled Wasps, or the semi-imaginary anti-Semites of Gloucestershire who figure affluently in The Counterlife .
But he is also a writer of remarkable ability who has managed to capture and to keep the readership he has bewildered and delighted and offended, and whose work is strong in an intelligent and generous-hearted awareness of public matters, some of them quite remote from the Family Roth:The Counterlife , for instance, carries a telling serio-comic critique of the hard line in Israel, the Israeli toughness, that refuses to ‘give ground’.
In The Facts he examines his own vexed state with reference to the vexed question of whether it is better to make things up, and to distort them, and by contemplating his earlier re-invention of the time-honoured dualistic account of literature and human nature.
His shiksas and replicas, hostilities and escapes, have taken part in a great game of long duration, and he can be said to be reviewing the state of play.
Escape, he thinks, is Jewish.
He knows that it is also dualistic.
The dualistic ambience in literature has long been influential, but has remained controversial, and it is both influential and controversial in these annals of the House of Roth.
Zuckerman's proposal of marriage to Maria in The Counterlife is an indication of its importance, and of the importance of escape both for the tradition and for the unsatisfiable Roth.
‘Because I've decided to give up the artificial fiction of being myself for the genuine, satisfying falseness of being somebody else.
Marry me .’
Here, it is as if both the single and the plural accounts of human nature were specious.
In general, though, he has been faithful, in most of what he has written, to a version of the mobile and multiple, mysterious and fugitive self.
At the end of The Counterlife there is a letter from Nathan Zuckerman to Maria on this subject which has the force of a  statement of allegiance on the part of Philip Roth.
The reader knows that it is Zuckerman's statement too, that it is fiction, and is likely to remind himself that it could well belong to the infinite regress of the dualistic indeterminable, where claim and counter-claim alternate indefinitely.
There can be no claim that this is what Roth really thinks: the affidavit that might have been contained in The Facts has been withheld.
It may be that he really thinks there is nothing that he really thinks.
But if Roth dissents from the statement, then imagining how he came to write most of his books becomes a problem.
Zuckerman tells his Maria:
Being Zuckerman is one long performance and the very opposite of what is thought of as being oneself .
In fact, those who most seem to be themselves appear to me people impersonating what they think they might like to be, believe they ought to be, or wish to be taken to be by whoever is setting standards.
So in earnest are they that they don't even recognise that being in earnest is the act .
For certain self-aware people, however, this is not possible: to imagine themselves being themselves, living their own real, authentic, or genuine life, has for them all the aspects of a hallucination.
I realise that what I am describing, people divided in themselves, is said to characterise mental illness, and is the absolute opposite of our idea of emotional integration.
The whole Western idea of mental health runs in precisely the opposite direction: what is desirable is congruity between your self-consciousness and your natural being.
Zuckerman is seeking to deny the traditional connection between illness and psychic division which is reaffirmed in the novel as a whole, and which is also reaffirmed in The Facts , and at the same time to deny that there is a traditional belief in division or multiplicity, a long-standing sense of selfhood as a chimera.
He goes on to say to Maria that
it's all impersonation — in the absence of a self, one impersonates selves, and after a while impersonates best the self that best gets one through.
If you were to tell me that there are people, like the man upstairs to whom you now threaten to turn yourself in, who actually do have a strong sense of themselves , I would have to tell you that they are only impersonating people with a strong sense of themselves — to which you could correctly reply that since there is no way of proving whether I'm right or not, this is a circular argument from which there is no escape.
All I can tell you with certainty is that I, for one, have no self, and that I am unwilling or unable to perpetrate upon myself the joke of a self.
The man upstairs, the first husband whom Maria is to leave, is not ‘self-aware’— unlike Zuckerman, who declares, on behalf of the self-aware, that he has no self and that the self is a joke.
But Roth must know that it is likely to be no joke to those who are reading his book.
Zuckerman says here that performance is all there is, that person and persona are one.
But we may feel on reading this that it takes two to perform — that performance requires, in however regressive or circular a fashion, the self that so many people believe they have, and that this epistolary Zuckerman exhibits here, in a display of inadvertence which may or may not implicate Philip Roth.
This is a self which there may be ‘no way of proving’.
It is a self which is proving, for philosophers, hard to prove.
But it is a self which readers of the book can only rarely have found it hard to experience.
The novelist referred to himself once as ‘amorphous Roth’.
‘Polymorphous Roth’ might be nearer the mark.
I think that many of his readers would be prepared to bear witness to the sense that somewhere in there among the changing shapes is the usual nonpareil.
In the ambience and tradition to which I am referring personality is defined in terms of breadth and contrast; the effect is at once stereophonically-internal — a number of speakers has been installed, so to speak — and invasive.
There is more than one Roth.
And in what Roth writes Roth and Bellow meet.
But neither of them is incapable of pursuing the artificial fiction of being himself.
No one would lightly believe that either of them has ever found it hard to tell the difference between himself and somebody else.
Dualistic explanations are moving, and intriguing: but they are often thought, even by proponents, to be far-fetched, fictional, theoretical, counter-intuitive.
That Bellow, this participant in Roth's inner life, can also be said to be out there in the world as his friend, and perhaps his rival, is a fact which does not help one to decide whether or not to trust the reports of literary duality — what comes in has to have been out — but it is very much in the tradition.
The tradition gives many convincing pictures of the inwardness and invasiveness of friends and rivals.
Brothers may be rivals, and they may be  internalised.
Roth's fiction internalises the brother identified in The Facts .
In The Counterlife Henry, the ‘distrustful fellow’ who distrusts his distrustful brother's ‘wallowing heroes’, is at one with the creator of those heroes, and with the heroes, and with the creator's creator.
Nathan enters Henry and Henry enters Nathan.
Maria bursts into italics (and out of character) to say to Nathan: ‘You are your brother !’
And Nathan says to Henry: ‘We are all each other 's authors.’
A universal fellowship obtains.
The definition of personality which is harboured in such procedures has moved and influenced several generations of writers.
The art that comes of them is one in which imagination takes power, the power to distort and exaggerate, in which difference of person is suspended, in which the experience of time is as it is in dreams.
The story that is told is a story which never ends — and which risks losing shape and momentum — because it is a story told of himself by a living author, an author who has yet to end, whose isolate's imaginative fury lives on to tell another tale, some more of his own story.
This fury can look like an onanistic or a solipsistic fury.
Mail that to your mother!
It goes without saying that the definition has been responsible for a major literature.
But about many of its manifestations there can be something ominous — something that is acutely understood and eloquently exposed in The Counterlife .
This is a generic something: I am speaking here of a literary practice long and widely and variously undertaken, in relation to which Roth is both critic and executant.
But it should also be said that some elements of this description of mine could be taken to characterise the activity, sometimes ominous enough in its human implications, of all imaginative writers, however remote they may be from the dualistic confederacy.
The caveats expressed in The Counterlife apply to all occasions when, in whatever genre or style, autobiography imposes itself upon, overwrites, the world.
By Roth, as by his predecessors in the dualistic art, this definition has been correlated with breakdown, madness, though, as we have seen, Zuckerman seeks to exert a counterclaim in his letter to Maria.
And it has evolved in contrast with character — that other, earlier product of the literary imagination  — and with purpose and achievement.
There are times when it might seem that this is a definition which can produce the sense of a self which is both amorphous and autonomous, of a doubtful self which also serves to cast doubt on the human world that lies beyond the subjective individual — a world which some writers are, and some are not, very cunning in, and which is inhabited by people with a working knowledge of who they are and what they are doing.
This is a knowledge which has been impugned in literature, and which has deteriorated there.
The books I am speaking of are, among others, books which pursue the idea of an escape from personality and from society, and in which personality and society are seen — as in Zuckerman's letter to Maria — to be aspects of a single threat.
Roth's turn towards fact — admittedly, an imagined and far from indisputable fact — will appear to some to signal a turn towards the self and towards the outside world.
Such a reading could well be found to have attributed too much to a recoil, a respite, a provisional position.
He is unlikely to have lost his distrust of the self; and he is likely (and welcome) to resume his furious fictions.
But when he does resume them, when the time comes for him to make his next leap, the suggestions made in the course of this affair of his fiction fatigue and literal turn — suggestions which receive both rebuttal and support from within the shape-changing dialectic represented by The Counterlife —will not deserve to be forgotten.
Levi's Oyster
THE Italian writer Primo Levi died on 11 April 1987, to the dismay of his readers.
There was a time when it must have seemed to many of them that he would never receive a bad review, or even a cross word.
His first book,If this is a man , about his months in Auschwitz, and its sequel,The Truce , were hard to fault, and the successive publications of his middle age have been greeted by an admiration responsive both to his skills as a writer and to his character as a man.i In October 1985, however, the chauvinistic American Jewish magazine Commentary did succeed in performing the outlandish act of disparaging Levi and his books.
‘Alas’, wrote Fernanda Eberstadt, a German-American, the later ones are inferior to the first two, and alas, the personal character imparted by his writings — freely imparted, one might add, and yet not unreservedly — is flawed.
‘Reading Primo Levi’ is in some respects a strong essay.
The later books are in large measure accurately described, and the experience of the assimilated Jew in Italy, where the Jews came to harm under Mussolini but where they were never the strangers they have been in several other countries, is summarised in a well-informed and pertinent fashion.
At the same time, the article is tainted by what seems to be a desire to inflict damage on Levi's reputation, of a kind which may be thought to serve the ideological tendency of the magazine in which it appeared.
So what is wrong with Levi and his Levi-like writings?
It is made to seem that he was a stranger, a gentleman, a ‘watcher from the sidelines’.
He was ‘cursed with a tin ear for religion’.
He could not get on with the believing Jews from Eastern Europe whose religion and traditions he neither shared nor understood.
As a result, there are ‘no Jews as such’ in his Auschwitz book.
But many Jews are not believers, and are still, for most people, including themselves, palpably Jewish.
He also had, the article conveys, a tin ear for the ordinary man.
He is like the poet Ausonius, alas — that Silver Age abstainer from the world and connoisseur of oysters.
Literary criticism is doing here what it often does: it has gone for the faults and, in so doing, inverted the truth.
When is a Jew not a Jew?
When he does not accept the religion revealed in the Old Testament.
The Primo Levi who is read by Fernanda Eberstadt is a man who is unable to write about Jews — though he does in fact write about them with great sympathy, believers and unbelievers alike — and who has no feeling for people whose background and abilities are different from his own, though the joy of Levi's work, for other readers, is very often that he has such feelings, that he knows himself to be, while also knowing himself not to be, an ordinary man, a worker, a man who worked as an industrial chemist and who was no less of a worker when he wrote books.
The Levi who emerged from a regime of cruelty and humiliation with his judgement intact, his mind not closed, neither vengeful nor forgetful, and who wrote a noble and rational book about what had happened to him, is mentioned only cursorily and as if concessively by Fernanda Eberstadt.
It is not the case that all her objections are mistaken.
But their accumulation is very far from the complicated truth.
The article leads you to wonder about her religious faith, if she has one, and about where it stands in relation to the outlook of the editor of Commentary , author of a book about his ambitions for worldly success:Making it must be the least pious book that has ever been written.
The stress on Levi's insensitivity to religion is allowed to suggest that all Jews are religious, and there are readers for whom this might signal the corollary that all Jews are Zionists, and are likely to be supporters of Israeli government policy.
By these standards, Levi would appear to be an imperfect Jew, and this could well be an opinion that underlies the talk about his later books being not nearly as good as his earlier ones.
Here is an assimilated Jew, a Diaspora Jew, unsound on Zion.
Among the principal references to Israel in Levi's writings is one which is, from a Zionist point of view, tin-eared.
The reference occurs in The Drowned and the Saved , of which a translation was published in 1988, on the anniversary of his death.
In this collection of pieces which revert to themes pursued in If this is a man Levi writes: ‘Desperate, the Jewish survivors, in flight from Europe after the great shipwreck, have created in the  bosom of the Arab world an island of Western civilisation, a portentous palingenesis of Judaism, and the pretext for renewed hatred.’
There are those for whom it is not Jewish to speak in this way about Israel.
It is odd to speak of the creation of a state as the ‘pretext’ for anything: the translator may possibly be responsible for the oddity here, as for the orotundity that precedes it.
But the passage certainly suggests that there was a distance between Levi's view of Israel and the views that Commentary chooses to publish.
The second sentence of the issue of May 1988 refers to the first twenty years of the state: ‘Threatening to ‘push the Jews into the sea’, the Arab world reformulated the Nazi theory of Lebensraum in Mediterranean terms: there was no room in the region for a Jewish homeland.’
Arabs who had been expelled from their land and thrust into the condition of Jewish refugees are hereby reformulated as imperialist aggressors and as Nazis.
This is reminiscent of the sort of inversion a fault-finding literary criticism can produce — which is not to deny, which is indeed to admit, that the Arab leaders and polemicists of the region have had their faults, including some of those which have been identified over the years by Commentary .
The magazine's line on such matters would also appear to be remote from, and distinctly harder than, that taken in its dying days by the Reagan Administration.
George Schultz travelled to the Middle East in the summer of 1988 to spread the word that ‘the continued occupation of the West Bank and Gaza and the frustration of Palestinian rights is a dead-end street.
The belief that this can continue is an illusion.’
It is a measure of the grim recalcitrance of the region's problems that Schultz's message was reported to have been saluted by a strike called in protest among the Palestinians of the occupied territories.
Meanwhile Fernanda Eberstadt has been practising as an expert on captivity and escape, and on the beliefs established for later generations by the children of Israel.
She has written in the same magazine (June 1987) on the Book of Exodus, warning that a reading of the Bible as literature, rather than as sacred text, ‘cannot lift heavenward’.
In the article on his work which appeared in 1985 Levi is at one point examined with reference to Leviticus.
She takes exception to a story of his about a Jewish Communist, an inhabitant of the camps, who  fasts there on Yom Kippur.
She observes that the prisoner is following a prohibition laid down in the Old Testament, but that a rabbinical ruling had allowed Jews to eat in the camps on Yom Kippur in order to stay alive.
It is not clear why this is a reproach to Levi, whose story concerns a man whose piety is idiosyncratic, especially severe.
Two years after this, in February 1987, she praised a Gulag memoir by Gustav Herling.
A World Apart is a ‘truly golden’ work, despite the presence in it, apparently, of a foul anti-Semitism.
Herling is thought to resemble Dostoevsky, whose Prototypical prison book,The House of the Dead , has in it a mansion tenanted by obnoxious, caricatured Jews.
A World Apart is, ‘despite’ its author's socialism, a ‘deeply religious book’, in which she has at times the sense of ‘a man talking to God’.
She displays more sympathy for this anti-Semitic Moses, for this religious man who is against Jews and against the Soviet system, than she does for Jews who are not religious.
Whether or not she has talked to God, she has certainly been reviewing for him.
Levi, the expert on metals, would have had no difficulty in telling the difference between gold and tin.
I have heard that he was saddened by these writings of Fernanda Eberstadt's, in which his own writings are faulted.
Two months after the Herling piece was published Levi committed suicide, throwing himself down the staircase of the house in Turin where he was born and grew up, where he wrote about his life in the camp at a desk which stood where his cradle had stood, a house he shared with his wife and mother.
He was 68 years old.
I don't suggest that these unfavourable writings pushed him to do what he did, though I don't mind suggesting that the bigotry and vicarious piety they may be reckoned to contain could be classed among the negative experiences of the last months of his life.
I have in fact no explanation to offer as to how he came to die, and it may be that no trustworthy explanation will ever be achieved.
Levi was an author who, without detriment to the other people who figure in his books, wrote all the time about himself, both in autobiographical and in fictional form.
The modes which he adopted were such as to licence elisions and lacunae, to enable him to leave out bits of his life — a procedure  which would seem to be connected with his scepticism about what can be known about people by biographers.
In Moments of Reprieve he remarks: ‘What the ‘true’ image of each of us may be in the end is a meaningless question.’
In The Periodic Table he mentions a woman ‘dear to my heart’ who was murdered at Auschwitz: but the book on Auschwitz does not discuss his relationship with her.
In The Wrench he creates the rigger Faussone, the practical man whose cranes girdle the world and who keeps returning, a little heavy-footed, to the house in Turin where two old aunts fuss over his welfare: Faussone was spoken of as ‘my alter ego’, and the book has to struggle to accommodate him as a second person, available for interview by Levi.
These omissions and transpositions indicate that Levi could well have kept to himself any plan he may have formed to end his life.
During the meeting with him a few months before his death which was recorded in an article published in the London Review , Philip Roth found him as keen as mustard: here was someone who listened, with the intent stillness of a chipmunk.
Levi had a high opinion of the grain of mustard, and of salt.
Fascism did not like these substances.
He associated the grain of mustard with his own activities, with Roth's, with Jews generally, with the awkwardness and tartness and wholesomeness of idiosyncrasy and dissent.
It was, or could be called, an impurity.
It was the taste of the stranger — who might at the same time be rooted, as he himself was, in some national life.
Back in Italy, after his departure from Auschwitz and his wanderings through Europe, he found that ‘the things I had seen and suffered were burning inside of me’, and that he wanted to write about them.
These words of his, in The Periodic Table , refer to some words of the past.
‘I felt like Coleridge's Ancient Mariner, who waylays on the street the wedding guests going to the feast, inflicting on them the story of his misfortune.’
He beg an work as a chemist in a paint factory.
Then came the meeting with the woman whom he was to marry, a meeting about which he writes in the same book.
In a few hours I felt reborn and replete with new powers, washed clean and cured of a long sickness, finally ready to enter life with joy and vigour; equally cured was suddenly the world around me, and  exorcised the name and face of the woman who had gone down into the lower depths with me and had not returned.
My very writing became a different adventure, no longer the dolorous itinerary of a convalescent, no longer a begging for compassion and friendly faces, but a lucid building, which now was no longer solitary; the work of a chemist who weighs and divides, measures and judges on the basis of assured proofs, and strives to answer questions.
These remarks concerning If this is a man do not describe the kind of book which runs easily to sequels, and which is easy to live up to.
Nor do they describe the sort of thing we are supposed to like very much.
The first two autobiographies, that is to say, are the kind of book to which a tradition of literary interpretation has been inimical, imagining for itself a literature of impersonality, in which autobiography is subsumed, invisible.
Philip Roth's article refers to this issue in referring to the later book If not now, when ?— Levi's ‘Eastern’, an adventure story of Jewish partisans during the closing months of the war, led by the Communist fighter-fiddler Gedaleh.
‘With his left hand he snatched the gun from the Pole's hands, and with his right he gave him a violent blow to the ear.’
Roth says to Levi in the course of the interview embodied in his article: ‘Your other books are perhaps less ‘imaginary’ as to subject-matter but strike me as more imaginative in technique.
The motive behind If not now, when ? seems more narrowly tendentious — and consequently less liberating to the writer — than the impulse that generates the autobiographical works.’
Levi explains that he had amused himself by writing a ‘Western’ and that he had wanted to write a hopeful book.
I wished to assault a commonplace still prevailing in Italy: a Jew is a mild person, a scholar (religious or profane), unwarlike, humiliated, who tolerated centuries of persecution without ever fighting back.
It seemed to me a duty to pay homage to those Jews who, in desperate conditions, had found the courage and the skill to resist.
I cherished the ambition to be the first (perhaps the only) Italian writer to describe the Yiddish world.
I intended to ‘exploit’ my popularity in my country in order to impose upon my readers a book centred on the Ashkenazi civilisation, history, language and frame of mind, all of which are virtually unknown in Italy, except by some  sophisticated readers of Joseph Roth, Bellow, Singer, Malamud, Potok, and of course yourself.
Levi's explained intention does not mean that there is no autobiography in the book.
The wish to evoke a Jewish resistance to Nazism relates to a history which comprehends his own writings and example.
And in the portrayal of the mechanic Mendel there is a portrayal of Levi.
Philip Roth is right, however, to point to the limitations of the book, and to point to a law of Levi's work in general: the less imaginary it is, the more imaginative — the more literal the better.
Let us praise, more than we do, and as we can here, the literal writer.
But there is no doing so unless we accept that the literal writer has an imagination.
Levi can sometimes appear incapable of fiction, but it is no less apparent that everything he wrote was fiction.
He was well-aware of the sense in which he made up what happened to him, imagined his misfortune.
In calling his recent book about his own early life by the name of The Facts , Philip Roth is issuing a challenge — expecting his readers to know that there are no bare facts, and obliging them to think hard about what happens in the recounting of the facts of a life.
Levi would have understood that challenge, just as I think he would have been happy to agree that it is possible to speak without contradiction of the literal imagination.
Levi's words to Roth about the adventure story If not now, when ? bring to mind the art of the Russian Jewish writer Isaac Babel, who rode with Budyonny's Red Cavalry after the Revolution, through scenes of hardship and atrocity.
Babel's art is imaginative, figurative.
It has been said, by Dan Jacobson, that he ‘aestheticises’ his response to violence.
This tendency has no counterpart in Levi, and it may be doubtful whether it could live with the subject-matter of the camps.
Babel's bad times could be turned into art — an art which has been seen to release him, as it were, from his subject, and which has also been seen to hesitate.
He felt imprisoned by his religious upbringing in Odessa, and was to remember ‘the rotted Talmuds of my childhood’.
And he was drawn to the grace and violence to be found among his Cossacks.
But he was also drawn to the Jews whom he met in their Polish villages, victims of persecution and war, ‘old Jews with prophets’ beards and passionate  rags', to their ruined ghettoes and synagogues.
To such scenes his narrator is introduced by the shopkeeper Gedali, believer in a peaceful Revolution.
Levi's Gedaleh and Babel's Gadali are opposing faces of the Central European Jew in times of crisis.
Action, power, are thought to be contrasted, in Babel's stories, with learning, devotion, resignation, suffering — those Jewish things.
His ambivalence is a bespectacled look at the long legs of the divisional commander, which were ‘like girls sheathed to the neck in shining riding-boots’.
The image — summoned by a narrator whose exhausted dreams are filled with girls — is like nothing we would ever meet in the literal Levi.
But the literal Levi is a writer who has his own way of interesting himself in the contrasts which have been attributed to Babel.
Levi was interested in action, purpose, work, and capable of them: and the capacity may have been formed in contention with a desire to withdraw and perhaps to give up.
I think myself that this was the case, and that it scarcely makes him very different from many other hard-working people.
The desire can be surmised, without recourse to hindsight, in some of what he wrote, but is far from being the point of what he wrote.
Work is the supreme subject in Levi.
‘We can and must fight to see that the fruit of labour remains in the hands of those who work, and that work does not turn into punishment.’
‘Perhaps the most accessible form of freedom, the most subjectively enjoyed, and the most useful to human society, consists of being good at your job…’.
These statements are from The Wrench , where Faussone is good at his job and Levi is good at getting this across.
There can be no doubt that he had an ear for what such people have to say for themselves.
Faussone talks about ‘the way we bent our elbows’— an expression (for eating or drinking) which I have heard spoken in English, but which I had never before seen written down in a book.
Book-writers, Faussone says, produce works ‘which may be beautiful and all that, but, on the other hand, even if they were a bit defective, excuse the expression, nobody would die, and the only loser is the customer who bought them’.
I have heard that before too, but not from any writer.
A builder friend of mine once talked to me about mistakes made by builders.
These mistakes mattered — whereas ‘in the arts it doesn't matter if you foul up.’
Levi's double life as chemist and writer suggests that if art and work need to be separated, according to a certain sense of what it is to be a Jew, art and work are nevertheless very often the same.
I like to think that he would have accepted that art is work, that the work that frees us, and is not just ‘punishment’, is art, and that anyone who uses his imagination is an artist.
The categorical difference of the modern world, between artists and others, does not come well out of his reports.
His chemistry is intriguing from this point of view.
Here was a second double life — that of a scientist who was also an artist, a chemist who was also an alchemist, a businessman who was also a magician.
He was as keen as mustard, and as Doctor Faustus.
The Periodic Table reveals that the ancient magic of transmutation and alembics persisted in Levi's laboratory.
The book has fumes, stinks, bangs and fiascos.
There is more than a hint of the search for the philosopher's stone.
It takes its structure from a set of correspondences between elements and persons, and the old definition of temperament as a mixture of qualities is present to the reader's mind — the same definition that permits us to think of Faussone as a part of Levi, or as his alter ego.
Levi's paints actually manage to come to life as human beings in The Wrench , a less fanciful book which nevertheless claims that ‘paints resemble us more than they do bricks.
They're born, they grow old, and they die like us; and when they're old, they can turn foolish, and even when they're young, they can deceive you, and they're actually capable of telling lies, pretending to be what they aren't: to be sick when they're healthy, and healthy when they're sick.’
The work that Levi valued is of an order to which Auschwitz — with the lying motto over its gates,Arbeit macht frei — was built to be antithetical.
In the camps, work was imposed on the prisoners with the aim of exploiting and of destroying them.
It bore a hideous resemblance to the blighting, punishing sorts of work which are common in the world at large.
And yet there was a work of survival to be attempted in the camps.
Intelligence, vigilance, practicality, cunning, luck, friendship — Levi was crucially helped by donations from an Italian workman he barely knew, and by the exercise of his skills as a chemist — kept you going and, in some few cases, made you free.
But most of those who stayed alive were ‘prominents’, or Kapos, prisoners  who were placed in authority, or members of the Special Squads who assisted with the killings.
One of the late pieces in The Drowned and the Saved casts doubt on this work of survival: ‘the worst survived’, he writes.
In 1946, a ‘religious friend’ told him that he, Levi, belonged to an elect: ‘I, the non-believer, and even less of a believer after the season of Auschwitz, was a person touched by Grace, a saved man.’
The friend felt Levi had survived ‘so that I could bear witness’.
Levi goes on to insist that the real witnesses are those who died in the camps, and that those prisoners who did not were mostly compromised people or privileged people: Solzhenitsyn is cited as making the same point about the pridurki — the ‘prominents’ of the Gulag system.
The book is no sequel to If this is a man , but its explications are never without interest.
‘In the Lager, colds and influenza were unknown, but one died, at times suddenly, from illnesses that the doctors never had an opportunity to study.
Gastric ulcers and mental illnesses were healed (or became asymptomatic) but everyone suffered from an unceasing discomfort that polluted sleep and was nameless.’
There is a chapter which discusses the letters from Germans —‘good Germans’ in the main — which were sent to him in response to his book about the camps.
An eager public woman appealed to him with the story of her cleaning woman, who had proved herself at fault.
The husband of the cleaning woman had been a soldier, and she had said that he had had no choice but to obey his orders to shoot Jews.
The correspondent explained: ‘I discharged her, stifling the temptation to congratulate her on her poor husband fallen in the war.’
There is a ‘Middle Eastern’ recalcitrance here.
Another chapter, on the Kapos and the Special Squads, exhibits what must surely be judged an analytic understanding of the concentration-camp system set up by the Nazis — an understanding Eberstadt is inclined to deny him, believing that the camps are insufficiently construed in the Auschwitz book as an institutionalised anti-Semitism peculiar to Germany and politically-determined: she thinks it is soft of him to see them as belonging to a universal latent hostility to strangers.
The chapter exposes a factor of complicity, and regards it, one might think, as a German invention.
The Special Squads were the  Nazis' ‘most demonic crime’, representing ‘an attempt to shift on to others — specifically the victims — the burden of guilt, so that they were deprived even of the solace of innocence’.
He never forgave the Nazis; they were always his enemies.
This was not, however, ‘personal’.
He is among the least ego-bound of book-writers, the least ego-bound of autobiographers, at all times able to look beyond himself and his community.
Two occasions in the book about his partisans quietly illustrate what he is for his readers in this respect.
In the partisan book Line has been Leonid's woman, and has gone with Mendel.
By then a ‘desperate man’, Leonid is sent as such on a desperate mission, and is killed.
Who can be said to have killed him?
Mendel tells Line: ‘The two of us.’
Not long afterwards, his attention fixed on the sufferings of those Poles who had caused their Jews to suffer, Mendel falls silent, thinking: ‘Not only us.’
For Fernanda Eberstadt, Mendel is ‘a worrier afflicted with an ability to see his enemy's side of the question’.
Those she doesn't like are ‘cursed’ or ‘afflicted’.
There's religion in that.
Levi's statement to Philip Roth about If not now, when?did not mention Babel, but it did mention another Isaac — the Yiddish writer, Bashevis Singer.
There is a story of Singer's — one of a collection,The Death of Methuselah , published in Britain in the autumn of 1988 — in which Levi, or a part or perception of Levi, is perhaps faintly distinguishable.
‘The Jew from Babylon’ is an enthralling tale about a Jewish sorcerer, a believer in the faith, hated by demons and disapproved of by rabbis, who in old age endures a turmoil which ends his life.
Singer is a writer of standing in the matter of when, in what he sees as the ‘disappointing’ modern world, a Jew is not a Jew.
Modern Jews, he affirms, are greedy creatures, tormented by their too many opinions.
It could well be asked if his is an Orthodox fiction.
Is it that of a vicarious believer, if such a person is possible?
Is he an aesthete of the subject?
Everything he writes is Jewish in the sense that everything he writes is conscious of the Jewish faith, if that can be said without relinquishing the thought that there are such persons as unbelieving Jews.
But there is some instability in the accounts he gives of dark professions of faith, in his acerbities and fatalities.
In one of the new stories a ‘recluse’, formerly a womaniser, says: ‘One step away from God and one is already in the dominion of Satan  and hell.
You don't believe me, eh?’
Do we believe him?
Is this some Jewish joke?
Singer can, after all, be very funny.
His religion is as much as anything the regression to a past of obedience, disobedience, sin and doom.
Such things are celebrated in his stories with a richness and unction which might appear to make a renegade of Babel and certainly of Levi.
Singer's religion is also a feeling for the power of the community to censure and reject.
This power is apparent in the story of his sorcerer.
It is a story in which the case of Primo Levi, that of a dissident, gifted, magical, mustardly Jew, might at moments be thought to be implicated.
But then so might that of the writer of the story, who may be less obedient than the gentile reader immediately recognises.
The story celebrates both the sorcerer and his rejection.
We mourn his fall.
‘In the morning they found him dead, face down on a bare spot, not far from the town.
His head was buried in the sand, hands and feet spread out, as if he had fallen from a great height.’
Glasgow Hamlet
STUDYING the West Coast of Scotland from the yacht Britannia , the Queen is said to have remarked, not long ago, that the people there didn't seem to have much of a life.
James Kelman's stories make clear what life is like in Glasgow, and what James Kelman's life is like.
They are not going to change the royal mind.
This is the queen who was greeted, on a visit to a Scottish university, by the sight of a student emptying down his throat, at top speed, the contents of a bottle of alcohol.
One of Kelman's stories, ‘Greyhound for Breakfast’, the last in the collection of that name which appeared in 1987, is, to my mind, a masterpiece.
It's about a fellow called Ronnie, who is on the dole.
His son has gone off to London, and he worries that he may lose touch with him.
He has dumped down the notes for a greyhound, has given his heart to the beast, and is derided for this by his friends in the pub.
He takes it for a walk — such walks have long been a ritual activity of the country's more optimistic male poor, the dog more expensively jacketed than the chap.
‘It stopped for a piss.
Ronnie could have done with one himself but he would have got arrested.’
Its withers will never win any of the races Ronnie had been telling himself about, and he is reluctant to return from this long, defeated, dark-thoughted walk to break the bad news or his adventure to his wife and daughters.
The story is wonderfully funny and depressing.
Ronnie, I think, could be held to be a precursor of P for Patrick Doyle in Kelman's novel of 1989,A Disaffection .
Both works end on a possible return, on what might look like a bleak diminuendo but is really an anxiety state.
There are important differences, though.
Kelman stands much closer to the new hero, and more is made of what happens in that hero's head.
The new book is funny and depressing at considerable length, and there are moments when a wee terror comes of its expanded universe.
A Disaffection is a problematical book — because of this closeness: we learn very little about how Doyle is seen by companions, very little about the standpoint of those who surround  him, those with whom he has his tender and abrasive dealings, with whom he airs his invectives and bitter ironies, with whom he conducts his antagonisms and ingratiations.
It's almost all Doyle.
If this is a problem, however, it is one the novel shares with many of the novels we now read.
We are aware, in the novels we read, both of an authorial identification with the leading character or the first-person narrator, and of material that might constitute an authorial judgement in that respect: but we don't know what the verdict is.
A Disaffection shares in that uncertainty, and in so doing acknowledges a connection with a certain whether-or-not that we meet with in the plays of Shakespeare.
Doyle —‘Patrick’ to his author — is of the fantastic-depressive, angry-and-otherwise Scots-Irish clan.
He is a schoolteacher, 29 years old — the age of Christ at Calvary, whose name is often in his mouth, averse though he is to ‘deities’, and perhaps of Hamlet, whose words enter the novel.
This Glasgow Hamlet is the latest in a long line of impersonations, and his soliloquies are the novel he inhabits, or most of it.
Doyle's greyhound is a pair of electricians' pipes, which he lights upon, paints and plays, producing a doleful sound that soothes him — it is like mumbling your mantra or telling your beads.
He needs soothing.
He has passed into crisis.
He is lonely.
His aged parents bore him (‘Are all parents boring?’).
His brother Gavin frets him, and he has a longing for Gavin's wife, together with a more urgent one for a teacher at the school, Alison Houston, who could be felt to lead him on a bit but doesn't want to have a ‘relationship’ with him.
With Doyle it's ‘fucking’ this and ‘fucking’that and the system this and the system that.
He is against ‘Greatbritain ’, with its aristocratic capitalists, its MI5 and its MI6.
Society is a stench.
Shite is everywhere.
Crassness is everywhere.
He is a schlemiel of the subject.
In such a setting, he believes, his work as a teacher can only be betrayed.
His work as a teacher doesn't involve much in the way of teaching.
Homework is a thing of the past.
His classes are soliloquies and Socratic teases in which his interest in Classical Antiquity, in Pythagoras and Heraclitus, and in Hölderlin, Hegel and Marx, and in James Hogg, is imparted to the young ones.
He is the sort of Sixties dominie who used to inveigh in class against the system.
His relationship with the kids is one between equals, but they also seem to expect him to be a wise  man, and this is what he sometimes expects of himself.
The kids are presented as decent and thoughtful, and there's an Arcadian absence of the stress and violence which some might look for in a class where the teacher swears and free-associates, and throws up and bunks off into the bargain.
If the Queen's telescope had been able to reach into Patrick's classroom, there would have been a surprise in store for her — but not for Patrick, who at least affects to believe the story that Orwellian minders are peering at the punters from the screens of the punters' television sets.
Kelman makes Doyle charming, and it is impossible to read the book without gaining the sense of a fully-developed authorial fellow-feeling.
Not that Doyle isn't taxing and maddening too.
His consciousness delivers paranoid images of aggression and hostility.
He is against racism and sexism, but is capable of reflecting: ‘He was in love with Alison Houston.
And he wanted to grab a hold of her.’
His crisis is precipitated by word of his transfer to another school; he staggers towards resigning from the school he's at, and maybe from the profession, and then bunks off for a long afternoon's superlager, home-brew and whisky with his brother, who is on the dole, and two of his brother's mates.
Eventually, stone-cold-sober-seeming but perhaps too drunk to drive, he treks off through the dubs of a drizzle (Thales said the world was made of water, the ‘primary element’, and he handni even been to Glasgow) back to his bachelor's tenement flat (Coelebs still in search of a wife).
On the way, he is chased, or fancies he is chased, by Police who hate him.
Kelman projects Doyle's state of mind virtually without framing or critique.
The Queen will certainly need a glossary, but even then she may well be uncertain as to just how much Kelman likes his unlikely lad.
This kind of thing has been said about Hamlet, to whom, as I say, Kelman alludes, and more than alludes.
At one point, ‘all he sought was death’; and the next paragraph has him aching to be ‘out of the road of trouble and strife and all things rotten and putrefied and shitey’.
Later he reproves himself for an impulse to be rude to a ‘good auld guy’ encountered during his terminal search for a bus, and we think of the prating ‘good old man’Polonius.
And on the facing page he breathes some more of Shakespeare's words: ‘To return to Gavin's or not.
Whether it is nobler.’
Whether he is sober enough to go back and fetch his dilapidated car, or should soldier on, is the question here, or at any rate part of it.
Hamlet kills his good old guy, as it happens.
He makes mistakes and causes havoc, in pursuit of the right course.
So does Doyle.
A high point in the novel is the altercation and huff with Gavin and his mates which precedes this: about the long holidays teachers get, or don't get, about the homework they withhold, and about the rights of weans — children — and the rights of parents.
Patrick said: Do you know what I tell parents Arthur?
I tell them to go and fuck themselves.
Patrick held both hands up in a gesture of peace, he smiled for a moment; I'm no trying to get at you personally but I just fucking feel that you cant expect the teacher to be the everything, the heavyweight boxing champion of the world.
Arthur stared at him.
Know what I mean, I'm just being honest with ye.
I don'tthink ye should expect the teacher to do everything.
If you want your weans to get homework then give it to them your tucking self.
Gavin said: That actually sounds quite right-wing ye know.
Well it's meant to be the fucking opposite and it is the fucking opposite.
Gavin nodded.
Then:
Gavin gazed at him, then laughed briefly.
He looked at Pat but Pat looked away.
Nor was Pat going to say anything further because he was fucking off home as soon as he swallowed what he had lying.
There was no point sitting here yapping to a bunch of fucking prejudiced right-wing bastards.
And Gavin turned on him once more: What d'you mean ye deny ye get long holidays?
I deny I get long holidays, that's what I mean.
Back it up.
What d'you mean back it up?
Show me what you're talking about?
Naw.
You show me what you're talking about.
I think I know what Paddy means, said Davie.
Good, tell me, replied Gavin.
I think I know what you mean Paddy.
Pat nodded.
Ye don'tthink ye get long holidays because when you're off from  the school you're still doing other things connected with it, making up timetables and all that.
Patrick nodded.
By the end of it you're no all that sure whether teachers get long holidays or no (they do, though most of them have to work hard for it), and whether parents should go and fuck themselves.
Soon after this we learn that Doyle thinks he has sold his rights by serving the system as a teacher for ‘a large wheen of pennies’: ‘He was an article that was corrupt…corruptio optimi pessima…’.
This, as he recognises, is a form of self-praise.
Throughout, Patrick is both the ‘King of the World’ that he wants to be — Glasgow belongs to him — and an abject sinner.
The rage of the novel's males can sometimes be made to appear the rage of those who believe themselves permanently beaten and cheated.
The women are the vessels of a better spirit; the injury to them is greater, and it is their own men who are responsible for some of that injury.
Patrick rages and scorns in proportion to his frustration: Hamlet's ‘weakness’ has its counterpart here.
‘Patrick couldni find a pen.
It is most odd indeed how objects disappear in rooms wherein the only moveable entity is oneself.’
(He slides into English here for a laugh.)
Objects disappear, and for a man of 29 he seems to have grabbed hold of very little of anything except a glass and a book.
Drink figures in the novel, in precisely rendered scenes, as a bastion of the culture which is also a slow death.
And yet this man is very far from useless.
What we are reading is the Book of Patrick Doyle.
Whether or not it can be seen as Kelman's self-portrait, it is the portrait of an artist.
The shortest stories in Greyhound for Breakfast owe a lot to Kafka's briefer parables, though they are apt to be more difficult to understand; and there can be no doubt that Beckett's solipsistic tramps have left an impression on the earlier writings.
These influences, however, would appear to have receded, or to have been digested.
The speech of Glasgow people is the big thing in the novel.
This is a good Scots which is at once distinctly literary and faithful to the speech of the city.
The deferred ‘but’ as in ‘There again but’is a particular pleasure.
There are many such verbatim effects, and indeed the oral dimension of the novel is very important.
This can be reckoned to contain the  succession of anecdotes that occurs and the fine detail of working-class life that is provided.
Doyle, for instance, thinks to himself a Scottish thought: ‘Would his grandparents ever have had sexual activity in the parlour?’
Elsewhere, ‘he put a teaspoonful-and-a-half of coffee granules into his mug and exactly the same into hers.’
The measure expresses a mean between saving and lashing-out, and it has remained a feature of my own Scots-Irish domestic economy which I would bet is widespread in northern parts.
There is good Scots, too, in The Book of Sandy Stewart , which contrasts poignantly with the Book of Patrick Doyle.
Stewart is a traveller, one of the people of the road — among them, tinkers, pipers and folk-singers — in whom an oral culture has survived to the present day.
Here, too, there is an antiquity to be aware of.
The book is a succession of anecdotes carefully transcribed in fidelity to his broad Scots, and largely concerned with the long-since of his early days.
A story that would appeal to Kelman concerns some killer donkeys.
One of these creatures once slew a butler whose toff gear had proved a red rag — quite a smack, this, at the system.
This gentleman bocht the donkey fae MacGreigor — it was afore my day though — an it wes two or three days in the field at the front door.
This day the butler went oot tae gie it a piece an it tore him doon wae its feets an mooth.
They say that it wes the different claes that done it — the way the butler dressed — an it hed looked at the claes an taen a bad wey o the claes.
It hed run intae him an tore him at yinst.
An they say the butler wes gaithert up intae a white sheet aff the field.
Kelman's work forms part of a flowering of talent which has come about in the urban Scotland of the last few years.
These books and plays and films reveal a humanity which surmounts, as has been said, the hardship and brutality they describe — surmounts it, as a rule, by laughing at it.
The Glasgow they evoke is a very hard and a very lively place.
And yet Stewart's small wandering world could well be thought the richer of the two environments.
He seldom responds to matters of personality, or individual psychology, is hardly ever in the least ‘inward’; much depends on the turn of the tale.
They are tales, moreover, which don't do all that much to summon the nostalgic reader.
They don't direct us to the late survival of a gypsy  paradise.
Nevertheless, they contain persuasive evidence to indicate that there was more for his people to do, and talk about, that there was more fun, than there is now in some parts of urban Scotland.
Less persuasively, a people which has had to defend itself against an enduring hostility is shown, for the most part, as free from fear, and, in particular , from the fear that exceeds and mistakes its objects.
Those under threat in the cities have not always been so lucky.
But then the travellers, too, may not have been quite as lucky as Stewart, in his old age, can sometimes suggest.
I remember these nomads myself, from a long while ago in Scotland.
I remember dark, solemn and suspicious looks, as a travelling family was given tea in the back-garden of a house in the country.
I peered at them round the end of the house.
They could not be let into it, but there was a duty to entertain them, and, as I was told, not to stare.
They were like spirits, and I loved them.
