States, Religions, and Ruling Ideas
Catholic Nationalists and Protestant Loyalists Today
STATES AND RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS
The chief purpose of the chapter is to outline how the two opposing groups in Ireland developed their dominant beliefs in the context of the new states of Ireland, and moulded the states to support them, strengthening antagonisms between the two groups.
What changed with the partition of Ireland in 1920 was that the two dominant alliances were internally reorganized.
In particular the protestant bloc lost the Southern protestant landowning gentry.
The two alliances were ascribed territories in which to produce their social structures, political institutions, coercive bodies, informal and interpersonal networks of maintaining influence, and more clearly defined hegemonic cultures.
The two societies gave expression to their own dominant interests as far as possible unhindered by each other 's interference.
The process was assisted in the North by the self-exclusion of Britain from internal Ulster affairs by setting up the Stormont parliament which survived from 1922 to 1972.
Protestant — loyalist domination, successor to the ascendancy, was circumscribed to one corner of Ireland while the catholic — nationalist alliance asserted total domination in the remainder.
The Catholic — Nationalist State
The direct consequences of this dramatic political change differed in each state, but paralleled each other, consolidating each alliance's power.
The Southern state became more catholic and nationalist in character.
Its protestant groups declined in numbers, wealth, power, and cultural importance (K. Bowen 1983; Walsh 1970).
The Northern state became wholly dominated by protestant loyalists and became extremely coercive in its dealings with the substantial catholic — nationalist remnant within its borders.
It was the failure to incorporate the catholic — nationalist remnant into  the consensus of the Northern statelet which resulted in sporadic violence, institutionalized and structural on the one side and insurgent-guerilla on the other.
The two alliances succeeded in creating sufficient structures of hegemony and coercion to maintain social control for a significant number of years.
But Northern reliance on force, necessary if the character of the state was to be absolutely preserved, was the weakest point and the eventual undoing of the apparent stability achieved by the partition settlement.
The Southern protestants have diminished greatly in numbers since 1911, because of the loss of life in the 1914–18 war, some emigration, and probably mixed catholic — protestant marriages (Walsh 1970; White 1975; Ch. 7, below).
In 1911, the protestant population in the South was 10 per cent.
By 1925 it was down to 7 per cent and in 1971 it stood at around 4.1 per cent.
Over the same period, the Church of Ireland experienced continuing rounds of church closures and became top-heavy in numbers of clergy.
Statistics up to 1971 showed it as having an old-age structure and to have been in continuing decline, though there are recent signs of improvement (Census of Ireland 1981).
Southern protestants do not appear to be particularly oppressed by the state (White 1975: 169), but they would clearly change aspects of the constitution and legislation if they were in a position to do so.
They have always retained a low political profile.
They have also never been perceived by the state as a threat, perhaps because of the revolutionary pedigree of some of their élite.
As such, their own life-styles, societies, and schools have been relatively protected, but perhaps at the expense of political action.
A practical ideology for a catholic Ireland was worked out and the aim of a society uncontaminated by the outside world was pursued.
Both church and state functioned symbiotically.
For his part, de Valera, prime minister for most of the period from 1932 to 1959, pursued isolationist policies, economically, politically, and culturally, seeking at once self-sufficiency, neutrality, the restoration in part of Gaelic culture through the minimal enforcement of the Irish language, and the control of media consumption.
In concrete terms, de Valera was acting on behalf of the established economic interests of rural Ireland, in particular the small landowners and small businessmen.
The commitment to the eradication of rural and urban poverty, while not entirely  forgotten, was subordinated to the goal of economic independence from Britain.
The path pursued particularly matched the clergy's vision of the profanity of towns and sacrality of rural life.
This was despite the fact that the reform of Irish catholicism in the nineteenth century sprang mainly from urban areas.
One must also remember that the bulk of the clergy both in Ireland and in the remainder of catholic Europe came from rural backgrounds, where the sense of God is, or was, part of the air one breathes (Acquaviva 1979).
From de Valera's point of view — and the majority of the nation and its politicians would have concurred — the fact that the Free State was over 90 per cent catholic meant that its moral and social outlook would reflect catholic beliefs.
This was seen to be the democratic process at work.
The results of isolationism in terms of human suffering were massive emigration (some 20,000 every year to Britain up to the 1960s), and industrial and commercial underdevelopment until the late 1950s.
But there were undoubted benefits to both church and state in this set of policies, for they were to the mutual advantage of nationalism and catholicism as these were perceived by their respective institutional representatives, namely the politicians and the hierarchy.
They were the result of catholic — nationalist success in establishing a separate state, so separate that the protestant tradition as a political force had been excised from the thinking of the entire catholic grouping in the South, from church to state to popular consciousness.
This occurred despite the continuity of the catholic hierarchy in Northern Ireland and despite the war experience of those catholics who had been involved in the army.
Armistice Day is still only celebrated in Southern Ireland by protestants: as late as the early 1970s, you could still tell a protestant by his poppy on 11 November.
The commemoration of the dead in the First World War was seen as a triumphalist commemoration of those who died for Britain.
The very existence of the catholic state in all but name, the realization, if only in part, of the territory of Ireland as both catholic and nationalist, had a significant and continuing impact on both the clergy's practical theology and the laity's day-to-day perceptions of social reality.
Similarly, the de facto existence of the protestant enclave in the North and its pursuit of protestant dominance in that state may have even reinforced a similar, though integralist, approach in the South.
With independence the Irish Free State developed a type of political party organization on modern lines, but without the genuinely class-based politics one finds in other European countries.
The party structure followed was based on the Irish civil war antagonism of 1922–3, with the pro-Treaty party more or less in power until the anti-Treaty party entered politics in 1930.
However, both sides developed a centralized party organization, with politicians following the party line.
The Protestant — Loyalist State
The condition of the Northern catholic — nationalist minority has been very different from that of the majority in the South.
The Northern minority has been feared throughout the period by protestant loyalists for two main reasons.
On the one hand, force has been required to subordinate it, and, on the other, it has always threatened to outbreed protestant loyalists, an outcome which has only been avoided by catholic — nationalist migration over the past seventy years.
The loss of numerical superiority by protestants would result in the collapse of their statelet.
Disappearance of their dominance would lead to a unified Ireland or else the restructuring of a new statelet with smaller geographical boundaries in which their dominance was again reassured.
In any case, repartition is not out of the question.
Recent work on the religious demography of Northern Ireland by Compton and Power (Compton 1985; Compton and Power 1986; Ford 1986; Commins in Clancy,et al .
1986) indicates a separating out of protestant and catholic, with the catholic population drifting westwards and vice versa.
The majority of the Roman catholic remnant in the North still believe in a united Ireland.
They demonstrate this partially by their support for the two nationalist parties, Sinn Fein and the Social Democratic and Labour Party, though support for the latter does not necessarily imply nationalism.
Despite the official socialist tendencies of these two parties, a substantial number of their voters do not appear to question the maintenance of a capitalist-type class structure in a new Ireland.
The Workers' Party still fails to command many votes in elections north or south of the border.
The provisional movement is divided on the issue of capitalism but, for  the time at least, has an openly declared policy of achieving an island-wide socialist republic by the combined means of violence and the democratic process.
The SDLP, still the main party of catholic nationalists in Ulster, has dropped much of its socialist platform and maintains a delicate balance between nationalism and pragmatism in its politics.
Despite frequently heard voices to the contrary, total catholic — nationalist domination would be the likely outcome of a united Ireland unless a confederal structure were implemented.
This is partly because of the structure of catholic nationalism in the Southern state and partly because the national unity sought by significant numbers of Northern catholic nationalists is still on the basis of the reversal of protestant — loyalist hegemony rather than a power compromise.
Solidarity with Southern nationalists is still a major Northern nationalist perception, despite the fact that they view their Southern compatriots at best with indifference and at worst as traitors who sold them out to the loyalists.
McGreil (1977: 363–408) has shown that though Dubliners find the English more acceptable than the Northern Irish, Dubliners still seek a solution to the Northern problem within an all-Ireland state.
Also, there can be no doubt that the South would intervene in the North on behalf of the catholic — nationalist minority if Britain withdrew and civil war broke out.
Equally, Southern catholic nationalists prefer a unified Irish state, though a majority of 54 per cent would accept a federal one based on the present two state units.
One can therefore conclude that there is a sense of unity throughout the catholic — nationalist population as a whole, though one in which certain groups, namely farming interests and the church, at both clerical and popular levels, have strategically dominated, at least until recently.
By 1914, the protestant — loyalist group was well established and ready for war against catholic nationalists should it have proven necessary.
Issues of class conflict within the group were to remain largely subordinate, as the matter of the nature and defence of loyalism itself was to dominate the scene right down to the present day.
There was to be an expression of a certain solidarity between members of both the catholic and protestant working classes in the Belfast demonstration of 1932 against the inadequate poor relief during the period of particularly high unemployment.
But such cooperation was rare and quickly taken over by sectarian issues.
Protestant — loyalist and catholic — nationalist politics in the Northern statelet differed from those in the South.
McAllister (1980) describes that political culture as traditionalist, and dominated by clientelism, parochialism, local attachment, and ascription: politicians were elected on the basis of local reputation and solely with reference to local issues.
During the period of the Stormont parliament, half the seats were uncontested.
This was frequently true of Westminster elections too.
It would seem that the special state character of Northern Ireland, with its very legitimacy always under threat, has been the main reason for the maintenance of this pattern of politics.
Up to the late 1960s, catholic nationalists were split between two main political groupings.
There was the Nationalist Party, a weak organization for which local priests had to provide some kind of legitimation.
As a party, it really only exercised a modicum of power in relation to the Stormont administration.
Then there were the republican parties who focused their attention on Westminster elections.
The disorganized nature of catholic — nationalist politics was only turned round with the emergence of the civil rights movement of 1968 and the subsequent forming of the SDLP in 1970.
However, during the 1970s, the socialist element was weakened with the departure of labour leaders.
The remaining leadership represented a modified nationalism in which new middle-class moderates held the upper hand.
The party as a whole tended to represent the employed and the over-thirties.
The unemployed and the under-thirties have lately tended to support Sinn Fein since its adoption of an electoral strategy in the 1980s (Bew and Patterson 1985; O'Dowd, Rolston, and Tomlinson 1980; Moxon-Browne and Irvine 1989).
The Unionist Party became the central political organization of the protestant — loyalist alliance.
True, there was some fragmentation of members on class issues.
The occasional independent unionist and independent Orange-lodge representative in politics were a feature of politics from 1880 to 1972.
The Northern Ireland Labour Party also was the principal organization representing protestant trade unionists.
But none of these groupings ever came near to threatening the dominance of Unionist Party organization, much less the solidarity of protestant loyalists, which always appeared total on the issue of incorporation into a united, independent Ireland.
It was only with ‘the Troubles’, from 1968, that unionists  broke ranks.
Yet, despite the splintering, they have succeeded in allying the present two main parties against the Anglo-Irish agreement of 1985.
The Alliance Party of Northern Ireland, formed at the time of the abolition of the Stormont parliament, represents those catholics, protestants, and others who disavow the twin alliance of Ireland but retain at least a practical attitude on sovereignty.
They prefer British to Irish rule and seem unlikely to move from that position.
While the party contains many who actively seek peace and reconciliation, it would be wrong to think of them in any sense as overcoming the basic conflictual components of bloc power in Ireland.
‘Castle catholics’, those who found a place in the Stormont administration and developed a stake in the union, have also voted alliance, but are probably now, in 1989, switching their allegiance to the newly found conservative associations, which are seeking to bring British party loyalties to Ulster.
The Northern Ireland statelet was founded on an alliance between the protestant loyalists of Ulster and British imperial and capital interests, particularly as represented by the conservative party.
But that is what the arrangement was: an alliance rather than a consolidated interest or a genuinely shared culture.
Protestant loyalists dominated the statelet from its formation.
The British government only obtained certain concessions from the Stormont government in implementing measures of the welfare state variety after 1944.
In a detailed study of the Stormont archives, Bew, Gibbon, and Patterson (1979) have shown that there were indeed different currents within the Stormont administration but the ones which predominated belonged to those among the ruling protestant classes who were bent on preservation of the status quo for their own purposes, including their own dominance of the protestant alliance as well as their particular sectional interests.
The range of tactics used to keep catholic nationalists subordinate was quite comprehensive.
At the political level, proportional representation was abolished for local elections in 1922 and for Stormont elections in 1929.
This minimizing of catholic — nationalist representation was aided by the gerrymandering of electoral boundaries for local government elections, which concentrated the catholic — nationalist vote in a smaller number of constituencies.
At the level of law and order, total control of the subject population was achieved in two ways.
Firstly, the Ulster Special Constabulary, invented to supplement the main police force, was derived largely from the former Ulster Volunteer Force.
Divided up into three groupings, the A, B, and C special constabularies, according to diminishing power, responsibility, and time commitment, the force was soon cut down to class B only and these came to be known as the ‘B Specials’, a thoroughly armed, militant, semi-private, and sectarian army.
It could be called upon at any time and indeed was from time to time.
Secondly, through the enactment of a special powers Act in 1922 Stormont gave itself and its police force the powers of detention without trial.
These were used copiously over the years of Stormont rule.
Catholic nationalists could be and were arrested with little suspicion, detained, frequently beaten, and all with little or no possibility of redress.
The British government over the water could have been a million miles away (for detailed accounts see Arthur 1984; Buckland 1979; Farrell 1976; for a summary see McAllister 1983; for a summary of all forms of discrimination adopted, see Whyte 1983; Hillyard 1983).
But the British government was still involved in the reproduction of antagonisms in the Ulster statelet, rather than passively accepting the perpetuation of inequalities and discrimination against the catholic — nationalist minority.
O'Dowd, Rolston, and Tomlinson (1980) point out that when the centralized state comes in simply to administer and maintain law and order, it tends to reproduce relationships which pre-exist its intervention.
When the British state began its policies of social interventionism from 1945, it succeeded in fragmenting the local power base of unionism by centralizing the sources of welfare and making them at least in part available across the sectarian divide.
There was thus some impact on discrimination.
However, when Stormont was abolished in 1972 and central government took over entirely the responsibility for local administration, it adopted the technocratic, non-policy making approach to its new role.
Part of the reasoning behind the move was the search for an effective policy to contain the violence within Ireland and prevent it from spreading to Britain.
It was also hoped that bureaucratic impartiality would reduce discrimination further.
But the technocratic approach did not lessen discrimination but reproduced it in a subtler form.
The continuation of inequality is still clear in the fields of income, housing, wealth, and employment but most of all in the protestant — loyalist alliance's embargo on the minority ever holding political office.
At least up to 1985, the British government submitted to the threat of violence from the loyalist community and accepted the protestant — loyalist veto on any change in the constitutional structure of their state.
With the Anglo-Irish Agreement at Hillsborough in 1985, it has sought to lay aside that veto, and establish in principle its political right to modify the structure of power and control in Ulster by involving the Republic of Ireland in a common policy on security.
However, in the interests of Western European stability and its own financial position, the British government is perhaps still putting off the final offer — either British withdrawal or some form of power-sharing with catholic nationalists — in the hope of loyalists coming round to what is seen as a more reasonable position.
The class structure of Northern Ireland is predictably dominated by protestants.
Of course, with the development of international monopoly capital and multinational companies, additional sources of power have been brought into play.
But it is likely that the professionals who have been responsible for the running of such companies at local level will have been allied to the more liberal group among the upper protestant classes, as represented by such families as the O'Neills, who have looked to the English public schools for the right sort of education.
Wallis, Bruce, and Taylor (1986) list this mainly landed gentry among the cosmopolitans of Ulster society.
Also cosmopolitan in outlook are a variety of traditional professions, particularly university lecturers.
Many of these moved their allegiance to Ulster's alliance party on its foundation in the mid-1970s.
The limitations on the power of these liberal groups within protestant loyalism are demonstrated by the fact that they have only been allowed to function among the leadership of the people so long as they obeyed the basic tenets and values common to the alliance as a whole.
This is shown in the protestant — loyalist rejection of Terence O'Neill and O'Neillism, and of his successors, Major Chichester-Clark and Brian Faulkner, as prime ministers of Northern Ireland (1968–74).
As Eversley (1989) has recently shown, while only 2 per cent of Roman catholics hold managerial and professional positions compared with 4 per cent of protestants, they are over-represented in the bottom third of the Northern class structure, but generally within the framework of a traditional dual protestant — catholic labour market.
Those members of the catholic population who  sought to advance up the class structure had to adjust to more marginal roles among the professional classes.
Those becoming solicitors, barristers, university lecturers, and doctors had to accept limitations on their careers if they stayed in Ulster.
Catholic civil servants usually had to abandon any practical political project if they wished to proceed through the ranks.
Even so, those who had any career success were extremely few in number.
In terms of the acceptance of law and order, the bulk of the catholic — nationalist remnant form a part of the civil society of Northern Ireland, though as much as a third of the remnant can defect from this consensus, as when supporting the Provisionals over the ‘H’ -Block prison issue.
But in terms of the protestant — loyalist philosophy, the overwhelming majority of catholics oppose the state's legitimacy.
This does not mean that there is no cultural convergence at all between the two alliances in Ireland.
Apart from basic agreements on the necessity for law and order for survival purposes, an issue which will be treated later in the chapter, there are a number of similarities which should be mentioned.
Both sides are based on capitalist activity and both governments have followed modernization rather than self-development strategies since the 1960s More particularly, despite some continuing differentiation in industrial specialisms, such as the declining presence of heavy engineering in Ulster, the types of industrial activity are increasingly similar as are the economic and unemployment problems, population growth, and productivity, with the probability of higher deficits in the North (FitzGerald 1972: 63–85; New Ireland Forum 1983–4: ii.
8–13; O'Dowd and Wickham in Clancy,et al .
1986).
Also, investment patterns in both parts of Ireland are increasingly similar, being a mixture of British, international, local, and cross-border companies.
Internal commerce, from heavy machinery to domestic goods, largely ignores the border, and the high street banks are the same throughout Ireland.
The main economic differences reflect the different structures of the state and the different state policies adopted by the British and Irish governments at any one time, though with a significantly higher state sector of employment in Ulster.
There is likewise considerable overlap in cultural areas.
There are strong similarities in inter-family and inter-gender relations.
There  is a recognizably similar personal style to all face-to-face interaction throughout Ireland (for the North, see Harris 1972; Easthope 1976).
There are similar strengths to kinship networks.
Catholic and protestant church organization straddles the border.
There are certain common features in ethical attitudes: puritanical attitudes in sexual matters, conservatism, friendliness, ‘down-to-earthness’, sense of duty to neighbours, critical attitudes to officialdom, and similar judgements as to what constitutes good and bad conduct (Harris 1972; Leyton 1966; 1975; Buckley 1984).
Public events sometimes confirm these viewpoints, as has appeared in the continuing joint catholic — protestant political opposition to the abolition of the criminalization of homosexuality.
However, the existence of a certain level of common values is no indication by itself of a ground for peace.
It may even be possible to obtain approval from opposing groups for a set of moral maxims such as peace, justice, and freedom — see the lists of values in McKernan's (1980) research, for which he found a high level of acceptance among both Northern Ireland communities.
But when it comes down to concrete moral judgements and commitments, such abstractions will be found interpreted in opposing ways.
Religion
The Roman catholic church retained a unified hierarchical organization for the whole of the island with its bishops meeting periodically at Maynooth.
In 1927, 1929, 1956, and 1960, there were plenary synods and councils.
Since then, the hierarchy has met more or less three times per year, but usually in secret sessions.
In the North, the bishops pursued the Irish catholic community's interests in what could only be called a spirit of ‘pillarization’.
This is the arrangement in Holland whereby various institutions such as media, schools, cultural organizations, welfare services, and hospitals are duplicated, and run by the separate catholic and protestant communities.
In Holland there is even a third or state sector.
In Ulster a full panoply of institutions emerged from the dual pressure of the church's concern for its people, and the Northern state's discrimination against catholics.
The clerical and lay leadership also experienced a third pressure, that of protecting the faithful from the proselytizing activities of a number of evangelical protestants mainly among the young.
The church obtained a separate school system, funded mainly by the Northern  Ireland government, similar to the system of catholic schools in Britain.
It also set up its own scouting organizations, clubs both sporting and social, with Irish music, Irish dancing, and Irish or Gaelic games.
These games were and still are much loathed by the majority within the Northern protestant community.
Priests continued to act as sponsors of the local catholic — nationalist political structure, chairing meetings of the party and permitting the political use of the parish hall.
The parish structure and school became the heart of the Northern catholic — nationalist community, rendering culture, politics, and religious identity as interchangeable for members of the in-group.
Employment patterns, which followed the routes of enforced segregation in favour of protestants — for they controlled the greater part of the job market and especially the major industrial enterprises and the entire government sector of civil servants and police — were even reinforced by the system of job references provided by the parish priests and catholic notables.
The church certainly had to follow this path in the face of the external constraints; but the practice did strengthen its status, power, and the structure of political divisions.
In the South, the church hierarchy pursued the path of full cultural control.
Conditioned by church canon law, participation by clerics in politics was forbidden.
But at the same time, an enormous sense of responsibility to protect the church, the family, and the minds and hearts of the faithful from incursions by the state was perceived to be the basic duty of the church leaders.
The leadership of the state knew in large measure what was wanted: it was part of the national — popular consciousness as well as being itself a result of the convention between church and Irish parliamentary party in the previous century.
What had been convention became part of the natural, common-sense universe of catholic — nationalist ideology.
No real consultation would have been necessary on that score.
As will be seen in the next chapter, when the republican wing under de Valera took over as the Fianna Fáil party in the 1930s, constitutional law was restructured, according to both a reformed republican ideology and current Roman social teaching, and in those areas where the high clergy thought it necessary.
In addition the church promoted strong centralized relationships between itself and government and actively discouraged the spread of power to the periphery or local level.
Within the ranks of the clergy and religious orders themselves, there was a far from complete, centralized structure, but rather a dual one.
Apart from small orders, usually of nuns, set up by local bishops for local needs, religious orders have always had considerable independence from the bishops.
Part of this independence must be attributed to their ownership of houses and schools, paid for directly by their benefactors, payers of school fees, or investment funds.
This has sometimes led to disputes between religious and secular clergy, between orders and bishops.
For example, in the Northern context, the previous bishop of Down and Connor, Dr Philbin, refused for most of his period of leadership in Belfast to have Jesuits visiting or residing in his diocese.
Not that the prohibition always succeeded.
It began to be violated in the late 1960s by Fr.
Michael Hurley who on one occasion addressed the presbyterian general assembly in Belfast against both the bishop's private wishes and Ian Paisley's open and defiant demonstrations.
The dual division of ecclesiastical power has also been important because the religious orders have often been the vehicle for innovative theologies differing from the Roman line.
Because such religious orders are themselves controlled from Rome, Roman discipline is conveyed via a route other than by the bishops.
Even so, some orders still remain slightly independent from Rome, particularly the religious orders of solemn vows, whose existence preceded the reformation.
Their numbers include the Augustinians and Dominicans, both of whom have been influential in Ireland and have produced theologians of liberal or left persuasion.
Despite their dependency on Rome, the jesuits too have been important innovators on the contemporary scene in Ireland, particularly in the areas of education for ecumenism and industrial relations.
Nevertheless the predominant catholic power lies with the hierarchy and secular clergy.
Thus, while it is possible to identify liberal catholicism in Ireland from the late nineteenth century to the present, and though there has grown up a climate of liberal dissent and criticism of conservative catholicism, it is still possible to assert the prominence of conservative catholicism, particularly in its alliance with nationalism.
The predominant political religious form was and remains, with some modifications and with increasing opposition, a centralizing and conservative catholicism.
The protestant churches in Ireland also retained their island-wide organization after the political partition of the island.
The church  of Ireland still has one all-island synod, the presbyterians a single general assembly, the methodists one conference.
Even Ian Paisley's free presbyterians, who have communities in County Cavan and Dublin, are centrally organized, though this may reflect the practical situation in Ireland and the role of the ‘big man’ himself within the church he founded.
The annual meetings of the churches' central bodies are a forum for religious political debate and have been known to express tensions between the values of the majority Northern and minority Southern protestants.
In the Northern statelet, the power of the main protestant churches at present remains subordinate to that of the fundamentalists and the religious political societies.
The societies of the Apprentice Boys, the Black Preceptory, and the Orange order, in conjunction with protestant paramilitary groups, could still form the basis for protestant political power if Britain withdrew from Ulster.
From its domination by the old ascendancy, the Orange order in particular came to embrace protestants from all classes and churches.
In fact, in rural areas today, the Orange hall has frequently been the only place where protestants of all shades have met to renew their belief and commitment to Ulster protestant loyalism (Harris 1972: 162–5).
It is important to note that these organizations are internally stratified.
Those nearer the top, particularly in the Black Preceptory, the inner sanctum of the society structure, are there because of their moral and religious standing in the local community: wealthy farmers, businessmen, good churchmen, or at least of known moral probity.
They tend to represent the ‘religious’ as opposed to the ‘rough’end of the protestant spiritual spectrum.
Fundamentalist religious groups have increased their power in Ulster in recent decades, especially the free presbyterians.
Their small church membership of around 10,000 hides the wider appeal Paisleyite politics has for the small businessmen and farmers of protestant Ulster.
The setting up of a new form of Ulster Club organization involving paramilitary activity in the wake of the Anglo-Irish accord of 1985, is an added dimension to the struggle for power within the alliance.
It is likely that the inner core of local church laity, such as select vestry members of the Church of Ireland and presbyterian elders, provided and still provide one of the links between the material and spiritual interests of the groups in the alliance, as these laity were and are active in the business and commercial fields also.
THE DOMINANT BELIEFS OF THE TWO ALLIANCES
As we examine the dominant beliefs of the two alliances, it must be stressed that we are not looking at beliefs possessed by each and every person who identifies to a greater or lesser extent with either set of traditions.
Rather we are looking at those beliefs, supported by significant power bases within each bloc, which have won out in the political process in the past seventy years and still appear to be doing so, in some cases with much decreased vitality.
The dominant beliefs of the catholic — nationalist bloc still are that the group forms a people who are Gaelic-Irish, constitute a nation, are republican, and populate an island which has a natural, inner political unity.
We reiterate: the dominant beliefs of the alliances which we have termed historical blocs are not necessarily shared by all but are promoted successfully by dominant groups and have some grounding in the consciousness of the wider membership.
Thus, Irish nationalism is conceived by most members in an abstract way, but it has concrete import for key groups.
Equally, a particular type of catholic identity may not belong to all but remains politically dominant for similar reasons.
The outcome of the dominance of both is that historically there have been critical mediations between religion and politics for catholic nationalists.
As will be seen in the remaining chapters, a particular form of Irish catholicism known as monopoly catholicism has assisted in the concrete success of the mix of the beliefs with economic beliefs in capitalism, ownership of land, and inheritance, helping to bring the elements to an explicit formulation in the 1937 Irish constitution, which has ever since shown considerable resistance to reformulation.
The prevailing protestant — loyalist beliefs stress the existence of the people of Northern Ireland, who are distinguished by their Ulster protestantism and democratic values, and by their claim to a flexible territory of Ulster.
Despite some socialist groups within the alliance, the dominant economic belief is capitalist.
A further central belief has recently begun to appear as equivocal, namely  loyalism itself.
Related to this is the final principal belief element, the conviction of the legitimacy of force in maintaining the subordination of catholic nationalists within the statelet.
A fuller account of these two groups of dominant beliefs benefits from some comparison between the two.
‘We, the People…’
The only way catholic nationalists can fulfil their present aspirations as a people is by extending the Republic of Ireland to the entire island.
This would mean containing within their state one million persons to whom such a national identity would be totally antithetical.
The Irish people are defined primarily by their allegiance to the present restricted or future enlarged republic, but it is popularly understood that they will normally have the further characteristics of Gaelic Irishness.
The belief is still popular that such a race exists, rather than there merely being a cultural group based on nationalist, republican, and catholic religious sentiment.
It is a belief which has intellectual credence in Ireland (O'Tuathaig 1986 and M. M. Ireland's responding letter,Irish Times , 8 Dec. 1986).
Theoretically, one would expect the Northern catholic community and the six counties of Ulster to be considered a lost remnant, unredeemed from British rule, and indeed this is by far the most popular interpretation.
But, of course, the problems that arise out of this interpretation are twofold.
Firstly, there is the problem of the protestant population itself in the North.
Their position as Irish people is ambiguous.
For the hard-line republican position, there is even a duality: protestant loyalists are taken as foreigners with an alien culture, and as either a pariah group — the mere instrument of British imperialism — or simply not there.
Their culture has no rights, no claim to an alternative identity.
Intellectually, the problem is the British presence in Ireland.
But emotionally, the non-people are hated or at least detested.
Clare O'Halloran (1986) has shown how the social reality of Northern Ireland remained a continuing blind spot for Southern Irish nationalists particularly from the founding of the state to 1949.
We aim to show in Chapter 5 that this blindness was in part promoted by the religious elements in their beliefs.
Secondly, there is the problem of the Northern catholic community, which tends to be taken as a monolithic nationalist community.
Apart from the fact that there has been significant support for the alliance party over the last dozen years or so among the catholic middle classes, there is also a further factor.
Rose's (1971) survey, conducted in 1968 on the verge of ‘the Troubles’, found that as many as 30 per cent of the catholic population were ‘explicitly prepared to endorse the constitution’ of Northern Ireland, which then included the Stormont parliament.
Catholics, however, did not vote for the Unionist Party.
This indicates an acceptance of the state structures, or a recognition of a need for the separation of Northern Ireland from the remaining state structure of Ireland, but at the same time a continuing opposition to protestant — loyalist dominance.
One can also add that there is something in the present policies of the SDLP which suggest a need to maintain a somewhat fragile unity in respect of the national question.
Seamus Mallon, MP of the SDLP may have seen the Hillsborough agreement of 1985 as a step towards a united Ireland, but some of his co-politicians in the party would not share that view.
Perhaps one should note the care with which the present leader of the party, John Hume, chooses his words over the future of the North.
He is careful not to promote the theme of reunification, but talks of discovering ‘a new way’, setting up structures of co-operation in the North between the two Northern Communities, with the support of the Southern government.
However, the policy is seen as ambiguous.
Those who wish, both unionists and nationalists, can interpret it as the beginnings of absorption into an all-Ireland state.
But those who wish for a basically Northern solution, even a dual national state with inputs both from the Republic and Britain, can interpret the policy as suiting their needs, and can thus find space on the ballot paper for the SDLP.
While in the last century there was still some attempt to embrace  all people in Ireland as the Irish nation, now the nation subsists in the Irish catholic population.
The ambiguity present in O'Connell has arguably aided catholic nationalists over the years in the justification of their policies.
They have sometimes stressed religious elements why certain political changes were not possible, such as in legislation on public morality, schooling, marriage, divorce, and adoption.
At other times, they have stressed the cultural, ethnic, historical, and geographical reasons why Ireland should be unified politically.
At the same time, in theory they wish to accept that Ulster protestants form part of the Irish people while they actually do not accept them in practice.
Indeed, until the ecumenical era of the 1960s, few catholics in Ireland were prepared to put before themselves some of the political religious issues which would have to be resolved if a united Ireland or accommodation to a separate political entity in Ulster were to become a possibility.
The other alliance in Ireland, the protestant — loyalist, does not thus far perceive itself as a nation.
The view that they are one appears mainly in the writings of the British and Irish Communist Organization (1972; 1973).
However, there can be little doubt that significant numbers of protestant loyalists see themselves as a distinct, almost ethnic group.
Clearly, they can be seen to have a particular self-concept, a sense of what Weber termed social honour (Wallis, Bruce, and Taylor 1986).
A group which perpetuates itself by endogamous sexual reproduction usually has some perception of ethnic identity.
It tends to have an active or passive belief, whether articulated or not, that it is either superior to, or rightfully distinct from, other similar groups.
The theoretical or articulated ground for this awareness is a set of abstract beliefs and moral dicta particular to the group.
One of these beliefs may be racial superiority, but does not have to be.
The distinctive feature of the beliefs is that they assert or imply the honour or prestige due to the group over and against another or other groups, and consequently motivate the group to achieve such honour on the field of social conflict.
Of course, such beliefs can be religious.
It may be that in the protestant — loyalist case this ethnic tendency may have priority over the British component of identity or be in conflict with it.
The contradiction can be viewed in two ways.
Either there are two different groups among the loyalists, subscribing to two different loyalisms.
Or there is really only one group, but sharing a dual identity, with now one dominating their consciousness, now the other.
The truth of the matter probably lies somewhere in between.
As Miller argues, there is a long tradition among the protestants of Ulster of viewing the British state ambiguously.
It is clear that in the past many of them have considered loyalty to be a two-way process, a contract or covenant, and that the state could be a traitorous party as well as the people.
The tradition proved of crucial importance in forming the basis for the strategy of the alliance from 1911 until British recognition of their separate political claim in 1914.
If the tradition still exists today — and it appears that it very much does so — it implies that the United Kingdom does not have for many loyalists a natural character of statehood in the way the Southern state has for catholic nationalists.
Covenant politics has come to the forefront again with the Hillsborough agreement of 1985 and shows the extent to which the populist politics of the Democratic Unionists is rooted in protestant — loyalist tradition.
This foundational belief gives meaning to the more popular belief in the right of the people to violence.
Rather than such force being seen as a prerogative of the state, it is seen by many in the alliance to inhere in the people of Ulster who over and over again need to assert their autonomous rights.
Increasingly it is seen as the only option left in the face of the continuing Anglo-Irish agreement.
Continuing or worsening strife could solidify covenant beliefs into a separate Ulster identity absolutely dominant over the British component, and demanding its own independent state form.
It is important to note that in 1912–14 the protestant — loyalist group saw their right to violence as prior to that of the official state.
It is also important to note that they saw the taking of law into their own hands as temporary, and pending the recognition by that state of its mistaken attitude towards them and their right to a degree of autonomy.
It appears to be increasingly the case that there are two major traditions of identity perception among protestant loyalists.
One tradition is the covenant one and is antagonistic to a straightforward nationalist sentiment.
It is adhered to by increasing numbers who have become disillusioned with British identity and have seen Paisley's words about the traitorous nature of British governments become reality as protestant — loyalist domination in Ulster has been continuously eroded.
These are probably more likely to vote for Paisley's democratic unionism and to come from  either religious, fundamentalist backgrounds or populist working-class and lower middle-class backgrounds.
The other tradition remains British identity and still would seem to dominate the values of the official unionists.
It is likely that a good many protestant loyalists oscillate between the two and still have to come to their moment of decision, one that is likely to be forced on them by future events.
The Monopoly of the Majority
The notion of the majority occurs frequently in Irish politics.
In the South, protestant loyalists are accused of subverting the wishes of the majority in the island by not consenting to a united Ireland.
In the North, protestant loyalists accuse catholic nationalists of not accepting the rights of the majority in the statelet to govern as it sees fit.
In both cases, democracy is invoked.
But it is the theory of democracy as the right of the majority to rule which is seen as central, rather than democracy as the preservation of minority rights.
In the North, the belief comes via the British parliamentary tradition of the two-party system and its accompanying electoral process of ‘first pass the post’.
For protestant loyalists, the majority means themselves.
In addition, protestant — loyalist politics has always been a zero-sum activity: one either has a monopoly of power or concedes it to the opposition.
Because the opposition is the catholic nationalists, concession means the end of the statelet as such.
The meaning of democracy shifts even further once it is interpreted within the terms of the Calvinist principle of the Godly society, where it is the lot of the just to assume power and to guide the citizens in the paths of righteousness.
With this religious overtone in Northern Ireland, the belief in majority dominance has justified ignoring the rights of the catholic — nationalist minority within the Ulster statelet.
From 1985, it has been continually invoked by Paisley and Peter Robinson in their attempt to subvert the Anglo-Irish accord.
The Republican and Nationalist Components
It is important to note that the political party system in the Republic of Ireland is largely based on the divisions in the  national-popular consciousness which occurred at the time of the Irish civil war.
To simplify a rather complex historical phenomenon, it can be said that the present political division between Fianna Fail and Fine Gael originates in positions taken by opponents in that war.
The civil war was not fought over the partition of the island as is popularly believed.
It resulted from one group, the republicans, not accepting the oath of allegiance to the royal sovereign of the United Kingdom, a requirement of the constitution of 1922.
Though the republicans lost the war, they eventually won their case with their successful introduction of the republican constitution of 1937.
This shows the extent to which the republican ideal gained ground once independence was in place, furthering the ideological divide between protestant loyalism and catholic nationalism.
Despite this development, the struggle between the two previously warring factions has continued, the original republicans developing a populist, nationalist party, and the former treaty party developing a concern with law and order, and moderation on the national question.
But the fight did not prevent the fundamental beliefs in the nation and ‘the historic integrity of the island of Ireland’, as nationalist parties described it in their New Ireland Forum (1983 — 4: i. 28), from remaining basic to the perceptions of both parties.
The Gaelic-Irish Component
From the early years of the Southern state, cultural nationalism was deliberately developed by government means.
There were deliberate attempts to develop elements of both high and popular culture in music, poetry, dance, and games.
In particular, Gaelic games were promoted by the independent Gaelic Athletic Association.
This association constitutionally still seeks to implement
the organization of native pastimes and the promotion of athletic fitness as a means to create disciplined, self-reliant, national-minded manhood which takes conscious pride in its heritage of unrivalled pastimes and splendid cultural traditions as essential factors in the restoration of full and distinct nationhood.
By this means, the association believes the cause of national unity will be furthered ‘until a complete nationhood is achieved’(Gaelic Athletic Association Rule Book (1970), quoted Hickey 1984: 40).
Within this statement, which is rhetorical for some but deadly serious for others within the GAA, lies precisely the reason why the protestants of the North are so opposed to the development of  Gaelic games and seek to oppose their extension if and when they can.
The re-establishment of the Irish language as the first official language of the state became the national policy of the Irish government under de Valera and has only toned down in recent years.
It was made a compulsory subject in the schools, an essential part of the Leaving Certificate, and it was necessary to pass an exam in the language to enter the civil service.
A similar exam is still compulsory for anyone seeking to enter the teaching profession without the required Leaving Certificate pass, even if they are never to teach the subject.
One immediately recognizes the active construction of the national ideal as promoted by principal currents in nineteenth century European nationalist thought (see Kedourie 1985).
Another aspect of this form of cultural nationalism is that it was been strongly supported in the Irish national school system and Northern catholic school system by the clergy and religious orders.
Not all the clergy and all the religious orders have been actively engaged in the pursuit of this ideal, but one or two orders have been; for example, the Christian Brothers are devoted to the ideals of a Christian and catholic education, and supporters of the concept of a nation dedicated to God and at the same time distinctly Irish.
In making this comment, one is merely pointing out particular ideological characteristics in hard-working, deeply religious, and committed people.
However, in the practical context of an Ireland divided between two power blocs, such a nationalist form is profoundly ethnic and exclusivist, whatever its believed aims and ideal content.
There is an elective affinity between this cultural vision and the religious vision of the Roman catholic church prior to the second Vatican Council, in its exclusivist attitude towards other Christian churches, an attitude which is far from overcome at the level of popular Roman catholicism.
The Suppression of Class by the Dominant Beliefs
In the South, the marginality of the third main political party, the Irish Labour Party, is an indication of just how successful the articulation of capitalism to religious and national beliefs is.
The South is not a classless society, but its class nature has been well hidden in consciousness and dominated by the procedures of the capitalist-democratic process.
Despite the principal duality of Irish party political power, the bourgeois structure of the state has rarely  been questioned, only the degree of state intervention in the bourgeois economy.
Also, the clerical church has been particularly antipathetic to socialism in any form.
It showed itself to have a horror of socialism already in the nineteenth century.
But its opposition also had a base in the property-owning, rural peasantry, and middle-classes, who had in the nineteenth century paid a heavy price for their liberation from oppression and whose status became rooted in their property, land, and livestock.
Their attitudes were shared by their priest-sons, who in their turn were supported by Rome, whose solid opposition to socialism until the 1960s was very clear (e.g. Pope Leo XIII, 1903).
From 1911 to 1914, the Irish high clergy made successive attacks on the trade union movement and on socialism.
Rumpf and Hepburn (1977) view the activity of the church during this period as quite decisive in limiting the appeal of socialism for the Irish subordinate classes until the 1950s.
The emergence of a new pro-capitalist party in the South from the end of 1985, the Progressive Democratic Party, might show the extent to which political divisions based on the treaty and within the nationalist component of hegemony may have become problematic, to be partially replaced by an even more explicit concern with increasing the popular wealth and prosperity.
Indeed, in the Irish general election of 1987, progressive democrats took 14 seats, and 11.8 per cent of the total vote, which is sizeable for a young political party.
The decline of the labour element in the SDLP in the North, however, does indicate a trend to the style of politics in the Republic, that is towards the suppression of class politics and identity in line with the dominant ideology of the alliance.
The national question as such still remains a central preoccupation for catholic nationalists.
Because the nation is seen as only partially liberated, and particularly by the membership of the largest party Fianna Fáil, the animus of the national-popular consciousness is focused on this issue, to the detriment of class-based politics.
There has, therefore, been little chance in the past for a political growth of class consciousness among subordinate groups.
What socialism there has been among the catholic — nationalist tradition has always tended to be allied to republicanism, especially in the period 1913 to 1930 (Rumpf and Hepburn 1977: 13).
The trade union movement was a case in point.
The labour movement  in Ireland was made up of two organizations.
One of these was James Larkin's Irish Transport and General Workers' Union, the ITGWU.
It came to have Connolly's support and was on the way to becoming thoroughly nationalist and republican under Connolly's influence.
The other was the Irish Trades Union Congress.
Before 1914, it became the Irish TUC and Labour Party and was neutral to the Easter rising of 1916.
The ITGWU became a member of the ITUC in 1909, but had very distinct and separate policies to the moderate ITUC which sought to keep its links with Northern protestant workers.
Socialists tended to be republicans, though only some republicans were socialist.
The republicanism of Irish socialist nationalists was of course logical in so far as they interpreted imperialism as an enemy of the indigenous population and as an expropriator of the people.
But it was thereby alien to Ulster protestant socialists.
A duality of class interests within republicanism has remained, with forms of bourgeois and rural peasant-owner republicanism existing side by side with socialist republicanism.
This combination still exists in the provisional movement especially in the South despite the officially socialist policies of Sinn Fein, as well as in the Fianna Fáil party.
In parallel with the Republic, class politics has flourished even less on the protestant — loyalist side, despite the periodic strength of protestant trade unionism (Patterson 1980).
There did exist the small Northern Ireland Labour Party which disappeared after the fall of Stormont; but it had been based on industrial workers, particularly in the shipyards, and remained much smaller in size than its Southern counterpart.
As Gibbon has noted, the cases of both Irish nationalism and Ulster unionism remain ‘the two most spectacular class alliances in the political history of the British Isles’(1975: 3).
The cause in both cases appears to be the strength of catholic — nationalist and protestant — loyalist popular consciousness and the way in which the cultural and material interests of the subordinate classes appear to be represented by the alliances themselves and their institutions.
By providing core beliefs, and by reinforcing their separateness for both alliances, religious beliefs and institutions equally suppress class divisions, become embroiled in cementing alliances, and help retain the overall divisional structure of Ireland as a whole.
The Religious Component of Catholic Nationalism
There is nothing theoretically which hinders religion being an ingredient, or even predominating in the nationalist mix.
Roman catholicism and protestantism constitute, in different ways and to varying degrees, nationalist and loyalist beliefs in Ireland.
This is even official in the case of loyalism.
In the case of Irish nationalism a specific relationship with catholicism has been formulated.
Catholic identity is not essential for membership of the catholic — nationalist group, but consent to the understanding that catholic values will predominate in the public sphere is essential, for these religious values are viewed to be eminently suitable, natural, and self-evidently of high moral quality, safeguarding the fabric of state and public morality.
The link between Irish catholicism and Irish nationalism is deeply rooted.
For centuries the Roman catholic church and faith were the bread of life to the subordinate classes in Ireland, deprived of their land, civil rights, and education.
The church not only provided solace and comfort in those long years, but also a vigorous identity which enabled its people to hold up their heads amid the persecution and oppression.
It provided intellectual and spiritual leadership and some alleviation from hunger and starvation.
The clergy were the only source of education apart from the ‘hedge school’ teachers (Dowling 1968) and provided a significant moral and organizational resource.
Several aspects of catholicism became particularly important in the nineteenth century.
As has been seen, partially as a result of Cardinal Cullen's nineteenth-century reforms, the church became more organized and developed in its numbers of clergy and religious.
Its spiritual life underwent a considerable transformation.
An important component of this religious renewal was its individualistic orientation; it was the individual rather than the group or its activity in the world which was the subject of this religious activity.
Like all the religious renewal of catholicism in the post-Tridentine period, it was predominantly pietistic.
The importance of conversion to Christ and subsequent pursuit of the way of perfection was the centre.
It was strongly influenced by the development and multiplication of the religious congregational system developed by Ignatius of Loyala, founder of the Jesuits and of the famous spiritual exercises or retreat system.
The exercises  were specifically directed to obtaining this effect.
A main real difference in the experience which marked it off from fundamentalist and some pentecostal forms of conversion experience was that the outcome was not the assurance of being saved, but rather a spirituality of trust in Christ based on repentance and the conviction that God forgives repentant sinners.
In this respect, it paralleled some forms of evangelicalism, particularly methodism.
The trust implied fidelity or commitment, together with an abandoning of the old ways of sin and indifference for a total dedication to God's will in Christ.
But if this was the ideal placed before the clergy and members of religious orders, the reality for the people was generally somewhat different.
There can be little doubt, however, that a sense of God's presence and of the supernatural in general were long-standing characteristics of Irish popular religion, along with magical and semi-magical local religious practices.
There can also be little doubt that the devotional revolution had a significant impact on the life of local catholic communities, especially as social life came to have a very strong relationship to the local parish and its priests.
The transformations effected by the second Vatican Council of 1962–5 in liturgy, sacrament, scripture, and so on led to the accelerated decline of traditional rituals such as wakes and pilgrimages to local shrines.
There has also been a significant decline in the cult of the saints, and many of the practices which characterized the devotional revolution of the mid-nineteenth century.
This has been assisted by the continuing process of urbanization and delocalizing of religious experience.
Local folk religion still continues in some forms.
Its resistance is exemplified by the recent ‘moving statues’ devotional upsurge of 1985 in South-West Ireland, where statues of Mary were believed to have changed their posture, wept, and bled (Tobin 1985).
National centres of devotion remain relatively strong — the shrine to Mary at Knock, the annual climbing of Croagh Patrick, pilgrimage and penance at Lough Derg.
In fact, whereas the parallel protestant movement of evangelical revival was for all people, and the issue tended to be decisive, catholic spirituality diverged on both points.
The principal one was that conversion and growth were particularly directed at the clerical-religious élite, where the annual retreat system formed the annual or biennial centre of the individual spiritual life.
The retreat consisted, and still does, of anything from five to thirty days of  spiritual exercises, usually in an atmosphere of silence and contemplation apart from listening to the preacher when there is one, but with additional features of both vocal and silent prayer.
The laity had a pale reflection of this programme in the parish mission, designed to convert the laity or at least bring them back to regular church practices.
Morality was for the laity, whose life was dominated by the battle against mortal sin, and who therefore lived under the threat of hell and were always at risk.
Spirituality was the lot of the clergy and the religious, who were judged to have left this crude level of human religious existence behind, through conversion and a subsequent, progressive spiritual change.
They were seen to succeed in living a sexually pure life as part of this.
There was some extension of the pietistic ideal.
Sodalities, such as the Legion of Mary, Opus Dei, and Christian Life communities, have partially extended this form of commitment to some, particularly more middle-class laity, and continue to have an important role in activating laity for what are judged to be religious goals both personally and socially.
But generally speaking the ideal has always tended to accentuate the gap between the clerical world view and the lay world view within catholicism.
Even though the gap between clerical and lay religious intellectuals has closed, with clergy being left behind in some areas, the clerics remain the true cognoscenti in religious matters, and are expected to be so by the laity.
This has always added to the clergy's spiritual authority and status, and has tended to merge with the authority claimed by the clergy in matters of faith and morals, with the high clergy deciding what constitutes matters of faith and morals.
The attitude towards authority within the church partnered the perception of the spiritual life.
The clergy were and still are in a special position, holding power over the laity because of it.
This is one of the special characteristics of catholicism, and is found to a much lesser extent in non-episcopal traditions.
Failure to conform to directives of priests and bishops were seen to break the very fabric of communion and to allow sin to enter in.
This remains particularly so today where an objectivist stance on morality prevails in a national or local culture anywhere in the catholic world.
From within this perspective bishops and clergy lay down rules for the laity to follow in any given situation and the teaching of the church is seen as absolutely clear and devoid of problematic.
Rules are enforced rather than principles declared.
In terms of the Irish catholic — nationalist context today, pietism and authoritarianism have tended to structure the religion of the people to a significant extent, though the numbers subscribing to its world view appear to be declining.
The clergy are seen as above criticism in their religious statements, and such criticism can cause considerable distress to many people.
In his analysis of the popular culture which appeared among the promoters of the Pro-Life Campaign, set up to achieve a constitutional ban on abortion in the Republic in 1983, O'Carroll pin-points certain characteristics, which can be abbreviated here: a monolithic and absolute view of the world, with its accompanying intolerance, derived in part from the direct consultation of clerics and politicians on public moral issues and the subsequent failure to develop an ethos of public debate; a localized belief system, rooted in family and communal authority and issuing in a spirit of absolute conformity; sexual prudery, a product partly of the inheritance problem; and the development of acute anxiety when such beliefs — inhering partly as they do in their practice and shaping of society — are threatened.
The absoluteness of the vision excludes all alternatives, and requires external validation.
This can be provided by the magic power or words, such as inscribing prohibitions into the nation's constitution, and by manifestations of the divine in terms of either retribution for failing to uphold the truth, or grace for upholding the truth, with rewards ‘such as oil finds and victories in the World Championships’.
O'Carroll sees such positions exemplified by the protagonists' refusal to accept that certain therapeutic abortions already permitted in Ireland were actually abortions and by their predictions of social chaos should they fail in their fight: ‘Hence phrases such as‘the opening of the floodgates’, ‘the thin end of the wedge’, ‘the slippery slope’, ‘the permissive society’, and ‘the abortion mentality’’(1983: 12).
It is important to point out that these expressions which interpret Irish social reality and events are also used by the high clergy.
They are thus not simply a mentality derived from popular religion but from a traditional Roman catholicism which held sway in catholic Europe from the post-Reformation period and remained unchallenged until the 1960s.
As will be seen in Chapter 5, understanding this religious social consciousness requires some grasp of the traditional catholic teaching on the natural order and the good society, and how the nation is to respect the divine order  established by God.
An example of this can be taken from the recent contraception controversy in the Republic, which began in the 1960s.
At that time, the Roman catholic archbishop of Dublin intervened in a pastoral letter in the following revealing terms:
If they who are elected to legislate for our society should unfortunately decide to pass a disastrous measure of legislation that will allow the public promotion of contraception and an access hitherto unlawful to the means of contraception, they ought to know clearly the meaning of their action, when it is judged by the norms of objective morality and the certain consequences of such a law…
It may well come to pass that…legislation could be enacted that will offend the objective moral law .
Such a measure would be an insult to our Faith; it would without question prove to be gravely damaging to morality, private and public; it would be, and would remain, a curse upon our country .
(Abp.
McQuaid of Dublin, letter to all the churches of the archdiocese, Mar. 1971, quoted Wright 1973: 224; italics added)
It is the specific effect this religious form has in Ireland which is under scrutiny.
But the form as a whole should be recognized as inimical to protestants, especially when pursued in the arena of politics.
This will be considered in the remaining chapters.
The Protestant Element of Protestant — Loyalist Beliefs
The dominant religious element in protestant — loyalist beliefs is a form of pan-protestantism.
It has so far overcome at the political level the doctrinal and organizational divisions between protestants.
It is based on the theme of protestant liberty, which is consciously contrasted with catholic authoritarianism.
There are, however, many strands within this protestantism and they are frequently conflicting.
One has to remember that well into the nineteenth century British identity was predicated first of all of the English.
It also tended primarily to be Anglican and only secondarily reformed.
Even when non-Anglican protestants had become accepted as citizens in England and Ireland towards the end of the eighteenth century as they already were in Scotland and Wales, English and Irish catholics remained politically suspect.
They remained so throughout the nineteenth century and were not normally trusted with public office.
Also, Irish catholics were represented in the dominant culture as an inferior race, ridiculed, and considered incompetent and beastly (Curtis, Jr.
1968).
The idea of defending a  protestant heritage is not solely an Ulster phenomenon but rooted in the British tradition.
Whereas in Britain, with the growth of suffrage, catholics could never be perceived as a political threat because of the smallness of their numbers, in Ireland, with the growth of the home rule movement and its accompanying nationalism, they could only be perceived as politically, religiously, and nationally subversive and suspicion of them remained.
The issues of freedom of conscience and freedom from Roman hegemony lie at the centre of Northern Ireland fundamentalism and are meshed in with its evangelical tenets.
They are at their clearest in the teachings of the appropriately named free presbyterians:
Liberty is the very essence of Bible protestantism.
Tyranny is the very essence of popery.
Where protestantism flourishes Liberty flames.
Where Popery reigns Tyranny rules.
As Liberty and Tyranny have no common meeting place, so protestantism and popery cannot be reconciled…popery is tyrannical in every sphere of life…protestantism, at a stroke, cuts down all the shackles of superstition and priestcraft.
The soul is free to commune with its Maker.
There is one mediator between God and man — the man Jesus Christ.
Protestantism hands out an unemployment card to every Papist priest…
The protestant's home is his castle.
He brooks no interference from Pope, priest, pastor, preacher or prelate…
No one can control the protestant's education or the books which he shall read.
He is free born and trembles not at priestly threats or the papal curse…
At the ballot box the protestant exercises complete liberty…
(Ian Paisley,Protestant Telegraph , editorial, 28 May 1966, quoted Wright 1973: 224)
Despite this common, oppositional identity, protestants in Northern Ireland retained institutional, class, and doctrinal divisions.
Presbyterians retained a consciousness of their Scottish origins and came to have a significant presence in the local economy and finance institutions, predominating in the North and East.
Church of Ireland members, largely of English origin though less conscious of it, predominated in the south of Ulster and still constitute the majority among the protestant farming community.
The small denominations and sects are province-wide, but are particularly strong in Belfast.
They are more fundamentalist both in religion and in politics — though some eschew political activity — and are frequently more politically volatile.
Both Church of Ireland and presbyterian political ethics in the North are supportive of the union and the forces of law and order, whereas the sects have a more flexible respect for state authority.
One is not talking about a lack of breadth in theologies and points of view within presbyterianism and the Church of Ireland.
Both have their liberals, religious intellectuals, and deeply committed ecumenists.
There is a tradition of strong social consciousness in the Church of Ireland, evidenced by its building of hospitals, the support of some of its leadership for the locked-out Dublin workers in 1913 and their activities in other works of mercy without a proselytizing aim.
A number of higher clergy in Ulster and many of its lay intellectuals stand a long way off from protestant — loyalist politics and are in fact politically dissociated from them.
In the South the church accepts the status of the independent republic and is loyal to it.
But the bulk of its laity and Northern clergy, and probably more so its industrial and farming classes, are low church and evangelicals, the more protestant and anti-catholic end of the Anglican synthesis.
One must also remember in this respect that a key feature of Church of Ireland organization is the local select vestry, which involves the laity in debate and discussion with clergy.
When placed alongside the house of laity in the synod of the Church of Ireland, the power of the laity in church decision-making, including statements on political ethics and positions on public local issues, is quite considerable.
A similar statement can be made of the presbyterian community, which is almost wholly Northern, and whose main Southern presbytery is in the counties of old Ulster which remain in the Republic — Donegal, Cavan, and Monaghan.
The organization of presbyterianism rests strongly upon the local community, with its division of authority between minister and elders.
The elders are individuals of good-standing drawn from the local laity, who both appoint their minister and have considerable control over his or her activities — there is at present one woman minister with a congregation in Northern Ireland.
The sentiments among the majority of Northern lay presbyterians are biased towards those elements in the Westminster Confessional which are antagonistic to Roman catholic practice and belief: the evils of the papacy and priesthood and the suppression of Christian liberty, the evils of the mass and devotions to the saints, all of which combine to turn Christians to superstition and idolatry and away from almighty God and true salvation in Christ.
An example of the strength of this animus occurred in 1982–3 in the celebrated case of the Revd David Armstrong, censured by the elders of his congregation for entering  the Roman catholic church across the road to offer its worshippers Christmas greetings, and eventually forced to leave his ministry (Armstrong and Saunders 1985).
Though the case is complex and the minister has joined the Anglican communion, the elements of the case at the time are quite significant.
Ministers, both presbyterian and Church of Ireland, suffer similar pressures in many other local communities, except that they often stay silent rather than risk conflict, personal hardship, or violence.
An added fear is losing church members to sects or the free presbyterians.
Protestantism has a deeper significance in Ulster than it has had in Britain for over two hundred years.
The very phrase ‘the Ulster people’ refers to those who originally set up the true faith in Ireland and colonized the land accordingly.
This religion of the people has some similarity to Calvin's theology of the city of God on earth, though in a more modern and less rigorous setting than the one which Calvin tried to realize in his lifetime in the city of Geneva:
Civil government is designed, as long as we live in this world, to cherish and support the external worship of God; to preserve the pure doctrine of religion, to defend the constitutions of the church, to regulate our lives in a manner requisite for the society of man, to form our manners to civil justice, to promote our concord with each other, and to establish general peace and tranquillity…
(Wright 1973: 225, quoting Calvin 1960: 46)
Calvin viewed his interpretation of the function of the state as the only Christian one.
This mode of political religious action no longer starts out from a universal centre and figure, such as the papacy, but rather from the national or local church within the state, whose ‘magistrates’— Calvin's term for lay political leaders — are ideally Christians of moral rectitude, who perform this duty as one ordained by God.
Wright is correct to see Paisley's interpretation of liberty as a development of this view.
Both reject papal centralization and papal authority as a means for discerning just government.
Wright is also correct to distinguish between a general interpretation of ‘salvation by grace’— the teaching of the reformers — and its fundamentalist variant, which he terms ‘salvation by grace through faith’.
Perhaps ‘salvation by grace, experienced in listening to the preaching or reading of the biblical word, and in affirming the literal interpretation of that word’ might be a better if clumsier phrase.
In its effort to avoid all church mediation of the revealed word of God, the fundamentalist version relies on the  literal interpretation of the Bible, but one which imposes a contemporary Western culture on to the different perceptions of a past culture.
It is this characteristic which renders fundamentalist religion open to large numbers of fissures in communities, with preachers or sections of congregations shaking the dust from their feet and moving off to build or buy another church.
Fundamentalism is radically anti — catholic in its refusal to accept any form of priestly mediation.
Hickey (1984) and Wright (1973) grasp the point that both fundamentalism and Calvinism have monopoly tendencies in the public sphere.
The consequent interpretation of liberty is anti-libertarian and anti-pluralist.
The implementation of liberty can stretch to keeping places of recreation closed on Sundays, upholding the rights of preachers to speak in public places even if it causes an affray, and opposing the development of catholic schools because their teachers do not communicate the Bible without priestly mediation.
At the level of the unchurched popular consciousness, particularly in the urban protestant working classes, liberty may have slightly different significances.
It may also mean freedom to purchase ‘Playboy’ magazine, to indulge in the vulgarities of verbal and visual displays of the sexual and sexist types, though at a much lower level than those current in Scotland or England at soccer matches and in public houses.
But there remains a strong respect for the religious leadership of the protestant — loyalist bloc.
There is a resonance of protestant beliefs in their unchurched experience, their rough, straight-from-the-shoulder speech, their interpretation of history and tradition, and solidarity at the economic level based on their dependency upon the leadership of the group as a whole for their work and welfare.
The working classes are strongly bound into the total if ambiguous ideology of protestant loyalism.
With the emergence of the statelet in 1922, covenant politics was subordinated to the Stormont alliance only to re-emerge after Stormont's collapse in 1972.
In 1971, a new covenant was signed by over half a million men and women, committing protestants to a renewal of the covenant political ideal.
Miller (1978) suggests that the contractarian element was no longer ever so solid.
Be that as it may, it may turn out that the preparedness not to acquiesce in any all-Ireland solution is decidedly stronger than most commentators until recently were prepared to accept, except for the work of Bew, Gibbon, and Patterson.
Thus, protestant loyalists fight incorporation into a united Ireland for the reason that their perception of protestantism and their values of polity contain a powerful rejection of catholic monopoly, which they identify with catholicism tout court .
Their deeply held view on this matter is bound up with their interpretation of political realities.
The South is seen as dominated by the Roman church.
They point to the laws against divorce, abortion, and contraception, the power of the church in the education sector and past evidence of a hot-line between bishops and politicians as the proof of their contention.
As will be seen in Chapter 5, this interpretation is not without foundation.
The ethnic identity or contractarian ideology of the Ulster loyalist is clear in its origins, motivated by powerful economic, ethical, and religious convictions, all of which are interrelated, mutually supporting, and validated by the existence of a dominating catholic — nationalist bloc in the Republic of Ireland.
The sense of solidarity has developed and hardened over the years.
The popular slogan ‘This we will maintain’, that is the union with Britain, can be equally applied to the religious and moral values the loyalists pride so much and which they see as embodied in the protestant — loyalist statelet, with its appropriate state apparatus of coercion and alternative paramilitary units.
For this reason, they feel that the siege of Londonderry has never been lifted and they are prepared to die to defend that heritage.
What the protestant loyalists in effect seek to maintain is protestant — loyalist domination within a flexible territory, one which they feel justified in calling their land and ruling according to their conscience.
The Key Mythical Structures of Protestant — Loyalist Popular Religion
It could be argued that the myths of Ulster protestantism and the institution of the Orange order take the place of the more centralized clerical organization of Roman catholicism in providing some element of overall religious unity among protestant loyalists.
By myth is meant here what has generally come to be accepted within sociology and social anthropology since the work of Levi-Strauss: an account of the origins of a society or of particular crucial events in its life, which unite the cosmos to the social structure by actively shaping everyday life perceptions.
The historical consciousness of Ulster protestants in this sphere is also a  faith consciousness.
The salvation history of the Bible is coupled with what is seen as a significant period in the history of the protestants of Ireland.
The key event in the history of Ireland which appears to encapsulate Ulster protestant faith in God through Christ and the destiny of Ulster protestants as a people, is the war of 1689–91.
William of Orange is seen to have worked the decisive victory at the Battle of the Boyne in 1690.
However, that myth is not quite the one which appears to have penetrated everyday life, perhaps because the place of the victory is located within the borders of the Southern state.
The most powerful myth affecting everyday life narrates the less decisive defence of the city of Londonderry in 1689.
The protestant refugees, inhabitants, and garrison of the city, which was built deliberately with a wall lest a catholic rebellion should ever occur, held the city for fifteen weeks against a poorly equipped catholic Irish army led by James II, the exiled king.
The besieged were led by a soldier and a clergyman.
A further particularity stressed in the protestant — loyalist account is the initiative and bravado of the local protestant apprentice boys who defied the city's governor, Robert Lundy.
He had ordered the opening of the city gates and capitulation.
The boys barricaded the gates and mounted the city walls, a move probably as much a result of a popular rebellion against Lundy's action as a defiant gesture.
Once the blockade of the river leading into the city was broken by English ships, James and his besiegers lost heart and abandoned the siege.
The mythical value of the siege for the construction of protestant — loyalist hegemony should not be underrated.
In his highly condensed and powerful analysis, Buckley (1984) details how the siege becomes interpreted by today's protestant loyalists according to a key paradigm mediating their experience of the world.
They may be talking about membership of Ulster's protestant secret societies, particularly the Orange order, the Royal Black Preceptory, and the Apprentice Boys' Club; or about religion — being saved, being a church member, or even a non-practising protestant; or what appear to them to be key ethical issues such as drink, tobacco, and money; or they may simply be describing in ordinary everyday language life in the family, on the farm, and in the village.
But in all these instances, similar categories of differentiation occur — the insiders and the outsiders, the religious and the rough, the parent and the child, the female and the male.
At one point, the protestants who are involved in violence are rough as opposed to religious, especially if they drink and smoke and do not follow the norms of thrift.
Shift the context and the same men become insiders as opposed to outsiders such as catholics and, presumably, even castle catholics.
The rough insiders are on the walls, defending God's true believers from Romanism and immorality.
As Buckley points out, it is also the rough who penetrate the virgin city — the British fleet, breaking the boom across the river to bring food supplies to the stricken protestants within and ensuring the city's survival and the faithful people's triumph.
One can recognize here, with Lévi-Strauss (1968), the importance of ambiguous mediators in relating the opposites within one's cultural universe and one can add the Apprentice Boys to Lévi-Strauss's shortlist of tricksters and twins in this role.
Despite Buckley's reluctance to play up the siege of Derry as a key myth and his preference for general categories of interpretation derived from various historical experiences, it does seem that the siege has particular significance.
Those who still seek compromise with catholic nationalists today are still known to the erudite leadership of the DUP as Lundies.
One should add that Buckley takes the Christian myth for granted, as backdrop to the discourse.
But one must remember that the divergent reading of the Christian myth by Reformation and Counter-Reformation is at the heart of the religious as opposed to the rough interpretation of the conflict.
The importance of the protestant variant should not be underestimated given the extent of religious practice and the power of religious men within the protestant — loyalist bloc and the grave importance of conceiving of one's position as absolutely irreproachable, depending as it does on a divine source.
At the heart, or within the innermost wall of the protestant — loyalist alliance, is the man of God — not woman, not rough, and not immoral — be he soldier, clergyman, businessman, or farmer.
After the account of creation and redemption, which despite the variance among intellectual accounts in the past probably has slightly less relevance as a divider at the popular level, the two main variants begin (for popular accounts, see Harris 1972; Leyton 1975).
In the Roman catholic account, Christ appoints Peter to lead the church he has founded.
In the other, the church is founded but taken over early on by the Popes in Rome and by priests who use magic and ritual to gain control of God's  people, thus profaning his divine word.
For the one version, the Reformation is the catastrophe by which half Christendom defects from the church, the church itself remaining intact and faithful to Peter.
This version still predominates among Roman catholic laity in most countries.
For the popular protestant version, one which is still shared probably by a majority of clergymen within the protestant denominations of the North, the church re-emerges after centuries of misguidance only with the Reformation.
The protestant version has variants as to how pure this church is or whether it remains sinful, but the evangelical version which is the basic one in the North of Ireland opts absolutely for ‘Jesus Saves’; the community, no longer medium of salvation, tends to take on a visible, earthly role, an occasion of grace and a support for religious ‘this-worldly’ activity.
Rome is seen to continue on its headlong path to misery and sin, a symbol of the rejection of Christ for the sake of human idols.
However, the earthly role of the community, be it protestant or catholic, is not seen as secondary to the religious message, but as either in continuity with or against it.
The Calvinist vision of an earthly city in which pastor and politician work in harmony to exclude evil from the lives of all those within the city walls remains a religious outlook for a significant number of protestant loyalists.
This is a totalizing view of society, and implies a certain anti-pluralism: freedom of belief and action within certain parameters, which are to be decided either by those who appear righteous in the sight of God or by those who, at least, conform in their lawmaking to the advice given to them by the righteous.
The very drift of the account of Christian myth and religious political ethics has certain parallels of structure with the siege of Londonderry.
These should be noted, before one views the siege as baseline myth for the interpretation of everyday life.
Religion and Violence
It is frequently denied that there is a relationship between religion and violence in Ireland.
Here it will be argued that an indirect, and occasionally a direct, relationship does exist.
Before applying the general analysis to Ireland, and in order to get to the heart of the matter, it is first necessary to understand the close relationship between beliefs and violence within the context of the state in general.
It is the state which properly exercises the use of force in order to maintain social control, whereas it is in civil society — the family, school, work-place, church, and other non-state institutions — that hegemony operates.
However, the state also performs certain hegemonic functions too, justifying its own existence and authority in the rhetoric of the courts and in its celebration of the nation.
The civil sphere can also be an arena for coercion, through the activities of vigilantes, private armies, and mobs, irrespective of individual criminal activity.
Even so, force is, in the ideal state, primarily an exclusive instrument of the state, though even here force diffuses outwards from the state to civil society and to sections of its population and, as such, is intimately connected with hegemony.
This is already true at the level of the institutions of law.
These express the beliefs of law and order, and justice and freedom, hegemonic beliefs necessary for both citizen and state in any society aspiring to some model of equality.
This ideology of the state is coercively implemented in the policing, arresting, trying, convicting, and imprisoning of those found to default.
But this coercive role is partly performed by citizens too.
Sections of the population assist the police in the performance of their duties not just by taking on gunmen or robbers but also by making telephone calls to the police.
They thus form an extension of the coercive dimension of the state.
They consider such actions as their duty as citizens.
Put in another way, force is underpinned by dominant values extensively shared by the population and which support the operation of the state.
Citizens then act as witnesses in the courts and finally may compose the jury — the real judge of guilt and innocence.
In all capitalist democracies there are two sources for the legitimacy of the state, namely statehood itself and the ideology specific to the state in question.
It will be argued that when the second source is threatened as well as the first, the power to coerce can devolve on the civil sphere in a substantive way.
The conclusion to the argument will be that there is a specific form of violence of a political kind outside of state control which cannot be reduced to crime.
The specificity of this form of violence or coercion has to be recognized, however one feels about the terrible consequences of it for the innocent.
This form of political violence requires political answers and not just an anti-criminal, police-oriented, coercive response.
But also because such violence can have some hegemonic justification — derived in Ireland from the threat of the alternative alliance — the beliefs too must be scrutinized for their contribution, religious beliefs as well.
We can look at the twin sources for the state's legitimacy in the context of the Republic of Ireland.
First there is the fact of statehood, with the implied acceptance of law and order by the people.
Second, there is the unifying dominant beliefs of Irish catholic nationalism.
The distinct importance of the two sources appears in the way in which state and society in the republic treat the provisional movement.
PIRA is a proscribed organization and there is also a law preventing the national radio and television, RTE, from giving air time to members of the movement.
The intention is to impede the divulgation of its aims.
At the same time, despite the popular support for many of the activities of the provisionals north of the border, there is almost no popular support for terrorist activities against the established government in the South.
The legal position of the IRA is thus indicative of the inviolability of the statehood of the Republic in the national — popular consciousness.
An anti-state force such as the provisionals, who do not recognize the statehood of the twenty-six county state, cannot achieve support in the South for this essential policy.
The power of the element of statehood among the dominant beliefs appears to have been sufficient to neutralize the provisional movement in the South, even though it was severely tested by the event of Bloody Sunday in 1972, when thirteen demonstrators were killed by British soldiers in Derry, and by the provisional hunger strikes of 1981.
Any further attempt to violate the principle of statehood by the new Northern-led leadership, it could be presumed, is unlikely to succeed — indeed, in certain circumstances could result in a reduction of support for their Northern campaigns.
Secondly, and in contrast with this respect for the state's monopoly of violence, because the provisionals seek to destroy the Northern dominance of protestant loyalists with a view to restoring ‘the historic integrity of Ireland’, there is and will remain substantial support from among the Southern population for the violence the provisionals actually commit in the North.
The belief in the integrity of Ireland is central to the unifying dominant beliefs of the alliance and is clearly distinct from the specificity of statehood.
The dual source of the state's role in hegemony helps us understand the limitations of the state in respect of the alliance whose power it also represents.
This is why collections by the provisionals in public houses were having partial success in the  1970s without too much interference by the Garda, the Republic's police force.
The collections indicated a wider hidden culture of support for ‘the lads’ who were at the forefront of the battle to restore national unity, in addition to the much smaller party political support they enjoyed in the South.
The Roman catholic church, in episcopal statements, unequivocally condemns violence North or South.
As seen in Chapter 3, this was also true in the nineteenth century, despite lower clergy support particularly for the Fenian movement.
Cardinal Cullen succeeded in getting three of the four religious provinces of Ireland to deny the sacraments to the Fenians, and only Archbishop McHale of the province of Tuam failed to toe the line.
Generally speaking, there is evidence that the church has always tended to support the hegemony of the state qua state.
It supported the British state for most of the nineteenth century in Ireland, then supported constitutional politics for home rule; and when independence came in 1921, it supported the pro-treaty faction in Southern Ireland and opposed the civil war because that faction was the state.
It would appear that the popular religious consciousness makes a distinction between violence against the Southern state, whose statehood cannot be questioned, and violence for liberation in the North.
Though the extent to which such a consciousness exists is not clear, one aspect of it is beyond dispute: 35 per cent of McGreil's random sample of Dubliners and 46 per cent of the males in the sample, including a spread from the younger age groups and the more educated, supported the view that ‘the use of violence, while regrettable, has been necessary for the achievement of non-Unionist rights’(Mác Gréil 1977: 387).
In any event, there is likely to be significant variation in views as to how far one should condemn or condone this liberationist violence in the North.
One can now see how the preliminary data dealt with in Chapter 1 on good and bad religiosity among Roman catholics is indicative of a long-standing historical contradiction.
Irish catholics find themselves in an ambiguous relationship to Irish nationalism.
Having become the political expression not just of the state appropriate to Ireland but of Irish catholics as well, the Irish nationalist tradition contained and still contains within its confines a culture of violence antithetical to the church's traditional teaching.
Catholic nationalists who support or condone the killing of protestant loyalists do so on the grounds that members of the  Northern police force and part-time army are either agents of British imperialism or maintaining alien protestant — loyalist power in a part of Ireland.
Some more theologically articulate members of the provisional movement justify violence on traditional Roman catholic ethical grounds, the theory of the just war against the unjust oppressor.
For this faction, the term ‘just war’ has secular as well as religious appeal, an ambiguity which permits them to communicate their cause in direct fashion to left-wing British and right-wing American groups at one and the same time.
This culture of violence is complex, and needs wider and deeper research.
One is not simply alluding to the tradition of Padraig Pearse, one of the leaders of the Easter rising of 1916, who paralleled national violence and bloodshed to the salvation effected by the blood offering of Christ.
That tradition was frequently eschewed by later republicans.
The broader tradition is a typically nationalist one, seeing national liberation through war as honourable and singularly justified.
To a degree it is widespread among many not just in the provisional movement but also in the Fianna Fáil party, and in general among those who see their history as one of liberation through blood.
The statue in the market square at Dundalk, a Provisional Sinn Fein memorial, of the Irish liberator rising up behind the phoenix, is an image with much wider appeal.
The Easter rising of 1916 as an act of national liberation, unquestioned in the dominant catholic — nationalist culture from 1922 until well into the 1960s and 1970s, still holds a cherished place in the hearts of the majority of the people.
It is possible for such sentiments of approval of this past to coexist with abhorrence for most current acts of violence.
But the political significance of this culture is that where opinion counts and where the catholic — nationalist remnant actually experiences the coercive power of protestant loyalists and the British army in the Northern statelet, there violence has all the more support.
When it does, it tends to be a reaction to perceived injustice, such as internment without trial, or the conviction of a son by a sole judge in a trial held in total secrecy and on the evidence of unseen witnesses, or a simple case of one's house being badly mauled by careless soldiers searching for arms.
This reactive violence is thus justified by its subjects and the justification subsists  in consciousness along with their Roman catholic profession of faith and identity.
The provisional IRA's commitment to violence against the British and against the protestant — loyalist alliance, which the provisionals rhetorically and conveniently subsume under the term ‘the British’, is frequently assumed to be based on either Marxist or nationalist principles and in both cases to be secularist or areligious.
Yet some provisional leaders and rank and file members are committed to their Roman catholic religious belief and practice.
These beliefs can in fact contribute to the motivation of their struggle.
As Gramsci points out, the religion of the clergy is not necessarily the religion of this or that social group of laity, whose religious interpretation is also related to their own concrete world of experience.
Catholic morality approves of the view that to repel an aggressor is to engage in a just war.
It just so happens that Irish national — popular consciousness interprets the presence of the British state in Ireland as a form of aggression and hence feel justified in repelling the British from Ireland.
Catholic morality also approves of a proportionate degree of violence to overthrow tyranny.
Many Irish catholic nationalists also consider the British and their Orange allies to have established tyrannical government in a part of Ireland.
Therefore they find it just to overthrow the Northern statelet by whatever degree of force proves necessary.
Of course, some beliefs in violence are unrelated to catholic moral teaching.
Some Irish nationalists hold that it is just to unite the nation by force — a typical view of secular nationalism throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries in Europe.
But traditional catholic moral doctrine would oppose this on the grounds of the legitimacy of the state qua state.
Doubtless some protestant paramilitaries — though there have been fewer religious persons among them than in the case of the provisionals — hold to similar religious understandings of the necessity of violence under certain circumstances.
Covenant theology itself empowers the people to take action against the state in certain and specific circumstances, and Ian Paisley and many of his supporters both within and without the Orange order have frequently used bully-boy tactics, and approved paramilitary processions, marching, and drilling.
From Carson to Paisley one finds the argument that it is legitimate to fight to regain one's fundamental freedom if the sovereign with whom one has  covenanted one's allegiance betrays that allegiance and conducts one into slavery.
The argument is clearly inspired by a religious motivation and shows Ulster protestantism to be a vigorous form of political religion, approving whatever defensive measures are necessary to avoid submission to Rome rule.
Ulster protestantism is not contained within churches but spills out on to the streets.
Religion is also involved in the violence indirectly.
Indeed, this is the most significant aspect of the role of religion in the divisions and conflicts in Ireland and goes to the heart of the matter.
In the remaining chapters, it is argued that religion in Ireland basically solidifies the opposing alliances in an exclusive way and precludes a common state form, thus providing the structure of violence which such divisions entail.
This will be shown to be particularly the case in the next chapter on the relationship between catholicism and the Irish constitution.
CONCLUSION
It would be true to say that catholic nationalism was at its most formidable in the years between independence and the rise of pragmatic politics in the Republic under Sean Lemass in the late 1950s.
In that period of the early development of the state, the nationalist ideal was almost totally unquestioned.
But now, on the basis of a number of well-documented opinion polls, W. Harvey Cox (1985) argues that the majority in the Republic of Ireland favouring reunification is barely two to one, and that in the island as a whole it is three to two.
What is more, Cox suggests that support in the South is at best lukewarm.
None the less, the characterization of catholic — nationalist ideology I have just documented would seem to fly in the face of this sort of evidence.
The general data presented by Cox are undeniable, but interpretation of the data rests on certain assumptions, principally that people act on an individualistic basis rather than as groups, and according to attitudes expressed in the quiet of their homes rather than in response to major events.
One remembers the substantial surge in Provisional support in the North on the occasion of the hunger strikes of 1981, and the impact they had on Northern catholic — nationalist consciousness, one which Cox himself acknowledges.
One also remembers the effect ‘Bloody Sunday’ had on Southern attitudes, resulting in the burning of the British Embassy  in Dublin, in 1972.
Though opinion in the South gradually softened, there can be little doubt that the obverse would have been the case had the British government not changed tack and demurred at an openly repressive strategy.
Public opinion responds to the conjunction of culture and event and solidifies either old or burgeoning values as might be the case.
What has been attempted in this chapter has been the clarification that so far the traditional values of catholic nationalism are still dominant among the Roman catholics of Ireland, even if they are severely contested by a significant minority from among them and lukewarmly subscribed to by a further significant minority.
There is as yet no shift in the overall direction of the group, which remains dominated in terms of political action by its monopoly catholic and nationalist constituencies.
Cox sees the growth of modernity and pragmatism as the likely direction for the group, with the consequent and gradual dissolution of catholic nationalism.
That is indeed a possibility.
But more likely is the possibility that it will continue to respond to events, in the way it has done in the past — and there is no guarantee that the evolution Cox envisages will be any more natural than the modernization of Iran seemed to be in the 1970s.
The comparison is a little strong, but only with the intention of making an important point.
In 1985 Cox's paper was timely and asked for shifts in American Irish and British labour politics in a wholly correct way.
But the optimism for change in the Republic of Ireland remains somewhat unqualified.
Religion and Law in the Southern State
Shoring up Monopoly Catholicism
INTRODUCTION
One of the key institutions which embodies the values of dominant alliances in states is the institution of law.
It is important particularly because it draws together both coercion and hegemony in the state.
The dominant religion can also be mediated through law.
In fact, in the Republic of Ireland, catholicism is doubly important.
Not only does it form a part of the dominant beliefs of catholic nationalists, but their state form gives catholic social teaching coercive and hegemonic support.
Catholicism is present in everyday life through state law, as well as through authoritative statements by clergy and through the national — popular consciousness.
The clearest example of law as mediator of political religion in Ireland is the Irish constitution of 1937 and its subsequent interpretation.
part of this interpretation has been by politicians and clerics as well as by judges.
The interaction of these powerful figures in the life of the Republic has been significant for the preservation and development of the catholic — nationalist world view.
Religious leaders have developed ideologies of natural law and the common good to reinforce the Roman catholic element.
Sections of the catholic — nationalist population have also combined their own popular nationalism and religion with aspects of the clerical interpretation already invested in the law, particularly in the anti-abortion movement of the early 1980s.
Other areas where political religion helps to solidify one or both of the alliances are separate education and catholic-protestant marriages.
These will be dealt with in Chapters 6 and 7.
The three areas can be described as ones of political — religious mediation occurring at different levels of social process.
They help solidify state, church, and common people of varying classes into two opposing blocs from whose grasp it is difficult to escape.
RELIGION AND LAW, 1922–1972
The Irish Constitution and Roman Catholic Teaching
Sown into the constitutional fabric of the Republic of Ireland is a local and time-bound Roman catholic ethos which has changed perhaps in only minor ways since the founding of the state.
The Irish state apparatus is certainly secular: priests have no role in it.
The Roman catholic church is financed out of voluntary contributions.
The state has no role in the appointment of bishops and the juridical processes of church and state are kept entirely separate, though it will be seen that a number of administrative procedures reflect a direct link.
We will see that this mode of constructing monopoly catholicism is alien to the Concordat period of Roman catholic church — state relations recognizable in arrangements, for example, with Spain, Portugal, and Italy.
A dislike by Irish clerics for such an explicit and direct church — state relationship has a long tradition and comes out best in De Tocqueville's (1957) conversations with Irish clergy on his visit to Ireland in 1834.
When asked if they would like subventions from the state to aid their stipends and church buildings, a move which was being seriously considered by the British government at the time, priests and bishops were united in rejecting the idea on the grounds that it would drive a wedge between clergy and people, identifying clergy with the principal enemies of the people.
De Tocqueville's notes reveal not only the conscious opposition to such a mode of religious power but also how deep the solidarity between clergy and people was, the degree to which the poor, half the catholic population at the time, looked to the clergy for material and spiritual leadership, guidance, and assistance, and how much they trusted them.
However, with the emergence of the Southern Irish state, it soon became clear that this secularization of the state form was not to signify an absence of Roman catholic power in the construction of public morality, but rather an indirect recognition of the sovereignty of the church in most areas of moral concern besides education.
In fact, precisely because Roman catholic power was to be accepted as normative in an entirely natural way by the catholic — nationalist population, the church's part-active and part-passive  acceptance of the capitalist system of government and thorough opposition to socialism had a significant legitimating function for the Irish state-form.
But this will not be the main focus of attention here; to make the general point requires tracing only the impact of the specific church teaching of the period on constitutional law and its implementation in Ireland.
A Roman catholic ethos is not only present in the constitution of 1937 but has penetrated into affairs of state, legislation, and decisions over the destinies of individuals with frequency.
A significant aspect of the religious hegemonic role can be seen in the translation of religious preoccupations into law via the concept of natural law.
This mediation of ethics makes indirect one's access to the problem of the relationship between the religious faith of some and the morality of the many, particularly on the issue of the freedom of the individual versus the intervention of the state.
In this respect, it is useful to pay attention to what we might now term the human rights' issue as one examines the handling of public — private morality in the Irish constitution.
The first constitution of the Southern state was the Constitution of the Irish Free State of 1922.
Under the treaty with the United Kingdom, the twenty-six counties which were to become the independent state were to remain within the British Empire with dominion status, and the British monarch was to remain head of state.
These principles were embodied in the constitution.
The prime reason for bringing in a new constitution in 1937 was the return to dominance of the republican grouping, the side which had lost the civil war, and which had retained the intention of establishing a republic.
The new Fianna Fáil Party, under the leadership of Eamon de Valera, was intent on asserting Irish independence to the full by leaving the empire and providing a president to replace the monarchy, thus becoming the Republic of Ireland.
The 1922 constitution approved by Britain was considered a model of libertarian democracy.
The preamble of the new constitution of 1937 proclaims:
In the Name of the Most Holy Trinity…
We, the people of Eire,
Humbly acknowledging all our obligations to our Divine Lord, Jesus Christ, Who sustained our fathers through centuries of trial,
Gratefully remembering their heroic struggle to regain the rightful independence of our Nation…
Do hereby adopt, enact, and give to ourselves this Constitution.
Clearly, the spirit of the laws of this Irish state was to be a religious one and therefore one which would not take account of the then one thousand, and now ten thousand or more of the population in the Southern state who professed no religion.
But it was also an explicitly Christian spirit — unfortunate therefore for the four thousand Jews and for the tiny but now increasing numbers of Hindus, Buddhists, Muslims, and Taoists.
The preamble was reinforced by Article 44, paragraph 1:
The State acknowledges that the homage of public worship is due to Almighty God.
It shall hold His Name in reverence and shall respect and honour religion.
The presidential oath (Art.
12) also embodied this principle by calling on God's name explicitly.
Church teaching was already having an impact.
The spirit of papal statements throughout the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was that it was the duty of the state to oppose freedom of conscience in matters of religion and freedom of worship and to celebrate openly the worship of God ‘in that way which he has shown to be his will’, namely Roman catholicism (Leo XIII 1903: 111–12).
In a sense, the new Irish constitution was going against the spirit of this approach.
As already mentioned, the Irish bishops had for some time found the separation of church and state both a workable and desirable solution.
In addition, paragraph 3 of the same article recognized the main protestant churches then existing in Ireland.
However, this was a fairly necessary compromise: paragraph 2 had already conferred on the Roman catholic church a ‘special position’ in the state, on the grounds that the church was ‘the guardian of the Faith professed by the great majority of its citizens’.
The concept of the majority is an important one in both British and Irish politics as already seen in Chapter 4.
What matters for the moment is to examine the contention that the Roman catholic church had this special position only because of this matter of fact.
It is true that the constitution was explicit in recognizing important personal rights in Article 40: equality before the law, the non-recognition of nobility privileges, defence of person and property, liberty, no detention without trial, freedom of speech and assembly.
In fact, some of the paragraphs reproduced in summary  form the personal rights articles of the constitution of 1922 and thus could claim to maintain the latter's libertarian heritage.
Yet the articles which followed qualified certain of these rights in a typically catholic way and in the terms of the papal teaching of the day.
Consider Article 41:
The State recognises the Family as the natural primary and fundamental unit group of Society and as a moral institution possessing inalienable and imprescriptible rights, antecedent and superior to all positive law…
This has a clear relationship with Pius XI's teaching, eight years earlier on the same subject: ‘the very fountainhead from which the State draws its life, namely, wedlock and the family’(1929: 14), and with the dispositions of the then current Code of Canon Law which had come into effect in 1917: ‘The marriage of baptized persons is governed not only by divine law but also by church law.
The civil power only has competence in matters regarding the effects of such marriages’(Code of Canon Law 1917: 1016).
The dispositions of the Irish constitution were clearly designed to accommodate such a position in full.
The implications were spelt out in Article 41, paragraphs 2 and 3, which pledged the state to protect marriage and the family and forbade divorce.
Thus were re-echoed the papal teachings of the indissolubility of both Christian and non-Christian marriage and of the state's obligation to reinforce that indissolubility (Leo XIII 1903: 68, 77, 78 —Arcanum Divinae 1880; Pius XI 1930: 4, 16; Code of Canon Law 1917: 1013).
Article 42 recognized that ‘the primary and natural educator of the child is the family’.
Again, this view is related to Pius XI's, as expressed in Divini Illius Magistri : ‘The family holds directly from the Creator the mission and hence the rights to educate the offspring, a right inalienable because inseparably joined to the strict obligation, a right anterior to any right whatever of civil society and of the State…’(1929: 14).
Article 42 went on to give an almost supplementary right to the state in providing for a child's education by acknowledging the right of parents to school their children in their own home should they wish it.
The article as a whole is strangely lopsided but seems to follow on from the logic of this position, embodying the agreement made between clergy and politicians towards the end of the nineteenth century outlined in Chapter 3.
The article now left the way open for the full expression of the teaching of Pius XI that, though the family had ‘priority of nature and therefore of rights over civil society’, education belonged ‘preeminently to the Church, by reason of a double title in the supernatural order, conferred exclusively upon her by God himself; absolutely superior therefore to any other title in the natural order’(1929: 5–6).
The double title consisted of the church's mission to teach under infallible guidance and her ‘supernatural motherhood’ by which the church ‘educates souls in the divine life of grace’(1929: 7).
As the church owned and managed the majority of the schools its faithful attended, and had a role in the management of the bulk of the remainder, the Roman catholic laity were left mainly on the receiving end of the educational policy thus legitimated.
More was to follow.
There had been no mention of the individual's property rights in the 1922 constitution.
In the new one, as if to repeat the church's social teaching against communism that ‘every man has by nature the right to possess property as his own’(Leo XIII 1903: 210), Article 43 announced:
The State acknowledges that man, in virtue of his rational being, has the natural right, antecedent to positive law, to the private ownership of external goods.
Not only did the church's social teaching directly enter into the definition of rights, wrongs, and obligations within this nation state, but it was also to affect one aspect of the structure of government.
The senate was to have 60 members: 11 were to be directly appointed by the Prime Minister, or Taoiseach, and 49 by election.
Six of the latter were to be elected by the two Irish universities.
But the remaining 43 were to be elected by local and national politicians on a vocational basis: that is, they had to be elected to five panels for which they would qualify by having the requisite vocational expertise — administrative, cultural — educational, labour, industrial and commercial, and agricultural.
A somewhat unusual system one might think: but not according to the papal encyclical Quadragesimo Anno of 1931.
It sought to overcome conflict within capitalist societies by encouraging Christian leaders to reconsider Leo XIII's suggestion of introducing ‘industrial associations’.
These were to be intermediary between capital and labour and based precisely upon types of vocational expertise in a way similar to medieval guilds (Leo XIII 1903: 240–7; Pius XI 1931: 32–4).
Reasons for the Political Religious Synthesis: first Conclusions
The way these various aspects of current Roman catholic social teaching were presented in the Irish constitution can hardly be taken as fulfilment of the need to reflect the opinions of the majority of the republic's population.
The confessional and moral articles were largely the work of the constitution's architect, the then prime minister Eamon de Valera.
He certainly felt that the culture of the state should reflect the fact that it was 93 per cent Roman catholic.
But it is hardly possible to reconcile this with the claim of the constitution in Article 2 that the new state was the legitimate means of government for the entire island, which included over one million dissenting protestants, forming some 20 per cent of the total population.
Their culture was not to be considered at all in the constitution.
One is faced here with the blind spot of the dominant form of Irish nationalism, already so apparent in the preamble to the constitution itself, a blindness made possible by the ideological differentiation of state and religion combined with the ideological unity of the people, seen at once as both nation and catholic.
De Valera was continuing the now dominant culture recognized by Eoin MacNeill and Douglas Hyde when, in his St Patrick's Day address to the United States of America, broadcast in 1935, he underlined the spirit of that preamble: ‘Since the coming of St. Patrick, fifteen hundred years ago, Ireland has been a Christian and a Catholic nation.
All the ruthless attempts to force her from this allegiance have not shaken her faith.
She remains a Catholic nation’(Catholic Bulletin , 25/4 (Apr. 1935), p. 273, quoted Whyte 1980: 48).
To the link catholicism-nation de Valera was also adding Gaelic identity in the form of the state promotion of the language:
The Irish language as the national language is the first official language.
The English language is recognised as a second official language.
(Constitution of Ireland 1937: Art.
B, paras.
1, 2)
De Valera, was, however, openly aware of the alienation of Ulster protestants which such an affirmation of language implied:
I would not to-morrow, for the sake of a united Ireland, give up the policy of trying to make this a really Irish Ireland — not by any means.
If I were told to-morrow, ‘You can have a united Ireland if you give up your idea of restoring the national language to be the spoken language of the majority of the people’, I would, for myself, say no.
(Quoted Laffan 1983: 119)
Whether or not he was equally aware of a similar alienation process in asserting the catholic nature of the nation is perhaps more open to debate.
In any case, the practical attitude clearly excluded the protestant population of the island and left protestant loyalists in no ambiguity as to their place in any future united Ireland.
If Ireland was a catholic nation, then its law and government would be correspondingly so whatever the disposition of church — state relationships, theocratic or secular.
The second likely reason for the deliberate use of church teaching in formulating parts of the constitution is implicit in the presence of the papal-oriented articles of the constitution themselves.
Pius XI had made it clear in 1930, subsequent to the success of the Vatican-Italian Concordat of 1929, that good sons of the church with political power were to look to the church itself for guidance in their statesmanship:
Governments can assist the Church greatly in the execution of its important office if, in laying down their ordinances, they take account of what is prescribed by divine and ecclesiastical law, and if penalties are fixed for offenders…
As Leo XIII has already so clearly set forth: ‘…
The dignity of the State will be enhanced, and with religion as its guide, there will never be a rule that is not just…’(1930: 64)
In fact, de Valera and the civil servants he appointed to assist in the work, consulted Irish theologians on matters of society and church — state relations (Longford and O'Neill 1970: 295–6; Whyte 1980: 379; Keogh 1987; Faughnan 1988).
The most important was John Charles McQuaid, a Holy Ghost priest and later archbishop of Dublin.
Jesuits and other Holy Ghost priests were also involved.
Papal encyclicals came to be consulted by this route, as did the current treatises of Ius Publicun on church — state relations.
These were heavily biased towards the view that there were two perfect societies, both supreme in their own orders, with the church supreme in spiritual and moral matters (see Pius IX's Syllabus of Errors in Freemantle 1956: 145–6, 152; Leo XIII 1903: 114; Pius XI 1930: 65; for typical treatise approaches see Van Noort 1960: 235–41; Bender 1960).
Of course, it was for the church  to decide what constituted a spiritual or moral matter.
But, to his credit, de Valera toned down the catholicism in the drafts suggested to him by the clergy, consulted Rome, and was successful in getting it at least to be neutral about his preferred formulations (Keogh 1987:.
43–53).
He also consulted protestant church leaders on the religious elements of the new constitution, a step unprecedented in catholic Ireland of his day, and gained their support on the basis of the recognition of their churches the constitution was to give.
But there is a third and underlying reason which must have motivated de Valera and the religious and political intellectuals in this religious pursuit of an allegedly secular and public morality which mirrored Roman catholic teaching.
The issue of heeding the church was not simply one of seeking a mediator of divine guidance on matters of Christian conscience.
For the Roman catholic social teaching of the day laid down certain things as of natural law which anyone who was reasonable and honest was supposed to be able to recognize.
The advice of the church's moral experts and authoritative clerics was thus pertinent to the entire population of the world, let alone that of Ireland.
The conscientious lay person was simply involved in a two-way process of having his or her conscience informed, while at the same time being protected from making unintended errors of judgement.
The church was acting on behalf of all, and had a prime obligation to push for a public morality which matched its perception of the natural law lest the very fabric of society be torn asunder and its members cast on the road of moral decline.
What was good for catholics was also good for protestants, and Ireland was to be no exception.
In fairness to de Valera, it must be said that he opposed any attempt to incorporate the church into the apparatus of the state and in this was, as already noted, going against the form of relationship preferred by the Popes of the day.
But his attitude was by now part of the common sense of clergy and people alike.
There appeared to be no reason to upset long-established routines in this respect.
But that did not mean that the ethos of a Roman catholic state would be in any way diminished, only that the form of political religious power would be different.
An important aspect of the successful implementation of these parts of the constitution was that the political opposition did not object to them.
They really were part of the unquestioned reality of the culture of the state.
Part of this culture was a certain distinction  between what made up the sacred and what made up the profane spheres.
If guidance were to be sought in matters which hovered on the boundary between the two, it was likely that the church would be seen by people and politicians as authoritative in resolving the issue.
But there was in any case no doubt that the areas of the family, education, and public morality constituted part of the sacred sphere.
One explicit guiding principle of papal teaching which came to influence the Irish constitution and successive debates culminating in the church — state imbroglio of 1951, dealt with below, was that of ‘subsidiarity’: that no ‘secondary’ institution such as the state should take on duties which ‘primary’and ‘intermediate’ones, such as the family, could assume.
Secondary institutions were also expected to assist primary ones in fulfilling their essential tasks.
The principle took on particular importance in the light of the development of totalitarian communism, and the Roman church saw the threat to be endemic in the growth of the modern state apparatus, including its welfare institutions.
It is also important to notice how easily such a principle supports personal enterprise and property in its contemporary form, capitalism.
Aspects of the Irish constitution and its implementation are clearly oppressive as well as offensive to other minorities besides the protestant ones.
The structure of this oppressive power contained not the Roman catholic church as state executive, but as what Gramsci termed ‘an organic intellectual’, as a planner and co-executor of the ethos of the state, merging this public aspect of the catholicism of the day with ideological elements from more recognized sources of catholic-Irish nationalism: the language movement, anti-imperialism and, generally, catholic-Irish domination.
The purpose of detailing the relationship between the Irish constitution and the papal teaching of the period has not been to ridicule seemingly outdated church — state dispositions.
The writings of Leo XIII (1878–1903), on which those of Pius XI (1922–39) were frequently constructed, are remarkable expressions of a papacy dragging itself up by its bootstraps from centuries of neglect in the field of social, economic, and political issues.
It had continually opposed socio-political change and had had little understanding of the industrialization process up to that time.
The growth of the catholic social movements and activity of Roman  catholics in trade unions and politics was rooted in this dramatic revival, which gave rise to Catholic Action and the development of catholic social studies groups around the world.
The birth of sociologie religieuse and the initial contributions of catholic institutions both in Europe and the USA to the founding of departments of sociology are rooted here rather than in the work of the founding fathers of the discipline, though clearly there are links between de Bonald, Maistre, and Durkheim on the nature of social solidarity and the concept of society, and authoritative Roman catholic social theorists.
Equally, the stress on the negative influence of Irish catholicism is not meant to imply a negation of its positive aspects: its sustenance of the people during long years of oppression, the dedication of its clergy and religious orders, both in education and in welfare, not to mention the contribution of its missionaries to the fight for social justice in third-world countries.
Its lay politicians have equally made important contributions.
De Valera himself resisted right-wing pressures to enhance the role of the church in the Irish state and successfully opposed tendencies to fascism apparent in Irish paramilitary movements of the thirties (Manning 1970).
The Pre-Constitutional Ethos.: The Case of the Protestant Librarian of County Mayo and Issues of Sexual Morality
Was the Irish constitution merely an abstract one, without actual social consequences?
It was not only a constitution which really was and is effective in the running of the state, but which was itself the product of the hegemonic culture already established.
Whyte (1980) provides several instances of the influence of the Roman catholic moral code in both state decision-making and in public behaviour from 1922 through to the 1950s.
The most interesting one, in which clergy, local people, and the Dáil all played their part, was the case of the protestant librarian in County Mayo, 1930–1.
A woman protestant was appointed as county librarian, but when the county library committee met to ratify the appointment, it refused to do so by ten votes to two.
The committee was largely made up of Roman catholic clergy, and they clearly opposed the appointment on the grounds that a protestant could not be trusted to safeguard the catholic morals of her charges in her purchase and loaning of books.
Though the Cosgrave government then in power insisted on the appointment, the local population and authorities boycotted  the operation of the library, and the government had to concede by moving the librarian elsewhere.
When the matter was debated in the Dáil, Fianna Fáil opposed the government view, and de Valera himself supported the local population's opposition on the same religious grounds.
From the point of view of the issue of law, there can be no doubt as to the influence both of the constitution of 1937 in the period following its enactment and of the influence of Roman catholic teaching on legislation prior to that date.
But these were all in areas circumscribed by the church as spiritual matters.
The church's greatest denunciations were reserved in the early period for sexual immorality and the dangers to the people coming from modern society: from the cinema, literature, radio, and, above all, from dance-halls (Whyte 1980: 25–34).
Already in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, there had been a powerful alignment between rural cultural ethics and church teaching.
On the sons and daughters of the farming family was imposed the strict necessity of abstaining from sexual activity other than for the first born, so as not to impair the integrity of land succession.
From the church came a dual impulse strengthening this morality: the prevailing teaching on sexual abstention outside of marriage under pain of mortal sin, and the rigorous life of a clergy pledged to chastity and preaching the need for an unmarried laity to practise the same degree and kind of circumspection in sexual matters which the clergy had been taught to impose upon themselves.
If anything, the return of the land to the practising farmers by the land Acts would have strengthened such a morality.
It is also interesting to note that the issue of land inheritance was a key reason why the Irish population voted ‘no’ in the referendum on divorce in 1986.
That the local priests continued to play a significant part in the regulation of local sexual morality from the beginning of the state is shown by accounts of ‘boy meets girl’ from the 1920s.
For example: ‘In 1931 we got a new P[arish] P[riest].
He condemned dancing in every form, even the kitchen dances were sinful and against the wishes of our Church.
Boys and girls should not be on the road after dark.
The C[atholic] C[urate] was sent out to patrol the roads and anybody found or seen on the roads had to give their names.
The people who allowed boys and girls into  their home to dance were committing a grave mortal sin…
Dancing was the devil's work…
(Kavanagh 1954, quoted Whyte 1980: 29–30)’
The Irish state apparatus assisted public and family morality by the fairly heavy censorship of books, magazines, newspapers, and films.
It also banned the making, importation, or distribution.
of contraceptives, and the distribution of any literature informing on such matters.
The reaction of the first Dáil to successive attempts to introduce legislation for divorce was to change standing orders so that such a bill could not be introduced again.
Since the new constitution was enacted in 1937, the prohibition on divorce has become so strict that couples who have been granted a nullity decree by Roman catholic canonical tribunals have found that they may still not be recognized as single by the state, and are thus unable to remarry in the Republic.
There has been a degree of attenuation of this rigidity in some respects, but only in favour of the church's interpretation.
People seeking to remarry must first get a divorce abroad — which in practice means Britain.
Naturally, apart from the accusation of hypocrisy and of letting Britain solve its marriage problems, the government ends up being accused of allowing divorce for the wealthy and none for the poor, as the cost of going to and staying in Britain and paying for the legal procedures is beyond the pockets of the majority.
An additional concern of the church remained the fear of socialism.
The labour party, which still had some of the socialist leanings of its founder James Connolly, was forced by its own lay members to amend its draft constitution in 1940 in order to fall in line with current papal social teaching.
Phrases such as striving for the setting up of a ‘Workers’ republic' and the establishment of ‘public ownership’were excised, as they were seen by the members of an affiliated teachers' union, and ultimately by the bishops, to counter church doctrine (Whyte 1980: 82–4; Keogh 1982: 7, 77 n.5).
The teachers' union even submitted the draft constitution to the bishops so as to get it right.
It is to be noted that, in this, it was the laity who took the initiative.
Testing the Alliance 1: The Adoption Controversy
The way in which the morality received by the state from the Roman catholic church could create conflict within the state but still be transferred into the coercive sphere of state activity can be seen in two cases in particular.
They are indicative not only of the strength of current Roman catholic social rules and sense of obedience on specified issues at the level of popular religion, but also of the direct power of the hierarchy operating through the state in affairs they considered sacred.
The two cases also show that change is a possibility, but that it has mainly been in the past through change in the hierarchy's and clergy's attitudes as well.
The cases equally indicate the boundary beyond which the church was seen as abusing its definitions of the sacred.
The first of these incidents occurred with the attempt to introduce a law on adoption.
During the period 1947–51, an inordinate delay on the part of the government was experienced in bringing forward the requisite bill legalizing adoption, despite considerable pressure from prospective adoptive parents and adoption agencies.
In the new state, fostering was the only way to provide a home for orphaned and otherwise parentless children.
It became clear that the relevant government ministers were deliberately hindering the progress of the necessary bill.
When both the Minister for Justice, General McEoin, and the Attorney General, Mr Charles Casey, made it clear that they considered the legislation inopportune, pressure for an explanation eventually brought forward a response from Mr Casey.
He argued that Article 42 of the constitution claimed the primary right of care for the natural parents and was inalienable: it could not be delegated.
In addition, he argued that legalizing adoption was against the teaching of ‘the church’.
He further argued, or at least implied, that to permit a ‘non-catholic’ to adopt children would be wrong because it might put such children's eternal salvation in jeopardy (Whyte 1980: 188–9).
It later became clear that the two ministers had consulted the Roman catholic archbishop of Dublin before delivering their judgement on the matter.
An adoption bill eventually became law two years later, in 1952, under the next administration.
Mr Casey and the archbishop were  judged to have followed a conservative catholic viewpoint and the
1952 solution was adopted because it reflected what had become a more theologically certain position on the matter.
But even the new bill limited adoption to parents possessing the same religious identity as the child.
This meant that couples who had married across the religious divide were not allowed to adopt at all.
As will be seen in Chapter 7, this itself could only have been due to current Roman catholic social teaching on mixed marriage.
It was 1974 before that particular form of discrimination was removed by a new Adoption Act.
Testing the Alliance 2: The Mother and Child Scheme Controversy
The second case reveals even more the extent to which the legitimation of the state was a Roman catholic affair, at least as one of the two principal sources of power in the alliance.
From the early 1940s, the Irish government began to work towards the introduction of a comprehensive health service for mothers and children in line with other legislative developments in Western countries.
There can be no doubt that the lack of such a programme bore heavily upon the poor, and that poor health and mortalities were a consequence.
In 1946 there were already signs of clerical opposition to any socialization of welfare in queries about Fianna Fáil's proposals from Archbishop McQuaid and the Confederation of Convent Schools.
As has already been seen, it was the style of both church and politicians to avoid their mutual consultations being known, which tells us that the secularity of the state at that time was partially a façade, but one which it was felt by both interested parties had to be maintained, probably so as not to confuse the faithful.
In a letter to the Irish premier in 1947, while an extensive health bill was going through parliament, the bishops ‘pointed out that to claim such powers for the public authority, without qualification, is entirely and directly contrary to Catholic teaching on the rights of the family, the Church in education, the rights of the medical profession and voluntary institutions’(Irish Independent , 12 Apr. 1951, quoted Whyte 1980: 143).
It appeared that one of the main sources of the bishops' opposition was the authoritarian nature of the legislation.
That the bishops were  affected by the opposition of the medical profession to the scheme — clearly they stood to lose money and independence if such a scheme were implemented — seems likely.
Whereas similar provisions in other countries were mainly designed to provide facilities which could or could not be used, the Irish ones were to be compulsory and there was to be no choice of doctor.
The hierarchy feared the move as the thin end of the wedge of secularism and the totalitarian state.
It appears they feared the appointment of secular medical personnel who might educate mothers in family planning and their children in sexual matters.
Additionally, they feared the full development of a national health service, viewed by them as unacceptable socialism.
A change of government in 1948 found the new administration equally committed to health reform.
The new Minister for Health, Dr Noel Browne, a dedicated reformer of the health services and much concerned in particular with the eradication of tuberculosis in Ireland, modified the earlier bill to exclude the compulsion elements.
But by March 1951, it was clear that even this reform did not satisfy the Irish hierarchy who had also been lobbied by the Irish Medical Association to oppose the scheme.
Grounds for the bishops' opposition were that only parents and not the state should have the right to provide for the health of their children, that the state had no role to play in the physical education of children and mothers, and that individual privacy would be threatened by public use of their private health records (Whyte 1980: 213–14).
Later the hierarchy made it clear that the basis for their objections was the increase in power by the state vis-à-vis the liberty and self-reliance of its citizens which such legislation would entail.
Perhaps the most revealing aspect of the whole affair is the way Dr Browne handled it.
The members of his party appeared to know nothing about the opposition of the hierarchy to the earlier Bill, and Dr Browne only found out in October/November 1950.
When he was told of the hierarchy's opposition to any bill of this kind, Dr Browne, himself secularly inclined, submitted his proposals and arguments to the hierarchy for approval, just as a previous Health Minister, Dr Walsh, had consulted Archbishop McQuaid on a similar matter in 1946.
If a man of such convictions felt it necessary to follow this course, how much more would have his religiously  devoted colleagues.
In fact, his cabinet colleagues, already unsure about public support for the bill and alienated from Dr Browne by his provocative politics, were not prepared to go against the hierarchy's condemnation and refused to support the proposal.
They moved that a new scheme should be prepared, in conformity with catholic social teaching.
Dr Browne was forced to resign.
Dr Browne has been something of a maverick in Irish politics even up to this present time.
He took the unprecedented step of going public on the issue, an action of which Whyte does not sufficiently stress the importance.
He handed on the correspondence between himself and the Bishops to the Irish Times , the recognized liberal and ‘protestant’ newspaper of the republic.
It was a contentious gesture.
Many were shocked and surprised at the interference of the bishops in the parliamentary process.
Others resented Dr Browne's tactics, for the church was clearly not to be brought into such public disrepute.
Again, it was clear that the ministers and their parliamentary colleagues, many of whom in any case disliked the scheme, would not pass into legislation any bill which had been declared contrary to church teaching by the bishops.
At this level, the power of the Roman catholic church bore directly on the institutions of government.
Dáil members would act on a decision of the hierarchy once that hierarchy had said the teaching of the church was at issue, providing of course that the area in question was a grey one, a new territory not previously covered by the generally accepted sacred-profane spheres.
In such an unclear area, it was not to be left to Dáil members to decide, irrespective of whether it still remained an appropriate public measure.
Even if Dáil members had thought otherwise, it must by now be clear that the ethos of the Irish Republic was still one in which it was impolitic to be in conflict with the church.
Reasons for the Political Religious Synthesis: Second Reflections
When the next government under de Valera introduced a very limited scheme of public health assistance in 1952, the hierarchy still opposed its introduction, and by direct methods as well.
Only de Valera's personal intervention convinced them of their lack of perception and judgement.
It was the 1960s before the bishops began to distance themselves from direct relationships with the government of the day.
It could be argued that such a strategy was in any case unnecessary.
However, it was not simply a strategy, but  embodied a particular ideology: the belief that the bishops were the church above all, and that they, not the laity, were the ones to communicate with the state.
The desire to make arrangements covertly could well have been affected by a double pressure.
On the one hand, the laity would not understand the complexity of the issues because of their poor understanding of Christian doctrine and the intricacies of morality; on the other, the area of the sacred in the political arena was clearly defined, and clear guidance from the clerical church was both necessary and expected by good Christian politicians.
What the bishops and the politicians had come up against in the Mother and Child controversy was that this paternalistic conceptualization was intrinsically at odds with the common understanding of democracy.
This appears to be the first contradiction which the bishops later sought to resolve by withdrawing from the direct contact method.
It indicates that a real change did eventually take place after all, in so far as freedom of information and the inappropriateness of direct consultation without public mediation eventually became accepted as something which, at worst, had to be risked and something which, at best , formed an essential task of the construction of a Christian conscience in a Christian society.
This, however, was the only contradiction which appears to have been solved by the 1960s.
The popular disquiet had deeper roots.
One was the detestation by the liberally oriented of religious paternalism, a mild form of anti-clericalism.
The other was the sense of injustice experienced by the subordinate classes at seeing the scheme dropped.
Many of these had just as much sense of loyalty and devotion to the church as the middle classes.
Large sections of the population, the subordinate classes specifically, were desperately in need of improved health care.
Many of them appear to have been angered and disappointed at the church's suppression of the proposed scheme.
The fact that it was not long after that similar if lesser welfare legislation was introduced is indicative of the public demand and that clerical socio-moral theory did not tally with the people's experience of reality.
The case reveals the extent to which the church as an institution was coupled with the nation.
Part of the state's legitimate authority rested on this acknowledgement and it was built into its hegemonic structure and consensus.
The case highlights the extent to which it was possible for the religious intellectuals to misjudge exactly  where the consensus lay, as well as the extent to which an evolving historical situation which created areas for new decision-making provided the field for a new power contest.
It was then more than a misjudgement: it revealed the extent to which the religious intellectuals' theory of church and state was outdated and incoherent.
What might have been the nature of the inner religious conflict?
One could try to approach it with the notion of spheres of competence.
The actual sphere of competence the church had sought to monopolize had been that of sexual morals, temperance, the semi-private sphere of the family, and education.
It was when the semi-public nature of family matters became the subject of attention that the sources of the legitimacy of the state — the Irish nation, the church, democracy — were brought into conflict.
To be more precise, the conflict was between the felt need of interventionism by the majority of the population and its politicians and the particular social theology of the churchmen.
The churchmen had failed to provide another theology suited to the case.
They failed to see that the principle of subsidiarity as interpreted was inadequate to a modern society.
The process of industrialization and the accelerated growth of the division of labour had already wrested from the family, including its rural variant, its monopolistic role in the processes of production.
The family had changed, and its various functions of education, food production, and the manufacture of clothing were already in part relinquished to a variety of institutions whose smooth functioning rested on the intervention and guidance of the nation state.
The change in the socio-moral context was hardly recognized, and the corresponding change in religious social ethics had remained unformulated.
In the case of the Mother and Child scheme, it was rather through withdrawal from the scene that first the politicians and later the churchmen avoided further trouble.
As will be elaborated now in further contexts, it appears that the underlying reality to such difficulties was, and remains a complex contradiction which the catholic — nationalist alliance has still failed to solve.
On the one hand there were the beliefs in the nature and extent of the clergy's political religious power and how that power was to be exercised in the state.
There was also the general assumption that the fact of a state populated by catholics must perforce imply a heightened degree of institutionalized catholic  value in law.
On the other hand, there was the nationalist theory of democracy, which derives power from the people and not from an élite group of religious intellectuals.
The next section will show the way in which this contradiction continued to be shared by a large number of clergy and laity even into the 1980s.
It should be added here that the high clergy hardly recognized that they had actually been exercising a political religious power of a specifically sectarian or monopolistic type.
Hence when Irish clergymen stated that church and state were separate, they meant they themselves had no legislative or executive role in the state.
But they did and still do remain the authoritative conscience of the nation.
In addition, the clergy appear to have considerable difficulty in recognizing the transformation which theoretical positions on Christian belief and morality undergo as they are concretized in historical human relationships, doubtless also because of the strong essentialist bias in their perception of socio-ethical issues.
Part of the overall argument of this book is that, as the Roman catholic church is principal validator or legitimator of the Southern state along with the concept of the national entity, what that state goes on to do in the field of social ethics cannot be separated out from the responsibilities of the church.
This structural link between politics and religion is underlined by the legitimacy the church gives to the state as a whole, by recognizing it simply as society.
However, it is the further legitimation given to a particular socio-ethical form of political religion in the constitution and to the implied authority of religious intellectuals in deciding in concreto what must be taken by the state as in the interests of the common good which gives to conflict in Ireland between the two alliances its political religious dimension in the sphere of law.
It is almost as if the catholic Irish people become a people of God in Old Testament terms, in a way similar to the Northern Calvinists, a people which have overriding power to set up their domain.
The continuing permeation of civil society by this particular variant of the Roman catholic ethos was most natural.
As already stated, the clergy had sustained the catholic — nationalist populace over centuries of oppression.
Furthermore, the ranks of that clergy were drawn from the common people themselves.
But a key element remained the considerable filial loyalty the catholic nationalists showed towards their clergy, bishops, and Popes.
The  authority of the clergy had been second to none during the years of persecution and this appears to have strengthened as a direct result of Roman centralization from the 1850s onwards.
This respect for authority has appeared throughout the examples given, but it has also been shown to be a respect within certain limits.
RELIGION AND LAW IN THE SOUTHERN STATE, 1973–86
Minor Indications of Political Religious Changes
There is a strong case for arguing that the dominance of Roman catholic high clergy in the determination of key value ingredients in catholic — nationalist consensus in the South is in a state of change, and that certain aspects in particular are being challenged.
From the 1950s onwards there was considerable improvement to the standard of living.
As Ireland opened up to foreign investment under de Valera's successor, Sean Lemass, another element in the value structure came to prominence, namely the obligation to achieve and retain full employment within the context of a modernized economy and a satisfactory level of housing, welfare, and medical care for all.
The economic growth of the 1960s and early 1970s came to grief because of the western economic slump of the last decade and the massive increase in the Southern population.
This grew from three to three and a half million by 1981 and was created by a combination of net immigration, earlier and more frequent marriage, and the maintenance of relatively high levels of childbirth.
This is a major reason, in addition to state interventionism, why economic matters precede the issue of Northern Ireland both theoretically and practically in contemporary Irish politics.
A further change has been the growth of liberal theology within the Irish Roman catholic intelligentsia.
The influence of the second Vatican Council (1962–5) has enabled theological discourse to become dominated by non-hierarchical models of the church and a generally eirenic theology in which all the churches in Ireland share.
Roman catholic theologians teach at Trinity College, former bastion of protestant Ireland, and Roman catholic writers, including clergy, question the agreed wisdom of the Irish catholic hierarchy.
But, as will be seen, such liberal theologians have yet to achieve power within the political religious establishment.
Criticism of the Irish constitution itself from both clergy and laity  produced one first change in the constitution.
The famous paragraph of Article 42 intending to give pride of place to the Roman catholic church in the state was removed by referendum in 1972, along with the accompanying paragraph recognizing other existing religious groups.
The Roman catholic hierarchy declared that they had no opposition to this particular change, but one wonders how the vote would have gone if they had.
Also, in 1974, an adoption Act made it possible for couples of mixed denominational or religious origin to adopt.
But Roman catholic adoption agencies, the source for the majority of children awaiting adoption, are not obliged to assign baptized Roman catholic children to such couples, and whether they do or not is not a matter of public knowledge.
The episode shows, as Whyte says, ‘not a clash between Church and State but a shifting consensus involving them both,(1980:399).
A further significant change in political religious attitudes occurred with the liberalization of legislation prohibiting contraceptives to be bought or sold, or even imported into the state.
A campaign begun in 1971 to repeal the ban dating from 1935 culminated in the famous appeal of Mrs McGee to the Supreme Court to declare she had a right to use contraceptives.
The supreme court found in her favour in 1973 and declared the relevant section of the 1935 Criminal Law Amendment Act to be unconstitutional.
However, a law dealing with the national situation as a whole was only introduced in 1979.
The Act, while permitting the sale of contraceptives, restricted sellers to chemists and only on the production of a medical prescription.
This did not prevent the Family Planning Association in its Dublin and Cork clinics from providing contraceptives freely and students at University College, Dublin from installing a condom-dispensing machine in their Union building.
In fact, the need to liberalize the law was mainly because it was inoperable: thousands of people were already using contraceptives.
A committee of the Irish Medical Association put the numbers of women using the contraceptive pill in 1978 as 48,000; and the Family planning Association saw 30,000 people in 1976 and more than 53,000in 1978 (Whyte 1980: 403–4).
It is quite possible that a number of other political changes would have got under way more recently were it not for the direct intervention of Pope John Paul II and the Vatican.
In 1985, Rome declined to follow the convention of choosing the new archbishop  of Dublin from the names submitted by the clergy and notables of the diocese, and imposed a known conservative and former president of Maynooth College, Dr Kevin MacNamara.
No clearer way of indicating the path to be trod could have been made.
It is possible that such authoritarian actions will occur again as soon as another crucial appointment to the hierarchy comes up.
Of course, Irish clergy and laity are sometimes at the forefront of political religious change in other countries, and a lively Irish intellectuals’ religion will continue: but whether or not it will eventually affect the structure of power is another matter.
Major Indications of Conflict: The Abortion Debate
The shifting consensus of church and state was not the major feature of the period.
The two changes which took place in law and constitution before 1980 were at least permitted by the clerical church in that it agreed with the abolition of the special position of the Roman catholic church, and did not oppose the limited introduction of contraceptives.
They were both cases expressing the consensus of politician and priest.
The major debates after that time have tended to show a split between church leadership and a large section of its laity on the one hand, and a significant proportion of Roman catholic laity, other churches, and secular groups on the other.
In this confrontation, the traditional religious forces, which support the old monopoly religious structure, have so far prevailed.
The first major demonstration of this was in 1983, in the controversy over the abortion amendment.
Two years previously, a campaign to write into the Irish constitution the existing legislation criminalizing abortion had got under way under the name of the Pro-Life Amendment Campaign.
It is difficult to describe this body accurately.
The bulk of its organizers were members of traditional organizations of the old sodality type: members from the Legion of Mary, the Knights of Columbanus, and one or two other organizations of more recent origin devoted to the strengthening of catholic morality.
Having acquired a sufficient number of signatures, the Campaign submitted their referendum proposal, which the government of the day, the Fine Gael — Labour coalition under Garret FitzGerald which had come into power that year, decided  to submit to the populace.
The Roman catholic bishops supported the wording of the referendum and, as the referendum approached, said it was legitimate to oppose the amendment even if one was against abortion, which was in any case still immoral and was ‘the direct taking of an innocent life’(Irish Bishops' Conference statement, quoted O'Carroll 1983).
However, on the eve of the referendum, the majority of priests preached against abortion.
The nexus appears to have been made for a sufficient number of the laity, as those who eventually voted in the referendum voted in favour of inscribing an appropriate anti-abortion clause in the constitution.
Article 40, paragraph 3, section 3, now reads:
The State acknowledges the right to life of the unborn and, with due regard to the equal right of life of the mother, guarantees in its laws to respect, and, as far as practicable, by its laws, defend and vindicate that right.
(Ninth Amendment of the Constitution Act, 1984)
Several points of note should be made.
Firstly, only slightly more than half the electorate voted, when other turn-outs for referendums have been around two-thirds; and despite considerable pressure from the clergy, only one-third of the total electorate actually voted for the measure.
There is the suggestion, therefore, that the traditional popular religion is in decline, albeit still responsive enough to hierarchical religious leadership to produce the necessary political religious results.
Secondly, anti-abortionism is the view of the great majority of the population in both parts of Ireland, as well as the various churches.
The appropriate committee of the presbyterian church in Ireland opposed the extension of the British Abortion Act of 1967 to Northern Ireland (Presbyterian Church in Ireland 1930–86,Annual Report (1982), pp. 194–6).
In consequence, it was resolved ‘That the General Assembly is firmly opposed to indiscriminate abortion, but does not believe it is wise to insert a clause banning abortion into the Constitution of the Republic…’
(Presbyterian Church in Ireland 1930–86,Annual Reports (1983), p. 9).
Its position on abortion itself was hardly ambiguous: the minutes of the Assembly meeting for 1982 point out ‘[the Assembly's]opposition to abortion on demand for purely social reasons, or as a means of birth control…[and]that in exceptional circumstances, where medical abortion might be necessary, the most stringent safeguards should be provided to  prevent abuse’(Presbyterian Church in Ireland 1930–86, General Assembly (1982), p. 61).
The Church of Ireland maintains its adherence to the Lambeth Conference decision of 1958 to oppose abortion on anything but the most exceptional grounds (Church of Ireland Submission to the New Ireland Forum (1984), p. 2).
The Methodist Church in Ireland was in session during an unsuccessful attempt by the government to quash the running of the referendum.
It welcomed
a belated attempt to meet minority principles in a plural democracy by avoiding any definition and by restoring ultimate power of decision to the Oireachtas [Parliament].
The Conference regrets the failure of the attempt.
It regrets that the previous Government [of Fianna Fáil, under Charles Haughey]made no concessions to protestant appeals for a more open position…
The Conference would wish all who may take part in the referendum to recognize that Protestant Churches are pro-Life but anti-amendment and to query whether they wish a clause in the constitution unacceptable to Protestant churches.
(Methodist Church in Ireland 1983: 48)
The position taken by the protestant churches, and the newspaper articles and television debates which preceded the referendum appear to have affected public opinion.
Caught between the preaching of the Roman catholic clergy and appeals from protestants and liberal Roman catholics — including Dr FitzGerald — not to constitutionalize the issue, it would appear that many voters simply stayed away rather than vote against the proposal.
As mentioned, it was already forbidden by law to procure an abortion.
Its constitutionalization is a direct result, not of this already widespread opinion, but of Roman catholic pressure of the monopoly type.
The writing into the constitution of the prohibition did not mark the end of the campaign for some groups.
Legal action was taken in 1986 by the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child (SPUC) to prevent the two family planning clinics in the Republic from counselling abortion.
The high court decision, announced at the end of December in that year, found on behalf of SPUC and declared such counselling by the Dublin Well Woman Centre and the Open Line counselling service to be illegal and ordered them to cease their public information service on the issue by 12 January 1987.
As the ruling only applies to the institutions named, SPUC intends to get further banning orders made against other groups  and named individuals as and when it becomes ‘necessary’(Irish Times , 30 Dec. 1986).
It should be noted that contraceptives which can result in an abortion, often termed ‘abortifacients’ and including devices such as the coil and spermicidal lubricants and jellies, remain illegal in Ireland.
The Roman Catholic Hierarchy and the New Ireland Forum
The next significant event of constitutional relevance was the important initiative taken by the nationalist parties in Ireland in 1983–4, the New Ireland Forum.
This was an initiative sponsored by the SDLP at first intended to bring together politicians from both catholic — nationalist and protestant — loyalist groups to discuss the future of the island as a whole.
In reality only the major nationalist parties participated.
Loyalist parties refused to join in, and the Provisional Sinn Fein was excluded by the fact that the ground rules for the forum only allowed parties accepting constitutional, nonviolent politics to participate.
The forum completed its consultations and reported in the Summer of 1984.
There was one vital breakthrough for the nationalist consciousness, though there still remains some doubt as to how deep this was for the Fianna Fáil party: all the parties committed themselves to the recognition of the protestant — loyalist group as having legitimate aspirations and affirmed the need for the recognition of ‘two sets of legitimate rights’ coexisting in the island as a whole: ‘Constitutional nationalists are determined to secure justice for all traditions…
The new Ireland must be a society within which, subject only to public order, all cultural, political and religious beliefs can be freely expressed and practised.’
This was made explicit in terms of the sense of British identity which protestant loyalists experience: ‘This implies in particular, in respect of Northern protestants, that the civil and religious liberties that they uphold and enjoy will be fully protected and their sense of Britishness accommodated’(New Ireland Forum 1983–4: i. 22–3).
For the very first time, the leadership of all the major constitutional nationalist parties in Ireland, representing 90 per cent of the nationalist population, had abandoned the concept of the tyranny of the majority will.
The people of Ireland were not identified as the catholic — nationalist population.
There were still traces of ethnocentrism in the nationalist viewpoint elsewhere in the report: for instance, they still referred to ‘the historic integrity  of Ireland’(New Ireland Forum 1983–4: i. 28), implying an almost naturalistic concept of Irish unity, when as a political unit Ireland only ever existed as a British-administered territory.
But whether the statement is rhetoric or reality, particularly for Mr Charles Haughey and the rest of the Fianna Fáil leadership, we will have to wait and see.
The Irish Roman catholic church leadership also submitted statements on its political religious position.
While preparing an early draft of the present chapter, the writer heard Bishop Cathal Daly of Down and Connor, a leading moderate among the bishops, respected by all except PIRA, repeat the adage that the Irish constitution was secular, implying that there really was little to be done for the moment.
This in fact was the main tack in the bishops' attitude to the forum.
There appears to have been a general feeling among them that there was no real problem on this score.
Concessions would only be required once a united Ireland was being negotiated (New Ireland Forum 1983–4: xii.
11).
Via the channels of public announcements at times of political decision-making, the bishops seek to enforce official Roman catholic morality on all members of the state.
Their intention to continue with this strategy remains.
Both in the Forum Report (New Ireland Forum 1983–4: xii) and in their written submission (Irish Episcopal Conference 1984), they not only repeated their oft-stated attitude to catholic schools, defending them from any contribution to sectarianism in Ireland, but opposed the introduction of divorce and any weakening of legislation which they felt protected the family.
They explicitly quoted sections of Article 41 or the 1937 constitution so as to support the view of including its provisions in any new all-Ireland constitution.
They further expressed reservations about the concept of pluralism and maintained an objectivist stance on the relationship between the Roman catholic understanding of the natural law, as the Irish bishops saw it, and the duties of the modern state:
It must…be kept in mind that ‘the moral law’, ‘the common good of all’ and ‘the objective moral order’are not derived simply from the teaching of the Catholic Church.
They are largely accessible to human reason…
They oblige all, including non-Catholics, because they proceed from right reason, and not because they are taught by the Catholic Church.
They are also an invitation to those who exercise political power to reflect on the nature of man and of human society and in the enactment of laws to  eschew the often brilliant attractions of pragmatism, of relativism or of short-term solutions in favour of lasting concern for the common good of all.
(Irish Episcopal Conference 1984: 18)
They also expressed reservations over the concept of minority rights: ‘Britain, for example, does not allow polygamy even though certain of its citizens accept it from their religious convictions’(Irish Episcopal Conference 1984: 18).
However, they did state that, in a united Ireland, Northern protestants would not lose any ‘civil and religious rights’(New Ireland Forum 1983–4: xii.
2).
This was generally understood by the media to mean that the hierarchy would not oppose the introduction of divorce in a future united Ireland, indeed that they might be prepared to budge on the issue even now.
But the bishops' statement does not say so.
When forced into a debate on the matter by Seamus Mallon of the SDLP and Senator Mary Robinson, the four church representatives, Bishop Cathal Daly, Bishop O'Mahoney, Bishop Cassidy, and Mrs McAleese, retained the right of the church to enter into public debate on the evils of divorce.
Bishop Daly then said:
there must be, there has to be a separation between Church and State and we totally endorse and emphatically reiterate that, but the separation between Church and State does not mean a separation between conscience and the electorate's responsibility in voting.
We cannot expect voters to leave their conscience behind them when they go to the polling booth.
Inevitably we would expect that those who freely accept the teaching of our Church will vote according to their consciences.
This is all we ask of them.
But we must have the right to carry out our duty to impart the moral convictions, the moral teaching of our Church to our own members.
I should have thought that is part of the reality with which legislators are faced, part of the situation within which they operate.
(Cathal Daly, New Ireland Forum 1983–4: xii.
13)
An examination of the documentation shows that there is, in fact, no real change in the bishops' view of the relationship between their perception of the good of the state and public morality, and what was to be de facto permissible in the state.
There is therefore no elaboration in the forum proceedings on hierarchical directives to their faithful on constitutional matters.
Events were to confirm the bishops' implied intent to oppose the granting of divorce as a civil right.
The Divorce Debate
Almost as if to test the political religious alliance of catholic nationalists in the South, the constitutional issue of divorce arose in 1986 as part of Dr Garret FitzGerald's constitutional crusade (see Cooney 1986) to make the Southern state more palatable to Northerners.
FitzGerald had been determined as far back as 1964 (1964; 1972) to make constitutional changes to those articles which appeared to alienate Northern protestant opinion.
After arriving in office as Taoiseach for a second time in 1983, he proceeded to collect opinions on such issues from various quarters.
From the Roman catholic hierarchy, he solicited the response that the church believed in the indissolubility of marriage.
Further, ‘the Catholic Church does not ask that the law should enshrine any particular provision because it accords with Church teaching’.
The statement then went on to oppose the introduction of divorce on the grounds of the protection of ‘the common good’ by the state.
In taking this position, the bishops were also following the lead of Pope John Paul II who, on his visit to Ireland in 1979 had argued: ‘Divorce, for whatever reason it is introduced, inevitably becomes easier and easier to obtain and it gradually comes to be accepted as a normal part of life’(1979).
From this FitzGerald could be in little doubt as to the likely course the bishops would take once a referendum campaign got under way.
Already, in expectation, the four archbishops had produced a pastoral letter in which they condemned the legalizing of divorce on the grounds of the preservation of ‘the common good’ and because they feared the tendency that people had to accept as right that which was legally permissible (Irish Episcopal Conference 1985).
On the basis of privately commissioned opinion polls showing an increasing majority in favour of some measure of divorce legislation, FitzGerald agreed with his cabinet to proceed with a referendum on whether to change the constitution so as to allow divorce for marriages irretrievably broken down, though only after a period of five years' actual breakdown and legal  separation.
The government bill moving the referendum was published in the Dáil on 23 April 1986.
Opposing pressure groups were already in existence and preparing for the campaign: in favour, the Divorce Action Group; and against, such groups as Family Solidarity, Women in the Home, and the Knights of Columbanus.
These last were soon replaced, on 9 May, by a more specific and highly organized pressure group headed by many who had previously mounted the Pro-Life Anti-abortion Campaign.
Of particular importance to the anti-divorce campaign was a lawyer, William Binchy, who had already produced a book in 1984 on the subject.
Large publicity campaigns began and the Irish Times also lent its weight to the pro-divorce argument, campaigning in its columns until the eve of the referendum in late June.
Though the coalition government were allowing their TDs — the Irish equivalent for MPs — a free vote on the issue, its parties, Fine Gael and Labour, officially sponsored the campaign for the constitutional change.
Fianna Fáil appeared to be equally divided on the issue.
The new progressive democrats came out in favour of the referendum proposal on 14 May.
Of the smaller parties, the Workers' Party was the most decisive in favouring the change.
Other public bodies who actively campaigned on behalf of the constitutional amendment were the Irish Congress of Trade Unions and the Irish Council for Civil Liberties.
The presbyterian and methodist churches in Ireland, along with the Church of Ireland, welcomed the proposal.
They too had been consulted by FitzGerald and had responded favourably.
The four Roman catholic archbishops replied on 28 April that they opposed divorce in general, and particularly the type of what they considered to be unrestricted divorce proposed in the constitutional amendment (Irish Times , 28 Apr. 1986).
Though in the statement it was mentioned that statistics from other countries were too unreliable to say that pro-divorce legislation increased the instability of marriages and led to an ever-increasing number of breakdowns, Archbishop McNamara was already preaching by 6 May that divorce ‘makes stable and permanent marriages more difficult for everyone’(Irish Times , 7 May 1986).
This was the line already adopted by Binchy (1984) who interpreted world-wide statistics in this direction.
Divorce was seen to be harder on the women than the men, who could get out of their family  responsibilities so much more easily with divorce than without it.
In opposing the arguments marshalled by the anti-divorce groups, the pro-divorce group argued that, despite the existence of divorce legislation in Northern Ireland, there was still a low divorce rate.
The period of separation in undefended cases was two years, and five years had to run if one of the parties opposed the divorce.
That men in particular do not benefit from the procedures was suggested by the fact that twice as many women as men filed for divorce.
It was argued that the pattern in other countries was that laws permitting divorce followed social trends in the numbers of marriage breakdowns rather than vice versa and that the fears of societal breakdown promoted by opponents in Ireland were unfounded in fact.
Despite the position of the church leadership, there were dissenting clerical voices.
A priest from County Galway, in a letter to the Irish Times , informed that Dr Enda McDonagh, a noted Roman catholic moral theologian, had told priests of the Tuam archdiocese in January that it was possible to make a distinction between the church's teaching on the ideal of marriage and divorce as a civil right.
The priest himself, Fr.
Standún, intended to vote in favour at the referendum along with‘many clergymen’(Irish Times , 10 May 1986).
Fr.
Pat O'Brien addressed the Divorce Action Group in Galway on 27 May, supporting their campaign on the grounds of religious freedom for minorities (Irish Times , 29 May 1986).
Professor Sean Freyne of Trinity College, a former Roman catholic priest, published an article in the Irish Times favouring the constitutional amendment, and suggesting that the Irish bishops' attitude to marriage, despite some signs to the contrary, was eminently legal and contractual in orientation (Irish Times , 5 June 1986).
An opinion poll conducted on 28–9 April and sponsored by the Irish Times showed 57 per cent in favour of the divorce amendment with only 7 per cent undecided.
But, one week later, this had fallen to 49 per cent in favour (see Irish Times , 5 May 1986 and Sunday Press , 11 May 1986).
Already by 14 May, the Roman catholic hierarchy had responded to the pressure with the production and projected distribution of one million copies of a pastoral letter against divorce (Irish Episcopal Conference 1986).
In it they asserted quite clearly that permitting divorce would certainly affect the stability of all Irish marriages because it rendered every Irish marriage dissoluble: ‘It is as though the legal availability of divorce builds up a social pressure which, for large numbers of people, becomes stronger than moral or religious resistance’(abridged version,Irish Times , 14 May 1986).
In effect, they were tending to the view that the very change in law brings about a change in the nature of society and human relationships within it.
The bishops also argued that any so-called restricted form of divorce was impossible to maintain in practice and that divorce might solve the partners' problems but only created them for the children.
The pro-divorce camp were quick to spot the traditional Irish view that written laws and authoritative words have a radically structuring effect on reality.
As Alan Dukes TD argued in the Dáil in response to the pastoral letter:
It is wrong to contend that divorce legislation ‘defines’ all marriages as being dissoluble.
It does no such thing; rather it defines the circumstances and conditions in which a marriage has ceased to be a source of happiness and strength to those involved and may be brought to an end…
There is no compulsive power in this amendment, nor will supporting legislation contain any obligation on those who do not wish to do so to use the mechanism it will set up.
(Dáil debate, 14 May 1986, as reported by Dick Walsh,Irish Times , 15 May 1986)
When it fell to Dukes to introduce the second stage of the Bill empowering the referendum, he was forced to address himself specifically to the bishops' arguments in their letter (text,Irish Times , 15 May 1986).
Similar remarks were made by Senator Mary Robinson, who also challenged the hierarchy's intent in their statement to the New Ireland Forum that the civil rights of Northerners would not be infringed by any pressure from the Roman catholic church in an eventual united Ireland.
TDs who opposed the amendment, such as Oliver J. Flanagan on 13 May and Dr Michael Woods on 14 May, began to call on ‘the silent majority, to make their opposition to divorce known.
The speech of Dr Woods of Fianna Fáil was a particularly important intervention.
It indicated that Charles Haughey in particular, and Fianna Fáil in  general were moving behind the anti-divorce lobby.
One might be forgiven for thinking that the bishops’ letter had something to do with it and that Haughey was intent on constructing an alliance between those heeding the teaching of the hierarchy and the party faithful.
In early May, two-thirds of Fianna Fáil TDs from the West had already indicated they would campaign in their constituencies against the amendment (Irish Times , 2 May 1986).
The Woods' speech also introduced an important new argument which may have had some considerable effect on Irish voters.
It suggested that second marriages would substantially infringe the rights of inheritance of the members of the first family.
In a society of extremely strong rural, traditional values on rights of inheritance, the suggestions that ‘constitutional Frankensteins’ would devour ‘constitutional orphans’(Dáil Debates , 14 May 1986) were clearly calculated to raise a moral panic, having produced the appropriate folk-devils.
In the ensuing debate, Alan Shatter, TD of Fine Gael, author of a book on family law, pointed out the better provision being made under the projected divorce law for a first wife than existed at present, and that children of the first marriage would maintain their present rights, though they would have to share with children of the second marriage.
There was also much legal debate over the intention not to allow divorce unless adequate and proper provision was made for the dependants.
Many critics, including William Binchy, saw this as likely to be an ineffectual provision and subject to the whims of judges.
Proponents of the changes did, however, find the prognostications of their adversaries far too pessimistic and polemical.
It is interesting to note that the debate centred on the concrete social consequences of divorce legislation rather than on its intrinsic morality.
In the Dáil debate of 20 May, Padraig Faulkner, TD of Fianna Fáil argued that the introduction of divorce would indeed end up as divorce on demand anyway, and Charles Haughey indicated his ‘personal view’ that divorce was bad for ‘individual stability’(Irish Times , 21 May 1986).
The next stage in clerical campaign strategy was introduced by  Archbishop MacNamara of Dublin who instructed the clergy of his diocese to preach on the indissolubility of marriage on the six Sundays from 18 May until the eve of the referendum.
He also instructed his parish priests in a letter, leaked to the Irish Times , to have the bishops pastoral Marriage, the Family and Divorce distributed to every home in the archdiocese along with special bidding prayers invoking divine protection for marriages and the guidance of Holy Spirit ‘at this critical time of decision for families and our country’(Irish Times , 17 May 1986).
An anti-divorce video was released by the Catholic Communications Institute of Ireland and placed on sale in the Veritas Bookshop in Dublin.
By the end of the month, it was reported to be ‘selling well’(Irish Times , 30 May 1985).
In an interview with the popular intellectual magazine Magill in June, Archbishop MacNamara found he could not accept that the state had the power to determine the meaning and nature of marriage and compared the effects of divorce to the recent Chernobyl nuclear disaster.
In pastoral sermons, the archbishop continued to oppose civil divorce, claiming that the weak would suffer as a consequence, along with the well-being of society.
He also continued to affirm that the introduction of divorce would make it more difficult for people to lead ‘good moral lives’.
Divorce has this effect because it suggests that remarriage in the lifetime of one's first partner is socially and even morally acceptable' (Irish Times , 6 June 1986; also 31 May 1986; 14 June 1986).
This same interpretation appeared in the Irish bishops' next statement in mid-June.
Voters had to decide in conscience ‘whether other factors outweigh the damage which divorce would certainly cause to individuals, to families, to children and to the whole of society’(Irish Times , 13 June 1986).
The bishops claimed, however, they were making it clear that people could in conscience vote for the introduction of divorce without incurring moral blame provided they made the decision in a reflective and conscientious way.
Some incidents at local level are worth recording.
The parish priest of Brackenstown, Swords, County Dublin, distributed a newsletter at all masses on Ascension Thursday, 22 May — though before he had read Archbishop MacNamara's guidelines on how to conduct the campaign — claiming that no-fault divorce was first introduced by Nazi Germany and that it had since wreaked ‘more havoc on the Allied countries than any German army or air force  ever did’(Irish Times , 28 June 1986).
On Sunday 17 June in Cork a priest was reported to have preached and behaved as follows:
At the sermon, Father McKenna introduced one of his altar boys, Colm by name, and got him to tell the story about how he and his altar boy teammates had recently beaten another altar boys' team by eight goals to five.
When he asked Colm over the microphone how many goals he had scored the boy proudly replied ‘Four’…
Finally, Father McKenna said he had one last question to ask.
The question was would Colm like his mother and father to get divorced.
Colm said ‘No’.
(Irish Times , 17 May 1986)
Protestant churches were not unaffected by the spirit in which the campaign often appeared to be conducted.
Some members of the anti-abortion lobby had apparently been indicating the ‘weak’ moral stance of protestants on the issue.
The Church of Ireland appears to have had this in mind when it invited the well-known English Roman catholic marriage consultant, Dr Jack Dominian, to provide a report on divorce for the Church of Ireland General Synod.
As Bishop Empey argued to the synod: ‘Somehow we have to nail the lie that permissiveness flows from the Church of Ireland and that morality is the sole possession of but one Church in this land’(Irish Times , 22 May 1986).
In submitting his report, Dominian stated:
I have to say that if this room was filled by the Roman Catholic bishops of Ireland and they were pushing me very hard about divorce, I would have to say very clearly that their fear that civil divorce will make marital breakdown worse, or enhance or facilitate it — my answer would be: No, it will make very little difference.
But in justice I think a society needs civil divorce and that the real concern of the Church and the community should be to work at understanding prevention.
(Irish Times , 22 May 1986)
Dominian's remarks were probably important to the Irish Roman catholic bishops.
They had in fact used material gathered by him, and some of his reflections of the sanctity of marriage, in their pastoral letter on marriage in the previous year.
At its annual meeting in Belfast, the Presbyterian General Assembly received a report promoting the amendment as implementing a rightful civil liberty (Irish Times , 6 June 1986).
Further criticism came from Roman catholics in Britain.
An editorial in the Catholic Herald and Standard on 25 May — it is distributed in Ireland as The Standard — criticized the Irish bishops' apparently  low esteem of their laity's ability to remain constant in their marriages.
Also a call from the Alliance Party in the North was made by John Cushnahan, party leader.
He found it ironic that anyone who supported the Anglo-Irish Agreement could oppose a modest measure to introduce divorce (Irish Times , 28 June 1986).
Perhaps an important counter to the archbishop of Dublin's interventions was the well-known lay liberal catholic and Head of Information at RTE, Louis McRedmond.
He used the columns of the Irish Times to inform Roman catholic consciences of permitted interpretations of state divorce on the grounds of religious liberty, interpretations which were diametrically opposed to that of the Irish bishops.
By mid-June, the projection of the opinion polls was already suggesting that the majority favouring a measure of divorce legislation was declining so rapidly that by the time of the poll, the noes would have it.
By the week of the referendum, an Irish Times opinion poll had a clear and substantial majority against the amendment, 45 per cent for and 55 per cent against (Irish Times , 25 June 1986).
The referendum proposal was as follows.
The present constitution in Article 41.3.2 stated:
No law shall be enacted providing for the grant of a dissolution of marriage.
The proposed change involved the deletion of this and its substitution by the following:
Where, and only where, such court established under this Constitution as may be prescribed by law is satisfied that —
i.
a marriage has failed,
ii.
the failure has continued for a period of, or periods amounting to, at least five years,
iii.
there is no reasonable possibility of reconciliation between the parties to the marriage, and
iv.
any other condition prescribed by law has been complied with,
the court may in accordance with law grant a dissolution of the marriage provided that the court is satisfied that adequate and proper provision having regard to the circumstances will be made for any dependant spouse and for any child of or any child who is dependent on either spouse.
The referendum was finally held on 26 June 1986.
The appearance of the results of the Irish Times opinion poll on the same day  predicting the failure of the proposal may well have affected the turn-out.
In any event, the constitutional proposal to replace the existing prohibition on divorce by a provision to allow it was rejected.
‘Turnout for the poll was 62.5%.
Of those voting, 63.3% voted against the proposal’(Ireland Today , No. 1030, p. 15).
The biggest percentages favouring the proposal occurred in the urban centres, particularly Dublin and Dublin County, where there was a slight margin in favour.
But the country areas and particularly the West were overwhelmingly against the proposal.
It would seem that catholic — nationalist morality is to remain a feature of the Southern state and of any future all-Ireland state, if the clerical church's wishes continue to prevail.
If an effective will to de-alienate Northern protestants in their attitudes to the republic existed, and if there had been a real change in the Irish catholic hierarchy's position on such matters, then they would indeed have taken positive steps to support FitzGerald's attempt to introduce such constitutional changes.
In other words, on the divorce question the Roman catholic clerical leadership were still using their joint authority, which is legitimate in the eyes of the majority in the Southern state, to press into civil legislation their views of public morality, and to use the informed conscience of the faithful as the primary vehicle.
They were failing to recognize or were positively discounting the rights of those dissenting from their particular views of public order, and subjecting that dissent to the full coercion of the state.
In other words, when the New Ireland Forum was being assured by Bishop Daly of the intention of the Roman catholic church in Ireland to support full civil and religious rights for Northern Ireland protestants, the bishops were effectively reserving to themselves, as a body of luminaries with a direct access to the inner structures of social reality, the right to declare what actually constituted a civil and religious liberty or right and they were doing so on the grounds of what they considered good for society.
There can be no question that the bishops are not in any way aware of this arrogation, as it is mediated in consciousness by their belief in, and conceptualization of, a static natural law which is accessible, even if with difficulty, to the conscience of everyman; which same natural law no one should be allowed to violate, even if in error, when that law, if broken, is seen to threaten the very moral fabric of society.
The bishops, conceiving of themselves as a body supported by the Holy Spirit in their proclamation of morality and  seeing themselves as following the equally and divinely guided line laid down by Pope John-Paul II, were assuming that the opposition to state legislation permitting divorce was of a similar standing and status to the Christian belief that Christian marriage was forever.
Therefore, informing consciences on the evil social consequences of divorce was seen by them to be of a similar standing to informing the consciences of catholic lay people on the sanctity and indissolubility of Christian marriage.
It is in this way that the Roman catholic bishops of Ireland, as intellectuals organizing the beliefs of catholic nationalists, continue to be aligned to the forces of conservatism within the alliance, forces which in practice do not recognize important protestant civil rights in Ireland.
The alliance is cemented by that traditional political religion, forged in the previous century, which sees the natural law as most accessible to true believers, that it is obligatory to enforce its practice by law, and that those holding other views only have rights to put their views into practice when they are not seen by the bishops to do harm to the social fabric.
This monopoly position is therefore totally beyond criticism.
One might speculate that an impending solution to the Northern Ireland problem would split off from the clerical leadership those groups for whom the present position is only accepted on pragmatic grounds.
Hence the traditional alliance between catholicism and nationalism might be split at the popular basis with the ensuing growth of a degree of anti-clericalism.
However, as the very existence of the catholic — nationalist alliance impedes progress towards such a solution, one should perhaps view such a possibility as unreal.
The Roman catholic leadership in Ireland has first to change and radically evaluate its monopoly beliefs, thus permitting the dissolution of one of the most antagonistic aspects of catholic — nationalist hegemony.
Schooling as Political Religion
Systems and Counter-systems North and south
INTRODUCTION
A second area where political religion has hegemonic power and structures the popular consciousness throughout Ireland is in the shaping and running of the institutions of education, particularly primary and secondary schools.
This chapter outlines the way in which the schooling systems were shaped from the early nineteenth century by a combination of church and state politics, developing in both the North and South as expressions of catholic nationalism and protestant loyalism.
They are therefore predominantly sectarian in political religious form, and attempts to modify this sectarian structure are at the moment opposed mainly, though not exclusively, by the Irish Roman catholic clergy.
An outline of the church's dominant political theology on the issue is therefore also explored.
EDUCATION AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ALLIANCE BETWEEN CLERGY AND POLITICIANS
A primary education system was established throughout Ireland as early as 1831 (see Akenson 1970; Lyons 1973; Miller 1973).
It was basically envisaged to be of national proportions as well as non-denominational, with religious instruction given in separate classes.
There was, however, controversy from the start.
The Church of Ireland withdrew its schools from the plan which threatened that church's dominance over the primary sector.
The presbyterians also had misgivings, and only came back into the system in 1838 when they were practically guaranteed control of their own schools within it.
The Church of Ireland rejoined in 1860, because it lacked funds to continue its own system.
Many Roman catholic clerics were unsettled by the plan.
The  Christian Brothers, founded in the early part of the century, withdrew from the scheme and unilaterally developed their own system.
The concern of Roman catholic clergy about the system was not without grounds.
Some feared the use of the schools by proselytizers to indoctrinate the children in protestant principles, especially as the local managers were at first mainly clergy of the established church.
There was division among the Roman catholic episcopate as well and as many favoured the system as were against it.
The archbishop of Dublin, Daniel Murray, had accepted a position on the National Education Board responsible for the schools.
The controversy was so deep that an appeal was made to Rome by the combatants.
Archbishop McHale, who opposed the non-denominational system, was hoping for a verdict to support his views.
The verdict from Rome, which came in 1841, favoured both and neither.
It asked the participants to stop haggling in public and permitted each bishop to take a decision either way for his own diocese (Murphy 1959).
It is noteworthy that at this time (when secularised education was patronised by nearly all the governments of Europe including those that were nominally Catholic) this query was dealt with as a matter of discipline by the Congregation of propaganda, and not as a matter of doctrine by the Congregation of the Inquisition.
(Gaine 1968: 163)
One could perhaps specify further: it was normal for disputes in Ireland to be referred to the Congregation of Propaganda, as Ireland, being part of a protestant state, fell under its jurisdiction.
However, it is likely that it was not felt necessary to refer the matter anywhere else as, according to current practice, it was a matter of discipline.
It is quite clear that Rome did not have a policy on catholic schooling at this time, and certainly not one requiring attendance at such schools as a religious duty.
This falls in with Gramsci's understanding of the stages of the development of catholic monopoly.
The phase of cultural catholicism was to develop somewhat later.
Over the next fifty years, a significant change in policy took place.
Catholics and protestants became more and more segregated by school, as the Roman catholic bishops sought to bind in their flocks from outside influences, on the one hand to protect them  from proselytism, and on the other to use the schools as a vehicle for the maintenance and development of faith.
An indicator of the growing importance of this totalizing view of education was contained in the 1841 rescript from Rome.
It announced that, if doctrine as opposed to Bible stories was to be a part of school education, then such religious education could not adopt a common denominator approach between the churches, but had to be total in its presentation of what the Roman catholic church considered to be the truth, otherwise such an approach would be ‘dangerous’ for the children (Gaine 1968: 164).
The implementation of this policy was the work in part of the new Roman episcopal appointees, from Cullen onwards, though the growing hatred of the ascendancy because of the famine and their continued landownership must have provided ample cause for separate schools for the majority of Roman catholic clergy.
Already in the 1850s, Roman catholic bishops attacked the setting up of the ‘model schools’, intended for the pursuit of educational experiments within a multi-denominational setting.
In 1860, the rules on the composition of the National Education Board was changed to permit equal protestant and catholic representation.
When state-supported secondary education was introduced in 1878, a denominational system was officially set up, though at this time the system was only availed of by the few families who could afford to lose the labour of young teenagers.
So extensive became the control of the catholic sector, both primary and secondary, that priests had extensive powers of dismissal over the teachers until the end of the nineteenth century.
From 1899, the intention of the clergy to assume and maintain absolute control of their schools led a number of them to refuse to appoint members of the Irish National Teachers' Organization so as to avoid trade union interference.
The result was that the union became subordinated for some time to the hierarchy and a breakaway union of protestant teachers was formed.
Despite the curtailment of some of the clergy's powers, friction between the teachers' associations, particularly the INTO, and the Roman catholic clergy has remained until this day.
Clergy control of the schools had indeed become a priority for the church leadership.
The understanding reached between them and the catholic — nationalist lay leadership resulted in schooling in the future state being allocated to the domain of the church, in exchange for the legitimation of that state by the church leadership.
It was also agreed that supplementary financial aid would come from the state.
The agreement came about through a delicate set of potentially dangerous encounters between the Irish party and the Roman catholic bishops during the first two decades of the present century.
It proved to be a period of strained relations with the English liberals, who were allies of the Irish party, but who were also in favour of bringing schooling more and more under state rather than church control (Miller 1973: 81–7, 120–38, 268–92).
By this time, the schools frequented by Roman catholics in Ireland were also largely under the direct control of the church's clerics.
But secularizing moves by the English liberals — over the Education Bills of 1902, 1906, and a private member's Bill of 1911 — led the Irish hierarchy to question some of the political intentions of the Irish politicians, who it was feared might sell out the church's interest in schools.
According to the Liberal-Irish alliance, the Irish party was supposed to abstain from the 1901 Conservative bill, aimed at bringing denominational schools in England and Wales into the national education system while at the same time absenting them from local government control: that is, giving finance while maintaining the system of denominational clerical control.
With the Irish party abstaining, both English and Irish Roman catholic bishops began to pressurize the leader of the Irish party, Redmond, and his associates to support the Conservative bill.
Added upset came in the same year from a speech by Dr W. Starkie, the commissioner of National Education in Ireland, who attacked school managers for not being up to their job.
The attack was within the context of a speech largely praising the Roman catholic church in Ireland.
But the church's clerics still took offence, particularly at the point that local people should be encouraged to take an interest in the schools by having some financial responsibility for them through local government.
As priests controlled the local school directly, this was seen to be a direct attack on their role in the school system.
Eventually the Irish party was forced to return to Westminster to see to it that the appropriate denominational interests in England were strengthened and to show the Irish political leadership's compliance with the similarly organized Irish system (Miller 1973: 77–85).
This controversy was immediately followed by another.
A specially appointed English school inspector reported negatively on certain aspects of Irish schools.
He concluded that the division into  different schools by denomination, sex, and age resulted in an economically inefficient system.
He attributed the inefficiency in part to the managerial system of independent clerical control.
Local accountability, state ownership of the properties, and a form of local authority supervision of teaching salaries were advocated as remedies.
The Conservative government, through its Irish Office secretary, George Wyndham, then indicated its intention of reforming the Irish system and devolving power to local, lay control, working in partnership with a central government department.
The Irish hierarchy immediately campaigned against what was for them a drastic solution.
They declared, rightly, that the very power of the clergy in education was being attacked, and, probably wrongly, that the reform of the faults of the present system was only the apparent reason.
Possibly in response to the stimuli given by the bishops' public statements, the bishops found that local councils were coming to their aid and support in opposing the proposed educational revolution.
The campaign to prevent change of clerical control of the school system was also linked to the contemporary campaign to set up catholic university colleges.
The bishops were successful in urging the Irish party to accept the church's programme for Irish education as a whole.
Their success was founded on a dual strategy.
On the one hand they subscribed to the annual Irish parliamentary party fund and, on the other, they publicly praised the Irish party as the true political representatives of the Irish people and its interests in the British parliament.
Even a ‘Castle’ bishop such as Archbishop Healy, now announced his conversion to the nationalist cause.
In other words, support for the education policies of the church were the quid the Irish party had to give in order to obtain the quo of the bishops' endorsement of the party as the genuine political representatives of the Irish people or nation.
The agreement over education was so clear that when the first revolutionary Irish government set itself up in 1918, prior to negotiated independence, there was no Minister for Education.
And when the Irish Free State did emerge in 1921, practically the entire school system was under the control of the churches.
STRUCTURES OF OWNERSHIP AND CONTROL: THE CLERIC-CIVIL SERVANTS AXIS
The present interrelationship between control of the schools and the two alliances varies in each part of Ireland, though one should also bear in mind the additional underpinning of the alliances both North and South by one of the traditional values of bourgeois capitalism, private and selective schooling.
Throughout Ireland as a whole, there has generally been an anti-comprehensive ethos in the education system supportive of both class and sectarian divisions in schooling and which is now eroding only in part.
In Northern Ireland, the catholic schools' sector is provided for out of state funds, and remains under the governorship of the local clergy, now assisted by laity and members of the local educational and library boards.
Many Roman catholic schools up to 1968 were financed for capital expenditure by the local church as part of the church's determination not to lose control of them.
The chairman of the board is usually the parish priest or his curate.
With the exception of a small group of public schools, there is the apparently simple distinction between state schools and Roman catholic schools which occurs in Britain.
However, it would be näive to think that control of the state sector, its general ethos, and the teaching of religious education was non-denominational.
These schools are protestant, though nothing else is perhaps to lie expected when protestant — loyalist teachers teach protestant — loyalist children.
Religious education in these schools is officially non-denominational or biblically based and loyalist sentiments are promoted.
But religious education has been known to be fundamentalist and in some cases anti-catholic, depending on the teacher.
It is important to note that, since the system began in the late 1920s, there has never been a significant move to split up the schools for use by the separate denominations, something which would have been feasible in the larger towns.
The Northern public-sector schools come from the partly voluntary system of pre-Partition.
In 1928, these schools entered the system of maintained schools, whereby, in exchange for full payment of current costs and 65 per cent of capital expenditure, the former owners and managers, usually churches, were allowed two-thirds representation  on the local board of management, with the other third coming from the local authority.
From 1968, these schools received the same benefits as the Roman cathodic sector.
Up until the late 1970s, 98 per cent of children raised in Northern Ireland experienced schooling only on their own side of the divide (Darby,et al .
1977).
Two major exceptions to the general divide were the secondary schools in Fivemiletown and Ballycastle, where shortage of catholic equivalents resulted in de facto integration.
In 1978, the mould was broken with the setting up of a private interdenominational primary school in Belfast, enabled by a special act of Parliament.
This was followed by setting up of a voluntary multi-denominational school at secondary level, Lagan College, in 1981.
The school was granted public funding from 1984, since which time a further four similar schools have opened.
All of this change was brought about by pressure from the integrated education movement discussed in the next section.
In the Republic, the unwritten church — state accord on education was maintained, and subsequently reinforced, by the emergent catholic — nationalist ethos.
The primary state sector, the ‘national schools’, is paid for by the state, but is effectively under the control of the churches, with a local priest or minister as manager.
Since the late 1970s management boards have been set up consisting of three diocesan nominees, including normally the parish priest, two parents, and the head teacher.
Until the mid- and late 1970s, there were simply no rules whereby groupings of parents could obtain a state-financed, multi-denominational school, as the only channels of communication in these matters were those between the Department of Education and the relevant diocesan department or other church board.
For example, a new housing estate would be built, the diocese would be informed of the development at the planning stage, and the diocesan office would put in for a school, or an extension for an existing school.
The arrangement had been unchanged since the early years of the state and had become entirely natural.
Similarly for the protestant community: the school plant is owned by the church, or appropriate church body.
The main owner of such schools is usually and indirectly the Church of Ireland, and current expenditure and salaries are provided by the state, with the board of governors presided over by the local minister.
The secondary sector in the Republic is hardly so simple in  structure.
For present purposes, three items in particular merit comment.
Firstly, it was not until the 1930s that a substantial sector of education arose which was not directly under church control.
Even then, this was the sector of vocational or technical schools, which were the schools of the politically and economically less influential classes.
These were not able to afford education or were unable to pass the necessary scholarship or entrance exams, or they were the sons and daughters of artisans seeking similar type craft training for their offspring.
About one-third of pupils have traditionally attended them since that time.
These schools come under the control of the Department of Education, through locally appointed committees.
They are organizationally secular schools, though some clergy are members of the local governing committees and this has always been a feature.
The ‘community’ or comprehensive-type schools which are beginning to replace vocational and local church schools have a more religious flavour, as they may include the interests of a former convent, which the new school is in part replacing, a former vocational school, and possibly a former diocesan boys' school as well.
The churches have never objected to the existence of the vocational schools since their establishment in the early 1930s.
It must be added that vocational schools have traditionally had low status.
They took what was left after the church schools had creamed off the more academic pupils and the upper classes.
Admittedly, the Christian Brothers' schools were open to all, but they tended to be academically inclined in curriculum and ethos.
Vocational school pupils in the cities come mainly from the urban working class.
In the country, they come largely from rural small holders and farm labourers.
In 1978, at least a dozen of these schools were attended by protestants in numbers of between 5–20 per cent of the total (Fulton 1982).
It is also true that the religious practice of those who attend vocational schools has been significantly inferior to those who attended catholic secondary schools, at least in the 1970s (Nic Ghiolla Phadraig 1980).
It is likely that this is caused not by having less religious education, but by the fact that they tend to be peopled by children of classes who have traditionally fewer links with the church, and include parents making active decisions to keep their children out of the clergy's grasp.
Secondly, there are twenty-eight protestant secondary schools in the Republic.
With the steady decline in the Southern protestant  population until recently, it was only possible to have government funds for such schools if these schools were reasonably economical.
Most of these schools are private, though parents receive assistance with the fees from a committee which is funded directly by the government and which allocates grants by means test.
Some of the larger schools, however, are comprehensives, taking in the whole range of abilities, and are government funded for their current expenditure.
The consequence of having such large schools with small protestant catchment areas was that those funded from the state had to make up numbers by accepting non-protestants.
The Roman catholic element in all the republic's protestant second-level schools varies from one school with 0 per cent to one school with 40 per cent of the total.
But some of the headmasters have a deliberate multi-denominational policy in terms of ethos and curriculum and the schools do provide multi-denominational settings which, if researched, could throw light on debates about denominational and shared schools.
The current expansion and urban growth in the Southern population has also affected the protestant community, and the increased pressure on schools in urban areas, such as Dublin, is likely to lead to a diminution of the protestant-catholic character of most protestant schools, unless deliberate decisions are taken to preserve the balance.
What emerges from this brief overview is the dominant role of the clergy in Southern education.
Clergy have a prime role in setting up schools and a favoured position of direct relationships with the appropriate state institutions.
One must remember that it was specifically this issue of clerical power over schools which was the nub of the controversy in the 1900–14 period.
In the North, clergy dominate the catholic sector, while a protestant and loyalist culture predominates in the state schools — albeit with a developed secular and liberal aspect in many of them.
THE TOTALIZING EDUCATION SYSTEMS UNDER THREAT: THE INTEGRATED EDUCATION MOVEMENT
The separation of the two opposing alliances in Ireland is thus replicated at the level of schooling.
This remains a fact no matter how one seeks to explain or excuse it.
It is largely the case that  catholic nationalists go to one set of schools which have a visible catholic and nationalist ethos, and protestant loyalists go to another, some of which have a less visible protestant ethos, but all of which have a loyalist ethos as well.
Some catholic nationalists in the South mix with a proportionally much larger number of Southern protestants who, however, are loyal to the Southern state.
Part of the reason why Roman catholics go to their own schools is because they believe they are obliged to do so.
The belief is to some degree affected by being told so by their authoritative pastors.
It has even been described as a fundamental moral precept by more than one Irish catholic cleric: ‘The law of the Church is quite definite, quite universal in this matter.
It is that there is an obligation to go to Catholic school…
It is the same in Northern Ireland as any other part of the world’(Bp.
Philbin, Belfast, in an interview on RTE, 3 Oct. 1976, quoted Mark 1979: 10).
This prescriptive approach has been repeated as recently as October 1988, when the director of the Council for Catholic Maintained Schools in Northern Ireland said that people who sent their children to integrated schools rather than catholic ones were breaking the law of the church.
There is also strong central support from Rome which places catholic education at the centre of its cultural catholicism ideal.
It should be noted that the largest threat to totalizing control of schools in Ireland has so far come from the integrated schooling movement.
This movement has a double constituency, one in the Northern, the other in the Southern, state.
Their membership, mainly middle-class, have met considerable difficulty in trying to achieve their limited goals — integrated schooling for the children of those parents who wish it — though some of the membership in the early days were aiming at a total integration of the schooling system.
Until recently, catholics in the North were practically forbidden by their clergy to attend state schools, exceptions being made in certain outlying areas.
Bishop Edward Daly in Derry liberally interpreted the needs of his Roman catholic pupils from the mid-1970s, allowing greater freedom and seeing to it that some alternative religious education was provided.
At the same time, the late Bishop Philbin began to refuse the sacrament of Confirmation to Roman catholic children attending state schools.
A number of clergy in his diocese refused religious instruction to these children.
The reason given was that children would not be religiously and  educationally prepared for the reception of Holy Communion and Confirmation because they had not been educated at a catholic school, irrespective of their parents' alternative provisions: in one area, parents had set up their own Sunday schools as an alternative.
The measures were felt to be particularly harsh by those catholic parents who were getting involved with the All Children Together movement.
Some of its parents had begun sending their children to the less protestant dominated schools within the state system, shortly before the movement was formed.
They were doing so on largely political religious grounds.
They felt that it was partly their responsibility to bring up their children in an atmosphere of knowledge and understanding of protestants, as they believed part of the difficulties of life in Ulster were caused by this lack of contact.
At the same time, they were keen to bring up their children as Roman catholics.
All Children Together, or ACT, was formed in the early 1970s.
It draws its membership from across the spectrum of religious and non-religious groupings, though they are generally middle-class and mostly committed Christians.
They remain dedicated to the task of setting up a group of integrated schools as a sector of education complementary to the existing system.
An appeal made to Rome in 1977 by the Roman catholic parents concerned with the Confirmation ban appeared to have been answered in their favour, as Bishop Philbin changed his pastoral policy and these children were allowed to go forward for confirmation in 1978–9.
A notable achievement of ACT has been the passing of the Education (Northern Ireland) Act of 1978, permitting the establishment of multi-denominational schools where such is desired by adequate numbers of parents.
The Act is an enabling one and does not affect the existing system unless the leadership of the churches wish to co-operate in a reshaping of the system or of schools in any particular area.
In addition, such schools have to be self-financing until they have an adequate complement of pupils.
In the Republic, as in the North, a parents' movement to set up integrated schools was started around the same time.
It grew up originally in the Southern middle-class suburb of Dalkey, County Dublin, and around the Church of Ireland national school there.
A dispute with the local rector and manager led to a group of parents withdrawing their support from the school and coming together to form the Dalkey School Project.
The organization  claimed membership from all parts of the South, and its membership contained education specialists, lawyers, people from the media, and civil servants, at least one of whom knew something of the existing channels of power and communication between church and state in the national school system.
Energy was directed mainly to the primary sector, where, until recently, it was impossible to have anything but a church-sponsored school if it was to be funded by the state.
In 1978, on the basis of their professional knowledge of schooling and civil administration, the organization succeeded in obtaining the necessary government permission to open in Dalkey a multi-denominational school governed principally by the parents, the mode of religious instruction to be determined by them.
It opened the following September.
Another project at Marley Grange in South Dublin was less successful, due in part to the Church of Ireland deciding to support its own primary school in the area, and in part to the open opposition of the local Roman catholic clergy.
At Firhouse, in South-West Dublin, a third project was in the making in 1975.
In a survey with a 75 per cent response rate undertaken by the residents' association on its new housing estate, some two-thirds of the respondents favoured the setting up of a multi-denominational school.
The present writer, who was not connected with the survey, estimated that there was about a 15 per cent non-Roman catholic element on the estate at the time.
There seemed to be the fairly uncomplicated desire among the community to see all the children attend the same school, as an expression of relationships existing within the community.
It is likely that children have the important function in a new housing area of bringing parents and neighbours together, particularly when there is a lack of other social amenities — a characteristic of new housing areas in and around Dublin in the 1970s.
The children probably appear as a source from which to develop new relationships and the immediate perception is to translate this experience into scholastic terms.
The absence of a non-Roman catholic school in the immediate area and the naïve belief that they were empowered in some way to have a say in what type of school should appear on their housing estate — there was a small Roman catholic school which was to be expanded to cater for the growth of the population — may have sharpened catholic parents' interest in having an integrated school.
There were at this point no apparent difficulties experienced between the majority of estate members and  no significant source of conflict, that is until the question of a multi-denominational school itself became such a source.
The two Roman catholic priests, who were in all respects dedicated pastors and much liked by many in the local community, immediately opposed the idea, preaching against it at Sunday masses in the local convent and the school hall.
The burden of the message was that good catholic parents sent their children to catholic schools.
The curate added to this that those promoting the integrated project were in fact promoting secularism.
The fact that a prominent member of the current community council and an integrated education supporter was a member of official Sinn Fein, the Workers' party, appeared to figure in the reasoning, as this party has always been suspected to be an anti-clerical and secularist force.
In residents' association meetings, the clergy's point of view received vocal support from one or two members of the older village community which preceded the housing estate.
The total of those favouring denominational schooling in the initial survey was less than one-third.
But, since the open opposition of the clergy, many of those attracted by the original idea were clearly dissuaded and the majority opposition dwindled away.
The clergy had informed the people's conscience on the basis of what they considered to be the essential religious interests of their flock.
Alternatively, from another perspective, the clergy had acted to preserve the old divisions.
Unfortunately, the one is an inevitable corollary of the other.
ROMAN CATHOLIC VERSUS INTEGRATED SCHOOLING: INTERPRETING REALITY
The clearest opposition to the achievement of a measure of integration has been from the Roman catholic church.
But where other churches have owned their own schools, as does the Church of Ireland in the South, a similar position has been adopted, though the reasons for the position have been on different grounds.
A proposal before the Church of Ireland synod in May 1979 to support interdenominational education was defeated, despite pressure from its ecumenical lobby.
The main grounds appeared to be  the danger which it might pose to the small Southern protestant minority by encouraging mixed marriages.
However, no evidence favouring such a contention has ever been produced.
Harry MacAdoo, then the Church of Ireland archbishop of Dublin, on several occasions put forward the argument that Southern protestants were a minority group with their own culture and traditions, and thus deserved to have schools for themselves in order to hand on their own traditions.
When considering the merit of this argument, one does have to bear in mind the particularly precarious nature of the Southern protestant grouping.
Protestant opposition to integrated schooling is sometimes heard in the North, particularly from the fundamentalist camp, who not only fear catholic infiltration of state schools but are opposed to anything other than Bible protestantism in religious education.
But usually the opposite is the case and popular protestant support for integration is expressed.
perhaps if integrated schooling were more widespread in the North, more protestant voices would be heard against it, particularly if there was a possibility that a nun or priest might show up as a teacher in such an integrated school.
There is also evidence of hardline evangelical indoctrination by some protestant teachers in state schools.
In addition, Roman catholic schools in Ireland, in continuity with the belief and practice of Roman catholics in a number of other countries, have a different concept and practice of teaching religion in the schools from that of the majority of protestant traditions.
This ranges from the presence of religious symbols in the classrooms and corridors of the schools to religious services such as mass or the saying of the rosary, and finally to the specific form of religious education which is praxis oriented.
Learning, singing, and praying are rolled up into one: catechesis, as opposed to dialogue or concerned interest for religious matters.
Children are prepared in the classroom for their first communion, confession, and confirmation.
The Controversy over the Reality of Schooling
Extensive public debate on integrated and segregated education has taken place throughout Ireland.
Bishop Cahal Daly has argued  that the debate on multi-denominational schools has effectively taken people's attention away from the central issues in Northern Ireland, namely social injustice, fundamental political inequality, and the violence.
In reaction to this, one can say that the very way in which the church leaders view the subject is itself revealing of significant mediations between religion, state, and national ideology in the institutions of schooling.
In the debates over the last twenty years there has been considerable interplay of theological and sociological reasoning, with social scientists also contributing to papers and discussions.
What has been seen as an aspect of the Roman catholic intellectual opposition to divorce in Chapter 5 can also be recognized as a feature of the defence of catholic schools too: the opposition contains an interpretation of the moral nature of contemporary society and of what happens to catholics who are not to some degree protected from it.
In this writer's view, the arguments against multi-denominational education and in favour of catholic schools support an overall political theology which is strongly based on authority within the church.
Hierarchy and clergy are seen almost to monopolize the teaching and wisdom about life.
They are both directors of souls and minders of the public conscience.
Put together with a faith vision of the contemporary social world as inherently secularist and radically subversive of Roman catholic values, the combination is significantly reactionary and ethnocentric.
The aspects of this political theology will be discussed later.
First it is necessary to consider the arguments used in the public debates.
While the arguments of the defenders of catholic schools have a theological basis, those of the promoters of integrated schooling have been founded on what they see to be the results of the present system, namely a violent and destructive society.
But there has been some attempt also to undercut the basic level of the defenders' case.
It has been argued that catholic schools do not do the job for which they were set up, that is educate Roman catholics sufficiently to keep them in the church.
Irish bishops have been well aware of Spencer's (1968) research.
Using traditional measures of religiosity, he has pointed out the apparent failure of English catholic schools to produce better catholics and fewer ex-catholics than state or  other schools, and has inferred the likelihood of the same for Irish schools.
Spencer's argument has been banded about from time to time.
This is not unnatural, as in the 1970s and early 1980s Spencer was at the Queen's University, Belfast, and an active member of the All Children Together Movement.
Support for this line of approach has been found in Greeley and Rossi's (1966) survey in the USA on the effectiveness of catholic schools.
Based on statistical data for Roman catholics educated in both Roman catholic and other schools, Greeley and Rossi noted as one of their findings that there was little difference in adult religious practice between the two groups.
There was a group among former Roman catholic school pupils who exhibited a more intense level of practice, but these were also children of fervent Roman catholics.
The causal inference adopted by Greeley and Rossi was that Roman catholic schools only had a clearly identifiable and reinforcing effect on the belief and practice of this group.
Clearly, Greeley and Rossi's findings could be used both ways, and in fact both camps in the Irish debate have found it supportive of their case.
In a similar survey undertaken in 1974, Greeley found the effectiveness of catholic schools either the same or slightly increased.
In the decline the church had experienced in the intervening years, fewer catholic school children had opted out.
In addition, whether or not one had attended a catholic school may have had little effect on sexual values or mass attendance but it did increase catholic activism and racial tolerance (Greeley, McCready, and McCourt 1976).
In the light of W. McCready's findings in another study that the religious behaviour of the father had a greater impact on children, Greeley considered the fact that catholic schools were having an increasing influence on men to be of significant importance for the future of Roman catholicism in the USA (1976: 173–5).
Clearly, the follow-up study was more favourable to the defenders of catholic schools than to opponents.
However, Greeley and Rossi's work also has been used to uphold the defenders' argument that, though Roman catholic schools varied in their efficiency, they were certainly better than any possible alternative in terms of producing good Roman catholics.
Thus, both sides have tended to use social scientific research to make statements in general about catholic schools which have been drawn from other countries and, therefore, beyond the cultural confines within which Irish catholic schools exist.
This is something  for which surveys, including that of Greeley and Rossi, are not and cannot be intended.
Another point worth bearing in mind is the very generalizing character of Greeley and Rossi's studies.
There was nothing in the studies on the differences between individual catholic schools, either in terms of pupil experiences or the varieties of educational practice and personnel in each school.
A black-box approach to the schooling process was used with no direct investigation of processes within the schools.
Finally, while it could be argued that Greeley and Rossi tell us something of catholic versus state schooling in the US, they have nothing to tell us about catholic versus Christian, multi-denominational schools, which is what most of the argument in Ireland is about.
But the central and substantive argument that defenders of Roman catholic schools have had to deal with is that the dual school system in Northern Ireland encourages, supports, or at least reinforces the sectarian divide, and that it forms part of the vicious circle maintaining conflict in Ulster.
It has been argued that one could help to break that circle by integrating the school system (Fraser 1974; Heskin 1980).
A small number of empirical studies actually done in Northern Ireland have been invoked in the course of the debate.
Rose (1971) pointed out that those with a mixed schooling background showed marginally less extreme political views than those educated separately.
Unfortunately, Rose did not elaborate on the nature of such mixed schooling experiences.
They  could even have proven to be the negative experience of small ethnic enclaves defending themselves in hostile environments, but even this viewpoint can only be speculation.
Murray (1983; 1985) advised not to expect too much of schools on the basis of his own in-depth research into two primary schools, one from each Northern group.
He has also sought support for this view from studies of separate and mixed schooling of different ethnic groups in other countries.
Such studies, he argued, have shown that joint schooling is not necessarily successful in lowering prejudice.
Consequently, one has to improve relationships within Northern Ireland without trying to merge the entire school system.
However, curricular changes, joint teaching projects, and overall greater contact were seen necessary.
Roman catholic church leaders have used additional local studies to refute arguments which treat Roman catholic schools as part of the Northern problem.
They have interpreted Salters's study of Belfast secondary schools as showing catholics to be less prejudiced than protestants.
Even if this were so, the implication has been made by catholic school supporters that catholic schools have not promoted or reinforced any measure of prejudice, and that no other possible type of school could improve on them (Daly 1975).
Unfortunately, the necessary link to warrant this second conclusion — a control group of catholics in a multi-denominational situation — was simply not available to Salters, and so the argument is void.
Use has also been made of Russell's work on the teaching of civics in Northern Ireland schools.
The work led Russell himself to conclude that the teaching of the subject had no effect whatsoever on pupils' political outlook.
This can be taken either as a criticism of the actual teaching of the subject or as a remark on the ineffectiveness of schooling on such attitudes in the Northern Ireland context.
Russell tended to support the latter view.
This has been taken to mean that teaching children together with the aid of a definite programme to reduce prejudice would not work, thus invalidating any proposed integration of schooling.
This, of course would have to be seen.
But both Salters's and Russell's work in Northern Ireland schools have been used by catholic schools supporters to aid a general principle, also derived from the work of some sociologists of education: namely that schools have little impact on children in terms of their basic values anyway, and one should recognize parents and community environment for the real  source of these.
The tradition in educational studies which seems to aid such views stresses that you cannot change society with the school.
Schools cannot have a real effect on children's basic values because these have been instilled earlier by the process of primary socialization in the home and in the wider social community.
Of course, other studies could just as easily be cited to state the opposite.
Schooling, according to Eggleston (1974) and Shipman (1972), has a definite effect on human behaviour and values, and, according to Bronfenbrenner (1972) can even enter quite profoundly into the socialization process.
The debate is now largely ‘old hat’ in the sociology of education and there is a general consensus that schools do indeed impart values, but these are usually modified or developed versions of already existing dominant values of the society of which they form a part, including a number of parental values.
Needless to say, any such denial of this would be a denial of the power of education as a whole to mature individuals in their intellectual and moral perceptions.
Again, according to Bernstein (1975), Ball (1981), and many more, schooling can have opposite effects on children according to whether children have been socialized into working-class or middle-class aspirations, and according to the actual way the schooling process is structured by the state, the teachers, and the subject-disciplines.
At the same time, sociologists of education generally hold to the view that schools can have an important role in both conservation and social change.
Consequently, the intricate role they play in the North or South of Ireland is for the investigator to find out.
