CAMRA FACT SHEET No 1
How beer is brewed
Beer seems such a simple drink that we tend to take it for granted.
Serious conversation about alcohol is reserved for wine and spirits.
Yet beer — good beer — is a highly complex product and one that arguably needs greater skill to produce than wine.
Wine, at its simplest, means crushing grapes and letting the wild yeasts on the the skins ferment the sweet juices into alcohol.
If you crush an ear of barley, however, you will not get beer.
The basic ingredient of beer needs careful nurturing and transforming into malt before it is ready to begin the slow, ruminative journey that ends with the pint in the pub.
When barley is harvested it is taken to a maltings where the grains are soaked in water to encourage germination.
As the roots begin to break out of the grains the barley is transferred to a vast hall heated with warm air and turned by large malt shovels.
When the maltster is satisfied that germination has unlocked the rich natural sugars in the barley, the grains are taken to a kiln room where heat stops germination.
The temperature of the kilning process determines the type of malt produced: the higher the temperature the darker the malt.
The malt is now ready for brewing.
In the brewery it is milled into a powder called grist and then mixed with hot water (known as liquor in breweries) in a vessel called a mash tun.
The thick porridgy liquid is left for several hours while the natural sugars in the malt dissolve into the liquor.
When the mashing has absorbed the maximum amount of sugar, the liquid — now known as wort — is run off through the slotted base of the vessel.
The remaining grains are sprinkled with more hot liquor to remove any last remaining sugars, a system known as sparging.
The wort is then run into a copper where it is boiled for an hour or more with hops.
Without hops, beer would be unpleasantly sweet.
Hops, brought to Britain in the 15th century by Dutch brewers, not only add bitterness and aroma but also act as a preservative and prevent infections in the brew.
After boiling the hopped wort flows from the copper into a vessel called a hop back.
Like the mash tun, it has a slotted base and the liquid runs out of the vessel over a bed of spent hops.
The wort is then cooled and run into fermenting tanks where yeast is added or pitched.
Yeast is made up of millions of tiny fungus cells which literally go berserk when confronted by a liquid rich with sugars.
Within a few hours a scum appears on top of the wort and this rapidly builds up into a great yellowy-brown crust as the yeast turns the sugars into alcohol and carbon dioxide.
The system used in Britain to produce mild, bitter, stout and strong ales is called ‘warm fermentation’, using a special type of top fermenting yeast.
This means that the yeast, encouraged by the warmth of the wort and the temperature of the brewery, works quickly and vigorously on top of the wort to produce alcohol.
After 4–7 days most of the sugars have been turned into alcohol and the yeast begins to sink to the bottom of the vessel.
The excess yeast is saved for future use.
So much yeast is produced during fermentation that large amounts are sold to companies such as Marmite to be turned into yeast extract.
When fermentation has finished the ‘green beer’ is run into conditioning tanks for a few days.
The remaining yeast continues to turn the residual sugars into alcohol and also helps to purge the beer of the rough after-tastes created by fermentation.
Some brewers add extra sugar at this stage to encourage the continuing fermentation.
Caramel is sometimes added to give darker colouring to the finished beer.
Finings, a glutinous substance made from the bladder of the sturgeon, is added either at the conditioning stage or when the beer is in cask to fine or clear the beer.
The finings attract yeast and other particles and begin to drag them to the bottom of the tank.
Now the beer is ready for the final stage in the brewery before it leaves for the pub cellar.
It is run or racked into casks, made either of wood or metal, sometimes with some ‘priming’ sugar and a handful of dry hops: the sugar will encourage a vigorous secondary fermentation in the cask and the hops will add a delightful aroma.
After all the mashing and boiling and the heaving and frothing of fermentation we now have beer, ready for its journey to the pub cellar.
The description of the brewing process varies from brewery to brewery: in some mashing, boiling and fermenting taking place in open or partially-open vessels.
In some modern plants, the process takes place in enclosed conical fermenters or European-style lauter tuns.
But as long as the finished beer is left to brew naturally and is free from such unnatural processes as chilling, filtering and pasteurisation, the end result is traditional draught beer, known in the industry as ‘cask conditioned beer’ and more popularly as…real ale.
Hops on the vine: the oils in the hop give bitterness to beer and also act as a preservative against infection
A classical Victorian tower brewery where the brewing process flows by gravity from floor to floor
A mash tun showing the sparging arms at the top and the slotted base
Hops being fed into the copper where the sweet wort is boiled vigorously and the vital oils are extracted from the hops
Fermenting vessels showing the head of yeast developing on the fermenting wort
The racking line: fresh beer is run from conditioning tanks into steam-cleaned casks.
After filling the casks are bunged before delivery to the pubs
CAMRA FACT SHEET No2
Unreal beer
There is a vital difference between real ale and keg beer.
Keg, which includes lager, is known in the industry as ‘brewery conditioned beer’.
Instead of a secondary fermentation in the cask to add a full, mature palate, keg beers are killed off in the brewery by a number of unnatural processes that affect the taste and quality of the product.
The aim is to produce beers quickly which, because they are sterile and have a long ‘shelf life’, are also highly profitable.
Where keg milds and bitters are concerned, when fermentation is complete they are conditioned for a short period in tanks under a heavy blanket of carbon dioxide.
They are then chilled and filtered to remove the remaining yeast and are usually pasteurised as well to ensure that death is complete.
Pasteurisation — avoided by skilled brewers in both Britain and other leading brewing nations — leaves an unpleasant burnt sugar taste to beer that is most apparent in low gravity drinks.
As the natural brewing process has been halted, the beer cannot generate its own carbon dioxide.
It would be flat and lifeless if served in this condition.
Keg beers — so called because they are kept in sealed and pressurised containers called kegs — are therefore injected with carbon dioxide and connected to cylinders of CO 2 ; in the pub cellar.
When the tap on the bar is operated, gas forces the beer to the bar.
The end result is a fizzy, burpy product served heavily chilled to mask its lack of taste and flavour.
Not all keg beers are pasteurised.
Pubs and clubs with a quick turnover serve what is known as ‘bright beer’ from large cellar tanks.
Bright beer is certainly preferable to a fully-fledged keg but it still lacks the rounded flavour of a cask beer and is served too gassy and too cold.
The last word in keg beer is British lager.
CAMRA is not opposed to lager.
Lager beer is the traditional beer style of many countries (see fact sheet on beer styles) and there are some superb beers in such great brewing countries as West Germany and Czechoslovakia.
What the Campaign is against is fake, poor quality imitation lagers being foisted on unsuspecting drinkers and passed off as being genuinely European or Australian.
All the main brands of lager on sale in Britain are brewed here, not imported.
Those that carry the same names as overseas beers are produced under licence and do not necessarily adhere to the recipe or strength of the original.
The Whitbread version of Heineken, for example, is 12 degrees of gravity weaker than the Dutch version.
There is no such beer in Germany as Hofmeister; it is brewed here by Courage.
Lager is brewed by using paler malts and European hop varieties.
Lager yeast should be used but this is not always the case.
After primary fermentation the beer is stored (the German word is ‘lagered’) for a short time but rarely for the month or more that is standard abroad.
The beer is then filtered and pasteurised and served under gas pressure and heavily chilled.
Unlike genuine lagers, which usually have alcoholic strengths of 4 per cent and upwards, the average British lager is often as weak as mild or standard bitter but is priced from 10 to 20 pence a pint more.
As brewers pay lower rates of excise duty on weaker beers, lager is a highly profitable business for the giant brewing combines.
CAMRA is also concerned at the way in which many keg beers are brewed and the ingredients used.
Mashing, boiling and fermentation are often speeded up in large breweries using such devices as continuous fermentation and high gravity brewing, both of which produce standardised bland beers of mediocre quality.
In order to further speed and cheapen the process, inferior ingredients such as maize, rice, triticale, wheat flour and potato starch are used and helped on their way by chemicals that hasten fermentation, cut down on the yeast head in the vessels to allow more wort to be treated, and to give a lively fake head to the finished product.
Beer is classified as a food stuff and yet it is excluded from the legal requirements to list ingredients.
Drinkers have a right to know whether the beer they are drinking is a genuine barley malt product or whether it is stuffed full of such tasty ingredients as corn syrup, propylene glycol alginate, amyloglucosidase, papain enzymes and potassium metabisulphite.
All these ingredients and additives were used to produce Miller Lite in the US until there was an outcry from consumers.
In Britain, Courage brew Miller Lite under licence but do not have to reveal the ingredients.
Keg bitters and lager have been enormously successful for the brewers not as a result of genuine consumer demand but due to saturation advertising.
Twenty years ago lager accounted for less than 10 per cent of total beer sales.
Today it is close to 50 per cent and giants such as Bass and Whitbread, once proud names in ale brewing, now trumpet the fact that more than half of their production goes to lager.
It is estimated that keg beer is twice as profitable as cask beer, lager four times as profitable.
Those profits are generated in part as a result of expensive marketing.
In 1987 British brewers spent £100 million on advertising and promotion.
More than two thirds of that colossal amount was devoted to lager, which is still a minority brand in Britain.
Bass, Britain's major brewing combine, was responsible for a quarter of all advertising spending and spent £15.14 million on lager compared to £6.67 on beer.
It is marketing and money that fuel the lager bandwagon, not consumer preference.
Kegs in the pub cellar, the one on the left connected for serving.
The lifeless beer is pumped full of carbon dioxide gas, and further gas is used to force the beer to the bar.
Heavily-promoted but weak and gassy, UK lagers have little in common with genuine bottom-fermented beers from Europe.
The can is a genuine Aussie one but XXXX is now brewed on ‘draught’ and in package in Britain by Allied Breweries at Wrexham.
AND THIS IS WHERE THE TRADITIONAL COLOURING, FLAVOURING AND PRESERVATIVES ARE ADDED
I KNOW THE ADS HAVE CREATED A GOOD DEMAND.
JUST HOW MANY SKOLS DO YOU WANT?
The balloon says it all: lager has less than 50 per cent of the British beer market yet the brewers spend two-thirds of their advertising money on it.
Ruddles, once a proud independent, now owned by Watneys, promotes its processed beers as though they have the support of CAMRA.
Miller Lite, brewed under licence by Courage.
Described as the ‘nearest thing to an empty glass’.
CAMRA FACT SHEET No 3
In the pub
Considerable care and skill are needed to handle cask beer when it reaches the pub.
It is not yet ready to be served.
Depending on its strength and the time required for it to reach maturity, a beer must stand for 12 to 48 hours before it can be drunk.
The usual practice is for casks to be rolled into deep, cool cellars.
Some pubs have their ‘cellars’ on the ground floor while a few pubs, often in rural areas, keep their casks on or behind the bar and serve the beer by gravity from a tap in the tap hole.
Wherever the beer is kept, the temperature must be carefully controlled.
The ideal temperature for serving a cask beer is 14°C (57°F).
It is wrong to say that real ale should be served at room temperature: too warm and the beer tastes tacky and rancid; too cold and the subtle palate of the beer is masked by the chill.
A beer cask can come in several sizes: a pin (4.5 gallons), a firkin (9), a kilderkin (18), a barrel (36) and a hogshead (54).
Many brewers are now using metric sizes.
A cask has two holes, the tap hole at one of the flat ends to which a tap and pipe are attached, and a bigger shive hole on top.
The cask is laid on a cradle on its side to encourage the sediment to sink to the belly.
A small wooden peg called a spile is knocked into the soft core of the shive.
Two types are used: a soft spile and a hard spile.
While the beer continues to ferment in the cask the CO 2 produced escapes through the soft spile.
When fermentation starts to slow down, a hard spile is used to control the escape of the gas.
Without natural CO 2 the beer would be flat.
When the cellarman judges that the beer is in perfect condition, he or she hammers a tap through the wooden or plastic keystone in the tap hole of the cask.
There are two ways in which cask beer can be stored that interfere with the vital secondary fermentation.
Cylinders of gas can be connected to the spile hole to keep a blanket of applied CO 2 on the beer.
A light covering of gas is known as blanket pressure, a heavier pressure used to force the beer to the bar is known as top pressure.
The aim is to keep the beer in a drinkable condition for longer but both systems interfere with the maturation of the beer and deliver an unpleasantly fizzy pint.
CAMRA does not recognise such pressure systems.
A number of brewers now use a device called a cask breather on low volume beers to prolong their life.
Although no extraneous gas is used, CAMRA also frowns on the breather as interfering with the natural process of maturing and serving cask beer.
Left to its own devices, real ale stays in a drinkable condition for about a week.
When the pub landlord or cellarman considers that the beer is ready to serve — it is said to have ‘dropped bright’ with the sediment of yeast in the belly of the cask, and to have matured sufficiently — a long plastic tube is connected to the tap and the beer is ready to be pulled to the bar.
The most familiar method of serving real ale is the beer engine, a simple suction pump operated by a tall handpump on the bar.
When the handle is pulled the engine delivers a half pint of beer to the bar.
Some pubs, mainly in the Midlands and the North, use electric pumps to draw the beer to the bar.
Electric pumps, either of the simple free flow type or the metered pump which delivers exact half pints, are a perfectly acceptable method of serving cask beer but they can be confused with the pressurised founts used to dispense keg beers.
In the North a nozzle called a sparkler is often attached to the spout on the bar to give beer the creamy head preferred there.
In Scotland beer is usually served in a quite different fashion.
Casks are placed on their ends in the cellar and a long tube known as an extractor is inserted through the tap hole.
The extractor is connected to the bar pump by a plastic beer line.
Instead of a handpump on the bar you will find a tall fount with a two-way lever.
When the lever is operated, the beer is driven to the bar by air pressure produced either by an electric air compressor or, more rarely, a water engine.
The strength of beer
Brewers pay tax or excise duty on the ‘original gravity’ of each brew prior to fermentation.
The excise officer measures the amount of fermentable material — malt and other sugars — in the wort.
As water has a gravity of 1000 degrees, a beer with 36 parts of fermentable material will be said to have an original gravity or OG of 1036 degrees.
While the gravity falls during the fermentation process, the OG does give a useful indication of the strength of beer.
Mild beers usually have OGs of 1030–1036 degrees, ordinary bitters 1034–1039, special bitters 1040–1048, and strong ales anything from 1050 to 1100 degrees.
Stouts usually have gravities in the middle 1040s.
Original gravity can be roughly translated into alcoholic strength as follows: a 1036 beer has approximately 3.6 per cent alcohol, a 1050 beer has 5 per cent alcohol and so on.
How to ruin perfection: gas connected to a cask of beer keeps the ale under a blanket of CO2, making it unpleasantly fizzy
Serving the perfect pint: a fine bank of handpumps in a traditional tap room.
Examples of different types of electric pumps.
The two on the left are metered pumps serving exact half-pints, the ones on the right are free flow pumps
The classic bank of Victorian beer engines showing the suction pumps operated by handpulls.
An experienced cellarman checking a cask of ale to make sure that the beer has ‘dropped bright’ and is ready to be served.
CAMRA FACT SHEET No 5
Beer styles
Mild ale is one of the last surviving examples of the type of beer the whole world drank until new developments in Britain and Europe introduced lighter coloured brews.
Until then beer was dark in colour, though it was considerably stronger than the milds consumed today.
It is the increasing burden of excise duty, however, that has reduced the strength of mild: at the turn of the century the average gravity of mild ale in Britain was 1050 degrees, the strength of a powerful modern bitter.
Milds today have gravities ranging from 1030 to 1036 degrees.
The style has virtually disappeared from the south-east of England but there is still considerable demand for it in the West Midlands, Wales and the North-west.
Fine examples of the style include Ansells, Thwaites and Brain's Dark.
As the last name suggests, mild tends to be dark, either by using dark malt or the addition of caramel.
There are some excellent light milds, though: McMullen's AK from Hertford keeps the mild flag flying in the Home Counties.
Bitter is now the premier beer style in England and Wales.
It developed in the early 19th century in Burton upon Trent where such brewing companies as William Bass answered the demand from the colonies for a cool, sparkling and well-hopped beer with India Pale Ale.
A taste for IPA spread rapidly through the home market and several large London brewers established plants in Burton to start brewing pale ale or bitter, taking advantage of the Burton waters, rich in gypsum.
Now brewers at home and abroad ‘Burtonise’ their water to brew pale bitters and lagers.
Bitters have gravities ranging from 1034 to 1040, best or special bitters — the true descendants of India Pale Ale — range from 1040 to 1050.
Some famous strong bitters, such as Fuller's ESB, weigh in at 1055 degrees.
Stout , in common with mild, is an historical throwback, the descendant of the great London beer styled called porter, which dominated the market in the 18th and 19th centuries and helped create rich and powerful commercial brewers.
Porter was a strong and dark beer, heavily hopped.
When Arthur Guinness started to brew porter in his Dublin brewery he created an insatiable demand for his beer that has never waned in Ireland.
Stout was the strongest or stoutest of the porter brews.
Stouts today are not exceptionally strong — usually in the low 1040s OG — and are distinguished by a high hop rate and by their jet black or dark brown colour achieved by the use of roasted malts and unmalted roasted barley.
Strong ales come in a variety of styles and strengths — winter warmers, barley wines, Christmas Ales, Old Ales — with gravities ranging from 1050 to 1100 or more.
They are usually dark and sweet and heavily hopped.
They are often sold in the winter months from small casks kept on bar counters.
They are best enjoyed in small quantities.
Bottled beers are usually filtered and pasteurised, the bottled version of keg.
Fortunately there are still a handful of splendid brews that are allowed to condition in the bottle.
Worthington White Shield, brewed by Bass, is a strong, nutty pale ale that has to be poured with care in order to retain the natural sediment in the bottle.
Guinness, a superb bitter-sweet beer, is naturally conditioned in crown-capped bottles; all other forms are filtered and pasteurised (as is the bottled version sold in Scotland).
Imperial Russian Stout has a powerful gravity of 1108 degrees and also conditions in the bottle.
Brewed by Courage, its name stems from the fact that it was once exported to Russia where it was so popular with the Czarist court that it was brewed under licence in Estonia until the 1917 revolution.
Thomas Hardy's Ale, brewed by Eldridge Pope, has an OG of 1126 degrees and each small bottle has to be laid down for several years before it is ready to drink.
Gale's Prize Old Ale (1095 OG) comes in a cork-stoppered bottle.
Scotland has a different brewing tradition in England and Wales.
Beers tend to be darker and sweeter.
Hops cannot be grown north of the border and the cost of importing them from England means they are used more sparingly.
Good malting barley comes from the Lowlands and from England; Highland barley is better suited for distilling.
The darker colour of Scottish beer comes from the use of roasted barley or dark malt in addition to pale malt.
Low gravity beers are called ‘light’— even when they are black or walnut brown in colour — medium gravity beers are called ‘heavy’ and strong beers are known as ‘export’, recalling the heyday of Scottish brewing when companies such as Younger sold their beers extensively to North America, India and Australasia.
Pump clips often bear the names of 60, 70, 80 and occasionally 90 shilling.
The use of the term shilling derives from an 19th century system of invoicing beer according to its gravity — a 60 shilling ale is a low gravity beer, an 80 shilling one is considerably stronger, similar to an English special bitter.
Although the invoicing system is long redundant, the use of the shilling in the name of a beer does give a useful indication of its strength.
While handpumps are now widespread in Scotland, as Fact Sheet 3 shows, the traditional method of serving cask beer in Scotland is the tall fount primed by air pressure.
Michael Thomas Bass, the great entrepreneur who turned Bass into a great Victorian company and, before the rise of the American giants, the biggest brewery in the world at Burton upon Trent.
CAMRA FACT SHEET No 6
How CAMRA works
The Campaign of Real Ale was started in the early 1970s by a small group of beer lovers who was appalled by the heavily promoted keg beers that threatened to replace traditional draught ales.
The national keg brands were the result of a wave of takeovers and mergers in the 1960s and early 1970s that created ‘the Big Six’ combines — Bass, Allied, Watney/Grand Met, Whitbread, Courage and Scottish &Newcastle.
The Campaign won media attention as a result of its outspoken criticism of the state of British beer, backed by punchy public relations, marches, demonstrations and the launch of the Good Beer Guide, which listed those pubs that still sold ‘the real thing’.
Membership grew at an astonishing pace, reaching close to 30,000 in the late 1970s.
CAMRA produced reports on the brewing industry, pointing to the monopoly grip of the Big Six in many parts of the country and the resultant lack of choice for consumers.
The industry went into rapid reverse.
The public interest created by CAMRA made further takeovers and closures unpopular.
Many small independent breweries were saved from extinction.
‘Real ale’ became a major talking point in pubs and the media.
Slowly and hesitantly, the Big Six attempted to rebuild bridges to its alienated customers by producing and promoting cask conditioned beer again.
When Allied Breweries unveiled Draught Burton Ale in 1976 to great acclaim, the flood gates opened and all the national combines hurried to embrace the new philosophy of ‘abroad portfolio’ of brands to please the disparate wishes of pub users.
CAMRA's strength lies in its style of organisation.
It has turned its back on the elitism of many consumer organisations and has based itself on a democratic structure in which the voluntary efforts of the members determine policy and action.
The Campaign is run by a National Executive elected by the Annual General Meeting.
NE members are volunteers who plan CAMRA's strategy through a wide-ranging committee structure.
Members are organised in local branches grouped together in regions that are overseen by voluntary Regional Directors.
Each brewery has a Brewery Liaison Officer who meets brewery executives on a regular basis to discuss policy and changes in the range of beers available.
The branch and regional structure is overseen by a national Branches Committee made up of Regional Directors.
National, regional and local beer festivals present a vast range of beers to the public and help gain many new members.
A small full-time staff based in St Albans looks after the day-to-day administration and finances of the Campaign and produced a monthly newspaper, What's Brewing, and the annual Good Beer Guide.
A subsidiary publishing company, Alma Books, has been set up to produce a number of guide books and the Campaign also works with commercial publishers to produce such titles as Classic Town and Country Pubs and Beer, Bed and Breakfast.
In its short history, CAMRA has produced many reports on the structure of the industry and the need to refashion it to meet consumer needs.
It has involved itself energetically in such issues as pub opening hours and the additives and adjuncts used in the brewing process.
In particular, it has lobbied both the British Parliament and the European institutions with demands to break up the brewing monopolies and to restore greater choice to pub users.
CAMRA's work is far from over.
The grip of the brewing giants is still powerful; the late 1980s has seen a worrying return to takeovers and mergers and the intensification of lager promotion.
The threat to choice and to the remaining independent brewers demands a strong and continuing Campaign that will fight for drinkers' rights and challenge the might of the brewing giants.
Membership of the Campaign will pitch you into the heart of the battle to preserve British beer.
For just £9 a year you will receive What's Brewing every month and will get generous discounts on CAMRA and Alma Books publications.
You will be able to attend branch and regional meetings, the national AGM and take part in CAMRA activities.
It is good fun, too, for branches organise regular beer festivals and brewery visits.
Joining CAMRA is a commitment to Britain's best-known and most successful consumer organisation.
You will play your part in helping to preserve a distinctive beer style for future generations to enjoy.
The early days: CAMRA members demonstrating against the keg beer policies of a giant brewery
Offering drinkers a wide range of regional beers: one of many Campaign beer festivals
What's Brewing is CAMRA's monthly newspaper, sent free to every member.
It champions the cause of good beer and good pubs.
CAMRA and Alma Books offer a growing list of national and regional guides covering good beer, accommodation and food
CAMRA FACT SHEET No 7
Brew it yourself
Brewing beer at home is great fun.
Unlike building model aeroplanes or playing computer games, you can consume the finished product, which works out at a cost of 10p a pint.
When you compare that with the price of the average pub pint, the advantages of Brew-it-Yourself are clear.
The initial outlay is quite low and the information here is based on using equipment and ingredients that are freely available.
If you want to take home brewing to a more advanced stage, which entails mashing and boiling with malt and hops rather than extracts, you should buy ‘The Big Book of Brewing’ by Dave Line or ‘Brewing Better Beers’by Ken Shales.
Both books are available from Amateur Winemaker Publications of Andover, Hampshire.
Basic equipment: a large white food-grade plastic dustbin with a capacity of at least six gallons; plastic tubing, about two metres long with an internal diameter of at least 10 millimetres; a wine cube — the plastic cubes used in an off-licence for selling draught wine and sherry are ideal; an air lock and rubber bung; about 40 one pint beer bottles; a corking machine and crown corks; a sterilising agent such as Chempro SDP or a mixture of sodium metabisulphite and citric acid; a 12 pint pan.
For basic ingredients it is best to buy one of the 40 pint size kits available from most home brewing shops or from branches of Boots.
A kit such as Edme Best Bitter, Tom Caxton Best Bitter, or John Bull Best Bitter will be a good starting kit.
You will also need a kilo bag of white sugar.
Brewing
Clean the white plastic brewing bucket with the sterilising fluid and rinse it thoroughly with cold water.
Set the bucket in the position where you intend to ferment the beer.
Now open the bitter kit and pour most of the hopped concentrated wort into the 12 pint pan.
Rinse the can out twice with boiling water to remove all the extract and pour the rinse water into the pan.
Add the kilo of sugar and stir water, sugar and wort until they are more or less dissolved.
Top the solution up to roughly eight pints with more hot water.
Place the pan on the cooker and bring the contents gradually to the boil.
Boil for ten minutes and then leave the pan to cool.
You can speed up the cooling by standing the pan in a sink full of cold water.
When the pan has cooled substantially pour the contents into the white plastic bucket, rinse out the pan and pour the rinsed water into the bucket.
Top up the level in the bucket to five gallons with cold water.
Check the temperature of the wort.
If it is below 21°C (70°F) you can pitch the yeast.
If the temperature is above 21°C you must leave the liquid to cool, covered with a lid or a tight fitting material such as Clingfilm.
During fermentation it is best to aim for a uniform temperature of between 18 and 21°C (62 and 70°F).
Neither the airing cupboard nor the garden shed in winter are satisfactory.
If the temperature is too low the beer will stop fermenting.
If the temperature is too high, the yeast will mutate and produce unpleasant off flavours in the beer.
Primary fermentation takes from three to five days.
It is advisable to leave the bucket loosely covered and not to skim off the yeast head.
At first just a ring of bubbles will gather on the surface of the liquid.
Then a creamy, frothy head of yeast will form and cover the surface of the beer.
After a few days the head will collapse and leave a brownish pancake.
When this happens take a hydrometer reading and if the gravity is about 1010 syphon the beer into the wine cube.
The cube should be thoroughly sterilised and rinsed before use.
Saw off the tap from the large plastic screw cap, insert the bung and the airlock.
Syphon the beer into the cube, leaving as much of the sediment in the bucket as possible.
Fit the screw cap with the bung and airlock and put a small amount of water in the airlock.
After two or three days in the wine cube the beer will be ready for bottling.
Sterilise the bottles and rinse well.
Use the plastic tubing to syphon the beer from the wine cube into the bottles.
Add approximately half a teaspoon of white granulated sugar to each bottle before capping it.
This will give the beer a head when you pour it.
After a couple of weeks in a cool place the beer should have cleared and be ready for drinking.
It is best to chill the beer slightly before drinking.
Thirty minutes in the fridge will ensure a pleasant cool temperature and encourage the yeast to form a hard ring at the bottom of the bottle that does not rise to the surface when pouring.
With a little practice you should be able to brew 40 pints of good cheap beer in less than three hours' work.
The basic equipment needed to brew tasty — and cheap — beer at home
