TROUBLE BREWING
PUB REFURBISHMENTS — OVER THE LIMIT?
A Report By THE CAMPAIGN FOR REAL ALE THE GEORGIAN GROUP THE SOCIETY FOR THE PROTECTION OF ANCIENT BUILDINGS THE THIRTIES SOCIETY THE VICTORIAN SOCIETY
TROUBLE BREWING
PUB REFURBISHMENTS — OVER THE LIMIT?
Written by David Gamston, CAMRA Richard Holder, The Victorian Society Nigel Langford, Langford Williams Partnership Steven Parissien, The Georgian Group Alan Powers, The Thirties Society Matthew Slocombe, SPAB
American .
‘SO THIS IS A REAL OLD ENGLISH INN?’
Barmaid .
‘NO; BUT IT WILL BE IN A FORTNIGHT.’
INTRODUCTION Steven Parissien 
‘The public house represents what should be the hub of our wheel of life, essential to our material need and second only to the church that stands and represents our spiritual necessity.
The Church is to the spirit as the inn is to the flesh, and, if good and well designed, they baulk the devil himself.’
(Edwin Lutyens in The Builder,15 October 1937, quoted in Claire Hunt,The Public House in Manchester: A Subject for Conservation,unpublished University of Manchester MA thesis, 1989)
‘When you have lost your Inns, drown your empty selves, for you will have lost the last of England.’
(Hilaire Belloc, quoted in Christopher Hutt,The Death of the English Pub,1973)
It is an often-repeated truism to say that the institution of the pub is unique to Britain — but it is still one which is well worth resurrecting.
It is also a fairly obvious statement to say that historic pubs have served the function well for hundreds of years.
As Alan Crawford noted in the SAVE/CAMRA report Time Gentlemen Please of 1983, old pubs ‘are not isolated or monumental, but part of the fabric of the city, and of people's ordinary lives, street-corner history.
They are not arcane but easily enjoyable.
They are not inaccessible but quite the reverse, and they have their original working use still.’
Often local pubs serve as a base for the local community: as Neil Richardson pointed out in CAMRA's Pub Preservation report of 1980, ‘The pub is first and foremost a social centre, the best ever invented…
If the pubs are taken away then the community is the poorer for it.’
It is thus both puzzling and worrying that so many brewers are still apparently obsessed with eradicating the uniqueness of the individual historic pub, effectively destroying what has been a familiar and secure social centre in their attempts to ‘improve’ upon a successful, time-honoured formula.
The pressure to remodel old pubs is of course nothing new.
The Victorian and Edwardian eras witnessed many wholesale rebuildings of modest Georgian drinking-houses; during the Interwar period even more money was pumped into enlarging and rebuilding old pubs, as well as in creating large new ones (see Alan Powers' essay below).
However, alterations were more often than not effected with some degree of sympathy for the existing fabric and atmosphere.
With the advent of postwar Modernism much of this sympathy evaporated.
The ascetic modernists' rejection of history in order to create a visionary brave New World was clearly incompatible with the historic pub.
This attitude was amply revealed in the results of the competition (‘Inside the Pub’) launched jointly by The Architectural Review and The Brewers' Society in 1949.
In October of that year the AR regretted that nearly all competition entries had evaded the key problem and had signally failed ‘to achieve the genuine pub atmosphere’.
‘Contemporary design’, the magazine's editor regretted, ‘because it has no roots in the vernacular idiom…will not appear immediately familiar’, whilst the ‘mock-Tudor and the mock-Georgian styles which have been so prevalent — no matter how misguided in themselves — have sprung…from a genuine attempt to preserve a traditional atmosphere’.
As pub designer Tim May noted in his address to CAMRA's AGM of 1990: ‘By any objective standards, the competition was a disaster’.
The response of the 1960s and 70s to this failure to capture the essence of the traditional pub was the ruthlessly-applied corporate image and the proliferation of ‘fun’ theme-pubs.
Thankfully, most of the more extreme excesses of the theme pub craze — so ably analysed by Christopher Hutt in his classic work of 1973 — have now disappeared.
With them have gone much of the outrageously condescending theorising expressed by professionals such as Watney Mann's head designer Roy Wilson-Smith, who declared in the early 70s:
‘I want to give the people who use my houses a rare and primitive relationship with the raw forces of nature.
People love to be awed when they enter a pub by a superior natural force — a strange sort of higher masochism.’
(Quoted in Hutt, p124)
The John Bull, Layerthorpe, York.
(David Gamston).
This is not to say, of course, that the age of the corporate brewery — or multinational — will not return: in SAVE and CAMRA's 1983 report, Nikolaus Boulting wisely warned that future students of interior design may find ‘that the cycle is complete, from company identity to corporate image and back in three generations’.
The inappropriate implementation of the ‘theme’ doctrine has now, though, been replaced by equally disturbing challenges to the integrity of the historic pub.
Piecemeal change to pub exteriors and interiors, while more insidious than wholesale rebuilding, can be equally destructive.
This is particularly true today: even in the recession-hit 1990s, brewers are spending increasing amounts on pub refurbishment — more on pubs, indeed, than at any time since the 1930s.
Much of this is due to the face that, following the recent Monopolies and Mergers Commission report on pub ownership, many breweries are actually moving out of brewing itself and concentrating instead on pub management — an area where they believe they stand to make the greatest profits.
At the end of the 80s the famous Manchester firm of Boddingtons sold its brewing operation to Whitbread; yet during 1988 alone, Claire Hunt has noted, Boddingtons undertook the refurbishment of 50 of their tied houses.
More recently, at the end of 1990 the regional brewing giant Greenall Whitley announced that it was closing both its breweries at Warrington and Nottingham (formerly the independent Shipstone's brewery) to concentrate solely on running pubs — contracting out its beer to be produced by former rivals Allied Breweries.
The principal victims or beneficiaries of this change of direction are the historic tied houses.
And the principal problem facing them today is the replacement of genuine and much-loved historical features by bogus ‘period’ fittings — which are invariably couched in a vaguely ‘Victorian’or ‘Edwardian’sham-historical style.
It is this alarming development which most concerns the National Amenity Societies represented in this report.
In 1988 the Mintel study The On Trade Revolution optimistically reported that, ‘far from disappearing, traditional pubs are being lovingly restored in most cases.
Natural materials, salvaged antiques and fittings, deep pile carpets and chintz are the order of the day’(Hunt, p43).
All too often, however, such fittings and materials are not only historically inappropriate — stained tropical hardwood from razed rainforests, horse brasses and rows of unwanted Book Club volumes are no substitute for an original, atmospheric interior — but also pay scant attention to the history and development of each individual building.
As internal partitions and old seating are removed in favour of connected raised levels of hardwood balustrades and matching chairs, the uniqueness of the pub is generally the first casualty.
Rarely is the customer consulted; in far too many cases the regular is a powerless bystander as his or her pub is transformed by identikit ‘Victoriana’.
As Claire Hunt observed, Chris Thompson's Beware the Barmaid's Smile of 1985 neatly summed up the trend in pub interiors in the 1980:
‘The transformation of the British pub currently underway has not occurred because of some conscious desertion of its doors by the public, but it is the result of some very careful planning by groups of retailers, marketing managers and accountants (back up by designers) encamped in the higher echelons of the brewing trade.
Far from being a conclusion of the ‘consumer-led’ revolution beloved of propagandists, the change is the child of a retail revolution which, for the consumer, constitutes only a re-arrangement of his or her individual powerlessness.’
Disregard for the individual qualities of pub interiors can be fatal.
A pub, like any other old building, is far more than just its principle facade, or its four walls.
As Neil Richardson noted in 1980, ‘An old town pub is not just an attractive Victorian or Georgian facade, it is a building which is still being used for the purpose for which it was built.
The design of interiors…are as valid today as they were in earlier times — the vaults, snugs, parlours, each with their own character, can still provide a pleasant, varied atmosphere’.
However, to public and professionals alike many old buildings are still regarded as representing little more than four external walls.
This even applies to listed buildings: there is still a worryingly widespread general belief that listing only covers the facade, or perhaps just the exterior, whereas it is of course expressly designed to protect the whole building.
Of those pubs which are listed — and there are still dismally few — such an attitude inevitably leads to a total disregard for those special qualities which distinguish the pub interior.
Historic pub interiors, as well as pub exteriors, are vital and irreplaceable elements of our cultural and social heritage.
This should not obscure the obvious fact that they are also profit-making concerns, too.
As such, they need constant updating — especially if the perceived trend towards reduced pub-going is to be reversed.
(In their 1988 survey, Mintel noted that ‘the proportion of consumer expenditure represented by alcohol consumption has fallen steadily, whilst at the same time that spent on leisure as a whole has increased’(Hunt, p42).)
Changes to the fabric have to be effected as new toilets are installed, or greater provision is made for food preparation facilities.
New and increasingly stringent fire regulations have to be accommodated and licensing magistrates — who often care little for the architectural integrity of historic pubs, but are principally concerned with good and easy supervision of the pub clientele — have to be appeased.
All of these factors may be detrimental to original interior features.
However, many breweries have taken advantage of such requirements to completely remodel their historic pubs.
Whilst the age of the theme pub may be over, more and more old pubs are being transformed into identical, pseudo-historical clones.
This is especially true of those pubs now targeted by the breweries as centres for family eating.
A traditional interior does not have to be incompatible with accommodating whole families, nor with providing meals; yet an increasing number of old pub interiors are being sacrificed on the altar of the identikit eating house — whether the brewer's concept be a downmarket steakhouse or part of a family restaurant chain masquerading as an independent local concern.
Many of the interiors created by the designers of such facilities are as forbidding as the old-fashioned spit-and-sawdust pub; any lingering atmosphere is swept away in a barrage of stained wood and fake Victoriana, and any casual visitors made to feel inordinately guilty if they do not, alas, wish to eat.
The subjugation of individual character in such cases — which on occasion even involves the removal of all traces of the pub's actual name — is particularly depressing.
The aim of this report is not to demand that brewers turn the block back to 1620, 1720, 1820 or even to 1920; pubs have to make money, and have to adapt to some extent to changing needs and expectations.
Nor does it pretend to provide a detailed and exhaustive analysis of the condition of Britain's pubs.
The aim is to present a brief overview of what is happening to historic pubs today, and to provide suggestions as to how this perceived threat to our old pubs can be effectively limited.
In this respect it supplements, rather than replaces, publications of the past such as the 1983 SAVE/CAMRA report and detailed regional studies such as Claire Hunt's of 1988.
Each of the organisations involved has its own particular viewpoint, none of which has been stifled for the sake of consistent unanimity.
We have also included the observations of a leading pub designer in order to give the report more breadth.
By presenting a broad front, which encompasses the country's official architectural watchdogs as well as the Campaign for Real Ale, we hope to alert both the general public and the brewing trade to what we believe is a growing and serious threat to our cultural heritage.
The Queen's Head in Little Underbank, Stockport today, after sympathetic refurbishment.
Winner of CAMRA's 1990 Pub Refurbishment Award.
(Ian Parry/Traditional Homes Magazine).
TRADITIONAL PUBS IN FOCUS: A CAMRA ANGLE David Gamston 
Most people nowadays would agree that a good pub is one of our best traditions and a vital and distinctive ingredient of our national way of life.
One problem with this cosy consensus, and its greatest irony, is that as a nation we take our pubs too much for granted.
We can believe that the pub is universally respected and prized and that there is common cause and common understanding between owners, operators and users alike.
If so, our sense of the true and the false is too easily deceived and manipulated.
The modern world is one which confuses and plunders our sense of the past; one where even the concept of ‘heritage’ itself is hi-jacked and distorted.
And with the pub in particular some of the loudest siren voices proclaiming ‘heritage’ are often the very ones most intent on debasing its meaning for us.
The pub has always had to tread a difficult tightrope in reconciling its social function, as a ‘house’ for the public, with its commercial function as a retail shop.
Imposed fashions are certainly nothing new — as the periodic crazes for pub refurbishment, from the Victorian era onwards, clearly testify.
However, it is well recognised by conservationists that the modern pace and scale of change poses a threat which is quite unprecendented .
In today's accountant-led brewing industry the destiny of individual pubs is often decided in remote boardrooms by managers answerable only to corporate dogmas and next year's profit forecasts.
We live in the fading twilight of an ‘overpubbed’ urban world; a world which, even within living memory, gave the citizens of a small city like York the choice to drink in a different pub for every day of the year.
Present-day reality is that pub deaths far exceed births, and the signs are that this is an accelerating process.
As a result, the brunt of investment pressures will have to be borne by an ever-decreasing stock of pubs; and what good pubs we have left will be more than ever exposed to the cold winds of change.
When the Campaign for Real Ale embarked in the early 1970s on its crusade to preserve and promote our disappearing beer heritage, three watchwords came quickly to the fore; choice, quality and tradition.
At once CAMRA declared itself as both a consumer and a conservationist watchdog, speaking up for citizens as well as consumers against the abuses inflicted on one of our best national traditions.
Exactly the same battlelines, with exactly the same watchwords and against much the same enemies, now urgently need to be drawn up to save the traditional British pub.
An old-fashioned, romanticised image of the pub is common fodder for our national nostalgia industry.
Cosy images of thatched country inns abound on glossy book covers.
Christmas cards, chocolate boxes and tourist literature, proclaiming a timeless tradition that is supposed to be the envy of the world.
Too often, though, myth and reality part company outside the door, behind the roses and the last flailing morris dancer.
We are not shown the acres of car park, the oversized modern restaurant extension and the gutted interior, knocked together from what were once intimate old rooms.
Yet if we should catch a glimpse of the fake plastic beams, the mass-produced horsebrasses, cartwheels and hunting prints there will, often as not, be unnerving claims of ‘genuine olde worlde atmosphere’ for this mishmash of bogus antiquity.
The myth-makers, with the tourist boards prominent among them, carefully ignore the fact that genuine historic quality has been lost forever from most of Britain's pubs.
In York, one of the country's major historic and tourist centres and the city best known to this writer, the visitor's search for some genuine experience of a better, bygone England will find little reward inside most of the old city's public houses.
There is little trace left of York's truly ancient coaching, posting and market inns, while nearly half the pubs which were standing in the 1950s, including some historic gems, have been closed down, converted, or redeveloped into oblivion.
Many of the pubs which are passed off as ‘historic’ to the visitor and tourist prove to be only film-set facades on what are now little more than youthful amusement arcades or glorified fast-food cafes.
Fewer than ten of the sixty or so pubs occupying old buildings in central York have completely escaped assault by post-war ‘improvements’, and in none of these is the surviving pub interior any older than late Victorian.
Indeed what we are now seeing in some cases as ‘the genuine article’ are quality brewery refurbishments dating from the 1920s and 1930s, good Brewers ‘Tudor, maybe, but hardly the stuff of the ancient, inglenooky world that the modern myth-makers — the brewers and the tourism industry — would have us believe still exists.
Most of York's old central pubs have fallen victim to drastic recent remodelling with yawning spaces, often indistinguishable from one pub to another, replacing the old rooms and idiosyncratic nooks and corners that previously gave individuality and preserved genuine historic character.
That two dozen of these interiors are in buildings statutorily ‘listed’ for their special architectural or historic interest say much for the low regard paid to pubs in the exercise of listed building control and indeed for the listing process itself.
A striking example of this is the list description for The Blue Bell in Fossgate, the last perfectly-surviving Victorian pub interior in York and one of only two pubs left in the city of truly national importance.
The premises is described as follows;
‘Circa 1600 with later additions.
Refronted in brick early C18: 2 gables: 3 storeys: 5 sash windows (generally minus glazing bars): dentil and modillion eaves cornice: modern shop front’
Reality, in York as elsewhere, means precious little public protection for our pubs and heavy reliance on the better nature of the brewers credit — brewers such as Samuel Smith's, for for their loving and appropriately ‘benign neglect’ of a low-barrelage, unpretentious gem like The Wellington Inn in Alma Terrace, York.
Some enlightened companies, like Joshua Tetley in the 1980s, even started their own special designation schemes for the best historic pubs in their tied estates.
The Fox in Holgate Road, York was an outstanding beneficiary of the ‘Tetley Heritage Pub’ initiative of that time.
It is a quite perfect example of pub conservation, combining careful preservation of the Victorian compartmented interior and servery arrangement, with judicious enhancement and enlargement of drinking areas.
This kind of move came at a time when Tetley's, along with other arms of Allied Breweries, espoused and encouraged a culture of well-informed and caring in-house designers.
Times change, however, and today, under a somewhat different corporate regime, ‘Heritage’ starts to smack of yesterday's fashion, and one is not entirely sure what commitment remains.
Already the other Tetley Heritage Pub in York, The Swan, is out on lease to an independent retailing chain.
Moreover, the very same Tetley's who so lovingly restored The Fox are now building, in the heart of a residential suburb not two miles away, an open-plan eating barn that contravenes all the accepted standards of enlightened and community-sensitive pub design.
Reliance on the brewers' better nature is a precarious sort of dependency, where today's Jekyll can be tomorrow's Hyde.
Our pubs are forever at risk of corporate gimmickry and catchpenny fashions.
And not only are the major brewers at fault.
Countless independent ‘free house’ owners have copied brewers' fashions and wrought untold havoc with unassuming old country pubs before moving on to pastures new.
Philistinism is rife, and it is high time for some loud restatement of the old conservationist maxim that ownership is no more than a temporary rental on the nation's heritage.
That any of our pubs can, at a stroke, be shut down or altered by uncaring owners, without any proper consultation with users or the community, is little short of a continuing national disgrace.
Our perception of the pub has to work at a number of levels — mostly obvious, but nonetheless worth clarifying.
First of all, the pub is an establishment where particular kinds of activity take place — the most important of which is informal social drinking, particularly of beer, our national drink.
It is quite unlike any other public, social or recreational establishment.
Entry is free, no membership is required, and it is open to any adult to enter, be served a drink and relax.
Pubs are, to quote Ben Davis, ‘the public buildings in which people feel most at home’, and in its truest sense the public house is exactly what it says — a house for the public .
This is the pub as social institution, so much more than just a place for drinking.
The loss or senseless alteration of the many ‘ordinary’ pubs that serve these functions can deal a serious blow to the quality of life of their users and the well-being of the wider community.
This is especially the case in rural communities, many villages depending entirely on just one pub.
For these very reasons, the care of our nation's pubs is much more than an exercise in architectural conservation.
If the pub as an institution expresses itself in a rich variety of ways, the same is true of the physical forms it takes.
One very obvious but important observation is that a pub is first and foremost an interior.
There are, of course, countless buildings that were purposely designed as pubs, yet many more occupy buildings intended for some other, usually domestic, use.
To this extent it is not especially helpful to see pubs as a category of buildings, but rather to keep a clear distinction in mind between interior and exterior.
To do otherwise is to play into the hands of the facadists and myth-makers.
Our country has more than enough pubs whose ruined interiors fail to live up to the promise of attractive historic frontages.
A number of modern pub designers attempt to rescue a sense of intimacy and defensible space by dividing these open-plan arenas into token drinking areas.
Yet a proper compartmentalisation of pub interiors means real choice for customers.
It enhances a pub's ability to cater for the different and sometimes conflicting activities and tastes of different customers under the same roof, and in so doing it keeps alive the healthy social and age mix that is a traditional hallmark of the true pub.
The current obsession with pseudo-Victorian and other bogus ‘historical’ styles imposed willy-nilly and quite regardless of the true age of the pub, seems to suggest two things; firstly that pub designers and fitters have completely lost their way, both in recognising and respecting what is genuinely old and in looking for a wholeheartedly modern pub style; secondly that there is some king of awareness, correct but misguided, that people like their pubs to look old and feel familiar.
The great pity of this is that most pubs are old, yet the proper opportunity to celebrate this has already been squandered.
There appears to be no creative public vision which will help the survival of the pub or help ensure a healthy and varied pub stock.
History, indeed, tends to show that public intervention can have the effect of reinforcing rather than curbing market excesses.
It was the licensing system and licensing controls, after all, which helped to foster Britain's peculiar ‘brewery tie’ and concentrate pub ownership in the hands of the brewers in the first place; and it was the same system which connived at and partly encouraged the modern contagion of open-plan pub designs.
In addition, the 1989 MMC Report, conceived as an attack in the public interest on the monopoly power of the major brewers and requiring the ‘untying’ of large chunks of their tied estates, may have devastating consequences for traditional pubs.
For despite their other shortcomings, most of the major brewers have been able and willing to cross-subsidise many less profitable houses.
Equally, the brewery-tie system has sheltered much pub property in tied tenancies from the harsh winds of the Market.
Investment in these has often been minimal — which, in the equation of pub conservation, has been a benign force for preserving many of our best traditional pubs.
All this is now due to change and it is, not surprisingly, the smaller, less profitable and traditionally-run tenanted houses that are in the front line for disposal.
There are still some genuinely old pubs remaining, as yet untouched by crass modernisation, which appeal to our true instincts of heritage and our craving for some sense of permanence and continuity in a fast changing world.
By far the best service that can now be done to these pubs, both for ourselves and future generations, is to leave well alone.
The Wellington Inn, Alma Terrace, York (David Gamston).
The Church Inn, Newton Road, Lawton, near Manchester: above, cement render and plastic windows; below, partitions and other historic features removed from the interior in its conversion to a single-room bar (Claire Hunt).
The bar at The Lighthorseman, Fulford Road, York.
This Late Georgian and Victorian pub is currently a prime candidate for listing; it is also, however, earmarked for disposal by its current owners, Bass.
(David Gamston).
MEDIEVAL AND EARLY MODERN PUBS Matthew Slocombe 
A house of sin you may call it, but not a house of darkness for the candles are never out, and it is like those countries far in the north where it is as clear at mid-night as at mid-day…
To give you the total reckoning of it: it is the busy man's recreation, the idle man's business, the melancholy man's sanctuary, the stranger's welcome, the Inns of Court man's entertainment, the scholar's kindness and the citizen's courtesy.
(John Earle 1628).
As today, drinking establishments held an important social and cultural position in medieval and early modern England.
These establishments were divided into inns, alehouses and taverns which had separate and distinct functions.
The inn was generally the largest of the three, providing accommodation as well as beverages, and was typically located in market places or on through routes.
Architecturally, the inn was often distinguished by an inner courtyard, sometimes with gallery, reached through an archway in the facade.
Some examples from the pre-reformation period, such as the magnificent George Inn at Norton St. Philip, Somerset, originally constructed in the 14th century, were established by monasteries for pilgrims and travellers; but after the dissolutions of the 1530s all were held in secular hands and subsequently catered for the increasing number of road travellers in the 16th century and the stage coach trade that first appeared in the early 17th century.
William Harrison noted in 1587 that:
In all our inns we have plenty of ale, beer and sundry kinds of wine and such is the capacity of some of these that they are able to lodge two hundred or three hundred persons and their horses.
In the medieval period the church was also involved in the brewing of its own church-ales, which were made on an occasional basis and produced a useful income supplement; in late medieval times these were often served in the Church House that frequently adjoined the churchyard.
The church-ales provided competition for the secular supply of beverages from the taverns and alehouses.
Both these establishments seem to have had an architectural form very similar to the ordinary domestic buildings of their area, and the hall provided the communal eating and drinking space.
The tavern was a meeting place, usually in the centre of the town or village, where wine was normally served.
According to John Earle, writing in 1628, the inn was a superior establishment to the alehouses and was ‘a degree or (if you will) a pair of stairs above an alehouse, where men are drunk with more credit and apology ’.
The alehouse in its most basic form was simply a domestic building where ale was sold to generate additional income for the household, although David Lupton observed in 1632 that the alehouse keeper ‘defies a wine tavern as an upstart outlandish fellow, and suspects the wine to be poisoned.
Her ale, if new, looks like a misty morning, all thick .’
During the 20th century an ‘historic’ architectural character — perhaps most typically that of the timber framed building — has become popular with, and desirable to, both publicans and brewers.
In many cases this has resulted in the introduction of faked features and the associated destruction of existing features which, though often of architectural and historic interest in their own right, do not fit in with the designer's concept of the pub's ideal form.
Artificial plastic beams are frequently introduced, ceilings are stripped of plaster to reveal floor joists that were never intended to be seen, other timbers are artificially blackened to create a supposedly ‘traditional’ though in fact inauthentic ‘black and white’effect and render or plaster is removed from walls to produce ‘rustic’charm.
At the Saracen's Head at Towcester, for example, a recent proposal to historicise the pub involved extensive destruction of genuine historic fabric and the introduction of the worst cliches of ‘traditional’ pub detail, such as bulls-eye glass and copper lanterns.
In recent years serious damage to the historic interiors of pubs has resulted from the creation of the open-plan which now seem to be pubs' standard internal layout.
Often the creation of the open plan interior requires the removal of walls, chimney breasts, stairs and other internal features of interest, which is highly destructive of the building's historic character.
The owner of ‘The Hollybush’ at Elstree proposed to infill an original coach arch in the pub's facade and to demolish the timber framed side walls of the passageway behind in order to form a larger and open interior, even though it was this feature that distinguished the building as an historic inn.
In the most extreme cases the existing building is so different from the ‘historic’ pub concept that a virtual rebuild is proposed.
At the Huntsman's Inn in Ide, Kent, the refurbishment proposals were to involve demolitions so extensive that all but a portion of the building's external wall would be destroyed, the planned reconstruction included an extension that would double the size of the original structure.
It seems most surprising that the breweries consider the large open space to be the pub's ideal internal form, or believe the artificial, standardised ‘historic’ pub interior to be preferable to genuine historic detail, when the original internal divisions and features are essential elements of the historic character that customers expect when entering such a building.
The Duke's Arms at Presteigne in Powys provides the perfect illustration of how the misguided quest for the ideal ‘traditional’ pub character can seriously threaten genuine historic features.
This pub was originally a 17th century timber frame jettied building; in the early 19th century its front was removed and a new rendered facade added.
Although the loss of the original front is regrettable, the present facade is in accord with the general architectural character of the street and retains original late-Georgian features, such as its sashes with glazing bars.
The pub's owner, however, wished to remove the 19th century facade and undertake a conjectural restoration of the jetted, timber framed front (the design of which included various historically inaccurate details).
The public clearly believed that this ‘restoration’ would enhance the building's interest despite destroying an historic element; he must also have felt that a new timber framed facade, despite its inauthenticity, would give the pub an ‘historic’character that was more readily recognisable and instantly attractive to potential customers.
If pub owners were prepared to emphasise the interest of genuine historic features, regardless of period, then this type of fakery, which disappoints or sadly deceives the customer in search of the traditional pub and irreparably removes much of a building's interest for future generations, could be avoided.
Georgian frontage of The Duke's Arms, Presteigne, Powys (Andrew Arrol).
Cruck Barn at Pincents Manor, Reading, Berkshire: the ludicrous spectacle of a bogus ‘half-timbered’ bar in the midst of a genuinely medieval timber-framed barn (Kenneth Major).
THE GEORGIAN PUB Steven Parissien
The modern pub is essentially a Victorian creation.
However, many of the features of the pub as we know it today were developed during the Georgian period; at the same time, many Georgian pub buildings — or at least Georgian architectural fittings — still survive today.
As communications improved during the 18th century, so the number of coaching inns or pubs situated at turnpikes increased.
To cater for the expanding coaching trade, many inns erected large carriage entrance on the street front and stables at the rear to facilitate the changing and housing of horses.
Those coaching inns which already existed were frequently refronted or even remodelled in the latest Georgian style.
At the other end of the scale, many rural or urban homes were adapted to serve as simple beerhouses, with little internal alteration.
By 1830 the pub had become comparatively sophisticated, responding to the changing demands and the technological advances of the industrial revolution.
‘Shop-taverns’, serving the passing trade as well as the locals, had become common in many towns, whilst many pubs had been partitioned into two distinct areas — the bar room and the tap room.
Modern serving equipment — including beer machines and even slop trays — had appeared.
And the bar on which they stood had evolved from a simple counter or hatch to something approaching the form we know today: in his Encyclopaedia of Cottage, Farm and Villa Architecture of 1833 J C Loudon described the ideal bar (the place ‘from which all orders are issued’) as being ‘of some size’, with ‘commanding views of the front entrance hall and back entrance’.
By the end of the Regency period the pub was becoming a far more attractive proposition for the government, too.
Wellington's Beerhouse Act of 1830 represented the most blatant attempt to eradicate the gin shop by promoting beer — and pubs — as a healthier alternative, abolishing the duty on beer and taking beerhouse licenses out of the control of the licensing justices.
Thus many of the elements of the familiar Victorian pub were already in place at the time of William IV's death in 1837.
Inevitably, few Georgian beerhouses or coaching inns survive in anything like their original form, having been comprehensively extended or altered in subsequent decades.
Given the propensity of many modern breweries and their designers to impose an overall, single-period ‘look’, however, the Georgian fabric that does exist is often the first thing to be swept away — to make way for a sham-Victorian world of clumsy stained glass and ugly stained hardwood.
Georgian windows, for example, are especially vulnerable to replacement by plastic (UPVC) examples.
The visual result can be seen in the accompanying illustration of Watneys' Crown at Haddiscoe in Norfolk: two-dimensional windows with flat, reflectant glass and sham glazing-bar strips which wholly fail to capture the depth and character of the original openings.
Despite what brewers' architects often allege, the life expectancy of such plastic window units is proving remarkably short — as little as five years for the fittings, and twenty years for the plastic itself, which is exhibiting distinct tendencies to warp and discolour with age.
Thus the arguments for easier maintenance and greater longevity of plastic windows appear to have little foundation in fact — an argument often ignored by the brewers.
Given their prime location in the centre of towns and on major thoroughfares, Georgian coaching inns are frequently prime targets for refurbishment.
Such redevelopment is often unnecessary and detrimental; the end product of such schemes is all too often a sham-historical parody, re-creating an idealised, sanitised Britain that never actually existed.
In SAVE's 1983 report Mike Pearce observed that many of the pubs in Winchester's historic city centre ‘have been modernised and remodernised to present the tourist with open-plan fast-food interiors modelled in the character of some mythical Merrie Englande’.
Nor do Georgian country pubs escape, either.
Many emerge from ‘refurbishment’ with little of their original partitions, fittings or even masonry remaining.
A good example of this can be found in the sleep village of Buckland in Oxfordshire!
The Lamb, a picturesque village pub closed some years ago by Allied, was reopened in 1989 as a free house after an extensive remodelling — which involved the complete gutting of the original unexceptional but characterful, partitioned interior.
Now nothing remains whatsoever of the old fittings, features or proportions; in their place is a vast, open-plan space with bright white walls, bistro furniture and cheery chintz.
A similar treatment was recently meted out by Allied's Tetley Walker subsidiary to what remains a fundamentally Georgian pub in an urban setting near Manchester — the Church Inn at Lowton.
Having applied cement render over the external brickwork, attached a hideous modern porch and added an extension in jarring and inappropriate modern materials, the brewery designers have gutted the interior.
As at Buckland, all of the original divisions have been removed to make one long, characterless room, from which all trace of its former features has disappeared.
Countless other pubs which date from the Georgian period, or at least incorporate a significant element of Georgian building work, have suffered similar fates.
National brewing giants such as Allied or Whitbread, though, are not the only villains; small independent firms can be just as insensitive in their treatment of their tied houses.
Claire Hunt, for instance, noted in 1988 of North Western brewers Robinsons that they ‘appear on the whole to be fairly oblivious to the individual merits of their historic pubs.’
One key problem with the more domestically-scaled Georgian pubs is that they were often originally conceived as, or converted from, modest homes.
The numerous internal partitions that result have often proved anathema to modern-day breweries.
In 1988 Courage's Head of Design disdainfully referred to such ramshackle, unplanned buildings as ‘an abundance of licensed living rooms’; many of his contemporaries have enthusiastically destroyed the internal room plan of such cosy and comfortable buildings in order to install in its place a series of short flights between ascending levels — an increasingly common solution originally devised by pub designer Roy Wilson-Smith in the 1970s.
A typically problematical situation is currently faced by Samuel Smiths at their London flagship of the Olde Cheshire Cheese in Fleet Street.
This atmospheric Grade II building — dating from the late 17th century but with a primarily Georgian bar and substantial Victorian additions — is a prime tourist attraction.
However, whilst its cramped and dark interiors are highly evocative of past centuries, they are also difficult to manage and flout modern fire safety regulations.
As such, the brewery has resolved to ‘improve…the operational efficiency of the building generally’ by remodelling the cellar area and the annexe building to the north and by giving the pub a frontage on Fleet Street.
Inevitably, this will entail losing some of the irreplaceable character of this unique building.
The new street elevation proposed by the architects (Waterhouse Ripley Adie Button) has been sensitively treated; however, the extension to the north will necessitate diluting much of the pub's evocative and cosy proportions, and it remains to be seen whether the design of the newly-created bar areas survives comparison with the adjacent historic interiors.
Work on this refurbishment is due to begin in May 1991.
An additional problem faced by many Georgian pubs — particularly historic coaching inns — is the treatment of re-use of stables and other related outbuildings.
As Matthew Saunders noted in the 1983 SAVE/CAMRA Report:
‘The freestanding stable wing, the coachmen and ostlers’ accommodation, the skittle alley and cobbled yard can be of the greatest interest and yet are very vulnerable to the ubiquitous need, often enforced by the planning authorities, for adequate car parking space.
Indeed such is the pressure for adequate car parking that there are a surprising number of cases where brewing companies have applied for permission to demolish not only outbuildings but adjacent cottages, some of them listed…’
A number of the larger Georgian pubs originally accommodated outbuildings to the rear.
One such example is the Grade II Pen and Parchment on Bridgefoot in Stratford-upon-Avon, where the barn at the back of the pub was used as a theatre throughout the 18th century.
Such appropriately Stratfordian associations have, however, been totally disregarded by Whitbread in their recent cavalier remodelling of the complex.
Not only are the pub interiors themselves of the nondescript, open-plan kind, but the barn to the rear has been wholly mutilated.
Fortunately, not all recent pub refurbishments have been in this vein.
A number of the big breweries have recently made encouraging moves towards a more sympathetic attitude to their historic pubs.
Allied's Tetley Walker subsidiary have established a further subdivision, Peter Walker, catering exclusively for their historic outlets, while Grand Metropolitan's Group Estates Director recently assured the Georgian Group that ‘we will always consider historic and aesthetic considerations in all our refurbishments.’
Even so, such vague promises are no grounds for satisfaction, let alone complacency.
Much needs to be done.
The multi-roomed and historically-eclectic pub needs to be protected against the ravages of the all-over designer look.
As has been frequently pointed out, it is no use providing excellent beer or food if the pub in question has lost all of its charm and atmosphere; and surely a multi-roomed pub, with a number of differing environments, is the best way to serve what is after all always a very diverse and unstandardised community.
In 1976 the Lord Chief Justice, dismissing Bass Charrington's appeal against a proposal to ‘open up’ the interior at the Romans Hotel in Southwick, Sussex, declared that it might be ‘undesirable in the public interest to see more public bars disappearing and more mergers of public and saloon bars of the kind in question here…’
In addition, far better liaison needs to be established between the breweries and local authority Conservation and Planning Officers, English Heritage, the National Amenity Societies, local civic bodies and, of course , pub landlords and their clientele over planned pub refurbishments.
In particular, licensing magistrates and fire and health authorities should be made more aware of the character and needs of historic buildings.
In order to help effect this, far more pubs of historic importance need to be specifically listed — and listed as pubs, not simply as buildings with noteworthy features.
As Claire Hunt recently suggested:
‘…is would be helpful if the Listing Division of the Department of the Environment could revise their own guidelines in order that certain pubs could receive more protection as an integral whole.
Also, if there was any way of legally protecting historic furnishings, this could be recommended…
Perhaps some consideration might be additionally given to the current situation regarding the lack of protection for the current situation regarding the lack of protection for the interiors of unlisted buildings within conservation areas…’
Ms Hunt noted that, in the whole Greater Manchester area, only 83 pubs out of a total of 3,712 were listed — and then, all but one just grade II.
Without sufficient protection, both the exteriors and interiors of historic pubs are still very much at risk.
TROUBLE BREWING 
A typical Georgian coaching inn with large carriage arch: The George and Dragon, High St, Cheadle, Cheshire (Claire Hunt).
Disfiguring plastic UPVC window units at Watney's The Crown at Hiddiscoe in Norfolk (Roger White).
The Lamb, Buckland, Oxfordshire: its exterior charm remains (left), but inside (right) little remains of the former interior.
(Rebecca Katkin).
The Cheshire Cheese, Fleet Street, City of London.
Top left, projected plan, showing additional areas to the top and right; right, the projected frontage to Fleet Street (Waterhouse Ripley Adie Button);bottom left, the old front to Wine Office Court in February 1991 (Steven Parissien).
Left, the exterior of The Pen and Parchment, Stratford-upon-Avon: Georgian windows masked by large blinds on the left, with what remains of the Georgian barn on the right.
Right, the ruthlessly stripped interior retains very little evidence of its Georgian glory (William Hawkes).
The Grade II-listed George and Dragon in Chesham, Buckinghamshire: a fine Early Georgian refronting to the High Street, but inside little remains of its Georgian or Victorian fittings.
(Steven Parissien).
In Chesham's Church Street a fine listed Georgian pub which has been sensitively modernised: Brakspear's Queen's Head.
(Steven Parissien).
VICTORIAN PUBS Richard Holder 
The Victorian period not only established the modern popular image of public houses, but also saw the involvement of specialists and well-known architects in their design.
The 19th century witnessed the evolution of public and saloon bars; the introduction of bar, or counter, rather than waiter, service; and the legal licensing of premises, all of which had profound effects on pub design.
As a result of the constant remodelling of premises through the period, most of the Victorian pub interiors which survive are late 19th century in date, and most attempts to create ‘Victorian’ interiors concentrate on the grander survivals; this, combined with the common inability to create a sympathetic design, has led to a stereotype of the Victorian pub which is inaccurate.
The limited design vocabulary used in modern refurbishment and pub design has led to a proliferation of etched and ‘stained’ glass; dark mahogany-stained bars; marble-topped cast-iron tables; shelves of unread books, bottles, plates and brasses; deep-buttoned plush upholstery; patterned carpets and wallpaper; and brass ceiling fans.
This creates an interior that no Victorian would recognise.
The rich variety of pub types created during the 19th century has subsequently been largely lost by redevelopment and remodelling.
This not only makes an understanding of the nature of Victorian pubs difficult, but also means that those which do survive merit special care and attention.
One of the most important changes in pub design during this period was in the plan.
Pre-Victorian pubs were largely run on the basis of waiter-service, following from the original concept that the pub was a house open to the public for refreshment — hence the term ‘public house’.
Thus the introduction of bar service was a revolution.
Bar service enabled various different rooms, or cabins within rooms, to be served from a central point; many late-Victorian pubs had a sequence of separate private bars serve from a single bar-counter, in total contrast to the current fashion for single-room pubs.
The modern desire for open-plan has led to the removal of many bar-partitions, destroying the character of original interiors and distorting any attempt to create a truly ‘Victorian’ interior.
The small private bars not only created intimate areas within a pub for small groups of people, but also enabled a wide variety of people to be served in the same building.
A 1907 description of a ‘typical suburban pub’ with six bars featured omnibus drivers and conductors in the ‘four-ale’bar, ‘horny handed sons of toil and lady customers’in the bar opposite, with other woman in the ‘bottle and jug’.
The private bar contained those who wanted to avoid the ‘mutable many’, and the saloon bar contained the ‘lads of the village’ and their ladies.
The niceties of these social distinctions were not lost on the pub designer of the period, as they boosted pub taking by enabling such a wide range of people to be served in the same building.
Except for the late 19th century saloon bars, Victorian pubs were, in contrast to modern ‘Victorian-style’ pubs, normally very plainly furnished and fitted.
Thus walls were often covered with, and the bar partitions made of, tongue-and-groove boarding, which was often grained.
Floors were frequently made from bare wooden boards or stone slab.
The exception was in the treatment of the bar itself, which was often treated as a decorative eyecatcher.
This approach to design could formerly be seen in the Public Bar of the White Swan, Bradford Street, Deritend, Birmingham (owned by Allied's Ansells division).
This 1900 pub has a tongue-and-groove dado, about which the walls are covered with glazed tiles.
The focus of the design was the decorative bar and its back display area, whose strong lighting made it the centrepiece of the pub.
This concept has, however, been ruined by the introduction of a bar overhang with secondary lighting which obscure views of the back-bar display.
Bookshelves for unread books have also been introduced.
It is a pity that the brewers did not follow the example offered by The Clements Arms, Coventry Road,Bordesly , Birmingham, where there is an interior of the 1870s which was restored in the mid 1980s by cleaning and a lick of paint.
This unaltered, restored pub now attracts a large custom, demonstrating that expensive refurbishments are not necessary to guarantee profits.
Richly-decorated Saloon Bars more closely approximate to the modern idea of a Victorian pub.
However the Saloon Bar was only one section of the pub, and only originated as part of the trend of the 1890s towards gentrification.
Its misapplication can be seen at Allied's The Tabard in Turnham Green, West London, designed by Richard Norman Shaw.
Shaw's Tabard Inn formed part of the Bedford Park Garden Suburb, a speculative development in the new ‘Queen Anne Style’; The Tabard, set at the centre of the development, forms part of the ‘Village Street’ opposite the Church of St. Michael and All Angels.
Bedford Park is regarded as the first Garden Suburb in England, and thus has an international importance, while Shaw is one of the most important architects of the Victorian period, best known as the designer of the old New Scotland Yard building on the London Embankment.
One would thus hope that the treatment of The Tabard would reflect its key role in the area and the importance of its architect.
However a recent redecoration has demonstrated the brewery's lack of awareness.
After a fire in the 1960s the pub was sympathetically restored; however, in 1990 it was proposed to remove the central bar, which divides the Saloon and Public bars.
Although persuaded to drop this proposal, the brewery redecorated in the most unsympathetic manner, using metallic glazed fabrics and crude reproductions of Morris wallpapers and carpets — destroying any attempt at a period interior (which the 1960s restoration had, ironically, tried to create).
The Victorian pub is now threatened in two ways: because it is not understood as a historic document, and because certain isolated elements in Victorian pub design have been overemphasised at the expense of others.
Surely it is time that breweries understood the importance of their Victorian pubs, and turned to conservation rather than mutilation.
The Public Bar at the White Swan in Bradford Street, Deritend, Birmingham (The Victorian Society).
Far left: The arrival of the Saloon Bar — plan of the Fox and Hounds, Sydenham, London — by T H Smith, 1892 (from Mark Girouard, Victorian Pubs).
Left: The Queen Victoria, Southwark Park Road, London of 1891: before (left) and after (right) alterations.
Note the changed internal spaces.(from Mark Girouard, Victorian Pubs).
The Tabard, Bedford Park, London: exterior and interiors (Rebecca Katkin).
THE INTER-WAR PUB Alan Powers 
The history of the inter-war pub stems from the beginning of state interference under the Central Control Board (Liquor Traffic) set up in 1915.
This established licensing hours for the first time, and put brewers on the defensive.
The prohibitionist thinking which affected America in the 1920s was not without supporters in Britain, and the practical result in architecture was that pubs emphasised their domestic image, and encouraged the serving of more food, as against the all-male tradition of ‘vertical drinking’ at a bar.
New styles of management, in an Arts and Crafts setting, were tried out in the state-owned pubs in Gretna and Carlisle during the war.
The inter-war period saw the construction of a large number of new pubs to serve the needs of growing suburban communities and reconstructed city centres.
These usually reflected Tudor or Georgian styles, sometimes with intentional accuracy, more often in an impressionistic way.
The spread of motoring caused a revival of interest in the tradition of wayside coaching inns, since these were rediscovered as charming nostalgic examples of bygone days, and the charm of the wayside inn was celebrated in the verses of Hilaire Belloc and Rupert Brooke.
Running a modern-day coaching inn became a fashionable activity after the painter John Fothergill took on the Spread Eagle at Thame in the 1920s and, later, the Three Swans at Market Harborough.
A melancholic figure dressed in black, he seems to have specialised in overhung jugged hare and insults to his customers.
Subsequently Clough Williams-Ellis bought the handsome inn outside the gates of Attingham, Shropshire, which he renamed the Mytton and Mermaid and promoted as a staging post for guests en route to Portmeirion.
The illustrator Cecil Aldin developed a romantic Dickensian view of the coaching inn in the 1920, which must have been influential in ensuring that ‘Brewers’ Georgian’was a favoured style.
Even the revered classical architect Professor Albert Richardson wrote a book on pubs, establishing their soundness and Englishness in the age of American cocktails.
Examples of neo-Georgian pubs can be found in the suburbs of Liverpool (often designed by Quiggin and Gee, two former pupils of Professor Reilly) and in many other places.
They are often associated with the rebuilding of former houses, like the Freemason's Arms, Downshire Hill, in Hampstead.
Some five village pubs were built in vernacular style, such as the Red Lion at Grantchester by Basil Oliver; while the rather artificial Drum Inn at Cockington in Devon by Sir Edwin Lutyens is a continuation of the Edwardian tradition of grand ‘Estate’ pubs.
Many brewers, of course, built fine half-timbered Tudor pubs, a style which neatly conveyed the message of ‘Merrie England’ and which for customers in the suburbs could represent a kind of home from home.
Fine examples are found throughout the country — notably Brighton's The Ship, by Ernest R Barrow in 1933.
Much re-Tudorisation of genuinely ancient buildings was carried out, as at the Greyhound and Punchbowl in Bilston, Staffs.
Tudor was favoured for roadhouses, too, such as the Ace of Spades on the Kingston by Pass, and the Thatched Barn on the A1 (now demolished).
These offered a variety of recreational activities, swimming, sports, dancing and so on in addition to basic victualling, and borrowed from the ordinary pub the opprobium of encouraging immoral behaviour.
The pubs of the Birmingham suburbs by local architects such as Bateman and Bateman, Buckland and Haywood and Holland W. Hobbiss were brick Tudor,occasionaly neo-Georgian, rather more restrained externally, and often situated on traffic roundabouts.
Some were convincingly disguised as country houses, with entrance gates and spreading lawns, such as the Black Horse, Northfield, Birmingham or the Hare and Hounds, Kingstanding Road, Perry Barr.
They were very well built, and included stained glass, decorative painting and other examples of the continuing Arts and Crafts tradition of Birmingham.
These styles are still sufficiently popular to survive, although any attempted ‘re-fit’ would be likely to sweep them away as a matter of principle.
The increasing stylistic simplification of the 1930s led to a ‘moderne’ style being adopted for pubs, although this was not always wholly at the expense of Tudor or Georgian.
The desire for a homely effect meant that pitched roofs remained, even if tucked behind parapets, while the windows adopted horizontal Crittall glazing.
A pub like the Nag's Head in Bishops Stortford, by E B Musman in 1935, is in the modernist style of the London Underground, with curved ends and flat roofs, yet its ethos is the same rather high-mindedness of the earlier neo-Georgian style, with a wooden post on the roadside to carry the signboard.
Examples like the County Arms at Blaby in Leicestershire (Pick, Everard, Keay and Gimson) is more in the Tudor style, while Oliver Hill's Prospect Inn at Minster in Thanet of 1938 is perhaps one of the most completely modern pubs of the inter-war period in its organic planning and use of floor decoration.
The antiseptic, do-gooding pub of the 1930s fell completely out of fashion in the post-war period, partly because of customers' understandable preference for cosiness, and partly thanks to the campaign in favour of Victorian pub decoration conducted by the Architectural Review from the wartime period onwards, and exemplified in the glorious in-house pub ‘The Bride of Denmark’ in the AR's offices in Queen Anne's Gate.
Pubs of the 1950s occasionally adopted a ‘contemporary’ Festival of Britain look, but this was easily fused with Neo-Victorian, and has usually been swamped by later changes.
Some delightfully crazy pubs were built, such as the Windsock in Dunstable (Smith and Wilson-Smith, 1965), and some refined and elegant ones, like Jack Straw's Castle in Hampstead by Raymond Erith, 1962.
Built for Charringtons, this blended surprisingly well with the company's corporate identity as determined by Milner Gray of the Design Research Unit, an identity which itself reflected an early 19th century graphic feeling.
While the majority of pub buildings from the post-1914 period survive, however, it is virtually impossible to find an unaltered interior in any of them.
This could be seen as a sign of healthy growth and change; yet the new fittings and equipment installed are usually totally insensitive to the design quality of the original.
1930s pubs are frequently ‘themed’ as Art Deco, with the crudest caricature versions of the style.
(The Paviours Arms in Page Street, Westminster is a good example, having originally been a showpiece of restrained and elegant design.)
Art Deco is offered as a ‘sensitive’ alternative to Victoriana, otherwise virtually the only decorative style currently in the pubfitter's repertoire.
Where interiors have survived, it has been through benign neglect.
The Nag's Head still has its decorative painting on glass by Cosmo Clark over the fireplace in the public bar, and some original chairs.
The Prospect Inn has two of its decorative lino floors intact, although the owners, Whitbread, destroyed the original pole sign outside when the tenants asked for it to be repaired.
The Comet Hotel, Hatfield (E B Musman, 1934) has lost all its fine interior fittings — such as an etched mirror glass wall with aeroplane vapour trails — some years ago.
The Thirties Society has tried to counteract the brewers' failure to understand the potential assets represented by their 20th century buildings, but since so few pubs are listed many cases escape our notice.
The County Arms at Blaby was subject to a proposal for ‘theming’ as a Beefeater steakhouse some years ago, which was rejected by the local authority with support from the Thirties Society although the building is not listed.
More recently, the Prospect Inn was threatened by an enlargement scheme by Whitbread which would have totally destroyed the remaining original features of the building, and its remarkable plan.
Fortunately, the Thirties Society was able to get the Prospect listed in May 1990, and alternative development plans are awaited.
The Prospect Inn, which could be restored a major tourist attraction, is also threatened by a road widening proposal by Kent County Council, although the local authority, Thanet, understand its importance and value the building.
Road widening is an inevitable and current threat to many former roadhouses, such as the former ‘Chez Laurie’ on the A299 near Herne Bay (W M Bishop, 1936).
The listing of pubs is made more difficult by the fact that they have almost always been altered.
The Comet was listed after the damage had been done, and with the Prospect Inn it was necessary to itemise all the things that had not changed, since the superficial impression of change was predominant.
The Vale, a moderne pub at Woodthorpe, Nottingham by Cecil Howitt, the favourite architect of the Home Brewery, was refused listing because it had been overly altered in 1968, although Gedling Council managed to prevent the application of ‘Victoriana’ signage.
The John Bull in Layerthorpe, York (B Wilson, 1937) was a Tudor-style pub remarkable solely through having survived unaltered, but not listable simply on these grounds.
The needs of pub management in the 1980s have been hard to contain in pubs originally segregated into saloon and public bars, if not into further distinct spaces.
This has been the experience of the Thirties Society in fighting for the retention of the main plan features of the Nag's Head, one of the few listed pubs of the period.
Designed as a demonstration of bi-partite segregation between public and saloon, it lends itself poorly to unification, and the restorable public bar would have been lost in the process.
The Thirties Society negotiated a compromise scheme with the architects acting for Ind Coope which the owners found unnacceptable , threatening closure of the pub.
Having appealed against East Herts' refusal of listed building consent, they withdrew from a public inquiry at a late stage after their intended expert witness informed them that they did not have a strong enough case.
The previous scheme is now to be re-submitted.
Problems like these arise from a lack of imagination in house management, but it must be acknowledged that the drinking public behaves in a very inflexible way and fails to adapt to the qualities of different buildings.
Brewers may underestimate the sophistication of their potential audience, however.
The availability of a period pub, particularly one representing the highly popular 1930s, could create a new market where none existed before.
This is the only hope for the conservation of pubs from a period with planning ideas so remote from our own.
A more straightforward case is that concerning Jack Straw's Castle, which was listed after a scheme was submitted to cover the courtyard with a new restaurant.
The new emphasis was to be on dining rather than drinking, and the design was as sensitive as it could have been.
Due to the circumstances of the original build, there are some strange anomalies in the plan, but the courtyard remains a key part of the design, much enjoyed by visitors in the summer, sitting under a fine specimen walnut tree.
The scheme was taken to Public Inquiry in October 1990, in which the Borough of Camden was supported by the Thirties Society and Lucy Archer, Raymond Erith's daughter and biographer.
The appeal was dismissed.
It remains now for Charringtons to upgrade the decoration and general management style of this marvellous pub, and make the most of its fine architectural qualities.
Inter-war interior design depended on subtelty and understatement, neither of which are much valued in the running of a pub today.
Yet buildings like the Nag's Head and the Prospect Inn are among the most delightful of their period, and their careful restoration might inspire similar and much needed projects elsewhere.
The Prospect Inn, Minster-on-Thanet, Kent by Oliver Hill in 1939 (Alan Powers).
The Nag's Head, Bishop's Stortford, Hertfordshire of 1935: left, the exterior of the public bar; right, original 30s furniture in the public bar (Alan Powers).
The former ‘Chez Laurie’, Herne Bay, Kent by W M Bishop in 1936–7 (Alan Powers).
POSTSCRIPT: A DESIGNER'S PERSPECTIVE Nigel Langford 
Langford and Williams' work with renowned listed pubs since 1987 puts the company in a favourable light with conservation societies such as The Victorian Society, SPAB, and the Georgian Group; we have even been known to win a few CAMRA awards yet at the same time the firm has also brazenly converted redundant pubs to café-bar concepts.
Consistent with conversationist bodies, however, we are appalled by much of the development of our pub heritage carried out during the 1950s and '60s.
In his address to the 1990 CAMRA AGM, Tim May of Design House succinctly highlighted the irreconcilable conflict between the functional modernist tendencies of the 1950s and the historical vernacular pub tradition.
This, in the context of pub development as it stands in 1991, in turn suggests an irreconcilable conflict between historic pubs and the brewers' profit motive.
However, such an assumption is possibly too glib and generalised.
Our experience of working with the major breweries throughout the 1980s is that, undeniably, mistakes were made — sometimes on a very grand scale indeed.
However, over this same period the converse was also true, with a significant record of successful developments consistent with the aims and ideals of conservation bodies.
Sadly neglected examples of classic pub architecture were restored to their former glory at no small expense.
This was not altruism on the part of the brewers, but was born out of a realisation that preserving the best of their heritage could make them money.
A classic example of this attitude can be found in the small but highly profitable Taylor Walker-run chain J &W Nicholson.
Nicholsons' pubs for the most part are architectural gems in their own right and include The Blackfriar and The Argyll Arms in Central London and the Prince Alfred in Maida Vale amongst their number.
And Nicholson's have not been slow to realise the commercial potential of this classic heritage; Langford &Williams' design brief from them was to restore what could be restored and to reinstate in sympathy with the building where necessary.
This brings us to the ‘Catch 22’ situation that we, as designer, find ourselves in with regard to conservation bodies.
When we are not being accused of ignoring the vernacular pub tradition with the abomination of café-bars and so on we stand accused of creating ‘pastiches’ when we get involved with restorations — no matter how conscientiously researched a project.
Often such schemes unashamedly make vast concessions to the demands of the modern pub customer.
Modern ‘task lighting’ systems are used to supplement the decorative fittings; air conditioning ducts are incorporated; bottle displays are refrigerated.
These are not just fizzy lager joints, but environments where a bank of six beer engines can sit happily on the bar counter offering a wide selection of real ales.
In the true tradition of the pub boom at the turn of the century, although decidedly grand, most of these refurbishments do not take themselves deadly seriously.
The alabaster freizes of monks with scatalogical Latin inscriptions created by Henry Poole for the Blackfriar in c.1905 come from the same tradition as the eclectic and irreverent use of ethnic imagery and architectural detail built into the new Horniman at Hays Galleria of 1986.
It is right and proper that the brewers and their designers should address the challenge represented by imported concepts.
French-style café-bars have been a runaway success over here because they address a market which had previously been actively excluded by the ‘pub tradition’— namely women.
Likewise, American family eating concepts such as Whitbread's TGI Fridays have received a warm welcome from the paying public.
They represent a very real challenge to the pub traditional client base.
As it becomes increasingly unacceptable for the man to remove himself to the predominantly adult male preserve of the pub, leaving wife and children at home, it becomes imperative for outlets to be found which can cater to the demands of the whole family.
This is the challenge for the brewers and their designers — to survive in the long term they must, in certain instances, address this radically broadened target market.
This need not necessarily be antipathetic to ‘pub values’ as we recognise them.
Indeed, Langford and Williams are currently developing family pub concepts for a major brewer which take as their starting point perceived elements of the vernacular pub: highly detailed joinery, ‘honest’ and tactile finishes, and the bar counter as a focus.
Just as important as establishing what to include is deciding what to exclude, and it is here that the purists may find cause to tar and feather us.
There will be no brass footrail, dark corners, etched-mirror backbars, or dartboards, and there will definitely be no hint of a smell of the heady cocktail of Real Ale and the Gents urinals.
Our theory — if we are in the business of expounding a theory on the subject of pub design — is that each pub must be treated individually and on its own merits.
We contest that there are no laws written in stone, and that there is room for hybrids.
As regards restoration, just as we would not dream of stripping out the original interior of the Blackfriar, by the same token we would not seek to preserve a Thirties estate pub which had long since ceased to address the needs of the community it was built to serve.
It is in our interests as designers in this field to ensure that the ‘pub tradition’ that we all hold so dear remains a living tradition.
As was so chillingly illustrated by the postwar period of mass destruction and misconceived redevelopment, it is possible to throw the baby out with the bathwater.
However, to entrap our pub tradition within a rigid set of rules and guidelines is at best to condemn it to becoming an anachronism, if not to extinguish it altogether.
Arguably brewers are still as constrained by the profit motive as ever before.
This may lead to the destruction of further historic pubs which are considered redundant; conversely, this may well lead to the further restoration and conservation of the best historic sites.
It may be an unpalatable thought, but we suspect that to an increasing degree throughout the 1990s brewers and conservationists will find themselves standing on the same side of the fence.
The Antelope pub in London's Belgravia; Langford and Williams' refurbishment of the exterior.
(Rebecca Katkin).
