5–11 SEPTEMBER 1991  CATERER  &Hotelkeeper £1.15
SMOKING  Banning the weed?
SOLUTIONS  Training and support 
PLUS  Chef magazine 
NEWS
OPINION
PRESSURE GROWS FOR CHANGES TO BANK HOLIDAYS
ARE HOTELIERS GEARING UP FOR THE NEW EC FIRE SAFETY DIRECTIVE?
TELEPHONE CHARGES COME UNDER ATTACK AGAIN
INTERNATIONAL Eire's National Food Centre report stresses need for quality
INDIA WOOS FOREIGN INVESTMENT WITH FAVOURABLE LEGISLATION
LETTERS
PEOPLE Forte Hotels announces overseas management reshuffle
VIEWPOINT: SAVERIO BUCHICCHIO What colleges should be doing to support the industry
JOE HYAM On unhealthy obsessions with diet
BUSINESS
BANKING ON THE EUROPA GATWICK HOTEL
QMH EXPERIENCES DIFFICULT TIMES
PROPERTY Westminster City Council rejects Harrods hotel plan
FOOD PRICES
FOOD COST INDEX
PERSONNEL Personnel chiefs are gaining seats on company boards
FEATURES
MENUS American food and wine is Frances Bissell's theme this week
CHINESE TEACHINGS Norwich Hotel School is enlightening its pupils to Chinese cuisine
SOLUTIONS
Twelve-page technology supplement, including news, new products, a viewpoint, data back-up, training and a Catering &Allied case study
WHAT'S NEW
LIQUID ASSETS Italian wines — a fresh approach
DRINKS NEWS Wine &Spirit Association to deal with complaints about EHOs
POLISH UP ON CUTLERY How to recognise, source and maintain quality cutlery
TAKING SHAPE We highlight the versatility and variety of pasta
INDEX TO ADVERTISERS
EC FOOD HYGIENE DOCUMENT CRITICISED AS TOO WEAK
FOOD
CLASSIFIED
YOUR NEXT MOVE: ALL THE BEST JOBS AND PROPERTY
NEXT WEEK
LANGUAGES, EUROPE AND 1992
NATIONAL LEISURE CATERING PROFILE
INTERIORS — FOCUS ON DANESFIELD HOUSE, BUCKINGHAMSHIRE,(above)
OPINION
Why holidays mean more work
THE tourism and leisure group of the National Economic Development Council (NEDC) has proposed that the UK reorganise its public holidays (see page 11).
Good idea: this would extend the tourist season into late summer and autumn and bring Britain more into line with its European neighbours.
The British Tourist Authority likes it.
The Government, however, has ‘no immediate plans’ to change the public holiday set-up.
The industry has marketed Britain energetically as a year-round destination, with many attractions that do not leave the visitor at the mercy of our fickle weather.
The public holidays should reflect that.
Families with children tend to be restricted, for their main holiday, to one of the three main school breaks.
But if the children's autumn half-term coincided with a bank holiday weekend for their parents, that would make sense both for families and for the tourist and leisure industry.
At the other end of the tourist season, Britain has a log-jam of holiday weekends, particularly if Easter is late, when it is followed closely by May Day and not much later by the spring bank holiday.
The NEDC Committee suggests that one of these could be transplanted to October — but why not move them further apart, and add another in the autumn?
Even then, we would trail behind other European Community members, such as Germany, France and Italy, each with 11 public holidays a year, Spain and Portugal with 13 each, and Denmark with 10.
Britain has just eight statutory days off.
The prosaic explanation for the Government's inaction is an insult to tourism: manufacturers have told Government that they want an uninterrupted flow of production between the August bank holiday and Christmas.
The fear is that if this is broken.
Britain becomes less competitive.
But that hasn't happened to our European competitors, who have more bank holidays than the British.
Tourism is our second biggest contributor — after North Sea oil — to gross domestic product.
Out of this money machine the Government collects many hundreds of millions in VAT, corporation tax, income tax and national insurance contributions.
It is asked to put very little back.
To have ideas like this one taken seriously and to be treated with respect is surely a reasonable request.
NEWS
THE £86m Dartford Bridge, set to open in October, is being welcomed by the marketing consortium the M25 Meetings Group.
Members of the group of hotels, conference centres and stately homes hope to use the bridge as a strong marketing tool.
A survey among the group's 16 founder properties found that 4,000 conferences were booked in 1990, attracting 90,000 delegates.
The group's first bridge promotion began this week with the launch of M25 Meetings Month.
Pictured from left to right are: Felicity Thompson, sales officer at Hever Castle, Kent; Charles Blowfield, managing director of Down Hall Hotel, Bishop's Stortford, Herts; Basil Sanderson, proprietor of Selsdon Park Hotel, Croydon, Surrey; Jean Glover, business development manager at the Gatwick Hilton; and Barbara Dadouche, sales manager at Oatlands Park Hotel, Weybridge, Surrey.
Financial Qs &As
ARE you an independent hotelier or restaurateur experiencing problems with your bank?
Or perhaps you have a good relationship with your financial backers?
Caterer , in association with Reed Catering, is undertaking a confidential telephone survey on the relationship between the banks and our industry, in preparation for a forthcoming forum.
‘Facing the Financiers’.
Would you be prepared to contribute?
If so, please write to Amanda Howell,Caterer &Hotelkeeper , Quadrant House.
The Quadrant, Sutton, Surrey SM2 5AS.
Please include a daytime telephone number.
Authors of the first 100 replies received will be invited as guests to the forum on 1 October at the Savoy, London.
Conservative pressure group calls for HIV-staff ban
PROPOSALS from a right-wing pressure group to ban HIV-infected staff from working with food have been criticised by personnel chiefs in the industry.
The report by the Conservative Family Campaign called for restrictions on AIDS sufferers and those carrying the HIV virus, including preventing them from working with food for the public.
The advice from the group once again raised the sensitive issue of employing staff who admit to being, or are discovered to be infected.
Sutcliffe Catering personnel director Peter Davies said: ‘This sort of advice really turns back the clock.
It is most regrettable and of no help to the industry.
There is no reason to have such a ban, in view of the medical knowledge now available.’
Since 1987, when caterers were inundated with information about their legal and moral duty in dealing with HIV-infected staff, the topic has receded from the headlines, although the number of those infected has increased.
About 4,600 people in Britain have contracted AIDS, of whom half have died, compared with about 600 four years ago.
In addition, there are 15,000 people known to be HIV-positive and twice as many believed to be carrying the virus without requesting medical help.
But Mr Davies said: ‘We have had cases of people who we have suspected of being infected and the degree of compassion and humanity among other staff has been remarkable.’
Phil Philips, deputy secretary of the British Hotels, Restaurants and Caterers Association, said: ‘People in the industry are much better educated about AIDS than they were in 1987.’
Many within the industry admit privately, however, that they may be less inclined to appoint someone who declares their infection at their interview.
Another senior personnel manager said: ‘It would not be a moral judgment, but we have to consider the practicalities of appointing someone who could be off work for long periods.’
NEDC presses for longer summer holiday season
BANK HOLIDAYS
RENEWED pressure has been placed on the Government to lengthen the summer season by bringing Britain up to European standards for public holidays.
A report by the National Economic Development Council (NEDC) points to the creation of a bank holiday in October as a way of extending the tourist season into the autumn.
The Harvest Holiday, as the report suggested, would be introduced in late October and would be the first of a series of changes to age-hold British holiday customs.
Many in the tourism industry believe the revenue created would far outweigh any protests that it was just another excuse for a day off.
The NEDC's tourism and leisure industries sector group, which studied the issue of ‘seasonality’, pointed out that Britain lagged behind most of Europe in the number of public holidays.
However, it suggested that the October holiday should replace an existing holiday.
Angus Crichton-Miller, managing director of the Rank Organisation's holidays and hotels division and a member of the study group said: ‘It is not an efficient system to have such changes between busy and quiet periods and it would be better if we could flatten prices over a longer season, rather than have such high-peak-season prices.’
The October bank holiday proposal has received a muted response from Employment Minister Michael Howard, who said he was open to persuasion but had no plans to make changes.
As well as suggesting an autumn boost for the tourism industry, the group also proposed changes at the beginning of the season by introducing a fixed-date Easter holiday.
By creating a more definite starting and finishing point to the season, members of the group believed that the growing trend of out-of-season holidays and short breaks could be accelerated.
The proportion of holidays of four nights and above between October and April has grown from 14% in 1976 to 22% last year, while August holidays have slipped from 24% to 20% and July from 25% to 18%.
In addition to the hotel income which a bank holiday encourages, the group was also aware of its importance in generating day-trip revenue which, at £5b a year, provides nearly a third of tourism expenditure by Britons in this country.
During the season, the NEDC group sees further benefits in amending the traditional school summer holiday, staggering the starting dates to avoid the sudden rush of tourist traffic.
A more even spread of half-term holidays over three weeks of October would offer the industry the incentive to open beyond September.
Chinatown gets ready for Food Act
CHINATOWN'S restaurateurs are upgrading staff hygiene training in preparation for draft requirements of the Food Safety Act coming into force.
Westminster City Council community liaison officer David Tan set up a training session last week, with a Cantonese interpreter at the Man Fu Kung restaurant in London's Leicester Square.
With Westminster College, Mr Tan has organised basic food hygiene courses for the Chinese community.
About 150 people have already taken part in these day-long courses since April.
These include exam papers in Chinese for people who are unable to speak or write English.
Westminster City Council has also issued leaflets in Chinese giving basic food hygiene rules.
Mr Tan said: ‘This training is to upgrade and spread food hygiene consciousness.’
Westminster chief environmental health officer Maggie Tomlinson said: ‘Any effort made by the Chinese community to improve food hygiene training and tailor courses to their specific needs would be welcomed.’
Westminster City Council community liaison officer David Tan helps Chinatown restaurateurs with food hygiene
E. Midlands shows worry over UBR
A SURVEY of the tourism industry in the East Midlands has highlighted concern over the Uniform Business Rate (UBR).
And with 1992 and the dismantling of trade barriers within Europe fast approaching, the spring East Midlands Tourism Business Survey also reveals a disturbing lack of interest in language training.
The survey, sponsored by Pannell Kerr Forster, the East Midlands Tourist Board (EMTB) and Nottingham Polytechnic showed that 63% of all hotels in the region believed the UBR had a detrimental effect on business.
And among medium-sized hotels with a turnover of between £100,000 and £1m, 54% were concerned about the impact of the UBR.
‘General opinion is that the rate will result in increased tariffs, which under the present economic conditions will serve only to reduce competitiveness,’ the survey said.
‘This must therefore be considered as having a detrimental effect overall on the tourism market.’
LANGUAGES
The survey asked firms what sort of advice and assistance would be helpful in developing business and was surprised by the low level of demand for language training.
‘It is most surprising that in the tourism industry the necessity for language training to meet the growing demand for overseas visitors is not felt to be important,’ the report said.
There was also very little demand for help on legal matters and employment issues.
EMTB development manager Andrew Keeling said the survey's findings would provide a background to a regional tourism strategy to be published in March 1992. * Look out for ‘Mind your language’ in Caterer , 12–18 September.
Study shows UK fast food boom
FAST food now accounts for almost one meal in every 10 served in the UK.
The boom in fast food is providing strong competition for both staff restaurants and school meal services.
The UK has become the largest fast food market in Europe — by 1990 there were about 1,500 fast food outlets in the UK.
When compared with 1985 figures, there was an overall increase of 40%.
The figures come from the latest study,Restaurant Chain Market in Europe , compiled by GIRA SIC, a market research company affiliated to the Geneva International Research Associates group, which concentrates on service industries and catering.
For the study, a fast food outlet was defined as one with highly systemised operations, normally with counter service, and a high volume of customers.
Using these criteria GIRA SIC found that chains produced more than 70% of the UK's fast food meals in 1990, with American groups dominating the market.
Hamburger outlets are by far the most important, representing almost 80% of total turnover in the fast food market.
In the UK, franchising has always played a significant role, although relations between franchisor and franchisee have not always been smooth, according to the report.
GIRA SIC stated that it was a reflection of the UK market that McDonald's delayed setting up its own franchise scheme in the UK.
Nevertheless, at the end of 1990 almost two-thirds of UK fast food units were franchised.
The report forecasts that the UK fast food market is set to continue growing through the 1990s at between 5% and 6% at constant prices, compared with 10% value growth in turnover during the mid-1980s.
Packed lunch ruling ‘illegal’
HOTELIERS have slammed as discriminating and illegal the confirmation that VAT is to be levied on packed lunches.
This follows representations by the British Hotels, Restaurants and Caterers Association (BHRCA) which learnt of the proposed change in May.
Customs &Excise introduced the changes, which will be back-dated to 1 July, after it found hotels had been treating the supply of packed lunches to guests as zero-rated (Caterer , 27 June–3 July).
It ruled that packed lunches are supplied ‘in the course of catering’ and are liable for the 17.5% standard rating of VAT.
The back dating of all VAT not charged on packed lunches could lead to hefty bills for hoteliers.
When VAT was introduced on hot takeaway food in 1987, amendments to the Finance Act were made after Parliamentary consultation.
Packed lunches remained zero-rated.
The arbitrary change to existing law was made by Customs &Excise Commissioners.
They decided that packed lunches should be standard-rated from 1 July.
However, the most up-to-date leaflet available to the catering industry — leaflet 709 published in February 1990 — clearly states that cold takeaway food is zero-rated in hotels.
‘Their new interpretation is illegal,’ said Martin Hill, proprietor of the Coul House Hotel in Ross-Shire.
In most cases, the hotels Caterer spoke to had offered guest prices that were inclusive of VAT or the tax was simply added to their bill.
Hotel marketing consortium MinOtels UK chairman Jon Redfern said his 200 members were virtually unaware of the changes.
‘It's grossly unfair and discriminatory that cold take-out food should carry VAT from a hotel but not from anywhere else.
Customs &Excise is adopting a wholly dictatorial approach,’ he said.
The irony is that no VAT would be levied if hoteliers were to set up a separate sandwich bar business next to their property and handed out sandwiches and drinks.
As yet no new VAT leaflet or instruction has been supplied.
Trade associations have been informed but Customs &Excise said it was up to industry bodies to inform their members.
The BHRCA has now received what Customs &Excise said was its final stand on the issue.
It said the effective date of introduction will remain 1 July and has advised the BHRCA to inform all members.
THE Smugglers' Kitchen, above, is being given away because its owner cannot sell it.
Bill Murray spent £50,000 on setting up his restaurant at Telegraph Hill, near Exeter, Devon, two years ago but said the business started to go downhill when he handed it over to a manager to run.
Mr Murray now wants to give away the Smugglers' Kitchen so that he can channel his efforts into another property — the Dartmoor Inn at Bovey Tracey, also in Devon.
He has identified the need for a fish restaurant in the surrounding area.
However, interested parties have to fulfil the following prerequisites:
•
Be young, enthusiastic and part of a team, with some experience of the catering industry;
•
Able to pay the £270 per week business rates and insurance;
•
Have good references and some financial backing.
Mr Murray hopes to make a decision this month.
FIRE SAFETY
A US government decision to ban its employees from using hotels which do not have adequate fire protection by 1996 could have a knock-on effect in Britain.
Meanwhile, work is under way on a European Commission draft directive which could tighten up demands already implicit in UK fire safety regulations.
Dorset Fire Safety Committee senior fire prevention officer Ian Clark said: ‘One of the biggest problems with hotels is that they do not maintain the requirements of the Fire Certificate.’
Under the Fire Precautions Act 1971, there is no requirement for fire authorities to re-inspect a certified building.
Mr Clark said legislation ensuring re-inspection could come into force within the next few years and he warned that it could result in hotels being prosecuted if they contravened their Fire Certificates.
The Home Office told Caterer &Hotelkeeper that consultation was under way on an amendment to the Fire Safety and Safety in Places of Sport Act 1987, giving mandatory powers of re-inspection.
US BAN
Director of the UK's Fire Protection Association, Stewart Kidd, said the US law would require a smoke detector in each room and a sprinkler system for hotels more than three storeys high.
‘By 1996, 90 of all nights spent by Federal employees in hotels must be spent in those which comply with this law,’ he said.
Any conferences, conventions or meetings paid for from Federal funds will be held only in hotels complying with this law.
Mr Kidd said that he did not think the UK Government would follow suit, but believed pressure from a more demanding American market could encourage British hotels to upgrade their precautions beyond the legal minimum.
He pointed out that large groups such as Hilton and Holiday Inns were already investing in fire protection beyond the minimum requirements.
Mr Kidd said he already had anecdotal evidence of US conventions pulling out of the UK: ‘One conference of surgeons and one group of insurance sales staff, who planned to come to London for two weeks, could not find a hotel they were happy with.’
Mr Kidd is also chairman of a working party which reports on the state of hotel fire safety across Europe and reviews the effectiveness of existing EC recommendations.
The working party has authority to form a draft EC directive.
The whole issue is to be debated as a conference in Luxembourg in September 1992.
Mr Kidd said the committee was producing a draft guide for management which would include a review of existing legislation in six European countries.
‘It is clear that UK standards are the highest at the moment.
I would have thought the UK hotelier would have nothing to fear from a European directive,’ he said.
‘It is possible an EC directive would be at the same level or just below UK standards.’
He added: ‘You only have to look at the figures for fire deaths in hotels to see this is not a problem.
We have had a substantial reduction over the past 10 years.’
But he said it could mean duties of managers/owners — such as keeping a hotel plan or ensuring staff are trained to use the fire fighting equipment — implicit in UK laws — would have to be spelt out.
UK Fire Certificates might say hotels must have a warning system but might not specify the means, Mr Kidd said.
‘The directive will say hotels of a certain size will have to have an automatic fire detection system permanently linked to a manned location for calling the fire brigade.’
He added that a draft directive standardising safety signing — making a lot of UK signs obsolete — could also be included in his committee's report.
MAFF guides lose out to coup
FOOD Minister David Maclean has blamed the KGB for poor publicity surrounding the launch of a series of food safety guides from the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries &Food (MAFF).
He told Caterer that the launch of the leaflets had been overshadowed by the events in the USSR.
The leaflets aim to inform consumers about healthy eating, food safety, additives, labelling and protection.
Mr Maclean denied that the renewed emphasis on food safety was part of a campaign of consumer legislation in the run-up to a general election.
He also ruled out Government assistance for caterers who needed to buy equipment to comply with the Food Safety Act, as part of an election giveaway.
‘It would not be fair on those people who have already bought the correct equipment.
Caterers should see that it is a good investment in their business,’ he said.
MAFF is looking at revising rules governing the labelling of cooked food on menus.
Mr Maclean said outbreaks of Salmonella enteriditis and reports of Bovine spongiform encephalopathy had stabilised but also recognised that the problem had not disappeared, just that interest had waned.
Maclean: coup in USSR took limelight
TELEPHONE CHARGES COME UNDER ATTACK
UK HOTELS have once again come under fire over the amounts they charge for telephone calls.
An English Tourist Board (ETB) spokeswoman said the board was concerned about the charges, particularly because of problems experienced by overseas visitors.
The ETB's comments follow reports of a visitor from the USA being charged more than £200 for a 45-minute telephone call to Los Angeles.
Bruce Doblin, a doctor at the University of California, said he was stunned by his bill from the Academy Hotel in Gower Street, London.
He subsequently received a discount of just over £50 after complaining about the telephone charge.
Mr Doblin claimed that no-one at the hotel seemed to know what the cost of a telephone call should be.
The cost of the call via BT would have been £29.25 at the cheap rate after 8pm, BT confirmed.
Academy assistant manager Mette Doessing promised to look into Mr Doblin's case, but said the hotel received few complaints about telephone charges.
She added that all rooms contained details about the charges in an information directory.
The ETB has been critical of hotel telephone call charges for many years.
It now requires all Crown scheme participants to display charges beside telephones.
And a British Hotels, Restaurants &Caterers Association (BHRCA) spokesman said a code of practice advised that customers should be notified of charges by signs in bedrooms.
The code was agreed by a variety of organisations including the AA, RAC, BHRCA and British Resorts Association.
Telephone charges at hotels vary considerably.
All those surveyed by Caterer &Hotelkeeper made sure charges were displayed and also offered guests the choice of using telephone call boxes in the hotel lobby.
Bernard Antoine, general manager of the Novotel in Hammersmith, West London, said he had received no complaints about charges.
He claimed the charges covered such costs as staff to man the switchboard and rental of equipment.
Stefan Drechsler, assistant general manager at the Copthorne Tara in Kensington, London, said the hotel's telephone charges were kept to a minimum.
‘We have 850 bedrooms and need a number of staff to deal with calls coming in and out,’ he said.
Edinburgh's Caledonian Hotel has the latest in telephone technology to prevent mistakes.
At De Vere all hotels now have telephone loggers to make sure no mistakes are made.
Gwent declares war on home caterers
ENVIRONMENTAL health officers (EHOs) in Gwent have shut down a ‘backstreet kitchen’ operating from a terraced house after a salmonella outbreak.
A local council spokesman said the council had declared war on large-scale home catering because of the outbreak.
Food for more than 100 guests at two wedding receptions was alleged to have been prepared at the kitchen.
So far 39 people have suffered from Salmonellosis.
Two people are being treated in hospital.
EHOs said the domestic kitchen was completely inadequate for cooking on such a scale.
The wedding receptions were held at the Crown Hotel in Varteg, Gwent, and Talywaun Rugby Club, Gwent.
The salmonella has been traced back to contaminated Scotch eggs.
Councillor Anne James, spokeswoman for the Torfaen Environmental Health Committee, criticised the private caterers' approach to food preparation with limited resources.
‘That's not the way you do catering properly.
Not for 100 people, or 30 or 40 people,’ she said.
Gwent Health Authority is preparing to take legal action against the private caterers involved: Valerie Shaw, Denise Shaw and a helper, Jean Robinson.
The council spokesman also said there were not enough professional caterers in the area to meet demand.
INTERNATIONAL
VISITORS to the Disney theme parks near Orlando, Florida, have a wealth of new-build state-of-the-art hotels to choose from, but none reaches the gaudy heights of the Walt Disney World Dolphin Hotel.
The picture (left) may look like a model of the hotel but is, in fact, the real thing.
Service at the hotel is provided by ITT Sheraton.
The hotel has just completed its first year of operation, which it celebrated with a month-long daily cake-cutting ceremony.
Eire needs quality food
EIRE's rapidly growing catering industry still has plenty of room for investment, according to a report published by the country's National Food Centre.
Urgently needed are suppliers which can guarantee prime quality meat and poultry to hotels and restaurants: the report says there are not enough of these to meet demand.
Fresh, unprepared potato suppliers are also few and far between.
The report clearly stresses that the catering industry is more interested in quality than price.
The number of establishments in retail catering has almost doubled over the past 20 years, with licensed restaurants the fastest growing sector.
The country has more than 800 hotels and guesthouses, about 1,157 licensed restaurants and 255 hospitals, which spend about IR£237m (£216m) a year on food alone.
The Irish splash out more than IR£240m (£219m) on hotel and restaurant meals each year.
The report —Market Size and Market Requirements for Food Suppliers in the Catering Sector — provides hints about investment opportunities, based on its findings.
Although it emphasises that the opportunities are not guaranteed to find success, market-orientated businesses should find them worth considering.
The study explains that in the hotel and licensed restaurant sectors there are opportunities for meat suppliers which are able to guarantee the supply of tender beef.
There are also openings for suppliers of tender, low-fat lamb in the hotel, licensed restaurant and contract catering sectors, while free range and maize-fed poultry are in demand by hotels and licensed restaurants.
Fresh, unprepared potatoes are urgently required in the hotel, guesthouse and licensed restaurant sectors and there are also opportunities for supplying fresh, exotic mushrooms to the same sectors.
* The report is available from the National Food Centre, Dunsinea, Dublin 15.
Tel: Dublin 383222.
Murder raises tourist fears
WORRIED tourism chiefs have moved swiftly to counter potentially harmful publicity following the murder of a German holidaymaker in Dublin.
They were alarmed that the continuing growth in the number of foreign tourists could be jeopardised by an isolated serious incident.
The recent killing of Georg Plappert in the city; s Phoenix Park caused particular concern to Eire's tourism industry because the victim came from Germany, one of its important tourism markets.
About 178,000 German tourists visited Eire in 1990.
Tourism authorities responded quickly to reports of the attack by issuing assurances that policing of Dublin streets had increased significantly during the past year and that crime against tourists had dropped by a third.
However, there have been an estimated 900 crimes against tourists in Dublin this year and the growing popularity of the city as an upmarket destination during its year as the European City of Culture has unfortunately attracted a hard core of criminals.
Jordan faces Iraqi influx
JORDANIAN hoteliers who saw their business decimated by the Gulf War are now suffering the ultimate irony of relying on Iraqi visitors to bolster their flagging industry.
Tourism income in Jordan ebbs and flows with the political mood of the Middle East, but it has been hit particularly hard by the most recent turmoil.
In Amman, hotel occupancy stood at only 40%–50% before war broke out in January.
This would have plummeted to single figures but for the influx of wealthy Iraqi ‘refugee holidaymakers’ now fleeing Saddam Hussein's regime.
Jordan is fighting to regain the £400m annual income by appealing to foreign visitors to provide high quality accommodation.
Following the appointment of a new Minister of Tourism, the Jordanian Tourism Consortia, which incorporates hoteliers, tour operators and transport companies, is preparing a marketing campaign aimed at luring back some of the missing millions of tourists and business travellers, particularly from nearby Arab states.
Before the Gulf conflict, about two million Arabs and 250,000 non-Arabs visited Jordan each year.
India aims to woo foreign investors
INDIA is hoping to revitalise its failing economy by making the country more attractive to foreign investors — especially hoteliers.
Last year the government introduced a number of tax concessions to bring private capital and expertise into the hotel and tourism sectors.
Now it wants to stimulate more investment by reducing the bureaucracy and allowing foreigners to have a controlling interest in hotel and tourist developments.
According to Har Govind, a former chief commissioner of income tax, the existing limit of 40% will be increased to 51% under industrial legislation put before the Indian Parliament last month.
Mr Govind said the finance minister had announced that 100% equity would be allowed on some developments if they utilised advanced technology and were in the country's interest.
Other changes to the 1956 Industrial Policy Resolution include scrapping the rule that foreign equity has to be accompanied by foreign technology.
The government is also expected to make it easier for foreign investors to take profits out of the country.
Richard Jarram, senior economist at the Economist Intelligence Unit in London, explained that the changes were designed to help India reach an agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
‘The IMF will not lend any money unless India shows it is doing something about putting its house in order,’ he explained.
He added that the government was also helping local businesses to expand and invest by cutting down on red tape: ‘If people in business try to expand it is very, very bureaucratic and government approval is needed for most projects.’
The loosening-up of regulations could lead to more hotels being developed in India.
Hilton International chairman and chief executive Michael Hirst said the country was a target area for the group.
‘We feel the arrangements will assist in development opportunities,’ he said.
‘However, from a management company perspective, we feel that doing business there very much depends on associating with the right partner.’
Mr Hirst added that Hilton had been discussing the possibility of moving into India and had already evaluated properties in Delhi and Bombay with the aim of a management contract with a small amount of equity.
Pannell Kerr Forster senior management consultant Nick van Marken said he did not think the changes would result in a dramatic increase in hotels.
‘It all boils down to supply and demand,’ he explained.
Taj Group sales and marketing vice-president Pankaj Balija said if hotel companies came to India they would find stiff competition.
‘Hotels here are of an international standard,’ he said.
Taj has 36 hotels in India already and plans to open a budget chain of properties across the country by 1992.
BANGKOK CHOICE
CHOICE Hotels International has opened its first hotel in Thailand, the Quality Hotel Pinnacle in Bangkok.
The newly constructed 166-bedroom hotel is situated in the business district and boasts a business centre, restaurant, poolside gardens and 24-hour limousine service.
Choice Hotels is looking to expand in Thailand with a target of 30 hotels in the country within 10 years.
US SHOW
THE 1991 International Hotel/Motel and Restaurant Show will run from 9–12 November at the Jacob K. Javits convention centre in New York.
As well as an exhibition of food-related products, the show will include a series of seminars covering quality assurance and customer relations.
DIET CONFERENCE
FOODSERVICE Systems Beyond the Year 2000 is the futuristic title of a conference of the International Congress of Dietetics to be held next year from 29 to 31 March in Jerusalem.
Contact the Conference Secretariat by fax on 972-2-868165 or by writing to POB 574, Jerusalem 91004.
Flying toques
CHEFS travelled in convoy recently to sacrifice their headgear on the stones of Tiananmen Square (left).
They were celebrating the opening of the Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza, Beijing, the third Holiday Inn property in the capital.
The 400-bedroom Holiday Inn Crowne Plaza is situated close to Tiananmen Square and the Forbidden City.
It brings to 10 the number of hotels operated by Worldwide Inns in China, with a further five properties under construction.
LETTERS
ACADEMY MENU WAS BLAND AND FAT-LADEN
I AM staggered that Frances Bissell should have chosen to praise the Academy of Culinary Arts/Charles Heidsieck awards menu (Caterer &Hotelkeeper , 22–28 August).
Was she actually there and, if so, did she actually eat any of the food?
My scepticism relates both to the planning and execution of this menu.
First, I do not understand how anyone can possibly think that a menu which features one fat-laden course after another — foie gras, creamy soup, fat-wrapped lamb, pan-fried potatoes, cheese and more cream in the mousse — is a well-planned menu.
Apart from the health considerations, it is simply too enervating.
Second, most of it was bland in the extreme.
I did not know it was possible for foie gras to be tasteless, but the complete omission of seasoning certainly showed I was wrong.
Any hope for the flavour of leeks in a soup, which was again under-seasoned, was drowned in the excessive amount of cream used.
The lamb was fine, but the caul was raw — and the mousse was pink.
I have great admiration for all those involved in the Academy of Culinary Arts and think it a fine, courageous and important creation, but can someone explain how a meal of such ineptitude can be served in its name, and how some of the best chefs and restaurateurs in the world can have eaten it without public comment?
RUTH WATSON Fox and Goose, Fressingfield, Near Diss, Norfolk.
LEISURE DESIGN IS IMPORTANT
WHY is it that hotel owners and operators put so much emphasis on recruiting professional ‘hotel designers’ to create the right hotel, but, when it comes to the inclusion of leisure facilities, then they appear to approach any designer, with the impression that it can be addressed from a design viewpoint just like any other area?
In fact the leisure facility is a minefield of safety, legal, and operational problems that, unless addressed in a professional manner, can cause catastrophic consequences.
It is often said that the two most difficult and specialist design areas within a hotel are the kitchen and the leisure facility.
The number of hotel-based leisure complexes that do not take into consideration the operation of a facility at the same time as its aesthetics are plain for all to see.
It takes more than design flair and understanding to produce a leisure complex.
It also requires the experience gained from having operated the facilities to understand where the pitfalls are and how they can be avoided.
So if you are contemplating the inclusion of leisure facilities at your hotel then do, please, think seriously about recruiting a specialist.
Ask to see examples of their work and contact references from their past projects.
JOHN DIBBLE Partner, Atlam Design Partnership, Portland House, Portland Street, Leamington Spa, Warwickshire.
RESPONSES FOR EC PURCHASING
I HAVE recently joined a National Economic Development Council working party on European public purchasing, which is seeking to contribute to the opening up of public sector purchasing in the EC.
It is investigating any barriers to this and ways to overcome them.
As the only catering industry representative on this working party, I would be interested to hear from any companies which have any experience, or knowledge of any examples, which make them feel that this is an area that needs to be examined quickly and subjected to public debate.
Of particular relevance to the industry is the sub-group on local authority purchasing and the research project looking at small- and medium-sized suppliers and the public sector purchasers which deal with them.
CHARLES ALLEN Managing Director, Compass, Queens Wharf, Queen Caroline Street, London W6.
THE COLOUR OF MONEY
ONE of our bar staff recently came into the kitchen to ask if she could look in the soup kettle to see what colour the soup was.
‘It's green,’ I said.
‘It's broccoli and ham.’
She then came back to tell me the customer didn't like green so wouldn't be having the soup.
‘What colour did she expect broccoli and ham soup to be?’
I pondered.
The customer ordered a salad instead!
JEAN NOLAN Manager, Ye Jolly Crofter, Chorley Old Road, Horwich, Lancashire 
INDUSTRY NEEDS POSITIVE ATTITUDE
I WOULD like to respond to James Stewart's letter (Caterer , 22–28 August).
I, too, have been employed in the catering industry for approximately eight years and hold similar qualifications to those of Mr Stewart.
The difference being that I have been fortunate to find a career that I love and, what is more, get paid reasonably for it.
I have always had reasonable live-in accommodation (having inspected it before accepting a position) and, although on certain days I have worked non-stop, on others I have been very quiet and still received the same salary.
I think this is a fair balance.
As for sociable hours, I would not be in this trade if I expected to work nine to five, Monday to Friday.
True, in some instances the USA does offer better conditions than the UK, but Americans also possess a positive mental attitude towards success and achievement.
My advice to young people thinking of going into catering is to gain as much information as possible, try it and judge for yourself.
My advice to Mr Stewart is to think carefully before entering into a career in medicine, as this is also a field which requires a lot of dedication, perseverance and long hours if one is to achieve anything worthwhile.
LOUIS RIGNEY Food Services Manager, Golden Lion Hotel, Lower Briggate, Leeds, West Yorkshire.
PUBLIC COMPLAINT WAS UNFAIR
EVERYONE is entitled to their opinion, and while I agree with Joe Hyam's concerning service charges (Caterer , 15–21 August), I feel he is taking unfair advantage of his position to have a go at people who do not do things the ‘Joe Hyam’ way.
If the restaurant in question adds a service charge, then that is between it and the customer.
Complaining in print about one restaurant's service charge policy — giving both the restaurant and proprietor's name — could cost that establishment a great deal of money in bad publicity.
Mr Hyam can choose not to pay the service charge or pay it under duress, stating so, but to complain like this in a magazine read by thousands is unfair and childish.
TOM MURRAY Glasgow House, Lanark Road, London W9.
NO-SERVICE CHARGE WORKS
I THOUGHT Joe Hyam would like to know that we changed our menu four months ago to the fixed-price system.
In doing so we felt that casual passers-by, looking in the window at the menu, would be more likely to come in knowing what price they would have to pay.
It seems to have worked.
During the summer months our casual trade has been fairly steady and a number of these casuals are now regular customers.
We don't charge extra for coffee, service or bread, which is home-made and devoured in vast quantities, and the majority of our customers leave a generous gratuity, obviously happy with the meal and service.
GILLIAN SCOTT Bistro Montparnasse, Palmerston Road, Southsea, Portsmouth.
PUTTING DUBLIN RIGHT
WHILE complimenting David Tarpey on an interesting article on tourism in Dublin (Caterer , 22–28 August), I would like to point out that Dublin's millennium was in 1988 not 1989.
However, the foreign exchange earnings on tourism did increase in 1989, not from IR£150m but rather by this figure.
Foreign exchange earnings in 1988 were IR£841m up from IR£731m in the previous year.
In short, the increase in earnings from tourism happened in the year after the millennium.
The former Jurys property in Ballsbridge was previously an Inter-Continental Hotel, not Holiday Inn.
While the latter's name has been associated on many occasions with Dublin, to date it has not operated here.
RONAN KING Abbey Court, Irish Life Centre, Lower Abbey Street, Dublin.
GMS NEEDED FOR MONITOR
Y0UR publication has carried reports on the two editions so far published of our quarterly Horwath Business Review , and in particular on the results of our business monitor which it contains.
This confidence survey is conducted among UK hotel general managers and is based on a sample of almost 100 drawn from different classes, sizes and styles of hotels geographically spread across the country.
We would now like to extend its scope and analysis and we invite any general manager, not already participating, to do so.
I would be very pleased to hear from anyone willing to accept this invitation.
We would send a copy of our most recent edition with a short, explanatory letter.
Participation is not time-consuming.
JONATHAN BODLENDER Chairman, Horwath Consulting, 8 Baker Street, London W1M.
TECS RESPONSE A BIG HELP
FURTHER to your article TECs slammed over funding red tape (Caterer , 22–28 August), I thought you might be interested to hear the other side of the coin.
As an individual who worked for over 10 years in relatively senior positions for two of the ‘major brewers’, I thought it ironic that here was one set of red tape specialists accusing another.
As the managing director of a recently formed company with, to date, only one outlet, I was quite naturally looking for any help I could get, advisory or financially or both.
I was pushed in the Bradford TEC's direction by the local Chamber of Commerce.
Bradford TEC responded immediately, helped me understand its systems and guided me in the right direction on form-filling, etc.
Lo and behold, after further meetings, I am now the proud owner of a ‘grant’.
If all TECs are as helpful and supportive as Bradford, then long may they flourish.
HUGH MANTLE Managing Director, Castlebridge Inns, Station Road, Steeton, Keighley, West Yorkshire.
TRAINING
CHINESE teaching
Norwich Hotel School has set up a Chinese cookery course to inspire future chefs.
Kate McDermid reports
TAKE a piece of fish, cook for 20 minutes until it has a wood-like texture, marinate for two days in soy sauce and sesame oil, then serve.
This ancient Chinese process is a fish preserving method comparable to smoking, and is just one of the techniques that catering students from the Norwich Hotel School will soon be taught.
It's part of the school's Chinese cookery awareness course — craft-based and designed to meet the City &Guilds' new ethnic element.
Later this month it will be a permanent feature of full-time courses at the hotel school.
All craft students will spend about 30 hours a year in the Chinese cookery centre, which is sponsored by British Gas (Eastern) and Far East Industries.
The centre, which will also offer short courses for industry, boasts £7,000-worth of state-of-the-art, mobile equipment including a steamer, duck oven and water-cooled, four-wok burner.
The course will be run by Norwich lecturer Martin Jermey.
The centre was christened in July with an adult education summer school and a series of master classes aimed at the professional caterer and taught by Jermey's Shanghai Institute of Tourism counterpart chef Xu Zhengcai, on his first visit to Britain, and Professor Dai Xin-Huan, his colleague and interpreter.
As a water-testing exercise these courses were successful, attracting ‘students’ from all over the country and even one from Saudi Arabia.
The other task in July for Xu — he is one of China's most highly regarded chefs, consultants and writers, the Chinese equivalent of Victor Ceserani — was to teach the Norwich staff and advise on setting up the course.
The idea for such an ambitious (but surprisingly nightmare-free) project was first mooted in 1989 when Professor Dai came to Norwich to attend a post-graduate degree course in tourism.
Head of the school Mike McKechnie later visited Shanghai to seal a friendship agreement and discuss the course content, a scaled down but otherwise authentic version of that taught at the institute.
Jermey's aim is not to turn out chefs who can produce Chinese wedding feasts, but adventurous chefs who can borrow techniques where appropriate and incorporate them into their own style: ‘They'll see new ways of finishing dishes, new combinations of flavours.’
Assistant head of the hotel school, John Staples, adds: ‘They won't be experts but they'll have a good understanding of what it's all about.
There's no reason why they shouldn't be able to develop their own dishes.
There are tens of thousands of Chinese recipes and shades of flavour.
We talk about sweet and sour but they may have five different sweets and five different sours.’
Another key difference between styles is in heat control, inextricably tied in with the equipment used.
Any standard piece of Western catering equipment simply cannot produce the heat needed.
‘That's the crucial difference in keeping the flavour,’ says Jermey, for whom an important concern has been authenticity.
‘The main differences between the two styles of cuisine is in the way the Chinese blend ingredients, how they introduce colour into the food, and that up to 90% of the work is done prior to cooking.’
Importing the ingredients through wholesalers has not been a problem.
The lotus leaf needed to line the bamboo steamer for the Szechwan dish of steamed beef and rice flour was examined with interest, as were the ingredients used to make the rice flour — short grain rice, cinnamon bark, star anise and ‘special’ wild pepper — which were then sautéed dry for 15 minutes and ground into a semolina-type texture after the removal of the bark and anise.
Left and above, chef Xu Zhengcai demonstrates to professional caterers at a master class
Xu's ingredients are fresh and he uses just one board
Even the duck used for Tai Bai Duck (a dish handed down from generation to generation and named after the Tang dynasty poet Li Tai Bai) despite being supplied by Cherry Valley, is, promises Jermey, authentic, because the company supplied much of China's duck breeding stock.
(Xu has willingly dropped monosodium glutamate after learning of its decreasing popularity here, admitting that it occasionally ‘covered a multitude of sins’.)
Xu says he is impressed with the standard of fundamental craft skills he found among both staff and students at Norwich.
‘Chinese and Western cuisines have very different styles, but since I've been here, I've realised that once chefs have the chance to exchange views and work together, it's very easy to adapt to a new style of cooking.
‘China has a long history of cuisine, a vast territory and abundant natural resources, many nationalities and a large population that has many regions and local diets and customs,’ he explains, adding that Chinese chefs tended to create new dishes daily, as each cooking method, each style and the range of ingredients could be used to make up different combinations — traditional menus contained a minimum of 100 dishes named after methods.
Xu's generation is now categorised as ‘middle-age’— chefs who have gained their qualification through professional training which enhances areas of traditional standards and techniques passed down through the generations.
But older generations of chefs learned to cook through long apprenticeships of five to nine years.
Among those noting Xu's habit of using just one board (ingredients are so fresh and so quickly prepared that food poisoning is not considered a threat) is Keith Mitchell, team captain of the British chefs competing at the culinary Olympics in Frankfurt next year, and head chef at the Grand Hotel, Eastbourne, East Sussex.
‘One board, one knife, one hand,’ he comments while watching stir-fried beef with carrot and onion being prepared.
Mitchell, rather than recreating Chinese dishes, uses some Chinese methods and ingredients and is particularly impressed with the handling of flavours.
‘Pick up a piece of chicken and all the flavours of that dish are on that piece of chicken.
The way we do things, you need your knife and fork to put the sauce on the meat or you haven't got the flavours.
In Western-style cooking, it's up to the consumer to combine the ingredients.
In Chinese cooking, everything's in the dish.’
Stir-fried beef with carrot and onion is one dish which required ‘one board, one knife, one hand’ to prepare
SOLUTIONS
INDEPENDENTS GET BREAK FROM BRAVO by David Goymour
BRAVO, a new on-screen booking system which puts British hotels and tourist attractions on travel agents' counters, has entered its launch phase.
It is said to offer independent hotels the kind of exposure which hotels in big groups can derive from international booking systems — owned, typically, by the big airlines.
Selected branches of travel agents Thomas Cook and AT May are using the computerised system, with the details of about 100 selected hotels.
Bravo is planning to have 1,000 hotels on the system by 1 November, and 2,000 by March 1992.
Majority shareholder in Bravo is Cable &Wireless (C), which also owns Mercury, the communications company.
C's partners are British Airways and Finite, a technology specialist.
‘Bravo will distribute ‘UK Ltd’ worldwide, and give the travelling public access to the total UK product,’said Bravo spokesman John Roussel.
‘The international chains have access to systems like Sabre and Galileo, but any hotel can join Bravo.’
Hotels taking part need not necessarily have computerised property management systems — a facsimile machine can be used as the link.
Participating hotels pay a subscription starting at £175 a year, up to a ceiling of £575.
This is based on the number of rooms in the hotel, not its tariff.
From the beginning of 1992 there will also be a joining fee of £150 per hotel, but businesses joining before the end of the year avoid that.
Bravo levies a transaction charge for each booking, starting at £1.80 to a maximum of £3.30.
Hotels whose computer systems can interface automatically with Bravo pay lower rates.
The promoters are collecting feedback from the travel agents which are testing the system, and selling the idea to the travel trade with the slogan ‘Book Britain through Bravo’.
If it catches on, Roussel sees it developing along several possible paths.
‘Essentially it's an electronic brochure, but it could be used to promote a branded product, such as a hotel consortium or Agatha Christie weekends.
‘As part of the Mercury communications empire, it can do anything: why not order beer through Bravo?’
PETER Einstein, director of network development for MTV Europe, has announced the appointment of Tony Wawryk as satellite music and television (SMATV) hotels manager.
Mr Wawryk will be responsible for building on the channel's current base of more than 110,000 hotel rooms and for increasing the number of households able to receive MTV Europe.
The number of European households connected at the end of June stood at 24.4 million.
Postmaster wins Thames TV contracts
PABULUM Consultants and its Postmaster point-of-sale system has won the contract at the three Thames Television sites at Euston, Teddington and Tottenham Court Road, London, operated by Sutcliffe Catering.
The installation was part of a review of catering operations, conducted by Food Service Designs.
This is Pabulum's second installation in the broadcasting marketplace.
Foodmaster has been running at the BBC catering department for two years.
The three systems at Thames run on IBM 4684 hardware and are networked, allowing sales reports to be consolidated from each terminal.
CRS report
THE rapidly growing crisis in labour supply and the impact of new technologies, notably central reservation systems (CRS), are identified as two major challenges to the world's hotel industry.
The Economist Intelligence Unit highlights CRS systems in a special report:Competitive Strategies for the International Hotel Industry .
Price: £195 (Europe, Middle East and Africa), from EIU, 40 Duke Street, London W1A 1DW.
Partnership
ANN Brough, Maureen Coulton and Shirley Taylor, who previously worked together in the systems and control department of the former Trusthouse Forte Hotels, have formed a partnership offering accounts and control support services to the hotel industry.
The company, called Systems 4 Control, is based at Unit 61, Northwick Business Centre, Blockley, Morton-in-Marsh GL56 9RF.
Tel: 0386 700896; fax: 0386 701069.
THORN SOFTWARE STAFF BUYOUT
THORN EMI Software, the computer services division of the electronics and entertainment group, has been bought out by its staff and management in an £82m deal and has taken a new name.
From two of its existing operations — Software Sciences, which produces the CHAMPS hotel management system and Datasolve, which manages other companies' data facilities — the new company has taken the name Data Sciences.
The existing management, headed by chairman and chief executive Mike Smith, and all 1,950 staff, will remain intact.
With turnover of £117m last year, the company accounted for only about 5% of Thorn EMI sales, but Data Sciences is number two in the UK computer services league.
CHAMPS will be one of the vertical-market products developed further by the independent company — and an announcement is expected in the autumn.
BAA Hotels recently installed the system at its three British hotels and one Belgian property — the Sterling hotels at Heathrow and Gatwick, the Stansted Harlequin, and at Ghent, Belgium.
Commenting on the Heathrow installation, BAA Hotels managing director Jeremy Logie said: ‘The primary role of technology is to give the guest a better experience at the hotel.
The CHAMPS installation will certainly meet that aim, and the interface of all its facilities allows us to manage the hotel while enabling guests to deal with their affairs in a quick and effective manner.’
Data Sciences also supplies software for other sectors, notably financial, manufacturing, and aerospace.
The company is expected to offer shares to its employees when it is allowed to do so, and a Stock Market flotation could follow in ‘two, three or four years' time’ according to Mr Smith.
High-tech investment at Fairfield Manor
YORK-based Croft Hotels is investing £80,000 in training and presentation equipment for its Fairfield Manor Hotel, near York.
The investment will provide the hotel with some of the most comprehensive and up-to-date training and presentation facilities in North Yorkshire.
It forms part of a £6m redevelopment programme for Fairfield Manor, which will be completed next spring.
‘One of the priorities in redeveloping Fairfield Manor Hotel is to cater for business users,’ said Croft managing director Keith Pope.
‘We are taking every care to provide the latest technology and a quality environment.’
Fairfield Manor's suite of meeting rooms will include a training room, conference room and two syndicate rooms.
The training and conference rooms will each house a screen, one 2.5sq m and the other 1.5sq m.
A simple, cordless, hand-held remote control will operate 35mm slides with merge facility, overheads, television, satellite television, U-matic tape and VHS video tapes on one or both screens.
It will also control lighting, curtains and the audio system with compact disc player.
The two syndicate rooms will also be equipped with video cameras for role-play exercises.
HOTECH '91
HOTECH 91, the technology exhibition for the industry, offers the solutions to help you run a better business.
David Goymour reports
TELECOMMUNICATIONS will be one of the buzz words at HOTECH '91, the leading exhibition of technology solutions for the hotel and catering industry.
The show, presented by Caterer &Hotelkeeper , is at the Wembley Conference Centre, London, on 6 and 7 November.
Telecommunications systems for hotels now perform many more tasks than just allowing people to make telephone calls.
Typical of most of the systems that will be at HOTECH are wake-up and message services; posting of charges for telephone calls to the room account; facilities to advise housekeeping when bedrooms are free for cleaning; and display of the guest's name on the operator console.
Among the companies specialising in telecommunications is a new HOTECH exhibitor, Digital Telephone Systems.
DTS will show the Harris 20–20 Accommodator hotel communication system for the first time at the show.
DTS claims the Accommodator system, as well as handling telephone traffic and the facilities mentioned above, makes an important contribution to housekeeping, maintenance and billing functions.
A DTS spokeswoman explained: ‘Once a guest has checked out, the room telephone is automatically disabled to prevent unauthorised use, and the room status changes to ‘requires cleaning’.
The room maid can enter maintenance requests into the system via the telephone, saving time in tracking down members of staff.’
Other telecommunications companies which have booked space at HOTECH '91 include: Western Telecom, now part of the Alcatel group; GPT Sales &Services; Ascom Telecommunications; 3C Communications, which is establishing telecom links with an increasing number of other suppliers' systems; and Mitel Telecom, which was involved in the refit at The Dorchester, London.
A special branch of communications which is also increasingly important to the hotel and travel industry, and which will be featured at HOTECH, is the on-line hotel bookings system.
One of these, PC-Hornet, which has been developed over the past 10 years, will be shown for the first time by McDonnell Douglas.
Latest developments to PC-Hornet include on-line communications between central booking office and hotel, and links to other reservation sources, such as airline systems and hotel syndicates.
Another on-line system recently launched in Britain is Bravo (see news report on page 55).
This is aimed at independent hotels, and will put them alongside chain properties on travel agents' terminals.
Bravo is part of Cable &Wireless — like HOTECH exhibitor Mercury Communications.
Mercury has not yet disclosed what announcements it will be making at the show.
•For further information about HOTECH '91 contact the organiser, First Event, tel: 071–252 6459.
HOTECH is an opportunity for the industry to see technology first hand
THE DATABASE GOLD MINE
THE hotel business is no stranger to information technology (IT).
Yet it is easy for pioneer users and IT investors to remain with the tried and tested applications and miss out on the cutting edge opportunities just around the corner.
The information already held on computer for regular operations is only yielding a fraction of its true potential — potential to contribute directly to the bottom line, if analysed with a marketing strategy in mind.
Few organisations have yet tapped the power of knowing their customers through a marketing database.
Those which have are reaping impressive rewards simply by identifying precisely the services or products customers want; looking at their most lucrative areas; finding out what clients really value; and establishing what would make them move to a competing hotel.
This fundamental marketing information can easily be gleaned from the vast stores of historic customer data which hotels possess.
As a seasoned business traveller I am constantly amazed at all the lost opportunities to build customer loyalty.
For example, I have never received a personal letter following my stay to thank me for my custom.
Maybe I could have been offered a discount if I brought my wife next time.
And why do reception staff often ask if I've stayed with them before when I'm booked on a regular customer discount?
If information is there it needs to be filtered and passed on — via senior management — into all areas of the operation.
The real power of computerised data lies in a deeper, more sophisticated analysis of the information which already exists.
This isn't just customer care: this is better margins and hard profit.
Those who embark on this deeper, marketing-centred analysis find it necessary to separate this process from the regular tactical use of the database for sales mailings.
To identify the complex yet crucial inter-relationships between customers and their characteristics demands sophisticated statistical and marketing knowledge.
Accepted marketing wisdom says that 20% of customers represent 80% of one's business.
Yet few organisations adjust their marketing effort and their management priorities accordingly.
With proper use of a database this is easy, with benefits directly on the bottom line.
Not only are the most profitable customers encouraged to return, but subtle features are identified and fed into the operation so that guests feel personally cared for.
When analysed at this more fundamental level, the database will also give clear guidelines about overall corporate image.
But there is also the flip side of the coin.
Customers return because they feel food about the product or service.
So it is just as important to know what it is about your organisation that customers value so that you can promote it fully.
The older a database is, the richer it becomes as a reference about customers and their views of you.
Isn't it time to take hold of that lead by realising their true marketing potential?
Charles Arthur,Managing Director, Datascope Marketing 
Supporting cast
Suppliers are more than sales people.
Use them to the full to guarantee the effective use of your computer system by ensuring staff are aware of its potential.
David Goymour reports
BUYING a computer system for a single hotel or restaurant, or for a chain of units, involves far more than ordering and taking delivery of powerful foxes loaded with clever software.
That part of the package has to be right, but it's impossible to separate it from the consultation that goes on between the customer and the supplier before the sale is clinched.
The conversation continues after delivery, with training for the staff who are to use the system, and support services while the system is in use.
Technology suppliers to the British hotel and restaurant industry say that their products are often under-exploited, because too little thought has been given to what the systems are supposed to achieve and too low a priority is given to staff training.
One industry spokesman comments: ‘The overall performance of computerised management systems within the hotel industry relates more to the attitudes of managers towards training and the commitment of their suppliers than it does to the ‘superiority’ of the individual systems.’
Two contentious issues are the cost of training to managers and the same managers' grasp of systems (or the lack of it).
It is claimed that catering colleges have failed to get to grips with the developments of technology, acknowledge its importance and provide students with a level of understanding based on the industry's needs.
How successful a computer installation is will depend largely on how clearly the customer and the supplier have defined, at the outset, what the system is supposed to achieve.
As Checkout Computer Systems' Tim Webb points out, people's expectations of technology often exceed the computer's remit.
‘The most frequently asked question is: What does the customer expect to derive from the implementation of electronic point of sale (EPoS)?’
Webb says.
‘The answers are wildly varied but generally appertain to improvements in control and standard of service.
‘When selling a system which has a full-control system at the heart of its operation, the first response is easily satisfied.
The second is not necessarily quite so easy.
‘One must consider the fact that, in most installations, the staff are also new and frequently new to the trade.
Speed and standards of service are, therefore, inevitably compromised, with either the EPoS system or lack of training being cited as the culprit.’
Fretwell-Downing Data Systems head of sales Charles Mobbs frequently points out that it is not possible to buy a piece of software and a manual from him and then walk away: partnership between supplier and customer is the approach.
‘The software package selected for implementation should be seen as the vehicle for a solution rather than the solution itself.
This, therefore, demands that the purchaser and supplier of a system must be capable of working in partnership, and that the supplier has specialist skills in all areas of implementation of systems to assist the customer over this hurdle,’ Mobbs says.
‘Any prospective purchaser of systems should, therefore, make themselves fully confident that their chosen supplier has the depth of skills and personnel available in all areas.
‘For this reason, purchasing from brochures or purchasing from a system demonstration on-site is simply inadequate.
In-depth evaluation of suppliers, their premises and personnel structures is vitally important.’
Potentially the customer holds the strong cards at this stage of the discussion: the hotelier or restaurateur knows what his business problems are and knows what the computer system is going to have to achieve — and the potential buyer, who has thought this through before the supplier appears, is more likely to end up with the right system.
Also part of the package, and defined more by the supplier, will be the equally important staff and management training, and on-going support for the hardware and software.
The training should be done by the system supplier, with no reliance on outside agents.
Some hotel and restaurant groups have their own systems trainers, who will receive instruction from the supplier and then ‘cascade’ what they have learned to operations staff at the units.
Either way, the training should be done on the supplier's premises.
Mobbs says: ‘On-site training is only viable where suitable facilities exist and commitment is given to releasing staff from daily duties.
Where either of these is not practical then off-site training is far more effective as a constructive environment can be created and release from day-to-day pressures guaranteed.’
Initial training to teach operators how to use the system takes more or less time depending on the software, but typically this ranges from two to five days.
Sometimes suppliers will say this is not nearly enough.
Innsite Hotel Services, for example, recommends, for its Innfront front office system, an on-site training package of 11 days spread over a period.
This includes instruction on reservations, sales ledger, guest accounting, guest history and two days of ‘live’ cover.
A maximum of six delegates can be accommodated on each course, and the package includes a one-day refresher, three months after going live.
Innsite, however, is realistic in its view of the market, for it also offers a budget start-up package that teaches the fundamental of Innfront in five consecutive days, which can be topped up later with further training.
Some companies offer to do the training either on their own premises or at the client site.
Lodgistix, for example, will come to the hotel or accept clients' staff at its office in Croydon, Surrey.
‘Off-site training is far more effective,’— Charles Mobbs
As Lodgistix account manager Phillip Wanbon points out, different packages require different timescales for training, but he adds: ‘We do guarantee to stay on site until we are fully satisfied that all the relevant personnel within the hotel or conference centre are competent enough to run an efficient operation with minimal help from us.
This is of course in our own interests.’
Training on-site can cost anything in the range of £200 to £350 per day.
Training courses at the supplier's own premises are typically charged on a daily delegate rate structured like the tariff for hotel conferences.
IGS, for example, quotes £60 per person per day, with a minimum of four to a group.
Computer systems are often under-exploited, largely because the people using the systems are not aware of its possibilities.
Pabulum Consultants' Jennifer Rust comments: ‘Many companies will only invest in the minimum training required to get the system up and running; it is not surprising in these cases that the systems are not being used to their full potential.
‘Management should regard a full training schedule as part of the total cost of the system and include this total sum in the system's payback calculations.
The computer system will only bring the returns that the company expects if the people using it are using the system fully, which can be guaranteed through investment in adequate training.
‘It must also be noted that the computer systems generate information and it is how this information is used that influences the returns on the total package.
The onus is on the company to ensure that staff are making intelligent decisions on the information that the computer system provides and this comes from in-house training.’
Telephone Management Systems customer care director Anne Nunn also speaks for many suppliers when she talks about the imbalance between the knowledge required of hotel staff and the time devoted to training them.
She catalogues some of the services guests now take for granted, and which require electronic equipment working behind the scenes.
‘A fully up-to-date room bill must be available on demand; the telephone must allow guests access to anywhere in the world the moment they enter their rooms; the video must be instantly viewable.
To achieve this most hotels have a number of systems, all provided by different suppliers, on which the staff come to rely totally,’ she says.
‘A system failure has a knock-on effect throughout the hotel and adequate contingency plans must be in place to cope with such a situation.
Yet despite this, many hoteliers are reluctant to invest in sufficient training for their staff.’
Welcome Computer Systems' managing partner Nick Chudley echoes this view: ‘Sadly, and we believe mistakenly, some customers decide to cut back on training as an economy measure.
We think it's a false economy, but we can understand that a seaside hotelier, for example, may not want to train casual, seasonal staff.
So the owner/manager will be trained and in turn will train a succession of staff.
‘Ideally we would like to go back to a site a few months after installation, for a meeting with senior management to show them how they can take advantage of the system,’ Chudley says.
‘The marketing manager can learn how to take advantage of the growing database and the finance manager can see how to use the special accounting systems.’
‘Operator training is fairly simple, but managers need more to get the most out of the system,’— Nick Chudley
READ THE MANUAL FIRST…
THERE'S a saying in the computer industry: ‘If in doubt, press a few keys; if that doesn't work, ask a colleague; if in deep trouble, consult the manual.’
There is some justification for this caricature of the typical computer user — though customers' critics might ask themselves first how well-written the manuals are, before complaining that people never read them.
Assuming the manual is in comprehensible English, users can avoid many unnecessary calls to the help desk by a combination of consulting its index, and using the onscreen help built into the software.
Pabulum Consultants' Jennifer Rust adds: ‘They could also help themselves by thinking through a problem before phoning the support desk.
In many cases a user will actually solve his or her own problem while on the phone to Neptune!
‘Users must also be encouraged to recognise the difference between a reception problem and a computer problem.
We get calls from our customers, from receptionists, for example, who cannot balance at the end of the shift.
This is, in most cases, simply a normal, everyday problem.’
Another way in which computer users can help suppliers to help them is to appoint a system manager.
This is a controversial issue: hoteliers and restaurateurs are supposed to be running hotels and restaurants, after all, not managing computer systems.
Hotel chains and other groups can support systems specialists, but even independents could benefit from making individuals responsible for the operation of information technology systems.
Realistically, most staff never will want to plough through the manuals that come with most software.
If the independent business has one staff member who regularly uses the computer equipment and sufficiently interested to study the manuals, that person will, given encouragement, build up expertise which can usefully be passed on.
The system manager would also be the contact to whom the supplier would turn when arranging suitable dates for updating software, for example, and other maintenance work.
Back up your data
Backing up data is one of the basics of any computer system.
Joseph Houghton offers tips for beginners
YOUR computer has just broken down.
You turned it on but nothing is happening — blank screen, no whirring noise, no beeps, no flashing lights.
Dead.
The VAT returns for the last quarter are due in, and that big (very profitable) convention which took over the hotel for three weeks last year is imminent but you can't get at your data.
You could type in all your accounting figures again, and recreate what you can of the customer histories from print outs in the filing cabinet.
Shouldn't take more than a couple of weeks at most…
Would you be panicking at this point?
If so, read on.
A chef would never leave a kitchen with food out on the worktops at the end of the day, and front desk is always tidied at the end of a shift, but how many managers do more than simply turn off the computer and go home at the end of a session with their spreadsheet or word processor?
Back up your data!
Everything stored in the memory of a computer can be copied on to removable diskettes.
It takes only a few minutes.
Hundreds of customers' details can be stored on one diskette, as can whole spreadsheets, and the diskettes can then be kept safely in a secure place away from the computer.
If anything happened to the computer and it proved impossible to get at the data inside, you could go to your back-up diskettes and simply copy the data back into the computer when it had been repaired, or replaced, or put it onto another computer.
This is true of all computers, whatever make, size or cost and irrespective of the programs you run on your machine.
Basic discipline can save you hours of wasted time, preserve years of carefully built up data and give you peace of mind.
The actual machine is replaceable, as are the programs which run on it — but your data is unique and cannot simply be replaced by the local computer shop.
Some people never have to use their back-ups, just as some people never need to claim on their insurance, but would you want to be uninsured?
You cannot afford to lose your data.
If you have no back-ups, then one day you will lose it and that could be the end of your business.
The most widespread type of computer in small businesses — the IBM compatible PC — can back up in several ways.
As data security is such a fundamental issue for all computer users, programs which enable back-ups to be taken are supplied with each PC.
These programs are part of the operating system — the set of commands which come with the computer and allow you to communicate with it.
One such command is COPY, and two more are BACKUP and RESTORE.
The manuals which come with the computer will explain how to use them.
These commands will do the job but, if you are willing to spend some money, there are programs available which will make the whole process much easier, even automating back-ups so that your data is kept fully secure at all times.
SHAREWARE
Some of these programs belong to the Shareware scheme which means that they can be used and evaluated for a few weeks, and you pay the registration fee only if you continue to use them.
A browse through any of the computer magazines will indicate several possibilities, and many companies will supply a demonstration version to try out before you commit to a purchase.
Even better, go down to your local computer shop and ask them to show you several different ways to back-up, then choose the one which seems easiest.
If you have large amounts of data to back-up (more than will fit on the six diskettes), consider installing a tape streamer.
This is a device similar to a normal cassette recorder but which takes bigger tape cassettes, each of which can hold all the data and programs on your computer.
These devices can back up the whole system or only those parts which you specify, and are very fast.
See a computer dealer for more advice and insist on seeing a demonstration before you buy.
Whether you go it alone, ask the computer shop expert or persuade a friend who knows about computers to help you, it is essential to set up a regular data back-up system.
STOCKTAKING made simple
The Psion Organiser: is it a fancy calculator, or a battery-powered log book?
One City caterer has found a novel use for it in the larder.
David Goymour reports
CONTRACT caterer Catering &Allied has teamed up with systems supplier TIS to speed up and simplify the job of stocktaking at its City of London contract with merchant bank Morgan Grenfell.
As part of the whole process of computerising its information systems, Catering &Allied is making neat use of the Psion Organiser II alongside personal computers loaded with the Caterdata software from TIS.
Operations manager Siobhan Hunter, who is responsible for the Morgan Grenfell contract, says: ‘We've been looking at computers for the past 18 months, and we went for Caterdata, having seen it in action at BE Services, the in-house caterer at the Bank of England.’
Catering &Allied took presentations from half a dozen systems suppliers, and put three possibles on trial, but the two others were found to be too complex for the company's purposes.
These purposes include control of the purchasing activity, minimising wastage and keeping selling prices as keen as possible.
Morgan Grenfell, like many Catering &Allied clients, wants its staff to pay only the cost of food, plus VAT.
It has also set out some rules about which menu items can or cannot be increased in price.
Soups, salads, potatoes and other hot vegetables, hot puddings, fruit and yoghurt are fixed-priced items: main courses and the ‘grill bar special’ are among those which can be adjusted.
Efficient stocktaking is a key element in controlling these prices and expenditure — and that's where the Psion Organiser comes in.
Deputy unit manager Phil Brown, who has taken responsibility for the computer system, says: ‘We can do the stocktake in about half a day with the Psion Organiser.
Doing it manually, it had to be done over a period of two or three days, fitting it in after work.’
The stock file on the Caterdata package allocates a code to each ingredient which Catering &Allied buys from its various suppliers.
When the latest invoices are recorded, Caterdata looks at various sections of its filing system and updates them with the information.
It's a cyclical process: when the butcher delivers to the kitchens at Morgan Grenfell, Brown enters the details from the delivery note on the computer in his office.
At this point the number of steaks, chops and other meat ingredients are updated on the stock file.
When the invoice comes in for payment, this is copied on to the system as well, and Caterdata first searches for the equivalent delivery note to check that Brown is being charged for the right goods.
As each item from the invoice is typed into the system, the program updates the stock file to show the most recent price paid per pound for each commodity.
TECHNICAL DATA
SOFTWARE in use at Morgan Grenfell: Caterdata from TIS — licensed to Catering &Allied at an entry cost of about £4,000.
Annual charge for software support is 20% of this.
Hardware: Compaq PC — Morgan Grenfell property.
Psion Organiser II, bought by Catering &Allied at a branch of Dixons.
Typical cost including four 128k data packs: from £480, including VAT.
And the next time Brown compiles a menu, the costing for each dish will be based on the updated purchase price.
As the goods are drawn out of the larders, the statistics are adjusted downwards, and Brown can quickly check how much he needs to re-order.
Having this kind of information conveniently available is exactly what Catering &Allied needed.
Hunter says Caterdata was chosen largely because it is ‘user-friendly, simple to use in terms of the number of keystrokes people need to make, and quick to learn’.
However, it is one thing to scan a computer screen in the catering office: it's quite another to do stocktaking — typically this involves carrying a notebook around the various larders and coldrooms.
Catering &Allied came up with a novel solution: copy the stock file on to one of the two 128k data packs which fit into the back of a Psion Organiser, update that file ‘on the hoof’; and copy the updated file back to the desktop computer.
TIS programmed a second data pack, in a language the Psion understands, to handle the information.
As Brown moves round the larders, the Psion Organiser presents him with a series of ingredient names, in a preset order.
Each ingredient has to be counted and a quantity entered.
This can be done by purchase unit, standard unit or a combination of the two.
So, for example, if wine is being checked, it can be counted by the case or by the bottle.
If the system disagrees with the figure entered it will challenge it — otherwise it moves on to the next item.
‘The first time we did it, the stock check was programmed to call up everything,’ Brown says.
‘After that, on each check it only calls up those items which have been active since.’
Brown can choose selective stock checks — concentrating either on particular commodities or on the contents of one larder.
Or the whole unit can be checked at a single tour, with a limit of 2,000 stock codes on the Psion.
The system is working happily, and the success of the Psion is sending out ripples both within Catering &Allied and TIS.
Brown, who went on a one-day course at TIS before coming back and installing the system at Morgan Grenfell, is now teaching colleagues to use it, including unit manager Karen Goate, ‘Computers used to frighten me, but not now,’ she says.
This is part of the Catering &Allied philosophy of ‘link manning’— people need to be able to pick up their colleagues' responsibilities if necessary, so knowledge gets passed on.
Brown will probably be involved in passing it on to other sites as well as to colleagues at the Morgan Grenfell operation.
Within TIS, too, the work which was done to bring Caterdata and the Psion together can now be sold on to other Caterdata customers, and a section explaining how Psion works has been added to the Caterdata manual.
Stocktake can be done in half a day with the Psion Organiser
Hotel Manager offers room status facility
by David Goyour
PHILIPS' Hotel Manager is a feature of the Sopho-Systemmanager, which is now offered in either a multi-terminal, UNIX version or single-terminal PC version.
The Hotel Manager's room status facility allows room status to be updated by using the telephone keypad as an input terminal.
A room status change can be initiated either by hotel staff entering a code manually on the bedroom telephone, or automatically by the Hotel Manager if, for example, a name is entered or deleted on the guest file.
Status of all rooms, including those ready for use, can be displayed and adjusted at the Hotel Manager workstation.
Names and details of guests are stored in the guest directory as they are checked in, and room status change is indicated.
At check out, a telephone bill and any messages pending are printed out and the guest details are removed from the directory.
When all people occupying a room have checked out of the hotel, the room status is changed to ‘not occupied’.
Procedures are also available to log hotel guest room changes.
The Hotel Manager can also provide automatic wake-up calls.
When the call is answered, the guest can be connected to a telephone set or to a voice announcer, for a ‘wake-up message’ or ‘wake-up tone’.
If a wake-up attempt fails, an alarm report will be printed out.
If you would like further information contact Philips Telecom, telephone: 0223 61222.
Launch of IMS 90
QUINTEK Systems has launched a new version of its Inn Management System.
The package IMS 90, runs under any industry-standard operating system and can be used with EPoS devices.
Designed for the brewing and leisure sector.
IMS 90 provides management with a comprehensive reporting system and incorporates applications specific to bar and restaurant operations.
Using all of the system's facilities, management can analyse sales and staffing levels in multiple bars on a single site, or can view an entire operation remotely from a head office.
Contact Quintek Systems Ltd, 4 The Courtyard, Denmark Street, Wokingham, Berkshire RG11 2AZ.
Tel: 0734 771444.
NORTHMACE, a British company which specialises in the provision of bedroom amenity equipment to hotels, now supplies televisions.
The company can provide televisions on contract rental, hire purchase or outright purchase.
Full maintenance cover is also available.
Sports package
SIEMENS Nixdorf Information Systems has launched Club 2000, an integrated leisure management software package, for any type or size of sports and leisure club.
Club 2000 features an Access Control System which enables members to book and use facilities with a single magnetic strip membership card.
Card processor
PENNINE and Royal of Scotland have developed ROYNET, a software system, which eliminates the need for any device other than a standard electronic point of sale till for processing credit and debit cards.
Labelling system
KROY (Europe) has launched Duratype 210, a compact, portable handheld labelling system, for £150.
The unit allows messages of up to 55 characters to be printed and has a repeat function which means repetitive text need not be re-keyed.
Gulf War spin-off aids stocking
INTEREST in portable computers of all kinds has been stimulated by the Gulf War, when everything from tanks and armoured vehicles to airmen's flying helmets were fitted with a range of increasingly smaller and more rugged technology.
Industry in general is expected to inherit many of the benefits in the future.
Pilots' helmets with miniature built-in video screens may not have obvious applications in hotels and restaurants, but there are several defence-led developments which do, and which will increasingly be seen around the industry.
Typical of these is the GRiDPad, a ruggedly built, pen-operated computer made by GRiD Computer Systems.
In battlefield conditions, particularly in the desert, keyboard-free devices are more likely to keep performing.
But in the hotel and restaurant industry, the GRiDPad's 12-hour rechargeable power pack and its genuine portability make it viable for operations like stocktaking.
Database files can be copied from the user's main computer system to the GRiDPad — a process which is slow currently, but will get faster — and updated in the field.
The updated file can then be copied back to the central system, by modem and telephone if necessary.
GRiD has announced a partnership agreement with Informant, a UK software development and systems integration company.
The two will develop and market pen and display-(PAD) based solutions to users in a wide range of commercial markets, including retailing and merchandising.
GRiDPad uses a lightpen to ‘write’ data directly onto the screen
Plan functions with Eventdata
EVENTDATA is a program to help the planning and control of function management.
The program — written to operate in a UNIX ‘open systems’ environment — includes a central diary management system with simultaneous access for several locations by multiple users.
This should reduce the risk of double bookings.
Each function has a menu screen which can be fully customised.
These cover inquiries and reservations; menu planning; quotations; and invoicing and updates to the customer database.
Further information from: CDL, tel: 0483 756813.
Maxial system offers accuracy and speed
POINT of sale terminals are now available for the Maxial advanced hotel system from General Automation (GA), and will be on show at HOTECH '91 in November (see page 59).
The terminal offers Maxial users a facility to enter restaurant and bar menu items with a single key stroke.
‘GA's policy of working closely with Maxial customers to evolve enhancements has led to this highly effective facility,’ said John Willson, GA hotel systems sales manager.
‘It offers users benefits through greater accuracy of input and gives them more time to respond to customers.’
Use of the Maxial PoS terminal requires the modification of the installation's central PoS software, which receives the same string of characters as that for a transaction entered through a conventional keyboard.
The new PoS terminal keyboard uses fixed keys covered with a plastic membrane to guard against moisture.
Further information: General Automation, tel: 0753 889112.
LIQUID ASSETS
ITALY — A fresh approach
In the first of a two-part series, Michael Edwards selects wines which break the Italian mould
IN THE British restaurant scene today, there is a growing interesting in all things Italian.
Several of our brightest chefs, often trained in French methods, are looking to the Mediterranean for inspiration.
The Italian influence on British cooking has resulted in a shift away from traditional classical sauces and stocks towards an emphasis on ‘something exquisitely fresh, with the least amount of modification in the process of preparation’, to quote from an old Tuscan cookery book.
The honesty and heartiness of this cooking is matched by an enviable choice of truly exciting Italian wines, which are now widely available in Britain.
The past 10 years has seen a dramatic improvement in Italy's wine technology led by the latest generation of gifted wine-makers.
No wine region is a better case study of the new Italy than Friuli-Venezia Giulia.
Friuli is tucked between the Alpine mountains of North-east Italy and the Adriatic and is a model of how high technology and human flair can achieve exceptionally graceful and vital white wines.
Wine supplier Bibendum's buyer Simon Farr says: ‘Friulian whites, particularly those from Collio close to the Yugoslav border, are wonderfully clean and restrained.
The influence of the Alpine atmosphere can clearly be felt in the best wines.’
Typical of these is the 1990 Sauvignon Vigneto del Cero (Venica &Venica) which is quite lovely.
So it should be at £101.62 a case (all prices are quoted exclusive of VAT) from Bibendum (071–722 5577).
But Sauvignon does not come better than this and to my mind the del Cero Sauvignon has more grace, character and length than the much-vaunted Cloudy Bay Sauvignon from New Zealand, which is comparably priced.
The del Cero is an adaptable wine for food, as good with fritto misto di mare as with grilled squid and fresh chilli peppers.
Another Collio white of real class is the 1990 Pinot Bianco from Vittorio and Giovanni Puiatti (£91.16 from Winecellars 081 871 3979).
The Pinot Bianco grape usually shows more character than the Pinot Grigio.
In the hands of Puiatti, this Pinot Bianco is a stunning wine with a tight vinous concentration and considerable elegance — and is a real rival to top-flight St Véran which costs much the same.
Try it with grilled sea bass and fennel.
Close to Collio is the Grave del Friuli district.
The best wines show much the same style as their more expensive Collio counterparts.
Drinking brilliantly at the moment is the 1990 Cabernet Franc from Vigneti le Monde (£68.94 from Bibendum).
This poised and slightly red wine shows great purity of Cabernet fruit and is the work of Piergiovanni Pistone-Salice, a man totally committed to quality.
The wine is excellent with calf's liver or plain roast veal.
If you drive westwards, skirting Venice you come to Verona, the home of Valpolicella.
In the past, this was one of the most abused red wines around.
Avoid cheap versions of Valpolicella (about £30 a case) like the plague.
Pay about £45 a case for a wine from the Classico hillsides and it can be a revelation.
Outstanding value is the 1990 Valpolicella Classico from the highly regarded Allegrini family (£43.56 from Winecellars).
Brothers Walter and Franco and sister Marilisa have steadily improved the quality of their wine over the years.
The 1990 is a ripe mouthful with a youthful, blush ruby colour and delicious primary fruit which is greatly superior to many Beaujolais.
The Allegrini has a pleasant, bitter cherry finish — the touch of austerity making it an ideal foil to buttery pasta.
In the search for alternative sources of good, reasonably priced wine, have a look at Sicily.
The Sicilian Institute of Vine-growing and Wine-producing has launched a generic campaign in Britain to increase awareness of Sicilian wines.
Certainly modern methods of vinification and new grape varieties have already produced good results.
Cellaro is a first-rate Sicilian co-operative.
It bottles only 4% of its production under the Cellaro label, paying growers a bonus for healthier grapes with a better balance of sugar and acidity.
The white is full-bodied yet fresh, while the red provides soft, early drinking.
There's also a delicious rosé.
These wines, priced at about £35 a case, would make superior house selections.
Ring Winecellars for details of your local stockist.
SWEET
Finally for something which is a real indulgence.
The remote island of Pantelleria, off the coast of Sicily and more than halfway to Tunisia, produces a superb dessert wine.
The Moscato di Pantelleria from Marco de Bartoli has a glistening mahogany colour and is at once aromatic, grapy and intensely rich.
It drinks wonderfully with chocolate desserts.
So go and try it at Riva's restaurant, 169 Church Road, Barnes, London SW13 (081–748 0434) where you can drink a single glass with Andrea Riva's tiramisu.
This Pinot Bianco can rival top-flight St Véran
DRINKS NEWS
Association fights back
THE Wine and Spirit Association has threatened to take formal complaints of environmental health officers (EHOs)‘deemed to have abused their authority’ to Government level.
The association said that it had heard of several cases in which EHOs had ordered unacceptable action from wine and drinks wholesalers under the 1990 Food Safety Act.
One Midlands wine wholesaler was ordered to clear dust from a warehouse floor used only for cased goods, the association said.
Association director Richard Insoll warned: ‘The Wine and Spirit Association will be reviewing this and other instances of apparent abuse of authority by EHOs in order to give its members the best advice.
Formal complaints will be lodged with the Food Minister where we deem it necessary.’
Chinon wine
LOIRE producer Langlois-Château, is introducing its first Chinon wine to the UK.
Château de Rivière Chinon 1989 comes from south of the river Vienne.
Langlois-Château said that it would be developing a range of single domaine wines in the future.
LANGLOIS-CHÂTEAU 183
Cape wines
BARWELL &Jones has introduced 35 South African wines from the Cape Province to the UK market.
The wines include Le Bonheur Blanc Fume (Sauvignon Blanc) from Stellenbosch which is unwooded with a fresh, grassy character; Fleur du Cap Chenin Blanc Sec (crisp and fruity); Witzenberg Emerald Stein (semi-sweet Fleur du Cap); and Roodebloem from the Bergkelder or ‘mountain cellars’ of Stellenbosch.
BARWELL &JONES 184
Whisky
SUPER-premium Canadian whisky, Canadian Classic, is the only 12-year-old Canadian whisky available in the UK and is now distributed here by URM Agencies.
URM AGENCIES 185
Vintage red
MIGUEL Torres has released the 1988 vintage of his best-selling red wine, Coronas, in a Bordeaux-style bottle.
The wine, which is 85% Tempranillo and 15% Cabernet Sauvignon, is available in England and Wales from H. Sichel &Sons.
H. SICHEL &SONS 186
Vodka
ABSOLUT vodka, the third largest selling vodka and the 17th biggest-selling spirit brand worldwide, was imported to the UK last month, marketed by Rivalage.
Absolut is now available in the European standard 70cl bottle size, initially only at selected bars and restaurants.
RIVALAGE 187
Wine category rejig
DEINHARD is creating a new identity for wines from the three main wine growing areas of Germany.
Deinhard owns properties in the Moselle, Rheingau and the Rheinpfalz regions and, in a move to clarify wine classification, all its estate wines will now fall into two categories.
The Wegeler-Deinhard Vineyard Selection includes Bernkasteler Doktor Riesling Spätlese from Moselle-Saar-Ruwer and Forster Ungeheuer Riesling Kabinett and Spätlese from Rheinpfalz.
The Deinhard Estate Selection includes Wegeler-Deinhard Riesling Kabinett and Spätlese, from Moselle-Saar-Ruwer, and Wegeler-Deinhard Riesling, Kabinett and Spätlese, from Rheinpfalz.
TWO styles of hand-made port glasses, designed by Austrian Georg Riedel, are now available in the UK.
The tawny glass is slightly less tapered than the vintage glass (above) to emphasise the perfumes of wood-aged port.
Each holds about 8.8fl oz and is available from Michael Johnson Ceramics, London.
Academy course
THE Academy of Wine Service has introduced a course designed to update senior managers, sommeliers and waiters on recent developments, innovations and service skills in wine.
The course covers customers' expectations and needs, wine and food combinations, use of the wine list, displays and liqueur trolleys.
Call 081–809 4671 for further details.
Europa
EUROPA Wines UK, Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire, has been appointed sole UK distributor and importer of wines for the Kiskorosh Allami Gazdasag Vineyards, Hungary.
Wines available now include Ausbruch Red; dry and medium Chardonnay; Muscat Ottonel; and Blue Frankish.
Sole agent
CANTINE MezzaCorona, a wine producer in the Italian Trentino region, has announced the appointment of Ebury Mathiot Wines as sole UK agent.
The brand covers a large number of DOC vineyards.
St James' awards
MORE than 300 Whitbread Inns are competing for the Grants of St James' Wine Awards.
Success in the exclusive competition for Whitbread's managed house company will depend upon sales success with wine, evidence of good merchandising strategies, product knowledge, staff training and enthusiasm for wine.
The first phase of the competition runs until 12 October.
Pol Roger
POL Roger has been appointed UK agent for Pipers Brook Vineyard, Tasmania.
The first consignment of wines is now en route to London.
CUTLERY
Polish up on cutlery
Cutting through technical jargon makes cutlery purchasing no easy task.
Bob Gledhill outlines how to recognise and maintain quality cutlery without forking out a fortune
CUTLERY sales are an unlikely but accurate indicator of the trading state of the catering industry.
Increased sales of complete sets indicate new openings, low sales a stagnant market.
Top-up orders indicate the restaurant is going to have to make do with existing equipment until trade picks up enough to pay for a complete replacement.
There is even a seasonal indicator which occurs at this time of year.
This is the start of the heavy banqueting season, leading up to Christmas, which should be a busy period for a lot of hotel restaurants.
It is no time to run out of knives and forks, so cutlery sales should be buoyant about now.
But companies are reporting that orders are still down on last year, with no sign from the catering industry that it is in a position to re-equip the dining room.
‘I honestly think there is no sign of things getting better.
The recession in the catering industry is not bottoming out,’ warns W. Lancaster managing director John Emanuel.
‘It would be ignoring the reality of the current trading position if I said I didn't believe there were more closures to come.
I don't think the upswing will start before spring next year.’
The Direct Tableware Company sales director Roger Young agrees that it will be next spring before any real growth in catering occurs, but he thinks there might be a slight upturn next month in the top-up business: ‘It's heading for the busy time and you can't serve customers without knives and forks.’
The most contentious issue among cutlery suppliers is that of quality.
Some argue that cheap imports are a waste of money — others say widely differing prices are being charged for exactly the same product and that suppliers which criticise imported cutlery often stock it themselves.
Couple this with a quality assessment system which is riddled with jargon and technical description and the caterer has a hard time deciding what he or she is going to buy and from which company.
The decision is not made easier by constant criticism by importers and suppliers of each other.
There is a habit of running down the competition rather than extolling the virtues of their own ranges.
Catering cutlery comes in two types of metal — stainless steel and silver-plate.
Within those two broad areas are multiple variations.
Stainless steel cutlery is a mix of steel (itself a substance of variable quality), chromium and nickel.
The chromium and nickel are added to give shine and prevent rusting.
The amount of chromium and nickel added is indicated with a number, which should be part of the description of cutlery in any sales literature.
Sometimes it is stamped on the piece.
It is impossible to judge the value of cutlery without knowing the alloy content.
The number is divided by a diagonal stroke.
The figure in front of the diagonal is the percentage of chromium content, the number after indicates the percentage of nickel.
The three most popular mixes in catering are 18/10, which is the most expensive, 18/8 and 13/0.
This last alloy is the cheapest and is the material that most vexes suppliers.
Arthur Price chairman John Price says: ‘13/0 certainly looks as bright and as cheerful as 18/8 but after it has been in use for a short while it goes dull and then grey and, after a year or so, stains and pitmarks develop which cannot be removed.’
Quality cutlery has a smooth finish, like this silver-plated look from Viners
But Emanuel of W. Lancaster dismisses this as nonsense.
‘We have customers who have been using the same set for more than 20 years,’ he says.
Director of Edinburgh-based MacGregor and Company, Charles Cavaye, argues that because there is no nickel content in 13/0, there is no strength: ‘Hence the bent knife or the fork with prongs at odd angles.
Replacements will be needed within a few weeks.’
Senior research metallurgist for the Cutlery and Allied Trade Research Association, Alan Medlock, says that it depends on what you call 13/0.
‘These numbers are just broad descriptions.
There are many variations within these categories.
It is about personal experience of particular brands as much as looking for the numbers.
‘I've examined some 13/0 and it has been good, yet I've found some to have as low as 10.5% chrome content.
That will rust.
It's the same with 18/8.
It isn't a standard product.’
He also says that the nickel content does not, for all practical purposes, make any difference to the hardness, but that it does make it more stain resistant.
So if the numbers are not an infallible guide to good stainless steel cutlery, what is?
Medlock gives the following advice: ‘Examine the finish very carefully, particularly the forks.
That is a good guide.
Poor cutlery will have tiny burrs inside the fork prongs where it has been stamped out of the sheet of metal.
‘Feel the weight and look at the thickness, that is a good clue to how strong it will be.
That's what causes knives and forks to bend, not the metal itself.’
When it comes to silver-plated cutlery there are just as many confusing statements coming at the caterer.
The base on to which the silver is electroplated is a mix of nickel, copper and zinc, called nickel silver, although there is no silver in the alloy.
When it is electro-plated with silver it is called electro-plated nickel silver (EPNS).
The production price and toughness of the cutlery depends on the proportions in which the metals are mixed.
The most common way of cheapening the cost is to reduce the amount of nickel, which is the most expensive of the three metals in EPNS.
W. Lancaster's 13/0 stainless steel cutlery: some customers have used the same set for 20 years
There is the obvious price dodge of skimping on the thickness of silver, measured by cutlers in microns — which can be anything from one to 50.
The British Standards Institute (BSI) specifies a thickness of 30 microns for hotel use.
It is doubtful anything less than 20 microns of thickness would withstand the sustained use cutlery receives in the catering industry.
Price recommends all caterers to not only determine the micron thickness when looking at silver-plated cutlery, but also to ask for this to be specified on the invoice.
Since topping up, rather than full replacement, is the favoured option for caterers, the first worry is matching up.
There are surprisingly few popular patterns of cutlery — most caterers use the historic patterns devised in Sheffield.
The fact that a wide number of manufacturers work to the same pattern means that the caterer who is topping up need not return to the same source for the top-up.
Identify a selection of cutlery distributors, send them one of your pieces of cutlery and ask them to match it and send their sample and yours back.
There will be some differences, but they may be too slight to be noticed by the customers, who would normally see only one piece of each item in any case.
Shopping around for a top-up will allow the best price while still keeping the cutlery service in the same style.
One way of putting off the day of replacement is to take more care of existing cutlery.
Although it is robust, there are some basic cleaning rules for both stainless and silver-plated.
While stainless is tough and harder to scratch in the first place, once it does become marked the scratch is permanent, unlike a mark on silver-plated cutlery which can be removed by re-plating.
Stainless steel is also attacked by the cleaning fluids intended for silver-plated cutlery and by immersion for long periods in vinegary solutions, particularly if the vinegar has salt with it, as in the case of pickles.
It can also become pitted if it is left soaking overnight.
It is worth ensuring that kitchen staff are not tempted to leave the dirty cutlery soaking until morning.
Similarly, stainless steel cutlery should not be left overnight in dishwashers.
The intense heat of being held over a gas jet will cause immediate and permanent discolouring.
The everyday food stains that come from things like tea and coffee can be easily removed with fine grit polishes such as Autosol compound, usually found in car accessory shops, or any cleaning fluid designed to clean stainless steel sinks and work surfaces.
The cleaner should be tested on a few pieces to ensure its suitability.
The most common mistake with these cleaners is to be too heavy-handed, which can faintly score the surface, or to rub blades and spoon bowls in an irregular pattern and therefore cause unsightly marks.
With silver-plated cutlery, part of its appeal is the scratches it gets in the early period of its life.
This gives it a whitish sparkle as light catches millions of tiny prisms and reflects white light.
Tarnishing on silver-plated cutlery occurs through exposure to sulphides.
These are air-borne and are also present in some foods, most notably in eggs.
The most common method of cleaning tarnished silver-plated cutlery is to use specially formulated cleaning fluids in which the cutlery is immersed.
It is important to follow the manufacturer's instructions on the dilutions and immersion times to avoid damage.
Larger hotels may have a ball-burnisher, which is a rotating drum containing tiny ball-bearings, water and a corrosion inhibitor.
This brightens and hardens the surface of cutlery so it becomes more resistant to wear and it also removes minor scratches.
Ensure that cutlery which has been cleaned using chemicals gets a thorough washing before going back into the dining room.
When buying cutlery, don't buy more pieces than you need.
The old rule was to purchase 25% more than your restaurant can seat.
Cavaye of MacGregor and Company says that stock levels should reflect business and the demand for the kind of food being served.
Cavaye recommends that caterers buy an extra 10% to 15% more than the number of covers on main items like knives, forks and spoons, double the number for teaspoons and a little over half for fish knives.
Emanuel says he is surprised at the number of caterers who are unsure of the amount of cutlery to buy.
‘Most think they need far more than they actually do.
‘We talk to them about the style of service and food they are planning and the figure we recommend is often less than they had estimated,’ he says.
The factor that governs all cutlery sales is its cost and Young of The Direct Tableware Company warns that big Korean manufacturers are increasing the minimum orders from importers.
At least some of the extra cost of stockholding is likely to be passed on to the caterer.
Imported cutlery is also bought in American dollars and, while the exchange rate of sterling to the dollar was very favourable for Britain last year, it has dropped considerably in the past six months, making imported cutlery more expensive to buy.
Young thinks those who are looking to save money now and buy cutlery next year will end up paying more.
Poor quality cutlery can be spotted by its rough finish
PASTA
Taking SHAPE
Carmen Konopka highlights the variety and versatility of pasta as an ingredient
PASTA originated as a filling, economical and quick-to-make food.
Although it is associated with Italy, similar peasant foods are found in many parts of the world — from noodles in China to pierogi, the ravioli-like dish, from Poland.
Like so many peasant foods, the essence of pasta is its simplicity.
Its basic ingredients are flour and water, sometimes with the addition of eggs or oil, occasionally with spinach, tomato or colourings.
Yet very few British caterers attempt to make pasta themselves, possibly because of the enormous diversity of ready-made pasta available on the UK market.
As the table on page 88 shows, there is a huge choice of pasta as an ingredient.
For many years caterers could obtain only dried pasta.
But since the early 1980s, chilled fresh pasta has also been on the market, from large and small suppliers operating on both national and regional bases.
In the past five or six years, foodservice companies have also been able to supply frozen pasta.
John Bray, senior brand manager for Nestlé Foodservice, which supplies both dried and frozen pasta, is keen to dispel any thought that one type of pasta is better or worse than another.
But he emphasises that chilled and frozen pastas are different from dried pastas and need different sauces.
‘Dried pasta is the best possible for straight and simple shapes,’ he says.
‘It has a firmer texture and goes well with the heavier sauces.
‘If you want ‘al dente’ spaghetti, you really need dried spaghetti, made with good quality durum wheat and no egg.
‘Some dried pastas do contain egg, which makes the pasta softer.
These originated in Northern Italy, where the pasta is traditionally flat and where they use a lot more egg and cream in their cooking.
‘But if you put an egg tagliatelle with a heavy ragoût, you lose all the benefits of the pasta.
‘Frozen and chilled pasta comes into its own when you are talking about filled pasta, especially individually quick-frozen products.
‘Generally frozen pasta has whole egg in it, giving it a softer, smoother texture which goes well with cream and lighter tasting sauces.’
Bray adds that frozen pasta with good quality fillings is especially useful to caterers because it can be made up quickly into either single- or multi-portion dishes without waste.
One example is Nestlé's Buitoni Beef Cannelloni, which has a ratio of 72% filling to 28% pasta.
The shape of things to come — McDougalls Catering Foods' Caribbean Chicken, Sunshine Lasagne and Veggi Surprise
Frozen pasta rarely has to be defrosted before use.
It is ideal for mix-and-match menus where, for example, five pastas are offered with five sauces for customers to combine as they wish.
The growing demand for pasta in the UK is illustrated both by the increasing number of specialised pasta outlets and by the growing menu presence of pasta in pizza restaurants, according to Master Foods, which markets the Dolmio brand of frozen pastas and sauces.
The company believes future growth for pasta will come from mid-market, non-specialist outlets, such as those in the travel and pub sectors.
Master Foods sector development manager Kathryn Bowler says: ‘Pasta is one of the fastest expanding areas of the UK's catering market and there is plenty of potential for further growth.
‘According to the latest Euromonitor report on the international pasta market, each British consumer eats 3.3kg of pasta a year.
This still leaves Britain way down on the pasta-eating league.
‘West German consumers eat 4.7kg a year, the French 6.4kg and the Italians 27.4kg.
In fact, only Japan lags behind us.’
Like potatoes and bread, pasta is no longer regarded as fattening.
It is now established as a healthy food, with popular appeal for the ever-growing numbers of health-conscious diners.
As supplier The Pasta Company points out, pasta has a surprisingly low calorie count — just 140 calories per 100g.
Pasta contains complex carbohydrates so takes time to be digested.
It is often eaten by athletes who require gradually released energy for long distance events.
It is also low in fact and high in fibre.
Well known pastas such as spaghetti and lasagne are still the best-selling products.
However, according to many suppliers, pasta shapes are rapidly increasing in popularity.
As a result, McDougalls has introduced Tricolour Mixed Shells, Spirals and Animals — with the latter being aimed at caterers producing children's meals.
‘Shapes, such as shells, twists and bows, are the fastest growing sector of the pasta market,’ says Teresa Cooke, product manager for the Knorr Collezione Italiana range from the Caterplan Division of CPC (UK).
The company has just added Flute Penne — ridged tubes which are ideal for trapping sauces — and Conchiglie Tricolore (shells) to its range.
Sauces cling more easily to complex-shaped pasta.
For this reason, some of the pasta shapes from Valerio's Olympia Group are produced with brass extruders.
This, according to the company, gives the pasta a home-made look and a porosity which allows better sauce absorption.
Some shapes also have internal ridging, which aids uniform cooking.
Egg pasta is another growth area identified by Caterplan.
The company has recently launched three varieties — Tagliatelle All' Uovo in plain and green versions and Oven Ready Lasagne All' Uovo.
The essence of pasta is its simplicity
Cooke says: ‘Egg pasta is certainly preferred by many chefs not only because of its excellent colour and flavour, but because it offers them the possibility of upgrading their pasta menus, thus increasing their profits.’
ItalBrokers managing director Carlo Gambuzzi adds: ‘Egg pasta is more enjoyable to the palate than other pastas and remains better al dente.
In fact, in the mature Italian dried pasta market it is the only sector showing a substantial increase.’
Two brands of dried pasta are marketed by ItalBrokers — Ferrari and Dallari, both of which are made with flour and eggs only.
The traditional Emilian recipe does not add water.
By contrast, the Federici range of dried pasta from Princes Catering Products emphasises the special water — from the famous Sangemini Springs — used in its manufacture.
The Pasta Factory, with 104 varieties of fresh and frozen pasta, specialises in designer pasta.
Recent launches include Ravioli with Radicchio, Ravioli with Saffron Orange Peel and Ricotta, and Black Pasta.
Unusual fresh and frozen pastas are also available from The Pasta Company.
As well as offering 21 standard items, the company makes specialist pastas for customers and has more than 500 specialist lines.
Dried pastas have a shelf-life in excess of a year and frozen pastas also have a long shelf-life under proper conditions.
And many companies have developed packaging to prolong the shelf-life of chilled, fresh pasta.
The Bertagni fresh pasta from Fine Italian Foods comes in controlled atmosphere packaging which, the company says, retains the texture of the pasta and prevents it from sticking together.
Alibert fresh pasta from Olga Catering is also in special packaging, which is said to give it a guaranteed shelf-life of 60 days.
Some pasta dishes, such as macaroni cheese and lasagne, have become British institutions in their own right.
But nearly half of all the pasta eaten in Britain is the canned variety, which often owes little to its Italian ancestry.
However, the more authentically Italian types of pasta are rapidly gaining ground and look set to continue in popularity.
According to Bray, only wholemeal pasta has been unsuccessful.
‘It was talked about a lot, but never really came to fruition.
There is still a place for it, mainly in institutional catering, but most people think it tastes like cardboard.’
For most of us, traditional Italian pastas are sufficiently healthy without imposing extra-healthy ingredients on them.
The conclusion has to be cook, eat, enjoy — and profit.
TOP 10 SELLERS
THERE are more than 200 pasta shapes, with more than 600 names for these shapes.
The following list, in order of popularity, has been compiled from suppliers' five best-selling pastas.
Spaghetti — sometimes also called spaghettini or spaghettoni.
Lasagne — most suppliers mentioned that the oven-ready varieties are most popular.
Green and uncoloured varieties were both nominated.
Fusilli — also often described as spirals or twists.
Maccheroni — better known as marcaroni.
Tortellini — these stuffed pasta shapes are also called tortelloni and tortelli.
Tagliatelle — both the green and uncoloured versions of this ribbon-shaped pasta.
Conchiglie — often called shells.
Penne — often sold under the English name quills.
Fettuccine — similar to tagliatelle.
Cappellitti — shaped like peaked hats and stuffed.
Other pastas suppliers say are popular include gnocchi, cannelloni, garganelli, torchietti, and frappe.
The seven varieties in the Country Range from Countrywide
Dolmio's Salmon Tortelloni from Master Foods
WHAT'S NEW
Leaked document not strong enough
by Linda Petit
AN EC working document on food hygiene, leaked before it had reached its consultation form, is already being criticised, for being too weak.
Institution of Environmental Health under-secretary, Linda Alan, said that the document was not strong enough, adding: ‘It leaves so much open to interpretation.’
She said that the aim of the directive was to harmonise the hygiene practices of all the member states, and it was up to each country to interpret the directive.
‘We would hope that in consultation it would be tightened up, but the EC might prefer it in its general form,’ she said.
The proposed EC directive, which is expected to be released for consultation by the end of the year, would affect all food business operators in Europe, including manufacturers, distributors and retailers.
The document stated that all food premises must ‘ensure that adequate safety procedures are identified, maintained and reviewed’.
The directive included advisory regulations concerning building requirements, kitchen equipment, food waste, water supply, personal hygiene and production hygiene, but is not specific about those regulations or their implementation.
Deputy manager of communication services at the Hotel, Catering &Institutional Management Association, Tim Knowles, said that although he welcomed the directive, it still needed a lot of work in its present form.
He particularly criticised the terminology in the document which he described as ‘woolly’.
An example of this is when it refers to ‘food business operators’ which, according to Mr Knowles, is unspecific and far too general a definition.
Mr Knowles suggested the definition include the words ‘hotel and catering industry’ to avoid outlets in member countries finding a possible loophole.
He also criticised the reference to critical control points under which it said that: ‘Food business operators shall identify any process undertaken which may be critical to ensuring food safety and ensure that adequate safety procedures are identified, maintained and reviewed.’
Critical control points were described by Mr Knowles as being ‘wholly inappropriate’ to the catering industry, which by its nature is not highly systemised.
Regarding training, the document said that food business operators must ensure that food handlers are fully trained or supervised commensurate with their work activity.
‘All food handlers should be trained, not just supervised, there should be the linkage between supervisors,’ Mr Knowles said.
Former chief environmental health officer with the City of Westminster, Robert Crozier, said that there were no surprises in the document as much of the legislation was already covered in the Food Safety Act.
Mr Crozier said that although the UK was more advanced in hygiene than most other member states, the document was still ‘a step in the right direction for Europe’.
Fast Food Fair set for success
THE 1991 Fast Food Fair will take place in Brighton, East Sussex, from 11–14 November.
This year it promises to be as big as ever, with 90% of stands space already booked.
The fair is being sponsored by Catering Update in association with Caterer &Hotelkeeper .
It already has support from companies such as Nestlé Foodservice, Kraft General Food Service, and Lyons Tetley.
The show will host such events as the product awards for the best innovations and introductions.
The awards, sponsored by Catering Update , are designed to encourage new ideas throughout the industry.
They are divided into three categories: Quality Product of the Year, Newcomer of the Year and Equipment Innovation of the Year.
Entry forms are available from Reed Exhibitions.
Entries for the awards close at the beginning of October.
A series of forums for visitors and exhibitors will also be running, addressing such issues as training and management in the snack industry, trends in pizza and pasta marketing, and the potential profit of themed food and desserts.
If you would like further information on the show, contact the Fast Food Fair ticket hotline and registering service on 091 416 4570.
FLANAGAN MOVES
ROGER Flanagan, former sales and marketing director for equipment supplier Masters &Andren, has left the company to concentrate on his own consultancy GP Consultants.
Together with design consultant Jackie Snaith and managing director Helen Flanagan, he will offer advice on all aspects of foodservice, including kitchen design and training.
Mr Flanagan said that with more choice from Europe, European legislation and the Food Safety Act, ‘people now want someone to look over their shoulders’.
Telephone 0883 653345 for further details.
BODFARI DEAL
FOOD manufacturer Northern Foods has bought Bodfari Foods in a deal worth £20.7m.
A further £5.2m may be payable depending on the company's future performance.
Bodfari Foods is a processor and supplier of liquid milk.
Last year the company saw pre-tax profits of £1.9m.
JUS-ROL INVESTS
POTATO product manufacturer Jus-Rol has invested £1.5m in its potato manufacturing plant at Amble, Northumberland.
By the end of this month manufacturing capacity is expected to increase three-fold as a result, according to sales and marketing director Joe Weston.
IDEAL CHANGE
CATERING butcher Ideal Meat Supplies has moved from its Smithfield Market site to premises in North London.
The company has also achieved a grade A accreditation from the plant evaluation committee of the National Association of Catering Butchers.
FOOD
Vitalite spread
VITALITE Light is a sunflower oil spread which is said to be high in polyunsaturated fat, and low in saturated fat and cholesterol.
It is packaged in 2kg tubs and can be spread straight from the fridge.
Orient Express dessert from Kaysens
Eastern dessert
ORIENT Express is an Oriental-style dessert designed to complement Eastern cuisine.
The gâteau is made with moist sponge layered with sweetened red bean paste, ginger jam and lychee-flavoured cream.
The top and sides are sprinkled with toasted nuts and sesame seeds and it is finished with orange jelly slices and raspberry jam.
Orient Express comes frozen and takes between 15 and 30 minutes to defrost.
Ring doughnuts
AMERICAN ring doughnuts from The Delicious Donut Co are made from a flour which is said to give them a light, fluffy, and non-greasy consistency.
The doughnuts cost less than 20p each and are available in Sweet Cinnamon, Sugar &Spice, White Delight and Choc-on-Top varieties.
Iced yogurt
DAIRY Crest has joined forces with Taylor Freezer to produce an iced yogurt, Piccolo, which can be stored in ambient conditions, and a soft-serve machine from which to serve it.
Two 2.5-litre tubs of yogurt cost £11 and are available in chocolate, vanilla, peach Melba, lemon and strawberry flavours.
The yogurt keeps for six months in ambient conditions or two weeks — once opened — in a refrigerator.
The serving machines are available in a selection of sizes and can be leased or purchased.
Wafer cups
TULIP wafer cups can hold a single scoop of ice cream or desserts such as fruit and cream.
They are made from wafer biscuits and cost £10.80 for a box of 120.
Sauce revival
G. COSTA has revived an 18th-century recipe, known as Harvey's sauce.
Harvey's sauce tastes similar to Worcester sauce and comes in 170ml bottles.
Potato flavours
DE-ANNE offers garlic &herb, onion Provençale, smoky bacon and cheese-flavoured potato powders.
The powders can be reconstituted with water and shaped to produce flavoured French fries.
The fries, made through a counter-top machine, can then be deep-fried before serving.
Boneless turkey
SMOKED Turkey Crown and Turkey Loaf are available in either smoked or unsmoked varieties.
The boneless turkey crown is packaged in 4kg sections and can be machine sliced.
Coffee creamer
COFFEE Rich is a frozen non-dairy creamer which can be used for whitening coffee or creaming sauces.
It is Kosher-approved and is available in half-ounce portions, 500g servings and 1kg cartons.
French pâté
ROLAND Monterrat traditional French pâté-en-croûte, is being distributed in the UK through Leatham's Larder.
The range includes salmon pâté-en-croûte as well as more unusual varieties of pâté with ingredients such as pistachio, morels, shrimp, or hazelnuts.
Chef SEPTEMBER 1991
MUSTARD:Hot stuff 
Welsh wizardry
Bernard Loiseau
WHAT constitutes value for money when it comes to food and drink?
This is something that the British harp on that incessantly, using it as the main reason for choosing one restaurant over another, but do we really understand what it means and are we consistent in our assessment of perceived value?
During a recession, the public cannot be blamed for watching pennies in the hope that pounds won't disappear quite so quickly, but most Britons eat to live rather than living to eat, no matter how the economy is doing.
So, has the ‘brasserie boom’ brought about good value in restaurants and, if so, is this recognised by the public?
On the one hand the multiplication of good brasseries in recent months has been a breath of fresh air to the restaurant industry, and the public has shown its appreciation by packing them full every night.
But, unfortunately, there are also restaurants cashing in on the brasserie bandwagon by serving cheap, cheerful and desperately trendy bistro food in designer surroundings — and charging the earth for it.
How many customers realise that the food cost of one portion of pasta with olive oil and sun-dried tomatoes is only about 25p?
It was not unusual in more buoyant times to see dishes like this on menus at £5-plus.
But times have changed and chefs may not be able to get away with overcharging for simple dishes using relatively inexpensive ingredients for much longer…or perhaps they will.
And what about drink?
Generations of British people have been happily walking into pubs for years and drinking alcohol that they could buy for a fraction of the price in a supermarket or off-licence.
Perhaps we're not so bothered about value for money after all.
Or at least, not always.
NEWS
Head chef at Ken Lo's Memories of China restaurant in London, Kam Po, is visiting the St Martin's Hotel, Isles of Scilly, from 6–9 September for a special Chinese gourmet weekend.
Po will prepare banquets on both Saturday and Sunday and will demonstrate vegetable chopping, drawing noodles by hand, and give away the ‘secret’ ingredients of crispy seaweed.
The gourmet weekend, including helicopter flight from Penzance and three-night break, costs £320.
Patrick Emmanuel, head chef at the Half Moon Bay Hotel, Antigua, will be guest chef at the Café Mediterranée of London's James' Court Hotel from 16–27 September, as winner of a culinary competition organised by the recently formed Antigua Chefs' Association.
He and two other award-winning chefs from Trinidad and St Lucia will be cooking at the hotel during Caribbean Food Festival.
Dishes on offer will include one of Emmanuel's specialities — red and silver talipia fish — and other Caribbean fish, fruit and vegetables.
Twenty-two-year old Geoffrey Bone, demi-chef de partie at the London Hilton on Park Lane, has won the Hilton Young Chef of the Year competition.
His British menu of Welsh Cheddar soufflé, English gammon platter, and baked fruit in puff pastry with caramel sauce was judged to be the best overall of the six menus prepared by finalists in London last month.
David Land of the Bristol Hilton won the prize for best starter with his Cornish lobster poached in its shell, infused with dill, lemon and thyme and topped with a soft cheese sauce.
While Kirdoff of the Langham Hilton in London won the prize for the best entrée — roast leg of Norfolk suckling pig with potato and leek ragoût — and Elizabeth Drudge of the Hilton National in Portsmouth won the top dessert prize for her hot Banbury apple pie.
All the winning dishes are to be featured in a British menu for restaurants in the Hilton group which will be available in the autumn.
‘We have achieved our two objectives — to encourage young chefs to look out for and use British ingredients in their recipes, and also to find a delicious selection of dishes to use in the British menu promotion later this year.’
said Mary Curnock Cook.
UK marketing director of Food from Britain.
Food from Britain, the Meat and Livestock Commission, Milk Marketing Board and Express Foodservice sponsored the competition.
A celebration of the food and wines of Spain will take place at the Brasserie on the Park at The Park Lane Hotel, Piccadilly, London, between 16 and 29 September.
Dishes on offer will include alcachofas mimosa — artichokes with prawn, egg and mayonnaise; sopa de mariscos — fish soup with clams and mussels; lechon asado — roast baby pig with baked apples; and fricase de perdiz — partridge cooked with mushrooms and brandy.
A three-course dinner, inclusive of sherry on arrival, coffee, and liqueurs will be £17.50.
Lunch is £15.95.
Marjan Lesnik (above), maitre chef des cuisines at Claridge's, London, will be guest chef at the Regency Club in Los Angeles from 11–13 September.
He will be reproducing some of the classic English recipes from his Claridge's menus, including grouse pie, best end of lamb with mint and summer pudding.
A regular guest chef at the Provence restaurant in Lymington, Hampshire, is Christina Novelli, aged four-and-a-half, daughter of head chef Jean Christophe Novelli.
She is pictured with sous chef Mark Jordan whipping up a storm in the kitchen.
The Park Room restaurant of the Hyde Park Hotel has been voted Best Italian Restaurant in Britain by the Instituto Italiano Spumante Classico — a group of Italy's leading wine companies.
Adriano Paganini became head chef at the Park Room after training in Italy and France, with spells at the three- Michelin starred Antica Osteria del Ponte in Milan, and under Paul Bocuse in France.
Paganini specialises in cucina Mediterranea — a fresh, health-conscious cuisine that features olive oil and herb-scented sauces instead of butter and cream; and which favours fish and vegetable dishes over red meats.
Tony May of San Domenico, New York, Mauro Vincenti of Rex in Los Angeles, and Pasquale Lavorato of Neuer Kaferkasten of Neu Isenburg, Germany, also received awards from the Italian institute.
Langan's Bistro in Paston Place, Brighton, has won the Perrier Best Restaurant of the Year Award.
Judges praised Langan's Bistro for a high standard of cooking, a wide selection of fresh vegetables, and its puddings.
Perrier invited consumers to nominate the restaurant they believed deserved the title of Best Restaurant of the Year in late 1990.
Paris House — the horse — recently won the Newbury Sales Sprint Trophy and prize money of £100,000 for his owner.
Paris House — the restaurant — in Woburn, Bedfordshire, has been rather slack at lunchtimes lately, so owner of both, chef-proprietor Peter Chandler, has been free to visit the races and witness his horse's success.
‘I know this is a bit of an unusual hobby for a restaurateur, but it's a little dream come true for me and I'm thrilled to bits,’ he says.
Paris House — the horse — is two years old and trained by Jack Berry at Cockeram, Lancashire, Chandler cautioned fellow chefs against betting on Paris House in the future, for fear that he could lose a lot of friends!
Paul Gayler, executive chef at the Rosewood Group's Lanesborough Hotel, Hyde Park Corner, London — due to open in early December — spent three weeks in Dallas last month researching other hotels in the group.
During his stay he cooked a five-course gala dinner for 150 at the Mansion on Turtle Creek with executive chef Dean Fearing.
The dinner included a mosaic of leek and shellfish with a tomato verjuice; a ‘nectar’ of mushrooms and pearl barley; salmon soufflé with cucumber and basil butter; roast duckling breast with clover honey and a saffron apple compote and iced Drambuie parfait with sour cherries.
Norbert Stening and Andreas Oehmiga from the Park Hotel, Seigen, Germany, joined the kitchen brigade at the Holiday Inn, Leeds, recently to celebrate 25 years of their town being twinned with Morley, near Leeds.
During their stay the chefs introduced Leeds gastronomes to such delights as doffeinsoabbe — a potato broth with sliced sausage — and scheankdong — prime ham served on black bread.
Later in the year, chefs from the Holiday Inn will visit Seigen to introduce British national and regional dishes to the Park Hotel.
Northampton College recently sent seven of its students on a two-week study programme to Aqui-Terme, Piedmont, Italy.
The students — John Frail, Michael Gayton, Jason Keeble, Dahlia Simpson, Penny Mitchell, Lisa Cotterill and Melanie Brown — who were accompanied by two Northampton College lecturers, cooked an English meal of beef in beer for Italian catering students and local dignitaries during their stay.
Students from Aqui-Terme will be returning the visit.
Claudio Notarbartolo beat three other national finalists to take the Masterchef 1991 title, sponsored by British Meat Catering Service and Dudson Brothers.
Notarbartolo cooked lamb cutlets with pimentos, wild mushrooms and a sharp shallot gravy to take first prize of a 40-piece Dudson china dinner service.
He is currently working at the Three Lions restaurant, Stuckton, Dorset.
Bookings are coming into the Academy of Culinary Arts for its course which begin this month.
‘The chefs who have signed on are leading a new golden era of culinary craft,’ said Peter Taylor, associate director of the academy.
Paul Gayler (left) with Dean Fearing during his trip to Dallas
COLUMN
by Kate Smith
Kate Smith, joint proprietor of the Beetle and Wedge Inn with her husband, Richard, tries to define the skills of restaurant management as opposed to those or the chef
Chefs are very easy to identify because they actually make a statement via their food.
Cooking ability is tangible, therefore attention can be focused on chefs as personalities, and their food represents clear statements of their feelings and professionalism.
In contrast, the restaurant manager is far less easy to define.
I would argue that they are as charismatic as chefs and yet their skills are less tangible and harder to gauge.
Perhaps their essence is more difficult to grasp because they are perceived by customers in entirely different roles, depending on the customer — for example, as friend, wine expert or simple emissary of the kitchen.
Tact and diplomacy, knowledge and friendship define the great restaurant managers, just as a great chef is defined by his skills in producing superb food.
The kitchen's perception of the restaurant manager is also fragmented in that the kitchen expects that manager to feed back customer response.
So many chefs feel their restaurant managers fail to do this adequately.
Similarly, a good front-of-house manager can give the customer an insight and appreciation of the chef's ideas and foods.
Many guests visit restaurants with preconceived ideas of what they should eat.
Therefore the restaurant manager and other front-of-house staff must use their skill to talk enthusiastically and intelligently about the menu so that customers will appreciate what the chef is producing, and dare to be adventurous.
The restaurant manager can gain maximum exposure for the chef and enhance customers' enjoyment of the food.
On return visits, they will take advice readily and gain better knowledge of the kitchen.
The wine cellar presents a similar opportunity.
A good sommelier or restaurant manager can persuade the customer to choose a super bottle of wine which offers marvellous value and drinks perfectly, rather than just a grand name in a superlative vintage which, inevitably, will have a premium attached to it.
The restaurant manager should also anticipate problems in the kitchen or front of house and prevent any ‘ripples’ getting through to the customer.
The ability to produce flowers at the drop of a hat or a cake to celebrate a customer's birthday should all be at his or her fingertips.
Dealing with the guest who is in a delicate business situation or just a very bad mood all goes with the territory.
The Académie Culinaire Meilleur Ouvrier de Grande Bretagne for service is exacting in its technical requirements.
These are the only tangibles upon which an assessment of such a profession can be made.
Unfortunately, the equally essential but less tangible skills which make the difference between the ordinary and superlative restaurant manager can hardly be judged in the short period of a competition.
PROFILE
WELSH WIZARDRY
Life-long food lover Wendy Vaughan has finally become a noted professional cook in North Wales.
Lorna Pettipher reports
‘The first thing I learned about nutrition as a nurse was that white food — fish and potatoes, for example— on white plates, with a white parsley sauce is unappetising purely because of its boring appearance.
It's good to gladden the eye with a dish full of colour.’
Wendy Vaughan began cooking professionally six years ago at the Old Rectory in Llansanfraid, North Wales — the family home she converted to a small hotel with her husband Michael when he sold his motor parts company.
They answered an advertisement to cook lunches for visiting parties of Americans to North Wales and these developed into dinner business too.
When they joined Wolsey Lodges — a consortium of private houses offering overnight accommodation — their transformation to hoteliers had begun.
On the catering side, Wendy Vaughan is completely self-taught.
She dreamed of becoming a chef at school, but her domestic science teacher hated her and told her that she would never be a cook.
So Vaughan contented herself with training as a nurse and avidly reading food books in her spare time.
But the evil ravages of the British educational system at its worst were not enough to keep her away from her first love forever, and she started to cook with simplicity and a straightforward style which she has maintained.
‘I derive my enjoyment of food from its colour, texture and the combination on the plate when I eat; so these are the things that I concentrate on when cooking for customers,’ she explains.
‘I feel disadvantaged as a cook because I received no formal training and didn't go to college.
When people write nice things about my food it always sounds like they are referring to someone else…’.
Wendy Vaughan at work in her North Wales kitchen
Clockwise from left: roulade of guinea fowl stuffed with duck on a cranberry and lime sauce; courgette and wild mushroom flan; marinated fresh trout with melon and red peppers
But write nice things they do.
The Old Rectory is County Restaurant of the Year for Gwynedd in this year's Good Food Guide , and Vaughan's fare on the no-choice, £22-per-head menu is described as displaying much skill.
Her taste for light food has increased with age and so she cooks a lot with vegetables (which she also likes for their strong colours), although supplies of fresh produce are sometimes limited in North Wales.
They eventually reach her via the markets in Liverpool.
A starter of courgette and wild mushroom flan is made by cooking potatoes, leeks and courgettes until soft and then squeezing the puree dry.
She adds eggs, cream, or a little crème fraiche, and wild mushrooms cooked with shallots.
The mix is baked for 20 minutes in moulds and served with a vegetable cream sauce, lentils, and sautéed mushrooms.
She sometimes puts slices of smoked guinea fowl around the edge to give added texture.
Vaughan's eyes light up when she describes the bright greens of this flan against the buttery yellow of the sauce.
She also becomes quite animated when talking about the excellent local supplies of fresh fish available to her.
‘I pay cash on delivery for fish, which the fishermen like, so they always call on me first and we get super turbot, mussels, scallops, sole and plaice here.’
Residents at the Old Rectory eat a set dinner every evening around one large, communal table.
Outside diners are given a choice of fish or meat main course when they book, and sit at smaller tables around the antique-filled dining room.
Vaughan cooks for a maximum of 16 people at any one meal.
Everything from the bread to the petit fours, is home-made and she has no help in the kitchen.
The fixed menu idea came from Michael Vaughan, who finally convinced his reluctant wife to stop offering a choice of four dishes at every dinner two years ago.
This system used to result in a great deal of food wastage.
Due to the small size of the Old Rectory and the communal style of dining, with Michael Vaughan serving, a lot of feedback comes from its diners and the vast majority do not feel the need for a choice of dishes at dinner.
One advantage of the no-choice system is that Vaughan can write her menu late in the afternoon, around the dishes that she feels like cooking on the day, with the best ingredients available to her.
No dinner menu at the old Rectory is exactly the same twice over.
‘There is no uniform pattern or discipline to my cooking in this sense,’ she says.
‘So I wouldn't last five minutes in a ‘proper’ kitchen!’
Fish is often served with spices and vegetable sauces to enhance colour and flavour.
The creation of her own with which she claims to be most impressed is a roulade of guinea fowl with limes and cranberries.
The roulade is stuffed with a layer of blanched spinach leaves and a farce of chicken, quail, duck or pheasant; then marinated in a mix of honey, oil, coriander and lemon juice to flavour the meat before roasting.
The remaining marinade forms the base of a red wine sauce with cranberries, redcurrants and slices of lime.
Katie's Game supplies duck, quail and guinea fowl, which it also bones for its customers.
Vaughan loves to cook, but finds it a punishing way to make a living: ‘People told me that there was no job harder than nursing,’ recalls Vaughan, ‘but they were wrong!
We close the Old Rectory just before Christmas every year and don't re-open until February.
That way we can keep smiling at our customers during the rest of the year.
But it is difficult to cook for people every day, especially when there are no other kitchen staff to cover.’
Vaughan's dinner cooking usually begins just as her two sons return from school in the afternoon.
They attend Welsh language schools and Michael Vaughan has very strong roots in Wales, although Wendy Vaughan is originally from Derbyshire.
The Old Rectory is quite an isolated establishment and there is little local interest in her excellent food.
‘Twenty years ago I would have liked to have been a cook elsewhere,’ she admits.
‘I was offered a restaurant in Cheltenham about five years ago, but I didn't even consider it.
‘My husband and my children are Welsh, and my guests here appreciate what I am doing.
But life is not just work.
If you look at it in shallow terms like that you are making a mistake.
I do what I do to the best of my ability and hope that people will hear about it and come and visit.
‘In another location I would probably have a full dining room every night, but that is only a part of what is important to me.
I do not suffer from a lack of ambition, I simply accept life as it is.’
Many an over-stressed big-city chef could benefit from Wendy Vaughan's well-balanced thoughts, even if time constraints and geography conspire to keep them away from her equally well-balanced food.
Above: fillet of turbot on spinach with chive and spiced sauces.
Left: lemon tart
CONTRACT CATERING
Corporate cooking
For many chefs contract catering is a more attractive option than its higher-profile restaurant and hotel cousins.
Lorna Pettipher reports
CONTRACT caterers are sick and tired of the industry-wide view of their sector as nothing but company canteens peopled by ‘Doris-the-dinner-lady’.
Another cliché that persists is that chefs work in contract catering only to avoid long hours and the tough competition of hotel and restaurant kitchens.
In fact, the main attraction of contract catering is the diverse opportunities for career development.
Sadly, many feel that such opportunities are lacking within other areas of catering, and chefs often face discrimination when trying to move from the kitchens up into management.
‘There are too many ‘I-am-the-greatest’ type people working in hotels,’says Roger Cole, who worked in several five-star hotels before joining London contract caterer High Table in 1986.
He is now head chef at a leading law firm with 120 partners based in the City, and feels that he has found his niche.
‘Earlier in my career I was working in hotel kitchens all the hours God sent, and the pay was very low.
Being married and having young children, the range of chef's hours available within contract catering was, of course, attractive; but the main incentives were the obvious routes by which I could move upwards on joining High Table.’
Cole has worked at a variety of catering units run by High Table in his five years with the company and has now been promoted to executive chef.
He has a budget generous enough to allow creative cooking with the likes of caviar, fresh asparagus and smoked salmon at his contract, and also works within an environment that he finds friendly and relatively stress-free.
‘I used to have the impression that I should feel almost privileged to work at certain big-name establishments when I saw the size of my pay packet, and I never used to know my general manager.
I know all the directors at High Table because corporate catering is free of the elitism found in hotels.’
After three weeks at his new contract, Cole has not been home before 8.30 in the evening once, so the idea that all contract catering chefs work nine-to-five is a fallacy.
But there really is such a thing as overtime for long days.
He also keeps the same brigade for years at a time because staff turnover in contract catering is not as rapid as in hotels and restaurants.
Opportunities exist to push for new contracts within the same company, so individuals do not always have to leave for a new challenge.
Steve Butler joined Compass eight years ago.
His training began with Strand Hotels in 1974 and block-release courses at Ealing College.
After his apprenticeship, he started work for a contract catering company called Partners at the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden.
Within a year, he was cooking for the Royal Box and state galas.
He has stayed on the contract/corporate side of the fence ever since because he feels that it suits his style and temperament.
He is now executive chef at a large firm of West End financiers.
‘I feel that, as chefs, we have the opportunity to provide a very personal service within this sector, and to become really involved with our clients,’ he says.
‘We do 60-hour weeks but there are no split shifts, and we are also committed to a team spirit because people are the main asset.’
The menus change daily in the directors' dining rooms, delibars and staff canteens that he operates because the clientele does not.
Dishes on offer include sautéed chicken with truffle and cream sauce; fish ragôut with saffron sauce; roast duck with ginger and thyme; and glazed venison with black cherry and Kirsch sauce.
On average, Butler and his staff cook for 800 people a day and all the chefs have an input when it comes to menu suggestions.
The catering manager at Butler's contract is Neil Patterson — a chef who joined Compass six years ago and has since moved across into management.
‘Chef managers are quite common in this sector,’ he claims.
‘An apprentice chef with us could be running a small unit after four years, budgets and all.
You are never far away from the decision-making in this kind of work, so you learn how to manage a whole range of areas and can be involved at a high level relatively quickly.’
At the end of the year, the finance company employing Butler and Patterson moves to Docklands and will merge all its UK offices into one complex.
Butler and Patterson will then manage a team of 70 staff for a clientele of 1,500.
Ian Lawrence, a High Table head chef for a City bank, starts work at eight in the morning and finishes eight hours later.
He works on a food cost budget of £5.50 per head for his top-floor staff restaurant, and £6.50 per head in the director's private dining rooms.
High Tables does not make a profit on his management of the ingredients budget — it simply charges a management fee for the entire contract.
Lawrence trained in London hotels and then worked in a series of upmarket casino restaurants before leaving the West End four months ago.
‘I run the kitchen just as I would run it in a hotel or restaurant,’ he says.
With his brigade of six, he turns out daily changing menus which include noisettes of lamb with herb mousse and lentils; penne pasta with sun-dried tomatoes, olives and oregano; and escalope of halibut with courgette ribbons.
All pâtés, terrines and fruit jellies are made in-house, as Lawrence believes in training his staff in these skills.
‘Food is secondary here,’ he admits quite openly.
‘I can't serve anything that needs thinking about when people are meeting to discuss big money deals — all fish must be filleted here, for example— but all the food must be good.’
He would like to open an informal, family-run restaurant in the country one day, so he can eventually imagine returning to the long hours of hotel and restaurant work.
But for the time being, with a young family at home, he is very happy to have switched to contract catering.
CHEF PAY SCALES BETWEEN SECTORS
ALL the contract catering chefs interviewed believed that their rates of pay were higher than if they were working in hotels or restaurants.
But Roderick Henderson, who runs the chef division of recruitment consultant Berkeley Scott, does not believe that contract catering is always a financially rewarding sector in which to work.
He estimates that an executive sous-chef working in a top London restaurant or hotel would be earning between £25,000 and £27,000, whereas a head chef in contract catering at a director's dining room, for example, would be doing very well to earn £20,000.
Brian Watts, managing director of B. E. Services, the in-house caterer at the Bank of England, pays chefs between £8,000 and £17,000 per year, but the financial benefits of the bank's employee package (cheap mortgages and pensions, etc), bring this up to considerably more in real terms.
Also, these are the basic rates of pay for a basic 35-hour week, and generous overtime rates are paid for late-night and weekend work.
Watts has interviewed chefs who are working an average of 90 hours per week in the West End and earning about £14,000.
Due to the high level of ‘burnout’ common in such chefs, few are offered jobs.
Ian Lawrence runs his kitchen just as he would a hotel
MUSTARD
Hot stuff
Britons play safe with herb mustards, but the French add roses and bananas, reports Michael Raffael
‘ENGLISH mustard holds pride of place.
This is far from being an indication of cultural superiority, but is due to the fact that English manufacturers extract the essential oil through their milling process.’
This quote comes from a standard work,Le Manuel du Moutardier , by Julia de Fontenelle.
The fact that it is over a hundred years old does not detract from its impact.
Just for once, a Frenchie has conceded that the Brits do something better.
The difference between the French and English approaches to making mustard, technology apart, has not changed for a century.
In France, mustard seeds are soaked and then ground to a paste.
On this side of the Channel, we mill them to obtain a flour.
But it's too simplistic to pretend that one way is better than the other because the comparison isn't between like and like.
There are three kinds of seed and it helps to know the Latin names:
•
sinapsis alba (white mustard);
•
brassica juncea (brown mustard);
•
brassica nigra (black mustard).
‘Brown’ and ‘black’are not easy to tell apart because they are both a reddish brown colour and similar in size.
‘White’ seeds are paler, larger and milder.
Chinese markets sell the juncea leaves, usually by their Cantonese name pak choi.
They look like young spinach and can vary in taste from bland to quite pungent.
The leaves can be pickled in brine (sometimes with added hot Szechuan spices) and served with pork dishes.
The seeds alone, as anyone who has dabbled in Indian cookery knows, are not pungent.
They require the catalytic action of water to release hotness.
Crushed and wetted, a chemical reaction occurs between the enzyme myrosin and a glucoside, a sugar-related chemical, to create the essential oil of mustard.
The change takes place only with cold water, a point worth remembering when preparing English mustard from powder.
Use hot or warm water and it turns bitter and unpleasant.
Garlic, cloves, chives, tarragon, peppers and even nettles are among the many ingredients often combined with mustard
Colman's, which enjoys a virtual monopoly of mustard powder, is a mixture of juncea and alba with added wheat flour and turmeric.
The company markets a wheatless version that would appeal to chefs who want an unadulterated product.
One the flour and water are mixed to a paste, it takes about 10 minutes for the heat to develop.
After an hour or so the pungency diminishes.
Another curious attribute of the powder is that when cooked out it helps to extract other flavours while losing its own.
Old fashioned cooks used to rub it over beef before roasting.
Martin Blunos of Lettonie's in Bristol puts some in his cheese soufflé to point up the cheesiness.
Julia de Fontenelle did not approve of flour extenders: ‘Wheatflour,’ she wrote, ‘harms the quality of this condiment.
This is not the case with sugar, honey, grape must, cloves and other spices which increase its merit.
In Provence, anchovy is mixed in with it, which gives a very good taste.’
Her view reflected a time when mustard was enjoying a vogue similar to that enjoyed by flavoured vinegars a few years ago.
In 1812 one manufacturer, Maille, had 84 varieties including garlic, lemon peel, yarrow, mushroom, truffle, six berry, chive, gherkin, shallot, olive and Champagne.
In France today, mustards may contain roses, lovage, banana or stinging nettles.
The basic Dijon process can admit plenty of variations.
The method of preparation is to macerate the juncea or nigra seeds in a vinegar or verjuice solution until they have swollen.
Then they are stoneground or mechanically milled and sieved.
The resultant paste is cask-conditions for a few days before bottling.
A vinaigre d'alcool will give a different taste from a vinaigre de vin vieux.
A cheap industrial vinegar may be less pleasing.
Heat-treated mustard loses some of its pungency.
And the word ‘forte’ on a label is an indication of strength — usually enough to get up one's nose!
Dijon mustards are flavoured with spices.
Some have added sugar.
Some are more salty.
The colour and the texture can also vary from yellow to brown.
Some contain antioxidants (preservatives), potassium pyrosulphite or sulphur dioxide.
By far the most widespread brand, Amora, is strong tasting and useful for vinaigrettes and in some sauces.
But Philippe Roy of Clos du Roy, at Box outside Bath, prefers the stoneground Dijon mustards prepared by the Normandy company Champ.
He rates their subtlety, but points out that they can be mixed only with warm sauces or, he warns, they start to lose their delicacy.
A wide selection of mustards were supplied to us by Arran Provisions, Colman's and Burnham Mustards
Wholegrain mustard is to Dijon what wholemeal is to brown flour.
Its popularity stems from Moutarde de Meaux, the one in the stylist stoneware jar.
It has a monastic origin.
The recipe passed to the Pommery family in 1760, and now it's a subsidiary of Amora.
It's not the only moutarde à l'ancienne.
Both in Britain and France large food companies and tiny cottage industries produce their own interpretations.
In some, the outer husks remain almost whole.
In others they are crushed and flaky.
They may contain any of the basic seed varieties or a combination of all three.
All have a generous dose of herbs and spices, everything from chervil and celery seed to cloves and peppercorns.
To quote Tom Stobart's The Cook's Encyclopedia : ‘Some are nice; others are beastly.’
They should never be bitter.
Mustard's role in a bistro or brasserie is varied.
As a rule of thumb, Dijon mustard ought to be presented with a pot au feu or potée.
Grilled beef can take any style providing that it's not too sweet (as German mustards are) or flavoured with an unsuitable herb such as dill.
Charcuterie and Dijon mustard are inseparables.
And English mustard, freshly prepared, goes best with cooked ham on the bone.
Mustard helps to emulsify a vinaigrette.
Philippe Roy prefers to do without, because he feels that it interferes with the flavour of a fine oil.
However, it improves lentil or potato salads.
A vinaigrette of old wine vinegar, olive oil and mustard, spooned over a warm, poached chicken stuffed with ham and Swiss chard, makes a wonderful summer dish.
Add diced shallots to the vinaigrette and it becomes a sauce for a jellied boeuf à la mode or an oxtail terrine.
Moutarde de Dijon is also a basic element of other cold sauces.
Rémoulade has to have plenty of strong Dijon mustard in it.
A summery variation is to add finely chopped cress.
A neo-classic, sauce grelette is a blend of cream, mustard and vinegar with fresh herbs.
Smetana or soured cream can replace the cream- vinegar and Roger Vergé mixes in a fresh tomato coulis.
Except in catering colleges, as part of a training course, few chefs still prepare a sauce charcutière.
It doesn't deserve to be neglected.
The basic recipe is a reduction of white wine and brown fond de veau lié with a julienne of gherkins and mustard stirred in at the last moment.
As with all mustard sauces, the important thing is not to reboil it.
A more elegant, but equally traditional sauce for pork or game is made by thickening a red wine sauce with mustard and blood.
Again, it's vital not to overheat the liquid because it will curdle as well as lose its taste.
Depending on the desired strength, up to a tablespoon of Dijon mustard can go into a pint of sauce.
Joël Robuchon's herb sauce for ribs of beef requires two tablespoons to half a pint of chicken bouillon.
Lobster thermidor does not take its name from the hotness of the sauce, but from a month of the French revolutionary calendar.
Nor is the lobster smeared with a mustard sauce, as most chefs imagine.
A little strong mustard is spread on the emptied shell of a grilled lobster.
The meat is put back, coated in a cream-reduction sauce and glazed.
This gives a lighter, cleaner taste which doesn't overpower and illustrates the fact that it is not just the obvious oily herring, mackerel and salmon which have the body to withstand a mustard onslaught.
Christine Frechet, a member of the Association de Restauratrices Cuisinières (ARC), serves skate with mustard and sherry vinegar.
Her ARC colleague Léa Linster bastes a saddle of young roast pork with honey, mustard and coriander, a cross between Apicius and the old English way of glazing hams.
Italian cooks have always combined mustard with honey or syrup and fruit.
The most notable recipe, in historical terms, is mostarda di cremona, a 17th-century grape marmalade, made with whole grains and crystalised fruit, it is more of a hot-and-sweet preserve and good with bollito.
In the USA, mustard is the most commonly used spice after pepper.
It's time to give it more of a chance here.
RECIPES
THREE chefs provide recipes which show versatility of mustard as an ingredient.
Martin Blunos of Restaurant Lettonie in Bristol provided the rabbit recipe, using grain mustard.
The Garland's Tom Bridgeman in Bath also opted for grain mustard in his dish of lamb's liver and bacon.
Tarragon mustard was the type chosen by Philippe Roy of Clos du Roy, Box, in his hake recipe.
Saddle of rabbit with mustard
OVERSEAS
From snails to STARDOM
Despite the ultimate in Michelin -starred success, Bernard Loiseau is not a chef who takes himself too seriously, discovers Roy Hayter
BERNARD Loiseau believes in the power of the auto-promotion.
It's a well-founded faith he has developed since Michelin this year singled him out as the only French chef worthy of upgrading to the coveted three-star accolade.
At 40, he knows he's on the road to fortune and admits to spending more time talking with journalists than working over hot ovens in the kitchen.
His first book,Envoler les Saveurs , is due out in October.
The Loiseau phenomenon has rocked French cuisine, transforming the son of a travelling salesman into the country's most talked about chef.
He laughingly nicknames himself the ‘potato king of the world’.
‘I was one of the first chefs to put gastronomic vegetarian meals on the menu seven years ago.
People said I'd gone off my head.
But I was offering a meal that didn't run any cholesterol risks.
It fitted in with my policy of using fresh, natural produce.
And potatoes are great.
They give a chef the opportunity to be creative.’
Frogs legs with garlic purée and a parsley jus
Paradoxically, Loiseau originally wanted nothing to do with cooking.
I always figured people became chefs when they couldn't do anything else.
It was the way we looked at life back in the mid-60s.’
His father thought otherwise.
Loiseau senior ate regularly at a three-star restaurant owned by the Troisgros brothers at Roanne in the Loire valley.
‘One day he returned home to Chamalières and said I had a job with Michel and Pierre for £1.50 a month.
I wasn't at all happy but I didn't have much choice.
At Roanne, Loiseau says, he started out by emptying the bins.
‘Afterwards I went on to peeling vegetables.
It took a while before they finally trusted me with a little cooking.
It was a tough, traditional apprenticeship.’
In 1972 Loiseau left Roanne for Paris to work with Claude Verger, owner of two prestigious city restaurants.
La Barrière de Clichy and La Barrière Poquelin.
‘Claude taught me a golden rule: only 45% of a restaurant's success depends on cuisine.
The rest is determined by decor, the welcome you give and the atmosphere.
Our business depends on applied psychology,’ Loiseau says.
He likes to talk in terms of percentages.
‘Rigour, dedication, personal sacrifice over 15 long years and a belief in quality produce earned 70% of those three Michelin stars.
The rest,’ he modestly argues, ‘is maybe down to talent.’
It was Verger who talked Loiseau into taking over, in March 1975, ‘a few tight square metres of greasy kitchen space’ at La Côte d'Or in Saulieu's only main street.
The pink-coloured building that overlooks a municipal car park rode out glorious days under the renowned Alexandre Dumaine before crumbling into a state of tatty neglect.
The backwater village of 3,000 inhabitants, 250km south-east of Paris, was once an obligatory stopping-off point for travellers headed south for the Riviera.
But it was bypassed and quickly forgotten with the opening of the A38 motorway less than 20 miles away.
Loiseau took on the challenge.
By 1977 the gamble regained the restaurant one of its three former Michelin stars.
A second was awarded in 1981.
Two years later he bought the property ‘out of love’ from Verger for £280,000, and promptly set about a £3m renovation that included a new restaurant, spacious kitchens employing 19 staff and 10 luxury bedroom suites affiliated to Relais et Châteaux.
Saulieu was back on the map.
In 1986 the quasi-biblical [in France]Gault-Millau guide voted him chef of the year with a 19/20 rating, raised to 19.5 in 1990.
Loiseau says: ‘Awards are the life blood of this industry.
They can make or break a chef.
But at the summit there's a fast road down if you take yourself too seriously.
Success is relative.
It's about chance — today people drive for miles to eat at La Côte d'Or, but tomorrow it might all be finished.’
Business has almost tripled since Loiseau joined the 18 other French holders of three Michelin stars.
He averages 70 covers on weekdays and doubles that number on weekends.
Set menus start at £57 and rise sharply to about £150 à la carte.
Talking through specialities, he cites three: frogs' legs with puréed garlic and parsley sauce, a colourful and popular dish.
Sea bream, with shallot and red wine sauce, comes a close second in the restaurant.
Mersault is his personal favourite wine for this dish.
He overcomes its characteristic darkening during preparation by throwing in a carrot.
Wine acidity, he explains, is swallowed up by the natural sweetness of the shallots.
Oyster soup with sliced sea urchin is the other original Loiseau signature dish.
Loiseau changes menus with the seasons.
‘You have to respect nature.
In the end, we don't invent anything.
We just intervene.
I'm known for a particular dish: snails with nettle sauce.
I didn't discover the first snail or the first nettle that sprouted up on this planet.
I just arranged their marriage.’
Loiseau goes to the Burgundy market to select produce like the wild asparagus he serves, buttered and flashed in a pan with lobster.
He buys rabbit and game from a local butcher.
His cheesemaker is situated on the outskirts of the village, but he keeps names top secret from the culinary competition.
Italian olive oil and vinegars, and butter and cream bought from a nearby farm are his favourites.
Bitter chocolate sablé with orange
FEMALE CHEFS
WOMEN'S WORK
Cuisine des femmes could be the latest cooking style if some French women chefs have their way.
Michael Raffael reports
AFTER cuisine nouvelle and cuisine moderne, what next?
A good each way bet could be cuisine des femmes — women's cooking.
Members of the Association de Restauratrices Cuisinières (ARC), a body of lady chefs, are working hard to prove that it exists and that it is a vital component of French cooking today.
‘A woman cooks like a birds sings’ is their motto.
They claim to have an instinctive talent, as opposed to men chefs who have to learn the mechanics of their craft.
The idea may not stand too much scrutiny, but it has charm.
Christiane Massia, whose restaurant — Au Marché, in Paris backstreet — reflects her convictions, argues: ‘Of course cuisine des femmes exists!
It's less technical, closer to the soil and to traditions.’
Until recently, male chefs have shut their kitchen doors on girls wanting to learn the profession.
Prestigious bodies such as the Maîtres Cuisiniers de France excludes women.
There are probably more Japanese working for top chefs than women in equivalent positions.
If the kitchen climate is changing, it's because working conditions have lost the barrack room brutality which once characterised what was a pretty sordid job in all but a handful of restaurants and hotels.
The difference between most ARC members and professional chefs, male or female, is that the former have not been through ‘the system’.
For the most part, they are self-taught.
As such they belong to a distinct and long-standing tradition, that of the ‘mères’.
In gastronomy, the honorific title ‘mother’ has an almost mythical force.
It's identified generally with many of the glories of bourgeois cooking through the 18th and 19th centuries.
Specifically, it's linked to names such as La Mère Saguet — who fed Balzac, Dumas, Delacroix and half the literary and artistic establishment of the early 19th century.
Above: Nicole Grenier's stuffed rock crabs and courgette flowers.
Right: Reine Sammut, this year's ARC trophy winner
Chefs in any doubt as to the influence of the grand dames of the ovens should remember that the three- Michelin -star Georges Blanc in Vonnas used to be La Mère Blanc until the son took over from his maman.
The late, great Alain Chapel's restaurant was once called La Mère Charles.
Drawing upon the culinary cred associated with ‘motherhood’, the ARC found an Académie des Mères Cuisinières for its more venerable members in 1990.
To celebrate the event it launched an annual competition, Le Trophée des Mères Cuisinières, held in Vichy.
It already enjoys enough clout to attract considerable television coverage, a senator and the cream of the French gastronomic press.
The theme of this year's contest was Provence.
The five finalists had three hours to produce their creations for a jury of 12 gastronomic chroniclers (as French food-writers entitle themselves) and ‘mères’.
Watching the cuisinières during the early stages, there was no obvious clue as to why anyone should find it necessary to draw a theoretical distinction between male and female chefs.
One woman was handier with a knife, another was better organised, two had marvellous raw materials, another was feeling the pressure of competing.
At least an hour before the cooks submitted their offerings to be judged, it was clear who was going to win.
Reine Sammut of La Fenière, a de luxe bistrot in the Vauclusian hill-town of Lourmarin, had the edge.
Her carré de'agneau de lait truffé en croûte, aux pointes d'asperges de Villelaure, combined new season Luberon lamb, the pick of the region's fresh truffles and asparagus tips in their prime.
It was a dish owing nothing to Sammut's sex and everything to Provence.
The dish was also eminently suitable for service in a restaurant, good to look at and practical to assemble.
Other contestants concocted dishes which did reflect a woman's touch.
Nicole Grenier of Le Berger des Abeilles, St Andiol, cooked favouilles et courgettes farcies et leur coulis truffé, tiny stuffed rock crabs and courgette flowers.
Marie Ferrand of La Gîte du Tourne-Pierre, Challans, filled the plates with half a crawfish, stuffed Bouzigues mussels, spinach caillettes and a substantial shellfish cannelloni.
Gisele Berger of La Bonne Table, Clichy, made the traditional farcis de Provence — aubergines, courgettes, cabbage and bell peppers filled with a pork and basil stuffing and served with a garlic, olive oil and tomato sauce.
All these were homespun recipes, comforting rather than refined.
Except for the more delicate crabs, they had a provincial Sunday lunch quality.
While the ARC cooks were emptying crabs and boning racks of lamb, five girls were involved in their own competition for the espoir, the most promising young cook.
The winner, 20-year-old Benedicte Demange, is already second chef in the Michelin -starred Les Abesses in Epinal.
Her patron is male and she feels no qualms about rubbing shoulders with male chefs and passing orders to a commis who may be older than she is.
‘I prefer working with men,’ she admits.
‘During the work, we're all equal.
If anyone makes a mistake, it's the senior person who has to carry the can.’
Her winning entry, grillade de rouget, St Jacques et langoustines aux asperges vertes, huile d'olive et basilic, came straight off the carte at Les Abesses.
La Fenière doesn't have a Michelin star, though it rates 16/20 in the Gault &Millau guide.
Sammut won't be drawn into a debate as to whether Michelin is fair to women or not.
However, winning the Trophée des Mères Cuisinières will bring her valuable publicity: ‘It's an important media event which is bound to attract a new clientele.’
It also helped promote the cause of la cuisine des femmes.
Marguerite Trompeau, who owns La Fontaine just outside Vichy, supplied the welcoming lunch of tripe, Charolais beef grilled over an open fire, cheese and a dessert.
And the celebration banquet was cooked by Elisabeth Bourgeois of the Mas Tourteron near Gordes.
Having worked through the afternoon on the competition, Sammut handled the press and plaudits during the awards ceremony.
She returned to the kitchens to assist with the evening's celebration banquet.
About midnight she started handling interviews.
In the early hours, she left with her husband Guy to drive back to Lourmarin so that she could open her restaurant in the morning.
You certainly couldn't accuse women chefs of lacking stamina.
BOOKS
Fruit: A Connoisseur's Guide and Cookbook — by Davidson and Knox, Mitchell Beazley £25
Alan Davidson's previous books include two on fish —North Atlantic Seafood and Mediterranean Seafood — which are classics of their kind.
Chefs like myself have referred to them and kept them at hand since they were written over 10 years ago, along with books such as Jane Grigson's on vegetables.
Pat Rance's on cheese and, more recently, Jill Norman's on spices.
These books are timeless, not part of the changing whirl of food fashion or trend, rather part of a backbone of information and knowledge without which all cookery books are quite irrelevant.
Good produce is inspirational by itself.
The more you learn about it, the more you understand how to use it, the less likely you are to subject your raw materials to absurd or unharmonious treatments.
Davidson's fruit book comes into this category.
However, the book works on several levels.
The format may be that of a text book — with first fruit then nuts dealt with on a family group basis — but it doesn't read as one.
It's never dry or boring, but clearly and interestingly written.
All you will ever need to know about each variety is there: history; scientific properties; handling advice; and translations of the fruit's name into French.
Finnish or whatever.
You cannot expect a reference book to be quite as gripping as an adventure novel, but all the same I read it cover to cover.
The book is also a work of art.
The illustrations are stunning.
On a purely practical basis, the paintings in this instance work better than the camera lens.
Perhaps because no photographer's sense of composition or lighting has come between the subject and the reader, they manage to be informative as well as visually satisfying.
No easy task and no wonder that Charlotte Knox, who painted them, receives equal billing with Davidson for the book.
The third aspect to this book is it's 40-page recipe section.
These are mostly fairly straightforward with clear and concise instructions for jellies, jams, dumplings and suchlike.
There are also recipes contributed by the likes of Claudia Roden, Sri Owen and Joyce Molyneux, but even the most exotic of these — like an intriguing banana pudding from Indonesia — seem quite achievable.
And there are notes on subjects such as fruit crystalisation and what is possibly the best explanation published of how and why jams set.
Good though they are, the recipes are not central to the value of this book in the way they are to Jane Grigson's fruit book.
This book would still be essential purchasing without them.
I shall certainly buy and use it, and advise anyone else who is fascinated by the food we work with to do the same.
Shaun Hill Head chef Gidleigh Park, Chagford, Devon
MY FAVOURITE DISH
SEA FARE
Andrew Baird's preference is for poached seabass with langoustine mousse
‘SEABASS is in plentiful supply around the islands in late summer.
It's caught by locals on the high tides and subsequently brought to the hotel at very competitive prices, I don't seem able to say no to it,’ says Andrew Baird, head chef at Longueville Manor, St Saviour, Jersey.
To make his favourite dish of poached seabass fillet with langoustines, he scales the fish and removes the innards, being careful not to break the connective tissue between the flakes of flesh.
He then slices open the fillet to add a langoustine mousse.
The mousse is made with a scallop meat base, which is puréed and combined with a reduced stock of langoustine shells, tomato, brandy and a little garlic.
The resultant mix is passed, seasoned and left to cool.
Baird rarely adds eggs to the purée as the scallop meat tends to be firm enough without them to absorb a fair amount of cream.
He leaves the mousse a little on the firm side to preserve the seafood flavour.
When tasted and corrected, the mousse is piped on to the fillets which are then carefully folded back together.
The fillets are wrapped in cling film with garden herbs and poached for six to eight minutes.
Once removed from the courte bouillon, the fillets are left to rest for four minutes.
Baird serves the fish encircled by a langoustine-flavoured cream and langoustine tails.
He recommends drinking a Puligny Montrachet Premier Cru, Les Referts, 1983 with the dish.
Baird started cooking at The Ritz on Piccadilly, London, under Michael Quinn in 1982.
He was one of six chosen from a brigade of 40 to accompany Quinn when he then left to work at Ettington Park, Staffordshire.
Baird was there for a further two years before leaving in 1987 with chef Barry Forster, who had been offered the position of head chef at Longueville Manor on Jersey.
Baird then returned to the mainland after two years to work as sous chef under Brian Baker at Hambleton Hall, Leicestershire, before being offered the head chef's job at Longueville himself 12 months later.
He leads a brigade of 13 and the hotel restaurant seats 70.
