JACK FELL DOWN
H R F KEATING
‘'TWAS on the Isle of Capreee that I found her…’
Blithely ignoring the rocking of the little steamer in the lurching Mediterranean swell, the girl with the sun-catching cap of peroxided hair sitting hatless on the wooden bench right in the vessel's prow lifted her voice in sudden bubbling song.
A blurred blueness in the distance, Capri, indeed, was the little wallowing tub's destination.
‘Really,’ exclaimed in heavily scandalized tones one of the few other passengers braving the last gusts of a salt-laden sirocco up on deck, an Englishwoman in an ample frock loud with different coloured daisies.
But, finding her exclamation had produced no reaction in the only other passenger not comfortably below, save in the stem for a scatter of peasants returning with emptied baskets from Naples, she moved nearer along the ship's greasy rail.
Her target was an excessively tall gangling gentleman, not very suitably clad for the Mediterranean in a suit of gingery wool with the trousers ending in tight bands round the calves.
He was leaning against the rail smoking a cigarette and staring with an air of melancholy towards the distant island.
‘Not a very lady-like performance,’ the ample, beflowered lady pronounced, with a look of pinched disapproval in the direction of the girl in the prow.
Briefly lifting his cap, the ginger giant produced, in foreign-accented English, a decidedly non-committal reply.
The large lady was not to be put off, however.
‘Tell me,’ she said, leaning forwards with a smile at once coy and overwhelming, ‘I must know.
Are you Mr Sven Hjerson, the famous Finnish detective?
I mean, you must be.
I saw your picture in the paper here just last week.
You've been helping the Vatican in some mysterious business or other, haven't you?’
‘Well, madam, I must make some congratulations to you.
You have, as they are saying, done a fine observation.’
‘Knew I was right.
Generally am.
Buckley's the name.
Arabella Buckley.
Miss.
You on another case, eh?
The Corpse on Capri, ha?’
‘No, no,’ Sven Hjerson was quick to reply.
‘It is just that after much brainwork in Rome I have thought to give myself a little holiday on this famous Capri Island.’
‘Sight too famous nowadays, if you ask me,’ Arabella Buckley pronounced.
‘All the fault of that dreadful song.
How that girl can bring herself to sit there singing it I can't imagine.
You know who she is, don't you?’
‘No, I have not such pleasure.
And, madam, I would…’
‘She goes by the name of Jilly Jonathan.
She's one of those, what-d'you-call-'ems, stars.
A star of the screen.’
‘The cinema is not a place I am very much attending.’
‘No, nor me.
Frightfully vulgar.
But one gets to know about these people somehow.
Well, I suppose in the case in point…
’ Miss Buckley directed a vigorous glare towards Jilly Jonathan, face lifted to the sun, cheerfully carolling the sentimentally sad words of the song.
‘Engaged to the Earl of Woodleigh, you know.
They announced it just a couple of weeks ago.
On holiday out here with him now.
Excelsior Hotel in Naples.’
‘And it is there that you also are staying?’
‘No, no.
Can't afford a place like that.
Simple pensione for me.
Appalling Italian food, of course, but beggars can't be choosers, what?’
‘You are unable to get good vegetables?’
Sven Hjerson asked with sudden anxiety.
‘In Rome I was in the similar predicament.
But I had heard that in the South things are better.’
‘Oh, the vegetables are all right, I suppose.
It's no porridge at breakfast that gets my goat.
Coffee and rolls.
What nonsense.’
‘Then you think that on Capri I shall be obtaining good vegetables?’ the detective inquired.
‘You see, they are so important for the uttermost functioning of the brain.’
‘Well, never stayed on the island myself.
just visited it once.
Last Sunday, as a matter of fact.
Same day as Lord Woodleigh and that — and his fiancée.’
‘They are travelling together, just themselves?’
Sven Hjerson asked with a sudden flicker of interest.
‘Oh, no.
Good gracious me, no.
Woodleigh's too much of a gentleman, of course, for anything like that.
Though I dare say she…
No, there's a whole party of them.
Woodleigh, the girl, the Hon. Peter Horbury and Mrs Lettice Horbury.
He's Woodleigh's cousin, and his heir, of course, unless that's the older Horbury brother who ran off to Australia years ago and has never been heard of since.
And then Woodleigh's secretary even came out last week, so I gather.
Some trouble at home, and he sent for her.
No, whole thing's perfectly above board.’
‘You are most well informed, madam,’ Sven Hjerson said, a little drily.
‘Oh, well, you know how it is.
Interesting people and all that.’
At the prow Jilly Jonathan abruptly stopped singing and jumped to her feet.
She made her way, still seemingly dancing to the tune, the huge crocodile-skin handbag on her arm swaying heavily in time, to the door down to the saloon.
Hauling it open, she thrust in her peroxided head and called out something.
A moment or two later a man who, from his lanky form and fine-boned features, could only be her fiancé, Lord Woodleigh, emerged, evidently doing his best to overcome a certain reluctance.
‘Darling,’ Jilly Jonathan said, her voice ringing out for all to hear, ‘don't fug away down there.
It's super up in the sun.
And, look, Capree's getting nearer and nearer.’
‘Capri, old girl,’ Lord Woodleigh said, giving the name its Italian rather than its popular song emphasis.
‘Oh, well, what's it matter how you say it?
The thing is it's there.
And this time we're really going to get to see the Blue Grotto.
You can't go to your stuffy old church today.
Not when it's not Sunday.’
Lord Woodleigh smiled at her, plainly overcoming a natural reticence.
‘Oh, my dear,’ he said, ‘you'll really have to get used to me going to Mass.
Every Sunday, without fail.
And on Holidays of Obligation, too.’
‘Well, okay.
But this isn't a — what-did-you-call-it?— holiday of obliging.
It's a real holiday.
Time to do as you like.
And fancy telling me that there was an interesting stoup in that old church on the island.’
‘It's what the guide-book said, my darling.
They are used in Catholic churches to hold holy water.’
‘Yes, but I thought it must be some arch or something that everybody had to stoop to go through.
I didn't think even that would be very interesting, but I liked the idea of old Peter having to bend himself for once.’
‘Now, you're not to make fun of Peter.
He's always been a bit on his dignity, I suppose, but that's the way he is.
Comes of half expecting to inherit the title and half not, I dare say.’
Jilly Jonathan gave a quick little frown.
‘I think actually,’ she said, ‘he's terribly jealous.’
‘Jealous?’
‘Of me, darling.
After all, I came along when he must have thought you were safe to be a bachelor for ever and ever, and now he'll never be a lord and everything.’
‘Well, that will depend on whether we have children, angel.
If we don't, although now you get the estate you can't, of course, inherit the title.’
‘But I would still be a lady, wouldn't I?’
Lord Woodleigh's long ascetic face broke into another ice-cracked smile.
‘Yes, my dear, from the moment we're married you'll be Countess of Woodleigh.’
‘And if you…
Well, if you were to sort of pop off, I'd go on being a countess, wouldn't I?
And shouldn't it be an earless anyhow?
And, darling, don't pop off, will you?
Ever?
Ever?’
Again Lord Woodleigh smiled.
Almost grinned.
‘Haven't I told you?’ he said.
‘A dozen times at least.
The wife of an earl is a countess, and if that earl dies his wife becomes the Dowager Lady Blank.
It's really quite simple.’
‘But, sweety pie, I am — what's it you keep saying?— a bear of very little brain.’
‘But a very nice little bear all the same.’
‘Brazen hussy.’
Arabella Buckley hissed out the words, but Sven Hjerson thought it very likely they had been carried by the sticky breeze as far as the couple in the prow.
He was unable to observe, however — as he would have liked to do in his ever-observant way — just what the expression on Jilly Jonathan's pretty face might have been.
At that moment, emerging from the saloon below as if propelled from a circus cannon, there appeared a distinctly grotesque figure.
He was, beyond doubt, an Italian, swarthy in complexion, crowned under a battered panama with a mop of grease-shining black curls, plump with much pasta.
But he had chosen to dress in what he may have conceived to be a British manner.
He wore a blazer, not unlike the one Lord Woodleigh wore except that instead of discreet brass buttons it was decorated by no fewer than five enormous, tinselly affairs.
In place of the modest flannel bags Lord Woodleigh had on, this fellow had a pair of white trousers, much too short for him, stained heavily on one side and showing beneath a pair of socks in a hideous approximation to a Scottish tartan.
These eventually were mercifully lost in brown and white ‘correspondent’ shoes.
‘Milord, milord,’ he shouted, hurling himself towards the pair in the prow.
‘Milord, you are, yes, yes, yes, wanting hotel on Capri?
Yourself and the pretty lady, yes?
One bedroom only.
Yes, yes, yes?’
Lord Woodleigh gave him a look that would have quelled in an instant any insolent groom or keeper.
‘Certainly not,’ he said.
‘Go away.’
He might have been obeyed.
Except that Jilly Jonathan burst into unstoppable giggles.
‘Oh, Jack,’ she managed at last to get out.
‘Do let's take up the offer.
If only as a joke, to tell people at home when we get back.’
‘No, really.
It would hardly be a joke in very good taste.’
‘Oh, milord, milord.
Make that very good joke, yes?
Very good joke.
One room only.
Very, very pretty lady.’
Now something more than a quelling look appeared on Lord Woodleigh's fine-bred features.
Cold anger.
‘Listen, my man,’ he said.
‘The guide-book warned us about hotel touts of your sort, and unless you make yourself scarce I shall put you into the hands of the Carabinieri.’
The threat was enough.
More than enough.
The tartan-socked tout positively scuttled his way to the vessel's stem.
By the time the boat reached the island Sven Hjerson had still not succeeded in shaking off the ample, daisy-sprinkled form of Arabella Buckley.
From the yet more gloomy expression on his normally lugubrious face it was evident that he had resigned himself to her companionship at least as far as his hotel perched up far above the sea.
So it was without surprise that he found himself sharing with her one of the tinny, open-sided cars of the creaky old funicular that saved tourists the toil of climbing the seven hundred and more steep stone steps up from the Marina Grande.
As soon as the linked train of little open cars began its steeply angled ascent she clutched the Finnish detective by the arm.
‘Mr Hjerson’ she gasped.
‘Did you notice?’
‘It is my business always to make notices.
But, alas, madam, I do not in the present know what it is you are asking if I am seeing.’
‘That Italian.
That what-d'you-call-'em.
Tout.
He's on the funicular with us, in the next car with Miss Abernethie.’
‘Miss Abernethie?
She is the lady I have seen?
Very middle-age, hair grey, clothes most plain, pince-nez spectacles, expression always disapproving?
Lord Woodleigh's secretary he has sent for?’
‘Yes, yes, that's her.
But don't you understand about that — that tout?’
‘Madam, what should be understood?’
‘Why, that he's here because of Jilly Jonathan.
He's trying to lay his filthy hands on her, I haven't a doubt.
And perhaps she…
You must have seen how struck he was with her.
Very, very pretty lady, all that sort of beastly foreign stuff.’
‘Well, but, madam, if the fellow is a tout — tout, is that the word?— for one of the hotels here, is it not likely he would need to be ascending like us?’
‘Ah, no, you see, no.
The thing is that it costs 40 lira to go up now, but if he had waited just one hour more, till the 11 a.m. departure, he would have had to pay only two lira.
It said so in the guide-book.’
The Finn considered.
‘Yes, madam,’ he said at last, ‘I am granting that his conducting of himself is not what might be expected.
But, you know, there may be many other reasons why it is important for him to get to the top so quickly.
It does not have to be that he has conceived what the French are calling the coup de force for Miss Jonathan.’
‘You can tell that,’ said Arabella Buckley, ‘to the Marines.’
It was an exclamation she might have had to clarify.
But at that moment their creaking conveyance gave a sudden fearsome jerk and came to a dead stop.
Once again Miss Buckley clutched Sven Hjerson's arm.
‘I knew it wasn't safe,’ she jabbered.
‘I knew it the moment I saw it last Sunday.
These Italians, you can't trust them, you know.
Certainly not with anything mechanical.
That's something it takes a sturdy British workman to understand.’
Sven Hjerson's lugubrious face lit up in a brief smile.
‘Then I am able to give you a reassurance, madam,’ he said.
‘This funicular is looked after by an Englishman.
You can rely upon the observations of Sven Hjerson for this.
I noted him working on the machinery while we were waiting to ascend.
He was dropping one of his tools and let forth a number of obscenities.
His voice was what is called, I am understanding, Cockney or perhaps Australian.’
‘Yes,’ said Arabella Buckley.
‘Yes, well, that is reassuring.
Only…’
‘Yes?’
‘Well, if he was repairing the machinery, it can't have been safe in the first place, can it?’
Then Sven Hjerson took his revenge for the past tiresome two hours.
‘Madam,’ he said, ‘you are right.
We cannot be certain.
Definitely not safe.’
His mischievous words, however, were to prove within a very few minutes appallingly prescient.
The funicular had resumed its climb, apparently smoothly enough.
Arabella Buckley had released her grip on the Finn's long, ginger-suited arm.
Perhaps with some reluctance.
They sat in silence then looking out to either side of the steeply tumbling rocks interspersed with dry, hard Mediterranean shrubs.
But, almost at the end of the ascent, there came a new series of alarming jerks and they juddered to a halt once more.
At once there came, clear in the sunny air, a long piercing scream.
The tall Finnish detective acted with a turn of speed altogether surprising to Miss Buckley.
In an instant he had vaulted over the side of their car and had begun swinging himself along  towards the head of the train and the car occupied by Lord Woodleigh and Jilly Jonathan.
They were no longer in it.
The side of the car opposite the landing stage, rustily flimsy at best, had fallen or been pushed away, leaving a jagged edge all round.
Sven Hjerson clambered aboard and cautiously peered over.
‘Nothing,’ he called at once to the others, whose view of the top car was obscured by the tall backs of their seats.
‘But one cannot see greatly far down.
Perhaps they are well.
It is not so long till some bushes are there.
I see to the side a railing also.
Perhaps it has stopped their descent.
I cannot make out.’
The remaining passengers — there were not many of them — had in the meanwhile managed to make their way, by scrambling from the outside of one car to the next, to the safety of the solid wooden landing stage.
They stood there in a frightened cluster.
‘I am going to make the climb downwards,’ the Finn called to them.
‘Help will be needed.
Would some gentleman like to assist me?’
‘Yes, yes.
Let me.
I'm his cousin, Peter Horbury.’
The Hon. Peter Horbury appeared to be some ten or twelve years younger than the earl.
There were traces of the same fine-boned look about him, but his features were already well masked by what was likely in the course of time to become a solid layer of self-indulgent fat.
Nevertheless he seemed willing enough to accompany the Finnish detective in the dangerous climb down over the tumbling rocks to where his cousin and his cousin's pretty, peroxided fiancée lay.
Perhaps dead.
Perhaps, taking into account the comparative shortness of the descent, only injured.
In the event it took the two of them, scrambling and sliding downwards beside each other, faces to the rocks, only some five or six minutes to reach the spot where the railing which Sven Hjerson had noticed further along had in fact stopped the  couple's fall.
But it had stopped Lord Woodleigh in the most horrible of ways.
His head must have fallen almost directly on top of one of the tall spikes that surmounted the old iron rail.
He had not been impaled, but the spike had been driven far upwards from near his throat before his body had slumped clear.
There could be no doubt at all that he was dead.
Jilly Jonathan had been luckier, or less appallingly unlucky.
She was lying not far from her fiancé, eyes closed, deathly pale but apparently hardly injured.
The tall Finn and Peter Horbury together raised her up and in a moment or two her eyelids fluttered open.
With unexpected tenderness Sven Hjerson told her what had happened.
‘Oh, my God, my God,’ she said, ‘I was showing Jack the view out there, and I leant over pointing to something and then suddenly the whole thing seemed to tilt and…’
She broke off, and Sven Hjerson felt her body slump again in his arms.
But by the time he had gathered up her handbag and Lord Woodleigh's camera, which had come to rest nearby, she was able slowly to make her way with them to the nearest point where the accident could be reported.
Some two hours later the whole party sat, exhausted and silent, in deckchairs on the terrace of Sven Hjerson's hotel, sipping half-heartedly at cups of abominable tea and looking without seeing anything at the wide sweep of the Bay of Naples spread out far below them.
Jilly Jonathan was pale but had calmed down after the bout of hysterical weeping that had overcome her once they had got her to the hotel.
Peter Horbury sat beside her, still looking tousled from his exertions among the rocks.
Next to him his wife, a tall rangy woman whom Sven Hjerson somehow saw even here as being astride a hunter, was leaning forward tapping the tips of the fingers of each hand one against the other.
Beside her, chair  drawn a little back, Miss Abernethie sat, her face rigid with disapproval, though of what precisely there was no telling.
And, to Sven Hjerson's concealed annoyance, Miss Arabella Buckley had contrived to make herself one of the group, her ample form straining the faded green canvas of a chair firmly set among the others.
Into the Finn's head there had strayed, not to be expelled, the words of an English nursery rhyme that a child had once recited to him.
Jack and Jill went up the hill to fetch a pail of water, Jack fell down and broke his crown and Jill came tumbling after .
The childish words went through and through his mind, blotting out all coherent thought.
And he felt, obscurely, that the terrible accident needed to be given coherent thought.
As much and as deep coherent thought as he was capable of.
But it had been days since he had managed to obtain a good, large dish of fresh-cooked vegetables.
His famous brain was stupified.
Perhaps this was why, uncharacteristically, he burst out aloud with the thought that at last chased the nursery rhyme momentarily from his mind.
‘No.
No, no.
That car could not have tipped over of itself.
Jack and Jill went up the hill, yes, and Jack fell down with Jill tumbling after also; But it was in no manner a simple fall.
There must have been a push.’
Arabella Buckley was the first to recover from the shock of that strange outpouring.
‘Mr Hjerson,’ she said, ‘are you…
Well, are you sure?
I mean, don't you…
Well, don't you sometimes expect to find mysterious deaths wherever you go?’
Sven Hjerson nodded slowly.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘Yes, that is a good supposition you have made, madam.
I would not have thought you…
But, no.
No, it is not right.
Sven Hjerson is always making observations.
He has trained the eyes to do it.
I was telling you, was I not, that I was seeing with exactness what the English workman was doing while we were waiting to ascend.
I know how the funicular is  operating.
Exactly.
And I am repeating.
Jack and Jill did not tumble down the hill without somebody giving a push.’
‘But…
But…’
, Peter Horbury brought out.
‘But that means…
Well, that means…’
‘Murder, Peter,’ his wife snapped, leaning forward in the saddle.
‘That's what Mr Hjerson has the effrontery to be claiming has happened.’
‘Madam, there is no effrontery.
Yes, Lord Woodleigh has been murdered, and Miss Jilly Jonathan has been a victim beside him.
Sven Hjerson has said it.’
‘In which case,’ Arabella Buckley pronounced sturdily, ‘there's only one thing for it.
The what-d'you-call-'ems.
The police.
The Carabin-somethings.’
It was perhaps an hour later that the island's police chief left them with a clicking heels bow.
Despite his almost complete lack of English and the poor Italian the others possessed, several things had emerged.
Only a handful of people, it had been established, had been near enough to the leading car of the funicular to have been able to give it the fatal extra push that had sent Woodleigh and Jilly Jonathan tumbling down the steep hillside.
These were Peter Horbury and his wife who had been in the little car immediately next to Lord Woodleigh's, and Miss Abernethie, who had been in the next car suffering the presence of the tartan-socked hotel tout.
‘I am afraid I took pains to look out at the other side so as not to see him,’ she had said.
‘But he was there.
He was very definitely there.’
‘So it could have been he who slipped over the side and did it,’ Arabella Buckley had promptly declared.
‘Yes,’ Sven Hjerson had been constrained to agree.
‘It would have been possible for him, I think.
Just possible.’
He had given Arabella Buckley a quick glance then.
‘Just as it might have been possible for you also, madame,’ he had said.
‘I, too, was regarding the view on the opposite side  from yourself.
I could not in the court of law swear that you had been under my observations the whole time we were making the ascent.’
But the others, with the abominable tout in their sights, had been quick to fix the blame on him.
The Carabinieri chief had left at once with a promise of finding the man within the hour, to which he added,sotto voce , a pledge to get the truth out of him by whatever methods might be necessary.
Sven Hjerson was not, however, willing to let this convenient solution put an end to his own investigation.
‘Ladies and gentlemen,’ he said when the police chiefs hurrying back was out of sight, ‘let us not make ourselves deceived.
Is it so likely that that man, however much he may have been struck by your beauty and gaiety, Miss Jonathan, would have at once decided to assassinate your future husband?’
But Arabella Buckley, with a murderer who was not ‘one of us’ almost under her thumb, was not going to let him go so easily.
‘Dash it all,’ she said, ‘Lord Woodleigh spoke very sharply to the fellow when we were on the boat.
And these Italians are fearfully hot-headed.
Everybody knows what foreigners are like.’
There was a chorus of agreement.
It served to make the Finnish detective rather sharper than he might otherwise have been.
‘No,’ he said.
‘Let us please seek for more stronger motives.’
Round the semi-circle of chairs quick looks flicked from face to face.
‘Yes,’ Sven Hjerson went on, ‘it is in fact, I am thinking, that all those people who might have given that not very well balanced car the one push needed have also possible reasons for wishing the death of Lord Woodleigh.
And of you also, Miss Jonathan.’
He gave Jilly Jonathan a brief bow from his enormous gangling height.
‘Well, I say, that's a bit rich, don't you know,’ Peter Horbury said indignantly.
‘Nonsense, Peter,’ his wife pounced down on him as if he were a hound that had misbehaved.
‘The man's quite right.
You've got a perfect motive.
After all, you're the Earl of Woodleigh now.’
‘Good lord, so I am.’
For a moment or two Peter Horbury contemplated his newly elevated status.
‘But, I mean to say, I did always think I would inherit one day, with Jack being such a confirmed…’
He broke off, blushed and tried not to look at Jilly Jonathan.
‘And you, madam,’ Sven Hjerson turned to Peter's wife.
‘You are now — I heard the belated Lord Woodleigh explaining this myself — you are now Countess of Woodleigh.
It is a great honour.’
The new Lady Woodleigh looked as if she might take her riding-crop to him if he so much as uttered another word.
‘Choose to think that would be a reason for sending old Jack into the next world if you like,’ she said.
‘But I'm sure there are others with better reasons for wanting to get rid of him.’
‘Don't see who you mean,’ Arabella Buckley said, a blood-red blush rising up in her cheeks.
‘I mean, I've hardly met any of you, let alone…,’
‘I am thinking,’ Sven Hjerson said, ‘that Lady Woodleigh the new, is meaning someone else, not you, Miss Buckley.’
He turned in his chair a little.
‘I am thinking, Miss Abernethie, she is perhaps wondering, Like myself, why you were sent for to Naples in the middle of the new-engaged couple's holiday.
Is the trouble at home that I am hearing of, perhaps, that someone had been — what is the expression?— boiling the books?’
‘No.
No.
It's a lie.
I haven't…
Why should…
Oh, you are all so beastly.
Beastly.’
Miss Abernethie jumped from her chair, scuttled in the direction of the broad flight of steps leading to the road outside, tripped clumsily over Jilly Jonathan's big crocodile-skin handbag, fell to her feet, scrambled up again, pushed the heavy bag aside with a cry of rage that came oddly from her dumpily  respectable self and ran off out of sight.
‘Quick, quick, after her somebody,’ Arabella Buckley shouted, her prejudice in favour of foreign murderers seemingly suddenly abandoned.
Poor overweight Peter Horbury, the new Lord Woodleigh began to heave himself from his deckchair and then sank back into it.
‘Oh, she can't get off the island,’ he said.
‘No need to go chasing about.’
He turned to Sven Hjerson.
‘Perhaps, my dear fellow, since you're some sort of detective, you'd try to get through on the telephone to the Carabinieri.
They should pick her up without any trouble.’
But Sven Hjerson appeared not to have heard.
He had made no attempt to pursue the fleeing secretary and was sitting as if in a trance staring somewhere between the chairs occupied by the new Lord Woodleigh and Jilly Jonathan.
‘Yes,’ he said eventually.
‘Yes, Sven Hjerson sees it all.
It is nothing so ever to do with that Australian or Cockney mechanic.’
‘I should jolly well hope you do see it,’ Lady Woodleigh snapped.
‘Damn it, the dreadful woman's run off.
It should all be quite evident enough by now.’
‘No, no,’ the Finnish detective said, shaking his head as if to rid himself of the last remnants of misunderstanding.
‘No, you see, Lady Woodleigh, it was not Miss Abernethie who was responsible for the death of Jack who went up the hill.
Perhaps she has boiled some books, but that is another matter altogether.
No, the murder of Lord Woodleigh was conceived here on Capri, I am believing.
Perhaps because something called a stoup in a church was not so interesting enough as he had thought.’
‘What on earth,’ Arabella Buckley said, ‘has the stoup to do with murder?’
‘I will tell you.
Last Sunday the belated Lord Woodleigh and Miss Jilly Jonathan could not see the famous Blue Grotto on  this island because Lord Woodleigh insisted to go to Mass in a church here.
It was this, I am thinking, that made Miss Jonathan realize that if the marriage she was about to enter into with a man much different from herself, and older also, would not go well, she would never from a Catholic be obtaining a divorce.
So she decided to make away with him.’
‘But that's ridiculous,’ Arabella Buckley bounced out.
‘I mean, the girl wasn't even married to him yet.
She'll be left with nothing now.’
She looked across at the film star, not with a great deal of pity.
Jilly Jonathan was sitting just as she had been ever since they had come out on to the terrace.
Still as a stone.
‘No, that is wrong,’ Sven Hjerson went on in his level, accented tones.
‘You heard so much as I did, Miss Buckley.
On board the steamer the two of them were talking about what would happen to the title if Lord Woodleigh was to die before they had any children, and Lord Woodleigh said — Sven Hjerson's ears heard it —although now you get the estate .
Now, he was saying.
And about something as important as so much land and money he would speak with correctitude.
So he has already made his will, yes, leaving all already to his future wife.
That is the motive.’
‘Well, yes,’ said Lady Woodleigh.
‘But that doesn't mean she killed him.
She survived the fall down the hill.
He might have done, too.
Not much worse than a tumble in the hunting field.’
‘No,’ Sven Hjerson said, ‘you have not thought about the wrong handbag.’
‘What wrong handbag, for heaven's sake?
Man's a fool.’
‘Yes, for some time even Sven Hjerson was a fool.
He saw that handbag.
He was even carrying it, and thinking how heavy it was.
But he was never saying to himself until one moment in the past that it was much peculiar that a girl as pretty and as fashionable with her peroxide hair as Jilly Jonathan was carrying on holiday a big, crocodile-skin handbag.
He was never saying to himself in that heavy bag what should there be?’
At this he leapt from his chair in one long gingery streak, seized the bag and without ceremony upended it.
Out on to the stones of the terrace there fell a thick metal spike, not at all dissimilar to the blood-smeared one on which Lord Woodleigh had not fallen, out of sight for a few vital minutes from anyone looking from above.
‘A clear case of premeditated murder, the conception made here last Sunday, the spiky weapon obtained from somewhere, the risk taken,’ he said.
‘Once more Sven Hjerson has triumphed.
Without also fresh vegetables.’
EXPERTS FOR THE PROSECUTION
TIM HEALD
It was a golden day in a golden age.
Golden lads and lasses had just breakfasted on golden toast, a little blackened at the edge in some cases, spread with golden shred or golden syrup.
Now they tripped merrily to a schoolhouse of golden Cotswold stone burnished by a golden English sun in a bright blue heaven inhabited by a golden English God.
All was right with the world.
Up to a point.
Sergeant Bramble had just returned from the Manor House upon his bicycle.
The sergeant was stout and pink and, after the exertion of a mile-long bicycle ride, seemed stouter and pinker than usual.
‘Well I'll be jiggered!’ he exclaimed to himself as he bent to unfasten his clips, ‘I'll be jiggered and no mistake.’
And so saying he went into the tiny village police station with its distinctive blue lamp and the lettering chiselled into the stone above the doorway which said ‘King's Magnum Parva Police Station’.
A handwritten note stuffed into the bootscraper said ‘Two pints today, please.’
Inside he filled a kettle and lit the gas-ring.
The Daily Express had arrived in his absence and its front page confirmed what he had already heard from Mrs Pettifer up at the Manor.
‘Baronet vanishes,’ it screamed.
Good headlines did scream at you in those days.
‘Baronet vanishes!
Clubs abandoned at 15th green.
‘Seemed perfectly normal to me,’ says Major.’
Sergeant Bramble turned his attention to the kettle.
When it  had boiled, whistling with a tinny Woolworth sibillance, he warmed the pot-bellied black teapot, spooned in two piles of thick tarry Indian leaves, left them awhile as he had a scratch of the back, then poured the dark brown liquid into a plain white cup, with saucer, added milk from a bottle plus two sweetening spoonfuls of caster sugar.
Only then did he return to the newspaper.
Routine in his life was everything and he would be jiggered if anything — even the abduction of Squire Blacker — would interfere with it.
The article was by Percy Hoskins, the greatest Commissioners of Police and thieves and villains, who drank champagne at the Caprice, had an apartment in park lane, was an intimate of Lord Beaverbrook, yet kept the common touch.
Sergeant Bramble allowed himself the luxury of a fleeting smile.
Perhaps, who knows, the great Hoskins might yet grace King's Magnum Parva with his presence.
Sergeant Bramble drank some tea and wondered where Constable Quince had got to.
Constable Quince was new to the job and, in Bramble's estimation, unsuited for it.
He seemed to think that a policeman's lot should be to deal in drama.
He wanted excitement.
He aspired to ‘The Flying Squad’.
He talked, misty eyed, of ‘The Yard’.
He wanted to be a detective.
He was a fan of Sexton Blake.
He was a pain in Sergeant Bramble's bottom and the sooner he could recommend that Quince be transferred to somewhere more metropolitan, where robbery with violence might occur, the happier Bramble would be.
‘Dratted nuisance that Quince lad!’ thought Bramble, and started to read the paper.
This he did with difficulty, partly on account of his bad eyesight, partly because of what in later years would come to be referred to as ‘a learning disability’ or ‘mild dyslexia’; and partly because he simply wasn't much of a reader.
He didn't actually have to run his finger along the line in order to make sense of it, but he did like to mouth the  words as he got to them.
‘Fears were growing last night for the safety of Sir Vivien Blacker, Bart.
of the Manor House, King's Magnum Parva who vanished from his home yesterday.
Eton and Sandhurst educated Sir Vivien, 28, was last seen yesterday morning at Royal Wrigglesworth Golf Club.
‘Sir Vivien often played a round before breakfast,’ said Major Ernest ‘Tiger’Bagshot, 43, Secretary of Royal Wrigglesworth, ‘But my suspicions were aroused when his black labrador, Bonzo, appeared at the clubhouse at approximately ten o'clock.
The dog seemed distressed and there was no sign of his master.’’
‘Major Bagshot accompanied Bonzo to the 15th green where he found a ball and a complete set of Henry Cotton ‘St Andrew's’ clubs lying, abandoned.
Sir Vivien's mashie niblick was in a bunker approximately forty yards from the hole.’
‘Sir Vivien is the eleventh baronet and is the only surviving son of Sir Tregarron Blacker, the celebrated big-game hunter who died in the sinking of the Titanic , together with his wife, Lady Mabel.
Extensive searches revealed a series of tyre marks along the fairway leading to the 15th and there are fears that Sir Vivien, reputed to be one of the seventeen richest men in the country, may have been kidnapped and held to ransom.’
‘Our Social Correspondent writes: ‘Sir Vivien Blacker is a leading member of London Society whose name has been linked with many of our most nubile heiresses.
A familiar and dashing figure on the polo field and the Cresta Run, he is universally popular in all circles being blessed with great charm, a ready wit and debonair good looks.
Unmarried, his heir is his second cousin, once removed, Mr. Alfred Blacker who is believed to live in Hobart, Tasmania, where he was last heard of working as a Real Tennis professional.’’
Sergeant Bramble was so engrossed in mouthing along with the Daily Express that he did not notice the opening of the door.
It was only when it shut with a rusty creak that he realized that he had company.
‘Sergeant Bramble?’
The query, for such it was, emanated from an elderly lady who appeared to be clad entirely in shawls.
Her complexion was pink and white and her eyes were very wide and of an astonishingly china blue hue.
She seemed vaguely familiar.
The sergeant deliberated for a moment and then spoke in the soft but unmistakable burr of deepest Mummersett.
‘I am he,’ he said.
‘Then, Sergeant,’ said the little old lady, ‘your troubles are at an end.’
‘Saving your presence ma'am, but I bain't got no troubles.’
‘Oh now, dear me, Sergeant, let's not beat about the bush.’
The lady raised an admonitory finger in rebuke and the sergeant observed, to his surprise, that despite it being a hot summer's day, she was wearing what appeared to be mittens.
‘I have come’, continued the old lady, ‘about the Case of the Missing Baronet.’
‘You'm don't want to be believing what they do write in they newspapers ma'am’, exclaimed the sergeant, but his visitor was not listening.
‘It reminds me of my dear father one day at Sandwich,’ she was saying, ‘when we were picnicking on the sands and we had arranged to meet him at the nineteenth hole.
Imagine mother's distress when she discovered there was no such thing!
But never fear, sergeant.
I shall find the body in a jiffy and we shall apprehend the guilty party before the day is out.’
Sergeant Bramble was about to remonstrate when they were interrupted by Constable Quince wheeling his bicycle.
‘And this must be Constable Quince,’ said the old lady.
‘How do you do, Constable?’
‘Very well, thank you Ma'am,’ said Quince amiably.
‘How did you know this man's name was Quince?’ asked Bramble with a hint of incredulity.
‘I make it my business to know such things, young man.’
Bramble was forty-five and had not been thus addressed for  almost a quarter of a century.
‘Which,’ continued his visitor, ‘is why I am able to assist you with your enquiries.’
‘What enquiries?’ asked the policeman.
‘Why,’ she exclaimed, ‘your enquiries into the murder of poor Sir Vivien.’
‘But…
’ Bramble began, but she silenced him with a glare from the astonishing blue eyes.
Strange, thought Bramble, that such an apparently dithery old lady should be able to look at you like that.
Bloody terrifying.
If you asked him she ought to be put away for she was plainly off her trolley.
‘And now, Sergeant, I must be about my business.
I shall begin with the dog.
If you have any need of me you may enquire of my nephew the vicar.’
And so saying she gathered up her shawl, adjusted her mittens and scuttled from the room.
‘Phew!’ exclaimed the sergeant, producing a red and white spotted kerchief from his trouser pocket and mopping his fevered brow.
‘What was all that about?’ asked Quince.
But before Bramble could answer, the door opened and another stranger entered.
He was a small man, distinctly foreign in appearance, with a rigidly waxed moustache and an egg-shaped head which he carried rather to one side.
He seemed somewhat breathless but his intelligent eyes twinkled with amusement.
‘Allo, messieurs, I have arrived as you would have it, in the Nicholas, n'est-ce pas?’ he said.
‘I'm sorry sir, I'm not entirely with you.’
The placid equilibrium of Sergeant Bramble's existence was suddenly being put at risk.
‘Oh ho, m'sieur,’ said the little man, ‘I was not, as your expressive idiom puts it, born on the preceding day.’
His eyes flashed and he presented his elegant moustaches.
‘It is correct, is it not, that your seigneur is vanished into the air.
Pouf!’
He  slapped his palms together like a conjuror.
‘Comme ça.
Without the merest trace.’
‘Well…
’ Sergeant Bramble made as if to speak, but the foreign person silenced him with a glance that would have iced coffee.
‘The answer,’ he said, ‘lies perhaps in your game of golf.
Our friend played, I think, off a handicap of trois.
Also perhaps we should think a little of the monnaie.
Was our friend Sir Vivien as rich as he pretended?
Perhaps there was trouble with the gaming table?
But I shall call first at the Manor and present my card.
Never fear, messieurs, we shall have this mystery solved in time of nothing at all.
Should you wish advice from the world's greatest detective you may enquire for me at the Rose and Crown.
It is there that I am putting up.’
Saying which he passed jauntily from their ken, shutting the door behind him with a flourish.
‘What's all that about, Sarge?’ asked Quince.
‘It means,’ said Bramble wearily, ‘that we are under siege from the great detectives.
We just have to hope your aristocracy don't read the Daily Express .
Otherwise we'll be up to our necks with toffs in monocles and deer-stalkers all of 'em trailing manservants and frightening the cows and horses by blasting around in they great green Bentleys they all drive.’
‘Cor,’ said Quince.
‘I'll warn Mrs Pettifer they're on their way,’ said the sergeant, ‘Then you'd better keep an eye on the old lady and I'll watch the froggie geezer.
Make sure they don't create too much mischief.
I do reckon they have till sundown.
Then we'll have it all sorted out.’
‘Sorted out?’ said Quince.
He looked astonished.
‘We're going to sort it out ourselves?’
Bramble nodded.
‘We'll sort it out, my son.
In our own good time.
Now let me ring Mrs Pettifer.’
The 'phone rang for a very long time and when Mrs Pettifer eventually answered she sounded quite put out.
‘Oh, Sergeant,’ she said ‘Thank heaven it's you.
I've got this  tiresome woman here asking endless rude questions.
She keeps wanting to know if I play golf.
She even had the audacity to suggest that I might have been ‘carrying on’ with Sir Vivien.
The idea!
She says she's some sort of detective.
But she doesn't look like a detective…
She says she's called on you already and she's helping you with your enquiries.
I tried to talk to her sensibly but she just wouldn't listen.’
‘Oh dear,’ said Bramble out loud.
Privately the words he used were ‘I'll be jiggered.
Silly old bat!’
He and the housekeeper continued to converse for a few minutes and finally he said, ‘Very well, Mrs Pettifer, sherry at six.’
He spoke the words ‘sherry at six’ with a hint of menace, rather as if he had said ‘pistols at dawn’.
When he replaced the receiver he regarded his subordinate for a moment and then smiled.
‘Now, young Quince,’ he said, ‘you've always wanted a spot of real detective work to do.
So I tell you what.
You get on your bike and find that old lady what were in here just now and you don't let her out of your sight.
Don't you let her know what you're up to, mind.
Just you do prevent any serious mischief.
And I'll do the same for the foreigners.’
He put down the empty tea cup with surprising force.
‘I don't hold with foreigners,’ he exclaimed, ‘leastways not here in King's Magnum Parva.
Foreigners may be all right abroad but we don't want none of them and their ways here.’
And without more ado the two officers fastened their clips about their ankles, wheeled out with velocipedes and were on their way.
Bramble spotted his quarry entering the post office some ten minutes later.
The small foreign person was walking as jauntily as ever, though Bramble realized that he did so with a pronounced limp.
Bramble decided to follow, and when he entered the office, which was also the village shop, he found the stranger in earnest colloquy with the postmaster, one Algy Brind.
‘It is, ma foi, a matter only of the little grey cells, m'sieur’, he  was saying.
‘Your baronet is kidnapped.
Now if he is kidnapped, what may we deduce?
That a person has done so in order to extract the monnaie.
And how will this be done?
In order to make such an extraction a message must be conveyed.
And how better would a kidnapper do such a thing than to send a letter by his Majesty's Mail.
In such matters it is the most obvious things which are the most important and which stare at you from under the nose without being perceived.
And so I must ask you again to allow me to inspect the morning's mails.’
‘Oh, Sergeant Bramble!’
Algy was obviously relieved by the arrival of the law.
‘This person says he's acting on your behalf and he wants to inspect all the mail.
Ingoing and outgoing.
I've explained that it's the King's personal property until safely delivered to the addressee, but he doesn't seem to understand.’
‘Now then, now then,’ Sergeant Bramble spoke in reassuring country tones, ‘what seems to be the problem?’
‘Pas de problème,’ the peculiar foreign person gave a dismissive shrug and Sergeant Bramble caught a strong whiff of musky eau de cologne.
‘Our friend here does not seem to appreciate that the world's greatest detective is conducting a criminal investigation and that he is not to be thwarted.
Now that you are here he will hand and deliver.’
‘You can't do that there here, I'm afraid,’ said Bramble affably.
‘His Majesty's mails are not to be interfered with.
This isn't France.’
‘You mean Belgium.’
The small man's eyes flashed and he looked awfully cross.
‘Ma foi, the world's greatest detective is not to be interfered with either.
We are in the presence of very great evil, my friends, and the little grey cells must not be denied.’
He paused.
‘Did Sir Vivien perhaps purchase a licence for his dog from this office?’
‘I'm not at liberty to divulge,’ said the postmaster.
The detective looked from one man to another and flexed his moustaches.
‘My friends,’ he said, ‘you will regret this very much.’
Meanwhile in another part of the village Constable Quince had run his quarry to earth in the vegetable garden of the Manor.
She appeared to be taking herb samples.
Constable Quince hid in the potting shed and lit a Woodbine.
Presently the old lady came towards him, entered the shed and sniffed knowledgeably at a tin of weedkiller.
Constable Quince had retreated behind a stack of deckchairs and extinguished his cigarette.
Much good it did him.
She had spotted the cigarette smoke from afar and now she could see his feet protruding from under the canvas.
‘Smoking is not good for the lungs.
Nor the complexion,’ she said.
‘Size nine boots, Constable.
Unless you have a good reason for standing over there I should come out and get some fresh air.
It is a very clement day.’
The constable emerged sheepishly.
‘Do you play golf, Constable?’ she asked.
‘Can't say as I do,’ he said.
‘If Sir Vivien had reached the fifteenth green at the time of his abduction and Bonzo arrived in the clubhouse at ten o'clock, we can assume that Sir Vivien himself must have begun his round at, shall we say, about half past eight.’
Since this clearly required an affirmative the constable nodded.
‘And as it takes half an hour to drive to Royal Wrigglesworth we must assume that Sir Vivien's Lagonda would have driven through the village at about eight.’
Again the constable nodded.
The little old lady seemed pleased at this.
She had evidently decided that the policeman was a handsome as well as an agreeable fellow.
‘Are you a married man, Constable?’ she enquired.
The constable said he wasn't.
‘Nor,’ said his interlocutor cryptically, ‘is Sir Vivien.
Perhaps this is a case of cherchez la femme.
But come let us go to the garage.’
Thus the day proceeded.
The two great detectives prowled up  and down the village street dogged by the two official policemen.
Sergeant Bramble and Constable Quince very quickly gave up trying to understand what it was that the experts were looking for.
It was perfectly clear to all four of them that the forensic skills, the intellectual abilities, the sheer weight of grey cellular matter, the brutalizing experience of countless similar quests, possessed by the real experts was infinitely greater than that of the mere professionals.
This was a case of Gentlemen versus Players in the golden age when such distinctions still applied and when it was obvious to anyone with an eighth of an intelligence that no paid journeyman could ever begin to compare with the rapier-like ‘amateurs’ who flitted with effortless superiority, solving one crime after another with a brilliant insouciance which was the dismay of the criminal fraternity, the envy of the constabulary, and a source of immense satisfaction to most of the upper middle class, especially those with an aptitude for the Times crossword.
So when the great lady detective drew a hair from her head and stuck it across the lock on the front door of Sir Vivien's motor car, Constable Quince said nothing.
And when the great gentleman detective got hold of the village postman and subjected him to an interrogation which ranged from what he had eaten for breakfast to whether or not he possessed a wireless set and if so what he had listened to on the previous morning, Sergeant Bramble maintained a stoic countenance.
At luncheon all four of them fetched up in the saloon bar of The Rose and Crown.
A great detective might have considered this an astounding coincidence were it not for the fact that the hostelry was the only place in the whole of King's Magnum Parva where a lady or a gentleman might obtain a meal.
And even then it was only a matter of sandwiches or pickled eggs.
‘Aha, my friend,’ said the great gentleman detective, ‘To pickle an egg in the English fashion is a chose extremely curious.
Today I would die for one of Mère Poulard's omelettes aux fines herbes.
But tell me, the English lady who sits with the  peculiar gloves drinking sherry wine with your colleague.
She is not, I think, a native of King's Magnum Parva.’
‘No,’ said Sergeant Bramble, ‘she's a stranger in town.
Just like yourself.’
‘Ma foi!
That is a suspicious circumstance.’
And the diminutive Belgian pursed his lips and frowned into his half pint of Old Parsnip Ale.
At the far end of the room the object of his attention was exhibiting a reciprocal interest.
‘Tell me, Constable,’ she said, sipping her drink with maidenly primness, ‘the small gentleman lunching with your sergeant.
He is not, I think, quite English?’
‘Dunno.’
The constable's speech was impeded by corned beef sandwich.
When he swallowed he said, ‘Leastways he bain't from these parts.’
The old lady smiled to herself, a secret smile that implied that the final clue in her private internal crossword had slotted into place.
‘Dear me,’ she said, ‘one is surprised to find foreigners in a place such as this.
That moustache is not an English moustache, the flower in the button-hole is from some foreign field and I fancy he does not care for his pickled egg.
There is also something about him which suggests that he is not unacquainted with evil.’
She gave a shudder.
An involuntary shudder but a shudder nonetheless.
The police remained silent in the face of such speculation.
It was plain that the two great detectives were discomfited by each other 's presence.
And both Bramble and Quince were relieved when their respective charges had finished lunch and set off again on their quest.
‘Wild geese, mon vieux, is what you presume me to chase,’ said the gentleman to Bramble, ‘but I assure you the stable door is bolted.’
‘Oh dear, oh dear’, said the lady, ‘Nothing, but nothing, is ever what it seems.’
And so, in the end it was time for sherry at the Manor House.
That sense of dénouement, of the safety catch being taken off pistols, of seconds Leaving the ring, was almost palpable.
The police were baffled.
Never had they seen so much enquiry, so much question and answer, so much deployment of grey cells at one extreme and of gut intuition at the other.
Yet they were not downhearted.
For all was not as it seemed.
Mrs Pettifer made a charming surrogate host in the absence of her master.
She greeted the ill-assorted quartet with genuine warmth and friendliness.
Nevertheless the atmosphere was somewhat fraught.
It was clear that the true purpose of this meeting went a great deal deeper than mere small chat.
It was the foreigner who broke the ice.
‘Eh bien, my friends,’ he said, brushing a crumb of cheese straw from the lapel of his immaculately pressed suit, ‘it is time to make the beginning.
For in the beginning, as the bible tells us, is the end.
And while it may be that the tragic case of the disappearing baronet is one that appears to defy all logic, it is not a case that defies the world's greatest detective.
It is a case which, I am afraid to tell you, has its own beginning and middle and — alas — an end too.’
Here, Mrs Pettifer began to interject but the small gentleman silenced her with a flap of the wrist which was altogether not very gentlemanly and proved too much for the great lady detective who made a more purposeful interjection of her own.
‘This is very interesting,’ she said, ‘but I'm afraid that it is nothing more than a performance.
It is a very clever performance — what they call in theatrical circles a beautiful performance.
But it is still no more than a performance.
Not real.
This person claims to be a great detective and yet he has detected nothing, nothing at all.
He has asked questions all over the village, but none of the answers have solved this dreadful crime.
And I can tell you why.
It is because the villain of this piece is none other than he himself.’
There was a sudden silence.
You could have heard a pin drop if anyone in the room had dropped one.
Eventually the little man cleared his throat.
‘Very ingenious,’ he said, ‘The classic smokescreen.
As soon as the villain is about to be unveiled what does she do, she throws the sand in the face of her pursuers.
In the chasse, messieurs, mesdames, the beast is at its most dangerous when it is cornered.
N'est-ce pas?
This little old lady is not so innocent as she seems.
Indeed she is not innocent in the least.’
And pointing a trembling finger at her he said in a steely voice of condemnation, ‘Madame.
J'accuse.’
Even as he uttered the words a strange noise could be heard from beyond the French windows.
At first Sergeant Bramble thought it was one of the latest Atco motor-mowers but it seemed to be coming from above them.
Mrs Pettifer spoke.
‘I think,’ she said, ‘that you are about to have your problem solved.
Come with me.’
And so saying she led the way on to the terrace with its beautiful scents of honeysuckle, rose and jasmine.
As they stood there looking east they were able to discern a small buzzing winged shape heading towards them over the immense Capability Brown park.
‘An aeroplane!’ said Constable Quince.
‘Well I'll be jiggered,’ said Sergeant Bramble.
The small bi-plane wobbled over the oaks and the elms, banked at the north end of the ha-ha and started to descend towards the huge lawn which ran, treeless along this side of the house between terrace and park.
It was a perfect landing.
The plane bumped to a halt, the engine coughed and died, and two figures in leather flying helmets swung out of the open cockpit and came towards them arm in arm.
One was a dashing, debonair young man; the other was a beautiful elegant girl with high cheek-bones and eyes of the purest grey.
‘Hello auntie!’ called the man as they neared the little party.
‘Hello uncle!’ echoed the young woman in a foreign accented voice waving cheerily.
‘Mon dieu!’ said the little man, not apparently sure whether to be terribly angry or frightfully cross, ‘Nicole!’
‘I might have known it,’ said the old lady, ‘Vivien's such a naughty boy!’
The couple tripped up the terrace steps and embraced their respective relatives with affection.
‘Nicole and I are getting married,’ said Sir Vivien, ‘and we wanted you to be the first to know.
Mrs Pettifer, I think you can bring out that magnum of the widow now.’
‘Saving your presence sir,’ said Sergeant Bramble, ‘I tried to explain that there was nothing amiss and that you'd be back in time for supper with Miss Nicole.
But they wouldn't listen.’
Nicole giggled.
‘That's exactly what we expected, Sergeant.
We knew that the one way to get the world's two greatest detectives to come here would be to stage a mysterious disappearance.
Of course that nice Mr Hoskins at the Express was in on our secret.’
She turned to the two detectives.
‘We telephoned Mrs Pettifer from Paris.
And she told Sergeant Bramble.’
‘I must say Nicole's a proper Amy Johnson,’ said Sir Vivien.
‘She put the old kite right down in the middle of the fairway.
Super piece of flying, darling.’
Mrs Pettifer came out on to the terrace with a tray, glasses and a big bottle of champagne.
‘Paris?’ said the foreign detective.
‘What better place for an engagement party à deux?’ said the baronet, pouring out wine.
‘Pity we had to leave Bonzo behind, but we knew he'd be good at raising the alarm.’
‘Mes enfants,’ said the small Belgian person, ‘chers collègues, I am enchanté by your successes.
Mme Pettifer, my man Georges, I think, has consulted with you on the subject of the wines.
And the cooking also.
You, my poor dear lady,’ and he turned here to the other great detective, ‘have as one says ‘raided the vegetable garden’.
We have established, have we not, that the public house is not worthy of a celebration dinner.
So, with your agreement, Sir Vivien, your aunt and your uncle will entertain you at dinner chez vous.’
‘My dear Vivien,’ said his aunt, ‘I do commend you on your herb garden as well as on your choice of bride.
Your dear new uncle-in-law whom I was fortunate enough to encounter on the morning train from Paddington agrees that it would be nice if our friends from the constabulary were to join us.’
‘But auntie…
’ The baronet was incredulous.
‘But uncle…
’ His fiancé likewise.
‘You see dears,’ said the old lady, ‘no one, least of all a great detective, believes what they read in the newspapers.’
‘Which reminds me,’ said her friend.
‘We took the liberty of asking our friend Percy Hoskins to join us for dinner.
He should be hear in a trice, for his departure from Paddington was scheduled, I believe, for nine minutes before five.’
There was a short silence now in which anyone with good enough hearing to detect a pin-drop would have detected the sound of hundreds of little grey cells jostling and barging each other in frantic efforts to arrive at a perfect understanding of the day's events.
And then everyone raised their glasses in a spontaneous salute to the happy couple, to the perfect English village, to exotic foreign ladies, to the belle cuisine, to love, to life and above all, of course, to great detectives and their creator.
A FÊTE WORSE THAN DEATH
PAULA GOSLING
Colonel Feather's card tricks were not going well.
Peggy Mitchell, seated at the rear of the Variety Tent, sighed in sympathy as, one after another, the right card failed to appear from or disappear into the deck.
Colonel Feather's face was getting red, and he was beginning to perspire.
The small audience had begun to fidget on their rickety folded chairs.
A child's piping question about the next ‘act’— a professional juggler currently on the variety bill in a nearby town — was hurriedly hushed, as much by the Colonel's glare as its mother's whisper.
The Great Whirlo and his potential fan would have to wait — Colonel Feather was a determined man, and this was his moment.
Once again, he shuffled the recalcitrant deck, smiling too broadly, compelling their attention.
Peggy stood up and slipped out of the tent into the bright August afternoon.
They had been so lucky with the weather; a clear sky, and a soft breeze that kept everyone comfortable.
The colourful draperies of the various stands and tents billowed and flapped gently, as the denizens of Little Tuckett strolled about on the freshly clipped lawns of the vicarage garden, taking in the various delights on offer.
She waved to old Mr Pinkney, who was patiently manning the second-hand bookstall.
Hemmed in by idle readers, and knots of little boys scrabbling through the boxes of Beanos ,Magnets , and Boy's Own annuals, he waved back with a weary smile.
Mr Venables was overseeing the bran-bin, frowning Like an irritated camel.
Right next to him, Mr Doran was grinning  maniacally as he handed out squishy tomatoes for the parishioners to throw at their young vicar, trapped in the ‘stocks’.
She beamed at her husband, bravely facing the barrage of produce, and winced as a particularly juicy specimen caught him right on the chin.
Poor daft lamb, she thought, affectionately.
‘Oh, Mrs Mitchell!
Mrs Mitchell!’
The thin, over-dramatic shriek was all too familiar.
Peggy turned.
‘What is it, Peony?’ she asked, with practised calm.
‘The water, ma'am, it's still off.
There's none for the tea urns or the washing up or…’ her voice dropped dramatically.
‘Or for the toilet, neither.
There's a queue built up.
People are complaining.’
‘Oh dear.’
She peered around at the various exhibits, squinting into the sun.
‘I'm sure I saw Mr Clancy around here, somewhere.’
Peony sniffed.
‘Probably in the beer tent.
He has an awful thirst since he come back from serving in Egypt.
Maybe he thinks being a Sergeant in the Engineers makes him too good to work for ordinary folk.
He was supposed to come, yesterday, and never showed up.
Old pisser.’
‘Peony!’
Peggy was shocked.
The girl was unrepentant.
‘Well…you'd think a man with so many kids would make an effort, wouldn't you?
Unless maybe they're not all his.’
She giggled.
‘That's quite enough,’ said Peggy, attempting a stern approach to her audacity.
‘I've told you before — if you want to keep your place at the vicarage, you can't go around saying such unchristian things.
You know Mr Mitchell doesn't like it.’
Peony looked suitably chastened, but there was a glint in her eye that told Peggy there was plenty more she could say, and would say, if it weren't for the fact that she adored the Vicar with a passion that bordered on the obsessive.
It was only by issuing rather unconvincing threats of his disapproval that Peggy could keep the girl in line.
It was not easy for a spirited young woman like Peggy to be  the wife of a country vicar.
When she was eighteen and had actually been accepted at Chelsea Art School, she had been determined to be somebody wonderful, somebody famous, like Amelia Earhart or Margaret Mead.
But her girlish dreams of adventure had somehow melted under the gaze of a handsome young curate who arrived, one bright morning, at their local church.
They had married within a year.
David was a hale and hearty kind of cleric, and for a while she cherished hopes of missionary work taking them into some exotic foreign clime.
His rather surprising decision to accept the modest living of Little Tuckett had put an end to that.
Sighing over lands and wonders lost, she had accepted the inevitable.
She had been brought up a good Church of England girl — she knew the drill.
And being married to David made up for a great many afternoon teas and Women's Institute meetings.
But organizing and overseeing Little Tuckett Church Fête had lowered her resistance.
The problem of the cut-off water supply — it had been off since eight that morning — had made it much worse.
Her patience in equally short supply, she found herself exasperated, not for the first time, by Peony's snide tongue.
But she stifled her annoyance, and smiled — the very model of a good vicar's wife.
‘Well, I'm sorry everybody's moaning at you, Peony.
Tell them I said the water will be fixed, soon.
If I can't find Mr Clancy, maybe David can coax it to work.’
She went to find her husband, and discovered him still laughing and ducking the tomato barrage, naked from the waist up but liberally coated with a kind of raw ketchup.
He was a totally happy — if less than salubrious — man.
It seemed a shame to disturb him, but…
‘David?’ she called, over the laughter and teasing of the good-humoured crowd.
‘The water's still off.
It's causing problems.’
‘Talk about Mysterious Ways,’ he grinned.
‘I was wondering when I was going to be let free to do the work of the Lord.’
‘You mean the work of Mr Clancy,’ said Peggy, as he stood up and took the towel she gave him.
‘And if you think you're going to get all that off without a shower, you're wrong.’
She handed him another towel.
‘Hurry up — I gather people are standing in line for the loo.’
‘Ah — now that is serious,’ he said, picking up his shirt and reluctantly easing it over the traces of tomato pulp.
‘I'll attack the pipes with my new hammer.’
David's approach to practical problems harked back to his days on the rugby pitch, often with similarly injurious results.
‘I'll see if I can locate Mr Clancy,’ she said, in some alarm.
She went over to the Cookery and Refreshments Tent, but was stopped at the entrance by a pale-faced Constable Perkins.
‘I'm afraid there's been a bit of bother, Mrs Mitchell,’ he said.
‘Maybe you ought to wait outside, here.’
‘Why?
What's happened?’ she asked trying to see past him,
‘Well — it's Councillor Phipps,’ the constable said, in a low voice.
‘He's dead — dropped right down in the middle of the cake-tasting.
Doctor's looking at him now.
It's a shame, happening right here at the fête and all.
But we don't want to cause a fuss, now, do we?’
Unfortunately, a fuss proved to be unavoidable.
‘Poisoned,’ Dr Padgett said, standing up.
There was a shriek from the group of six women who stood back against the side of the tent.
‘No!’
Maxine Venables held her hands clasped before her as if in supplication.
‘I never,’ she gasped.
‘I never.’
Dr Padgett looked puzzled.
Mr Catlett, Chairman of the Judging Committee, spoke low in explanation.
‘He'd just tasted Mrs Venables' cake and was cutting into Mrs Feather's.
He was doing the cake judging for us, as he always does, every year.
Bit of a gourmet, he was.’
Mr Catlett , a plain and practical man himself, pronounced it to rhyme with poor-net.
‘Said it were very nice, very nice indeed — and then he choked, went a funny  colour, ripped his collar open, waved his arms a bit, and dropped down dead.
Very shocking, it was.’
‘I never did it!
I never!’
Mrs Venables insisted.
‘All right, woman, all right ,’ said Dr Padgett testily.
‘I said he was poisoned — but not necessarily by your cake.
Did you change your recipe?
Use a new brand of anything?’
Mrs Venables drew herself up.
She was a tall blonde woman, slightly overweight but still handsome.
‘Not a bit,’ she said.
‘Coffee gâteau, mine was, an old family recipe.
All pure ingredients from the cleanest kitchen in Little Tuckett — ask anyone.’
‘Well, you can see the colour of him,’ Dr Padgett muttered to Constable Perkins.
‘It will mean tests, of course, but from his appearance and what Catlett described, I'd say cyanide.
It was very quick — he still has bits of various decorations and cherries in his mouth.’
He turned and looked at the display of cakes on the long table.
There were six of them, five with small slices taken out and the sixth with the knife still in it.
Miss Pinkney's was a chocolate layer cake with cherries, angelica leaves, and pink sugar roses on it.
Mrs Doran's was a Victoria sponge with toasted almonds and walnut halves carefully arranged on the top.
Mrs Clancy's was a marble cake frosted white and decorated with chocolate curls and chocolate creams.
Mrs Yardley's was a plain sponge, but had been lacily covered with swirls and dollops and curlicues of golden buttercream icing dotted with candied violets.
Mrs Feather's cake was a simple white confection, quite plain in comparison with the others.
But then, Mrs Feather had never needed anything to brighten up her baking — she was a superb cook.
Mrs Venables' cake was — as she had said — a perfect coffee gâteau, smoothly frosted in caramel, with three cherries on the top.
A fourth cherry had been in the slice the Councillor had just removed and eaten.
‘There was a cherry on your cake, too, Dorothy,’ Mrs Venables said, accusingly, to Mrs Feather.
‘Yes, I know there was,’ said Mrs Feather in a soft, sad voice.
‘That packet of cherries was the only decoration I had on hand.
I haven't been doing much baking lately.’
She sighed.
‘But I woke up in the middle of the night and couldn't get back to sleep, so I decided to bake a cake, after all.
I hardly had anything in the cupboard so I had to make do…
’ She trailed off, embarrassed.
‘He could never resist a cherry,’ said a soft voice, and they all turned.
Mrs Phipps stood there, quiet, plain, dressed in dove grey, with a handkerchief clutched in her hand.
In the excitement, everyone seemed to have forgotten her — which was not unusual.
Her husband had always been the centre of attention wherever he went — large, handsome, charming: a vote-getter by trade and inclination.
There were tears on the unremarkable face of Mrs Phipps, but she had made no sound, from the minute of entering the tent until now.
‘Oh, my dear,’ said Peggy, going to her.
‘I'm so sorry, so very sorry.
Come up to the vicarage and I'll make you a cup of…
’ Then she remembered the water problem.
‘Come and sit down’, she said, and led Mrs Phipps to a chair by the useless tea-urn.
Constable Perkins, who had been enjoying himself at the fête, ‘patrolling’ the exhibits, had only by chance come into the Cookery Tent at the vital moment.
He'd kept the curious out while the doctor made his examination.
Now he drew himself up and Took Control.
He gazed at the women, and the small group of people who had been in the tent when the councillor actually collapsed.
Fortunately, most of the crowd had been drawn to the main attraction of The Great Whirlo in the Variety Tent at that particular point in the afternoon.
There were no teas being served and, anyway, everybody in Little Tuckett knew that either Mrs Clancy or Mrs Feather always won the Cake Competition.
‘I'll want nobody leaving until I say so,’ said Perkins.
There were murmurs of both assent and dissent.
Some protested they had to get home, but their tone was half-hearted.
What supper  preparations could compare with this rare excitement?
‘And nobody touching anything,’ Perkins went on, in a loud voice.
‘Nothing — is that understood?’
He glared at Mr Catlett, who quailed before this rare intimidation from a man who was normally jovial and kind.
‘Touch nothing,’ Mr Catlett echoed.
‘I quite understand.’
‘Now, I am going to make a list of those present,’ Perkins continued.
‘And we shall eventually want to take statements from everyone — in particular, the six ladies who baked these cakes.’
It did not take long.
One by one the members of the crowd trickled out into the fête, carrying with them the news of Phipps's death.
(‘And maybe murder!’)
Gradually there arose a faint humming from outside the tent as people gathered to talk and speculate, so it seemed as if those left inside were surrounded by a swarm of curious but not unfriendly bees.
Constable Perkins was torn between keeping an eye on the scene of the crime — and perhaps making a brilliant arrest — or calling up reinforcements.
But common sense, coupled with the prospect of the time and paperwork involved in interviewing the hundred or so people who'd been through the Cookery and Refreshment Tent during the past few hours finally defeated his hope for personal glory through brilliant deduction.
‘I shall have to report this to my superiors,’ he finally said, when only Peggy remained in the tent.
Mr Catlett was deputized to ‘keep an eye on everything’ while Perkins went up to the vicarage to make his 'phone call.
Voices were raised outside as he progressed through the crowd, but he told everyone to ‘move on’ and ‘go home’, instructions which, of course, were ignored.
They stayed outside — but they stayed.
The six competitors sat at the tea tables, together but strangely separate — each gazing at her hands or off into the distance, and never at one another.
Peggy and Mrs Phipps sat  together, slightly apart from the rest.
Peggy was determined to be sympathetic.
The trouble was, Mrs Phipps didn't seem to need sympathy.
She was perfectly calm, perfectly quiet, and had nothing to say, other than a reiteration of her previous statement, to wit, ‘he could never resist a cherry’.
Was this common knowledge, Peggy wondered?
She asked Mrs Phipps, as delicately as she could.
‘Why else would there be so many fal-lals and thingamajigs on those cakes?’ the widow said, wearily.
‘They were all out to catch Henry's eye.
The fancier something looked, the better he thought it tasted.
Cherries, chocolates, walnuts, and anything in silver paper — Henry always wanted the best of anything and everything.
Thought it was his due.
I'm glad he's gone — I can do what I like, now.’
It was the voice of a woman released, in more ways than one, from a life of obedient acquiescence to a stronger personality.
It was also the voice of innocence, Peggy thought.
For if Mrs Phipps been clever enough to manage her husband's murder, then she was too bright to make such uninhibited admissions, even to a sympathetic vicar's wife, other than in the knowledge that she'd nothing to hide.
Peggy glanced across at the six women seated nearby.
She had learned, over the past five years, that a vicar's wife is expected to be sympathetic, helpful, and above reproach.
To her credit, whatever other social solecisms the inexperienced Peggy might have committed during their stay in Little Tuckett, she had never betrayed a confidence.
Once they'd realized this, the villagers came to her often with their problems.
She had soon learned that almost everybody has something they want to hide, and something they're eager to share.
A great deal of gossip about the village and its inhabitants had thus come her way, from every direction.
It gave her a rather unique 360-degree view of the place.
She knew of at least one reason why each of these six women would have been glad to see Handsome Henry dead.
Miss 
Pinkney's father had been nearly bankrupted through a failed business venture with Phipps.
Some said this loss of funds was what lay behind a recent broken engagement between the rather unattractive Miss Pinkney and the third son of a titled but impecunious family.
Then there was the question of the paternity of Mrs Clancy's last child: Mr Clancy had only just returned from Egypt after a two-year posting, and — as Peony had pointed out — the child was only 14 months old.
Mrs Doran's husband had been a loser to Phipps, both at golf and in the bedroom.
Had he discovered it, or was she afraid he would?
Doran's short temper and long memory were famous in Little Tuckett.
Mrs Feather's daughter Imogen had a brief, unhappy affair with Phipps, only last Christmas, and had subsequently left the village to care for an elderly aunt in Scotland.
Some said she'd left with a broken heart.
Phipps's latest conquest — he rarely went long without excitement — had been the childless and bored Mrs Venables, whose cake was the last he'd tasted, and whose husband was the local chemist.
Oh dear, Peggy thought — the local chemist .
And Mrs Yardley?
What about Mrs Yardley — oh, yes.
Of course.
Mrs Yardley's husband had lost his job recently, and Phipps held the mortgage on the little cottage they were so proud of.
They'd been in it only a year, but Mrs Yardley had lavished as much effort on it as she had on her beautiful cake.
Had Handsome Henry tried to foreclose — or, seeing how pretty Mrs Yardley was, had he suggested an alternative form of payment?
Peggy thought she knew of at least another ten people who would not really be mourning the death of Henry Phipps.
There could be as many more — dozens more — about whom she knew absolutely nothing at all.
As manager of the local estate agency and building society, Handsome Henry got around.
Had an enemy completely unknown to Peggy travelled to the fête in Little Tuckett with the express purpose of bumping off the fulsome Phipps?
If one such had done the deed, she could be of no assistance in the enquiries.
But if it was a local person…
‘Dear me,’ she murmured.
‘I beg your pardon?’ asked the Widow Phipps.
Peggy saw with some dismay that she wore the distant smile of a woman reviewing her late husband's insurance position.
The tent flap drew back, and David Mitchell entered, cleaned up and resplendent in dog-collar and cardigan.
Apparently the water supply had been restored.
Peggy got up and hurried over to him.
‘David,’ she whispered, drawing him aside.
‘I'm afraid I know rather a lot of people who wanted to kill Mr Phipps.’
‘Oh, so do I,’ he said, gravely.
‘Heaps.
Including me.’
‘What?’
She was shocked.
‘He's been pressuring me to sell the land next to this house,’ David said.
‘The very land on which he now lies dead, in fact.’
He glanced over at the mound of tablecloths hastily borrowed from the tables of the unused tea-stall, under which the body of the late Councillor Phipps was now reposing.
‘But — it belongs to the Church.’
‘Of course.
But both the vicarage and the church itself are in desperate need of repair.
A word from me to the Commissioners might have swayed the sale in Phipps's direction.
He had a tame developer all poised to move in.
Kept saying something about building a parade of really modern shops.
He went on and on about it until I could cheerfully have strangled him.’
‘Well, fortunately for you, he was poisoned,’ said Peggy, in some relief.
‘Doesn't matter — I could have done it,’ said David, pointedly.
‘In fact, from what Perkins was just telling his inspector on the telephone, anybody might have slipped into the Cookery Tent before the judging and put a poisoned cherry into temptation's way for Henry Phipps.’
‘Only somebody who knew his weakness for them,’ said Peggy.
‘You usually have to know someone quite well to hate them,’
David observed.
‘And a lot of people knew him very well indeed, believe me.’
Peggy was all too aware of that.
Questions of Morality and Christian Virtue aside, she didn't really blame all the women Henry Phipps had conquered for succumbing to his wiles.
Life in a small village could be deadly dull, and Henry had been absolutely charming when he chose to be.
The difficulty was, he'd chosen to be charming so very, very often.
Why, even Peggy herself had been one of his targets — until he realized there was no chance for him there.
If David had ever learned of the things Phipps had said to her, he would probably…
‘Oh dear,’ she said, again.
They stared at one another in dismay, the sad, small wickedness of their friends and neighbours strewn around their minds like dirty confetti from a party long past.
Henry Phipps had been the chief celebrant at this particular form of ‘get-together’, and now someone had brought his priapic revels to a rather spectacular end.
Constable Arthur Perkins was a phlegmatic man, resigned long ago to losing his hair and his prospects for promotion as he worked out his years in an area singularly free of serious crime.
This was only his second murder in eighteen years, and he was somewhat annoyed by it, coming as it did during the best fishing of the year, and right at the time when his garden was at its peak.
Murder, he felt, was a winter occupation — dark deeds were suited to dark months.
Not now, and surely not here, in these gaudy summer surroundings.
He glared at the people who surrounded the tent, and they glared back, wanting action.
Well, he thought, they'll have plenty of action when my Inspector gets here.
Meanwhile — and he crossed his arms as it to underline the point — nobody gets in and nobody gets out.
Leaving David with Mr Catlett, Peggy went back to the table and sat down.
‘The police will be here soon,’ she said, quietly.
‘Constable Perkins is here,’ Mrs Clancy said.
‘Yes, I know.
But there will be a great many more, soon, and they'll be asking a great many questions.’
‘Oh dear,’ Mrs Feather said.
‘And it's so hot.’
That was true enough.
With the tent flap closed, the heat had been building up under the canvas.
Mrs Feather looked quite pale, and there was a constant and discreet pressing of handkerchiefs to the upper lips and foreheads of all the women.
‘Perhaps if we tried to get things straight in our minds now, it might hurry the enquiry along,’ Peggy suggested, casually.
‘I really don't see what good that would do,’ snapped Miss Pinkney.
‘Oh, anything to get it settled,’ said Mrs Doran, glaring at the spinster beside her.
‘I have a hairdressing appointment at four.’
‘Well, we could start by working out exactly how and when the cakes arrived.’
said Peggy.
‘They're not easy things to carry, after all.’
It transpired that each woman had packed up her own cake to bring to the fête.
Mrs Yardley had re-used a proper cake box from a city bakery; Mrs Doran, Miss Pinkney and Mrs Clancy had used their usual cake tins; and Mrs Feather and Mrs Venables had used ordinary cardboard boxes.
And they'd all packed them up this morning.
‘Did anyone help you to get the cakes out of their containers for the judging?’
Peggy asked.
‘I mean, I expect it's difficult to manage without harming them.’
No — each lady had personally placed her cake on the long table — without assistance.
But then Mr Clancy and Mr Venables, who had been standing by to offer encouragement, had fallen into an argument concerning position.
Mr Doran had moved his wife's cake to the first position, and Mr Clancy had moved it back to the middle, saying the first cake tasted had the best chance, and his wife's cake would be first as it had got there first.
Mr Venables disagreed and made some claim about tastebuds and their ‘overstimulation’.
Mr Clancy was not impressed  by this scientific distraction, and said so.
Vehemently.
Colonel Feather had then expressed a worry that children could easily reach over and scoop up a fingerful of frosting, perhaps spoiling someone's chances, so he and Mr Doran — the latter complaining mightily about his lumbago — had moved the cakes to the back of the table.
Agreeing that the cakes should be protected, Mr Pinkney had set up a sort of crêpe paper barrier along the front of the display.
There was one exception.
Mr Yardley, according to his wife, had never set foot in the tent.
‘He just dropped me off,’ she said.
‘He had to go to Burford to see someone about a new job.’
‘But I saw your husband come into the tent while you were over at the tombola,’ Mrs Doran said to Mrs Yardley.
‘Oh, you couldn't have,’ Mrs Yardley protested.
‘Well, I did ,’ said Mrs Doran, piqued.
‘What's more, he was hanging around the cake display, looking rather shifty, if you ask me.’
‘Well, nobody asked you,’ huffed Mrs Yardley.
Peggy pressed her lips together.
Trying to find out who had direct access to the cakes had proved nothing.
Apparently all of the husbands — or, in the case of Miss Pinkney, her father — had had the opportunity.
Even young Mr Yardley had to be a possibility, if Mrs Doran was right and he had been ‘hanging around’ the tent instead of pursuing job opportunities in Burford.
Poison was traditionally a ‘woman's weapon’— but would a woman bake a cake for a competition and then put poison on it?
Hardly likely, since tests would immediately reveal her guilt.
But a decoration — that was different.
What if it had originally been on one of the other cakes?
It could have been switched around by anyone, hoping to lay the blame elsewhere.
Or it could have been brought in and substituted.
Or even added to others already there.
She looked over at the long table.
The six cakes sat there, apparently innocent and, oddly enough, still appetizing.
In previous years the competition cakes had been  auctioned off to benefit the Belltower Restoration Fund — and that had been the intention this year, too — but there would be no bidders, now.
Mrs Doran smiled at young Mrs Yardley.
‘Wouldn't be the first time your husband's come back when you didn't expect him, would it?’
Her tone was very unpleasant.
‘Maybe he's keeping an eye on you.’
‘What do you mean by that?’
Mrs Yardley demanded, her cheeks flaming.
Mrs Doran just smiled — and it was not a pleasant smile.
‘That was unkind,’ said Mrs Feather to Mrs Doran in a reproachful tone, as Mrs Yardley began to sniffle.
‘I'm not feeling particularly kind at the moment,’ Mrs Doran snapped.
‘I'm not surprised,’ said Mrs Clancy.
‘I hear your husband was blackballed when he tried to join the Country Club.
Wonder
who did that?’
Mrs Doran stiffened.
‘That's not true!’ she said, but her voice betrayed her.
Miss Pinkney spoke up, her small voice carrying a waspish sting.
‘Some people never learn.’
Mrs Doran's lips drew back in a snarl.
‘And some people learn just in time.
Too bad Henry Phipps happened to mention your father's debts to that chinless wonder you had on the string.
That will teach your father to allow your ‘admirers’ to visit the Black Lion.’
Miss Pinkney went scarlet.
‘Geoffrey didn't care that we were poor, it was nothing to do with that.
I decided I didn't want to get married.
In fact, I sent Geoffrey away, if you must know!’ she shrilled.
‘And now somebody has sent Henry Phipps away — for good,’ Mrs Venables said, and laughed — or tried to.
‘If he'd gone away a long time ago, it would have been better,’ said Mrs Clancy wryly.
‘There's altogether too much said at the Black Lion,’ Mrs  Yardley said darkly.
‘And too much heard,’ Mrs Venables agreed.
Mrs Feather drew a long breath and let it out.
‘I wish you'd all stop this,’ she said, rubbing her forehead.
‘Has Dr Padgett gone?
I have such a headache.’
She did look unwell — her face was pale.
‘I haven't been sleeping well, lately.’
‘Guilty conscience?’ asked Mrs Clancy unpleasantly.
‘Bad dreams?’
Mrs Venables suggested.
‘No — it was the telephone.
It rang around four o'clock and woke us up.
Marcus said it was some idiot wanting the Water Company.’
‘There's a burst main at Nether Hassett,’ Mrs Clancy said knowledgeably.
‘They wanted my George up there, yesterday.
He was gone all day, and come back late for supper.’
‘Hmmphh,’ said Mrs Venables.
‘Your precious George can't have done much good if the main burst again .’
‘Perhaps that's why our water went off this morning,’ Peggy mused.
‘Well, they never called him back, and lucky for them,’ Mrs Clancy said.
‘If it was four in the morning, he'd have told them what to do with their water main.’
‘It's usually our number they ring,’ Miss Pinkney said.
‘Our number's only one digit different from the Water Company's.
Father's complained again and again.’
‘Well, all I know is, I couldn't get back to sleep,’ said Mrs Feather wearily.
‘I never can, once I'm woken.
My mind just goes on and on…
’ She looked bleak at the recollection of those dark hours.
‘Well,my conscious is clear,’ Miss Pinkney said archly.
‘I sleep like a baby.’
‘You surprise me,’ said Mrs Venables.
‘Considering the Council is planning to close down the Library because you can't keep track of things properly.’
‘No doubt you take sleeping pills,’ said Mrs Clancy.
‘Your husband has so many potions and mixtures on his shelves.’
‘Oh, yes — wasn't there something about a wrong prescription last year?’
Mrs Yardley asked.
‘Didn't he poison someone?’
‘How dare you!’ said Mrs Venables, going white.
‘I think you're all disgusting,’ Mrs Doran sniffed.
‘And poor Mrs Phipps, with her husband lying there…’
Mrs Phipps stirred.
‘I don't particularly need your sympathy, Hazel Doran,’ she said.
She looked at each of the women in turn.
‘Or anyone else's.’
‘I don't know what you mean,’ Mrs Doran said stiffly.
‘She means you're all hypocrites,’ said Shirley Yardley in an accusing tone.
Her eyes filled with tears — whether of shame, frustration, or grief it was difficult to tell.
‘You all had good reason for wanting Henry Phipps dead.’
‘So did your husband,’ hissed Mrs Doran.
‘So did Henry's wife,’ snapped Mrs Venables, stung by Mrs Phipps's collective rejection of their doubtful sympathy.
‘I don't deny it,’ Mrs Phipps agreed.
‘I'm glad he's gone.
I'm just waiting to see who I have to thank for it.’
She looked around the tent, her pale eyes filled with simple curiosity, and then looked back at Peggy.
‘Who do you think I should thank, Mrs Mitchell?’
Peggy shook her head, unable to speak.
Suspecting was one thing — accusing was quite another.
The heat in the tent, the pinched faces and the angry voices were all becoming unbearable.
She couldn't face them a minute longer.
Especially not one of them.
She stood up, abruptly.
‘If the water is back on, I'll get Peony to make some tea or some nice fresh lemonade.
I think we all need cooling down,’ she said, and left them to their bitter devices.
‘What is it, Peggy?’ asked David.
Something in her face, in her eyes, in the clenched line of her jaw, had made him hurry out of the tent after her.
‘I think I know who did it,’ she said miserably.
‘Then you must say,’ David told her.
‘Not until I'm certain’ she said and went slowly toward the vicarage — and the telephone.
He was still in the Variety Tent, sitting on one of the rickety chairs.
Peggy sat down beside him.
‘I'm afraid it's going to have to come out, Colonel Feather,’ she said gently.
‘They'll soon find the evidence they need, once they know where to look.’
He fixed her with a bloodshot eye.
‘Evidence?’
‘That you killed Henry Phipps.’
For a moment he glared at her, opened his mouth to deny everything, and then slumped in the chair, which creaked in protest.
‘Man of action,’ he said.
‘Always was.
See an opportunity, seize it.
That's how you win wars.’
And lose battles, Peggy thought.
She waited, then spoke softly.
‘Was it your daughter, Imogen, who made that trunk call from Scotland this morning?’
He sighed, and shook his head.
‘No.
It was my sister.
Imogen is dead.
And the baby, too.
It happened very quickly, she said.
Haemorrhage, complications….’
His bleary eyes filled with tears but he tilted his head back and glared at the top of the tent.
‘I couldn't find the words to tell Dorothy, so I said it was a wrong number.
Was going to tell her this morning, but when I came downstairs and saw her packing up that cake — when I remembered he was going to be there, that I'd have to see his smug damned face, hear that ghastly loud laugh of his…
I couldn't stand it.
I saw the cherry and realized an opportunity was at hand.
Had just the stuff in the shed.
Should have got rid of it years ago, but hadn't.
Fate, perhaps?
No?
Well, have it your own way.
While the wife was getting dressed I took another cherry from the packet and prepared the thing.
I planned to switch them when we got here — just sleight of hand, you know.
Work of a moment.’
He riffled the deck of cards he still held, then faced her.
‘I gave him an even chance, of course.’
‘An even chance?’
Peggy asked, in some surprise.
‘Absolutely.’
The Colonel apparently had his own rules about  such things.
‘I put the poisoned cherry there, I admit that.
If he hadn't eaten it, I would have bought the cake at the auction and got rid of it.
But he did eat it, and I thought he would.
His own greed killed him, you see.
Took what didn't belong to him, as usual.
You could say he killed himself, really.’
‘I don't think that would hold up in court,’ said Peggy softly.
Or in Heaven, she thought.
‘No?’
The Colonel shrugged.
‘Well, I shall get a good lawyer.
We'll have a go.’
He glanced at her.
There was no guilt in his eyes — only grim satisfaction.
‘How did you know?’
Peggy took no pleasure in the telling.
‘I checked with the Exchange about your early morning caller and they said it wasn't local, but a connection from Edinburgh.
You hadn't told your wife about it, so I thought it was probably bad news, and that it might have upset you enough to — well, to do something.
You see, whoever put that poisoned cherry on the cake must have got sugar on his hands, but couldn't lick them because of the poison, and couldn't wash them because there was no water available.
Wiping them might have been enough for most people — but not for somebody who was trying to do card tricks.’
The Colonel looked down.
‘Ah,’ he said.
‘Sticky fingers.’
He smiled at her in wry relief.
‘Thank you, my dear.
for a while there I thought I was losing my touch.’
WEDNESDAY MATINÉE
CELIA DALE
The Regent Theatre stood halfway down Shaftesbury Avenue towards the Piccadilly end, convenient for the Trocadero or the Criterion for those who like their after-theatre supper served amid gilt and chandeliers rather than in the garlicky hinterland of Soho.
It was a handsome building, much embellished by scrollwork picked out in cream, and topped by a tower something between a lighthouse and a campanile on which was displayed in enormous, twinkling light bulbs.
CISSY SALT AND FREDDY PEPPER in RING FOR ROBSON The Cheeriest Show in Town with Marion Conroy Bunty Baird Gilbert Forbes Jack Walker
Beneath this an equally twinkling canopy overhung a pavement inlaid with tiles of lilies and acanthus leaves leading through swing-doors to a foyer rich in crimson carpet, mahogany, plump banquettes, frames of photographs of the cast in this or other productions, a Box Office within whose highly carved confines the Box Office manager or his assistant lurked like priests in the confessional receiving through the pinched grill the whispered wishes of communicants.
In the evenings they wore dinner Jackets.
As did the House Manager who roamed throughout performances in the foyer or the staircases, the bars of Stalls, Dress Circle and Upper Circle, keeping an eye on programme girls (most of them certainly mature) who, in their black dresses and little aprons, ushered, sold programmes and in the intervals brought trays of tea and biscuits (coffee in the evenings), while in the orchestra pit the band (tuxedoed, although who knew whether their trousers matched) played pleasing music.
The crimson curtain, weighted with gilded fringe and tassels, footlights glowing at its hem, promised delights.
Backstage, however, things were different.
Round a side street, down an alley strewn with the detritus from Berwick Street fruit market, a scuffed swing-door gave entrance to stone stairs and passages like those of a tenement building.
Straight ahead big doors led on to the wings and stage itself; up one flight the star dressing-rooms 1 and 2.
Above again numbers 3 and 4 — and the lavatory for all; above again, numbers 5 and 6, and a sort of cupboard where lurked the two understudies and Johnny, the callboy/Assistant Stage Manager.
The air was close, soured through with the smell of size, canvas and stewed tea, and, around the entrance cubbyhole of Bert, the stagedoor-keeper, Goldflake cigarettes and the chancey whiff of Flossie, his aged spaniel.
It was a hot August afternoon, a Wednesday matinee.
The smell of rotten oranges from the alley was strong as the swing-doors were pushed open.
Bert looked up from his Star.
‘Afternoon, Master Conroy.’
‘Good afternoon, Mr Bassett.’
He was a stout, rather handsome boy of thirteen, grey flannelled, pulling off a school cap.
‘Come to see your mum, 'ave you?
Act Three's just gone up, so she'll be a while, but Miss Baird's not on yet.
Be sure and tap the door, else you'll catch 'er in 'er desserbil.
She'd like that, I daresay, but yer mum wouldn't, and can't say as I blame 'er.’
He inhaled sourly and broke into a glutinous cough.
‘Thanks, Mr Bassett.’
Conroy folded his cap into his pocket and started up the stairs, then pressed against the wall as footsteps clattered down and round the turn came Freddy Pepper himself, big ears and horn-rims that were his trademark, in tennis togs above which his ruddy make-up glowed.
He did not acknowledge Conroy, but hurried on down with that glazed look of someone already encased in their next entrance.
He had come not from his own No. 2 dressing-room but from the floor above.
The door of No. 1, where his wife Cissy Salt dressed, was ajar.
Conroy continued up to the next landing.
The door of No. 4 was open, the room empty; No. 3, the room his mother shared with Bunty Baird, was shut, and as he came to it he heard a sharp crack, a yelp and Bunty's voice ‘Oh shog off, you silly old fool, beat it!’
As he hesitated the door opened and Gilbert Forbes came out in a rush, his make-up smudged on one side of his face, his toupee not quite straight.
His tall frame, in its butler's black and white, seemed to vibrate.
He glared at Conroy without seeing him and charged back into No. 4, slamming the door.
Bunty, in a rather grubby pink kimono, turned from the mirror where she was padding her face with a caked flat powderpuff.
‘Conroy, angel!
How lovely to see you!’
She twined her arms round him and kissed his cheek.
She smelled warm and sweet, Like a marshmallow.
‘Mummy's on stage, you're just in time to button me up.’
He had known his mother would be on stage and her dresser Jessie in the wings waiting to help her with her quick change, and Bunty alone; but he had not bargained for her not being dressed.
He stood, scarlet-cheeked, as she moved towards the screen, throwing off the kimono as she went.
She wore peach satin camiknickers and no stockings — it was breath-taking.
From half behind the screen she called, ‘Tell me the gossip, darling.
How's school?’
‘It's the holidays.’
‘Of course it is!
Silly me!’
Garments fluttered over her head  and she emerged more or less inside a pleated tennis dress, sailor-collared but daringly short.
‘Be a pet and do me up, sweetie.
I'm on in five minutes, that old ass slowed me down.’
It was difficult to fasten the buttons down her back as she bent and moved about in front of the mirror, powdering, moistening, curling.
Besides, his hands were trembling.
She turned, all flaxen and pink and white, haloed by the naked light bulbs round the mirror.
She was only a little taller than he.
‘What a useful boy you are, darling,’ she said softly, ‘Good at all sorts of things.’
He was dumb as an ox.
‘Find me my shoes, there's a pet.’
Dazedly he saw them by the sagging chaise-longue.
As he bent to get them she stretched out her leg beside him, smooth and wet-white bare, a shabby pink mule dangling from the toes.
‘Put them on for me, Conroy,’ she said, leaning back on both hands against the dressing-table.
On his knees he took off the slipper, slid the white high-heeled sandal on to her foot.
Her toenails were varnished pink.
He felt as though he were going under dentist's gas…
The door banged open.
‘Why, whatever are you doing, Master Conroy?’
Jessie, his mother's dresser, sidled in, a dress and Jacket over her arm.
He jumped up, scarlet.
Jessie was small and hunched, like a white-haired mouse, hardly visible beneath the garments she carried.
She gave Bunty a very sharp look.
‘You'll miss your entrance, miss.’
‘Keep your hair on, Jess.’
Coolly Bunty turned to give a final look in the mirror; then put her fingers to her lips and, as she passed Conroy, pressed them against his.
‘You were marvellous, sweetie,’ she murmured and was gone.
Marion Conroy was on stage until the final curtain calls and came up the stairs with the rest of the cast afterwards, observing as she did that Pepper went into his No. 2 and shut the door but that Cissy opened it and went in after him, the wide-eyed  babyish stare that was the caricaturists' joy quite absent.
She entered her own No. 3 to find her son reading a copy of Playgoer and Jessie creeping about hanging up costumes.
Strictly speaking, Jessie's services were shared with Bunty, but Bunty had no quick changes and was also a slut — her dressing-shelf was a clutter of blunted sticks of grease-paint, dirty powderpuffs, a mangey rouge-stained rabbits-foot, caked make-up towels, and powder over everything.
Besides, Jessie had been with Marion for years, following her from production to production, doing sewing and little chores in between times when Marion was ‘resting’.
Marion, a ripely handsome woman in her mid-thirties, who had played a season at Stratford-on-Avon and toured as Mrs Tanqueray, was extremely displeased at having to share Jessie, let alone a dressing-room, and particularly with a chit like Bunty; but the Regent was small and naturally the two Star dressing-rooms, 1 and 2, went to Salt and Pepper, that perennial and professionally married pair of comedy-thriller performers whose productions never ran for less than a year — a godsend in a profession where rehearse for three weeks, open and close in two was not unusual.
So Marion, back on the boards after the death of her boring solicitor husband some years ago, compressed her lips and maintained as well as possible the stately calm that so well suited her part as the Balkan Countess whose family jewels were stolen in this season's Salt and Pepper offering (Robson the butler was the master crook, in league with the Countess's French maid).
She greeted her son with a nod and relief that Bunty had lagged behind on the stairs, giggling with some others.
‘Not a good audience,’ she declared from behind the screen as Jessie helped her out of her dress, ‘Typical matinee.
And some silly woman crashed her tray to the floor just as I made my second entrance — disgraceful!’
She emerged in a dressing-gown and sat down to remove her make-up.
‘Are you hungry, Conroy?
I don't feel I can face more than a snack in this heat…’
The door flew open and Bunty danced in.
‘Conroy, my pet, are you still here?’
His mother's voice was cold from behind the make-up towel.
‘We shall be going out, Bunty, never fear.’
‘Oh I don't care, darling, I shan't be here.
I'm going up to Jack's for a bite and a bubbly between shows.
It's too much of a fag to go out.’
She bounced to the mirror to powder and tweak for a moment, catching Conroy's eye and giving him a wink.
Then she undid her dress (she could manage it quite well by herself, it seemed) and let it fall, picking up the kimono from the couch and wrapping it casually around her.
‘So don't mind me,’ she said sweetly, patted Conroy's cheek as she passed, and was gone.
Marion and her son had an agreeable high tea of poached eggs on toast, tea and cakes, went for a little walk along Old Compton Street and bought some gorgonzola and a pound of cherries before returning to the theatre for the evening show; he was allowed to watch the first act from the wings before making his way back to Putney on his own.
There was plenty of time before Curtain Up at 8 o'clock, half the cast had gone out and backstage had a drowsy air about it.
Even Bert was not in his cubbyhole, but Flossie was and gave a languid thump of her tail.
There were no new notices on the wall-board criss-crossed with tape for messages, and Marion allowed Conroy to push open the big doors and go out into the cavernous darkness of the wings with their slats of scenery fencing the hollow stage, its set furniture dead beneath one working light.
He loved yet feared this place.
This empty stage, this empty auditorium beyond, agape like a hollow mouth, had more potency for his mother than ever he and his dry father had; its unreality was more real for her than their reality.
He could not comprehend but he could feel it.
The smell of canvas, dust and size pinched up his nostrils, a heady mysterious smell, sweet and sour at once.
He shivered.
And then, tearing the silence, came a scream.
Dressing-room doors opened, voices questioned, feet clattered on the stone staircases.
And on the stone staircase, a few steps up from Bert's cubbyhole, Flossie barking asthmatically from inside, lay Bunty Baird, head down, her pretty limbs ugly in disorder within the flimsy disarray of her kimono, one white sandal still on her foot.
Shrieks, exclamations, curses.
Pepper, Cissy, Dorothy, who played the comic char, the Stage Manager Bob, his Assistant and callboy Johnny, all popped out of their various rooms like gophers from their burrows to gather and shout.
‘My God!’,
‘Christ!’,
‘She's knocked out,’‘Lift her up’, ‘Don't move her’, ‘What happened?’
Marion pressed Conroy's face into her bosom to hide the sight.
Jack came rushing down from his room on the top floor and threw himself down beside Bunty, cradling her head.
‘What happened?
Oh God!
Speak to me, do something someone…’
Freddy Pepper pushed him aside.
‘Give her air, for God's sake.
Let her breathe, man.’
‘She's unconscious…’
‘She's dead!’ from Dorothy.
‘No she's not.
Move her into Props — gently, be careful…’
Gently they lifted the bedraggled form as Bert came lumbering down from the 3 and 4 landing, with Gilbert Forbes behind him, and behind him the trembling form of Jessie, wringing her hands.
Pepper and Jack carried Bunty through the doors into the wings and on into the Property Room, a cavern of furniture and baskets of props, rich with the smell of dust and old beer.
They laid her on the couch, Jack huddled at her side.
‘What happened?
Did she fall?
Get a doctor!
She'll be all right.’
But she was not all right.
She had broken her neck.
They stood around her in the stuffy room, aghast.
We must get a doctor.
‘Too late.’
‘Are you sure?’
‘Oh poor little Bunty!’
‘The  police…we must call the police…’
‘No.’
Cissy Salt, her baby face hard and cold as a coin, stood back from the couch and looked round at the trembling tearful group.
‘There's nothing we can do for her now and it's House Full tonight.
Police would shut the theatre and I'm not having that.’
‘But Cissy…
’ Her husband gazed at her across the body.
‘You can't do that.’
‘Yes I can.
Rita can go on for her, and Jack's understudy can take over as the maid, Rita's part — we'll make it a footman.
Half-way through the last act we'll call a doctor, and the police if you like — they won't stop the show then and the delay won't harm Bunty, poor little cow.’
‘But the police…’
‘It was an accident, we all know that.
She must have caught her heel and tripped, just rotten bad luck.
But I'm not refunding a whole House Full just because the police come in and close the show.
It wouldn't do Bunty any good.’
There was a shocked but not altogether hostile silence.
Then Marion, still clasping Conroy to her, spoke.
‘It might be as well,’ she said majestically, ‘if we all said where we were when it happened.
Did anyone see?’
They stirred uneasily.
Jack, still kneeling beside Bunty and holding her hand to his cheek, said, ‘She'd just left…
’ He was crying.
‘We'd been in my room — Ronny'd gone out, he always does between shows.
We were — fooling about.
I'd got sandwiches and some gin.
We — we knew Ronny'd be back soon, it was near the half-hour, so we tidied up and I kissed her and — gave her a hug…
’ He gave a sob, ‘and she went rattling down the stairs to her room the way she always did and then I heard that awful sort of slither and Bunty's scream…’
‘And where was Gilbert?’
Gilbert Forbes, still in his butler's costume but without the tail coat and his toupee, was standing at the back of the group, his bald head pallid above his painted face.
‘I was in my  dressing-room.’
His voice croaked.
‘I knew she'd gone up to Jack's — she always does now if he's alone, makes no secret of it.
I'd shut my door, I was reading.
I simply heard the scream and went out and looked down — Bert can tell you.’
They all looked at Bert, standing behind Forbes in his old tweed Jacket, nicotine-stained moustache drooping.
‘Me?
I daresay that's right.
I was so shook up by the screeching I couldn't rightly say what happened.’
‘Why were you up there?’
Marion asked sternly.
‘When Conroy and I came in you were not at your post.’
‘Answered a call of nature, didn't I,’ he answered sourly.
‘We're not all bleeding camels.
I 'as to use the bog on the landing, don't I?
I never saw nothing of that Miss Baird, only Mr Forbes standing there like he says, and Jessie right beside him.’
‘Yes, yes, Jessie was there,’ Forbes said eagerly.
Where was Jessie?
She was sitting crying on the bottom step of the staircase outside Bert's cubbyhole with Johnny, the ASM and callboy, who had his arm round her shoulders.
He looked up as Marion, Conroy still clutched to her side, came out through the doors from the stage, some of the others trailing behind her.
‘I've only just got in,’ he said.
‘What a bloody ghastly thing.’
‘She caught her heel, she caught her heel,’ wailed Jessie.
‘Of course.’
Cissy was with them now.
‘Those ridiculous heels.
And flying up and down the stairs full of gin and nooky — no wonder she tripped and crashed all the way down.’
Her blue eyes were cold as slate as she turned to her husband.
‘It's a pity you didn't run into her, Freddy, on your way to the Gents — I presume you were on your way to the Gents.
You might have caught her.’
‘And you might have heard her, darling.’
Freddy pepper's voice was sharp.
‘I noticed your door was half open — I presume you were inside?’
‘Cissy, Freddy — if I might make so bold?’
Marion stepped forward, statuesque with Conroy held to her side like Medea in her  big scene.
‘Curtain up is in just over half an hour.
We're agreed, I think, that, ghastly though it is, there's nothing we can do for that poor girl at the moment, and that Rita can go on for her.
And Dicky can take over as a footman — he may need a few lines changed here and there.’
She looked round calmly.
‘It will be a lovely surprise for them both when they come in, Rita's chance at last.
Then as soon as the last act goes up Bobby will ring for a doctor and say that Bunty's had an accident.
And if the doctor wants the police the performance will be over by then and the house cleared before they can possibly get here.’
She paused and mostly everyone nodded.
‘And all we shall have to do is to stick together and confess that this dreadful accident did happen a little bit earlier and we all felt devastated but there was a full house and we all felt we owed it to the public that the show should go on.
Yes?’
There was a grudging, muted agreement, Cissy and Freddy too preoccupied with their personal tensions to dispute Marion's dominance.
‘Now,’ said Marion, ‘some of us must go back to that poor girl and put her decently in order.
And get poor Jack away and back to his dressing-room and fit to go on.
Thank God for a fixed set and no stagehands, and the electricians aren't in yet.
And Conroy dearest, go up to Mummy's room and wait there till I come, and try to pretend that all the dreadful things that have happened are just part of the play.’
She gave him a little push and, in a daze, he followed Dorothy and one or two of the others up the stairs to the room that had been and still seemed to be Bunty's.
He hardly comprehended what had been happening; the reality and unreality merged together like a nightmare or a melodrama.
Bunty's death — lively, stupefyingly alluring Bunty who had stretched out her bare leg to him and put her fingertips on his lips — annulled by a group of people because a performance must go on?
He was used to contrasts: Mother taking morning tea in bed with an old shawl round her shoulders and her hair pinned  up under a boudoir cap, her face sticky with face cream as he kissed her good bye before school; and Mother in full evening dress decked out in false pearls, her eyelashes beaded with mascara, dominating the stage in any play's Last act…
But this — the group decision to put make-believe before reality — he could not take it in.
Nor enter that dressing-room.
He sat down on the top step of the landing outside numbers 3 and 4.
The concrete was cold to his bottom, and he stared at the stairs down which Bunty had fallen, his throat and his face and his eyes seeming to swell up in a great hot surge of grief.
And there, on the third step, upside down in the corner by the wall, was Bunty's other sandal — dainty lacy white straps with the arched instep and the two-inch heel hanging half off.
He focused, stared, reached out and picked it up.
It was light as filigree in his hand, the heel held to the shoe only by one fragment of cleanly cut leather.
He held it in his hands and began to blub.
‘Oh master Conroy, don't!
Don't upset yourself, lovie, don't take on so!’
He was aware of a shuffle of shoes, thick stockings, a dark skirt, a slightly stale warm odour.
Jessie had come out of No. 3 and now sat stiffly down on the step beside him.
She put out her hand to take his but at the sight of the sandal recoiled.
‘Oh master Conroy, she wasn't worth it!
She wasn't a nice girl at all, truly she wasn't.
She was after everything in trousers, young or old, she'd have had Mr Pepper in the end, you mark my words, and then what'd happen to the Company?
And as to how she behaved to your mother you'd never believe it — cigarettes, mess, gin in the teacups, and never a please or thank-you.
Oh master Conroy, don't upset yourself, dear!’
He sobbed and held the shoe.
‘Oh master Conroy, don't cry — not a big boy like you.
You was big enough for her, I could see, but you're only a baby still really.,’ Jessie was crying now too, the tears swelling slowly out above the bags and pouches of her face and running into the wrinkles.
‘The rudeness and impudence you wouldn't believe, to  me and to your mother.
She'd even got Bert's back up proper, over his betting and poor old Floss.
And there was poor Mr Forbes gaga as a gooseberry over her, never mind she was laughing at him all the time.
And Mr Walker behind locked doors between every matinee and evening.
But when it come to you, master Conroy, and you hardly out of short trousers…’
She looked down at the sandal and with one worn finger gently moved the heel to and fro on its fragile shred of skin.
Her tears were easing and she gave a long gurgling sniff, reaching, it seemed, deep into her empty body.
‘All the same,’ she said, ‘all I meant was for her to break a leg.’
SPASMO
LIZA CODY
It was Nanny who told me the rotten news.
Nanny and rotten news seem to go together if you ask me.
‘Magnus's mother has been to see your mother,’ she said.
‘Poor Magnus has chicken-pox, so you can unpack that suitcase, Andrew.
Your trip to Cowes is off.’
She isn't my Nanny.
She's Annabel's.
She has a black hairy mole on her chin, and I hate her.
‘It's very bad luck,’ Nanny went on.
‘But don't look at me like that.
And don't throw your suitcase on the floor…now you'll have to pick everything up.’
She didn't understand.
‘Temper!’ she said.
‘If you carry on like that, Andrew, I'll have to tell your father.’
Nobody understood.
I would have to have my tenth birthday party in the rumpus-room with the girls.
The summer holiday was ruined.
No yacht.
No Cowes.
No Magnus.
It was absolutely and completely spasmo.
Nobody cared.
It was all right for Annabel — she's only six, and as long as she can feed sugar to the milkman's horse every morning she's happy.
Little sisters are spasmo.
So are big ones: Claire was going to the south of France.
Her friends didn't go and get chicken-pox.
They were all too old for that, and too superior.
Magnus, I thought, was a spasmo, spotty piece of elephant dung.
If he was ill, bad luck, but why did he have to ruin  everything for me?
‘Don't kick the rug,’ my mother said.
‘It's Persian.
Don't be so selfish, Andrew.
Think of poor Magnus.’
Was Magnus thinking of me?
Was Magnus's mother?
If she chose to stay in London to nurse spotty Magnus instead of taking me sailing she was worse than everyone.
‘It's spasmo,’ I said.
I must have said that several times already because Ma fixed me with a glittering stare and exclaimed, ‘If you say that word once more, Andrew, just once more , I'll send you to the Science Museum again…with Annabel.’
I should have known better.
Ma was always at her most unreasonable on do-days, and I must have known it was a do-day because not only did we have extra help in the house, but Nanny had been co-opted into the kitchen to make pastry.
‘She has cold hands,’ Ma explained.
‘That's why her pastry is better than anyone else's.’
You didn't have to tell Claire, Annabel or me about Nanny's cold hands; we had suffered from them most of our lives, but what that had to do with pastry was what Father described as a ‘female mystery’.
He seemed to know a lot about female mysteries and I wanted him to explain.
But he never had the time.
We didn't see a lot of Father that year because he was in the Government.
‘He wanted something in Dominions,’ I heard Ma tell one of her friends.
‘And he's not the most cultural man, but I expect he'll accept all the same.’
Of course he did: it made him more important.
But, although it was something to tell the others at school, secretly I thought he was important enough already.
All my life I have suffered because of Father being important.
‘Don't disturb your father, Andrew,’ Nanny would say, ‘he's an important man.’
‘Spasmo,’ I said.
‘And don't say that word.
It's not the sort of thing the son of an important man should say.’
‘Spasmo, spasmo, spasmo,’ I said, under my breath.
‘Go to your room!’ ordered Ma.
She was counting silver ice buckets for the do.
What did she need ice buckets for?
All she had to do was look at the champagne the way she looked at me and you'd be able to skate on it.
‘It's your own silly fault,’ Claire said.
‘You think people have nothing better to do than listen to you.’
I might have guessed I'd get no sympathy from Claire.
She's always sucking up to Ma.
‘What's this one for, anyway?’
I asked.
‘We had a do only last week.’
‘Don't call it a do,’ Claire said.
‘It's a reception.’
‘What for?’
‘Don't you listen to anything?
It's for the Berlin Dance Company.’
Claire was excited.
I could tell because she was nibbling her fingernails and then trying not to.
Now that she was Claire could get any sillier, but she did.
‘The exquisite Kezia Lehmann!’
Claire said, and sat on her hands.
‘They say she's the youngest prima ballerina ever to dance at the Coliseum.’
That was not really Kezia's name.
It's just that I could never remember it afterwards, and anyway everyone seemed to pronounce it differently.
At the time I was not even listening properly.
‘Ooh, a belly dancer,’ I said to annoy Claire.
‘Everyone says she's exquisite,’ Claire said dreamily.
She wasn't listening either.
‘Spasmo,’ I said.
Magnus could have made one of his rude jokes which would really have got Claire going.
That might have been fun.
But Magnus had boring chicken-pox and Claire ignored me.
‘A bus-load of boring belly dancers,’ I said, and pranced around the room.
‘Another boring foreigner.
I bet she's a Jew.’
‘You're not supposed to say that,’ Claire said primly.
And she  added something po-faced about toleration and talent.
It was the dullest reception ever.
It's always the same.
You stand by the window with a pathetic glass of lemonade while all father's secretaries drink champagne and try to make conversation with hoards of people who don't know enough to speak English.
Ma and Father shake hands with everyone and look as if they are having a wonderful time.
Claire, Annabel and I are supposed to help distribute the food, and let me tell you, at some of these do's it's like feeding a pack of hounds.
These foreigners are so greedy there's never anything left over for supper.
I don't know why Ma and Father make us come.
I considered slipping away to chew a mouthful of toothpowder.
I could work up a good froth and then make my entrance doing an impression of a rabid dog.
That might wake the foreigners up.
Actually I quite like the Germans.
Their soldiers really look like soldiers.
I'd like to have a pair of boots like a German officer.
Just think, if Magnus and I went back to school in boots instead of those horrible lace-up shoes, the big boys would have to watch out.
Even Father says the Germans are not a bad lot really.
Claire appeared at my shoulder.
‘That's her,’ she said, tearing at a hangnail.
‘Who?’
‘Kezia.’
‘She doesn't look very exquisite to me,’ I said.
She was no taller than I was and she wore a grey thing that looked like a schoolgirl's dress.
‘Everyone says her extensions are spectacular’, Claire informed me.
She pointed her right toe.
Claire was wearing stockings instead of socks that summer, and her legs looked funny.
‘She hasn't got any extensions as far as I can see,’ I said.
In the grey dress Kezia looked as flat-chested as Annabel.
‘Not only are you ignorant,’ Claire said icily, ‘but you are also  a filthy-minded little toad.’
She went away.
I looked around, and it seemed that everyone was looking at Kezia.
A lot of them were pretending not to, but somehow she was the centre of an invisible circle.
She wasn't saying anything, but Ma smiled at her as if she had done something very clever.
It was so unfair.
How could Ma look like that at someone who couldn't even speak English?
And why was a country like Germany interested in anything as spasmo as ballet?
‘You are not interested in the ballet, I think?’ someone said, and I turned around.
He was tall, and he looked as if he might be good at something decent like cricket.
Except he was a German and they don't play cricket.
I was about to say ballet was spasmo, but I stopped myself.
‘Girls are interested in ballet’, I said instead.
I did not want any stranger thinking I could be keen on anything my sister was stupid enough to find interesting.
‘Ah, the manly sports,’ he said, and smiled.
He was quite friendly really — for a foreigner.
And he was the only one not swooning over Kezia Lehmann.
‘You should come to my country, perhaps.
Our young men are better entertained.’
‘Sailing?’
I asked.
I am big for my age and I didn't mind if he thought I was a young man.
It was about time.
He wouldn't make me have my birthday party in the rumpus-room with the girls.
‘Of course, sailing,’ he said.
‘And much, much more.’
‘Could I have a pair of boots?’
I asked.
He was being much more friendly than Father who hadn't spoken a word to me all evening.
While we watched, Annabel wormed her way into the circle around Kezia with a plate of smoked salmon sandwiches.
I was thinking how funny it would be if I had switched the smoked salmon for ham.
Everyone knows that if Hebrews see ham they fall writhing to the floor and all their teeth drop out.
I was going to tell my joke to the nice German but he had  started talking to someone else.
Kezia refused a sandwich but she smiled at Annabel, and — I could hardly believe it — Annabel curtsied.
All the grown-ups smiled in that boring way they have when little girls are being exceptionally sick-making.
Annabel, taking advantage as usual, wanted to know how to curtsy properly, and Kezia showed her.
All the grown-ups clapped their hands.
Claire pushed forward.
family made of themselves in public.
Just then one of Father's secretaries, who was standing right behind me, said, ‘Such purity of line, do you notice, even when she's only showing that sweet child how to curtsy.’
She thought Annabel was a sweet child!
That's how much she knew.
‘They say she is on borrowed time,’ someone else said.
‘They say her family is being held hostage to her good behaviour.
Utterly tragic.’
That was the limit — what did she know about tragic?
‘They say she goes like a stoat too,’ I said loudly.
That is what Magnus says about girls he doesn't like and it's very funny.
But I never expected the reaction it got coming from me.
Everyone stopped talking.
Father spun round, took three steps towards me and smacked me on the ear.
I was stunned.
You shouldn't hit children on the head: Father says so himself.
But he did it, right in front of a roomful of people.
Tears filled my eyes.
He didn't even notice.
He grabbed my elbow and dragged me to the door.
‘What for?’
I cried.
‘What have I done?
I like stoats.’
Everyone was watching.
‘Out,’ Father said in his quietest voice.
‘You've disgraced yourself once too often, Andrew.
And this time you've disgraced us too.’
I caught sight of Claire, bright red in the face, looking as if she were about to burst into tears.
What did she have to cry about, I thought as I stumbled through the door.
Trust Claire to act as if she were the centre of attention.
Although, at that  moment I could have done with a little less myself.
‘What have I done?’
I repeated.
‘I only said…’
‘I know exactly what you said,’ Father almost whispered, ‘and unfortunately so does everyone else.
Go straight to your room.’
‘But what am I going to do?
It's spasmo in my room all by myself.’
Father looked as if he might hit me again.
He said, ‘A public insult deserves a public apology.
You can think about that, all by yourself in your room.
Because, believe me, Andrew, there will be an apology.’
He just turned his back and walked away, leaving me in the hall.
‘I hate you,’ I shouted.
‘You're a bully.
You shouldn't hit boys.’
The back of his neck went pink but he didn't come back.
I went upstairs, but I didn't go to my room.
I sat on the gallery floor and watched through the balusters.
When those silly women went to the downstairs powder room, I saw them go.
I know what they do in there.
They can't fool me with that ‘powdering my nose’ act.
Even that spasmo Kezia has to have a wee.
I thought about it and it made me feel a bit better.
I thought about writing a letter to The Times and telling them about an important man who beat up his children.
That made me feel good too.
Magnus would have to take notice.
His mother might take me away to live with her.
She's a lot nicer than my mother because she doesn't have any stupid daughters to distract her.
Magnus's mother understands me.
It's so unfair.
Magnus has a far better time than I do.
It's probably because his father isn't important.
When Magnus wants something he gets it, and his parents listen to him when he talks.
When I grow up, I thought, I'm going to join the Socialist Party and become a spy.
I could make a floor plan of Father's study, and I'm good at listening behind doors.
I bet if I told those Germans downstairs what I knew about Father's job they'd sit up and pay attention.
You don't think all those men downstairs are what they say they are, do you?
Half of them are spies and secret policemen.
Everyone knows that.
I could give  them the key to Father's safe and they'd be so grateful they'd have a pair of boots made specially for me.
German secret policemen are funny.
They wear black suits with baggy knees and look like wrestlers.
I bet they're very strong.
I'd like to see Father go a round or two with one of them.
That'd teach him something.
Bullies are always cowards.
I was beginning to feel quite happy again.
I screwed my wet handkerchief into a ball.
I was about to throw it at one of the maids as she passed beneath me with a tray of glasses, but just then Claire came out of the reception room.
She was saying, ‘You can come up to my room if you like.
I've got a lovely mirror.
It's much better than downstairs.’
Annabel appeared too, tugging that awful Kezia by the hand.
‘See my room too!’ she squealed.
‘I've got a camel.
A big camel.
It's the biggest one you ever saw.’
And all three of them made for the stairs.
That made me move in a hurry.
I scuttled backwards and hid behind the curtains.
Magnus and I call girls the ‘Lower Breed’, along with servants and foreigners.
That made Kezia a ‘Lower Breed’ on two counts.
Apologize to her!
I'd rather eat cold fat.
But a good spy is supposed to take risks, so after a while I tiptoed along the passage to Claire's door and peeped in.
There were my two sisters consorting with the enemy.
She was sitting on Claire's bed with Annabel beside her and Annabel's disgusting camel on her knee.
She was pretending it could speak German, chattering away in gobbledegook, and making Annabel scream with laughter.
What really made me sick was Claire, who was kneeling behind her, brushing her hair.
Downstairs you couldn't see her hair because it was all screwed up in a knot.
But now it stretched all the way down her back and Claire was making it shine like black oil.
Claire said, ‘I wish I had long hair.
It's beautiful.
I wish you could stay here for ever.
I'd brush your hair every day.’
Kezia said, ‘I wish too, I could stay forever.’
She looked sad.
Girls are always trying to make you feel sorry for them, but they  can't fool me.
‘It must be quite difficult for you,’ Claire said, brushing, brushing, brushing the long black hair.
It made me feel funny looking at that hair, and I didn't like it.
So I didn't hear what Kezia said next.
But Annabel squeaked, ‘Why can't you stay with us?
You could have Nanny's room, next to mine.’
Well, if that meant Nanny leaving I could almost support the idea.
Nanny is definitely a ‘Lower Breed’, but she doesn't act as if she knows it.
Except Nanny would never leave.
In fact I think she will live forever just to spite me.
‘Is it your family?’
Claire asked.
What did Claire care about families?
She is such a hypocrite.
‘Everything depends on me,’ Kezia said, and I nearly laughed out loud.
Girls think they are so important.
‘I must go down now,’ she went on.
‘I am watched, you see.’
You didn't have to tell me that.
Everyone downstairs had been gawping at her.
I made ready to slip away down the passage.
But Claire said, ‘I wish there was something I could do to help.’
A silence followed that, so I sneaked another look.
Claire and Kezia were looking at each other and saying nothing.
You'd have thought they were best friends or something, except that girls don't have proper friends the way boys do.
And besides, they had only just met.
But Claire is like that: one minute she knows nothing about a subject like ballet, and the next she's a world expert.
You should have heard her when she got that craze for Vegetarianism and Bernard Shaw.
‘I think you are sincere,’ Kezia said next, and I had to stuff my handkerchief in my mouth.
Anyone who thinks Claire is sincere must have a brain smaller than a mouse dropping.
‘There is something you can do,’ she said.
‘It is a small thing, and for you there is no risk.’
‘What is it?’
Claire asked, eyes wide.
‘I have written a letter,’ Kezia replied in a whisper.
‘There are  friends of my family who are refugees in America.
Perhaps they can help us.
I cannot send this letter because I am always watched and I must never be a disloyal German.’
That finished me off.
The girl must have cracked.
‘Disloyal to letter boxes,’ I said to myself and went down the passage where I could laugh without being heard.
If there's anything that is totally spasmo it's girls.
From my place on the gallery I could keep a watch on Claire's door and on what was happening in the hall below.
People were beginning to leave.
Not the foreigners, though.
They always stay till there's nothing left to eat or drink.
Father came out.
He was saying goodbye to a wrinkled old man, all smiles and handshakes.
But then he turned towards the stairs and his face went grim and cold.
Obviously he had remembered me.
I made straight for the curtains, and he went by me without noticing.
He walked past Claire's room and turned the corner.
He was Looking for me.
When he was out of sight I pushed the curtains aside and ran downstairs.
If I could stay hidden until Kezia and the rest of the foreigners had gone, I would be all right.
Father's study was locked, so I dashed to the kitchen.
I don't think Father has been in the kitchen in his life.
But I had forgotten about Nanny.
She caught me on my way to the back door.
‘Can't you see we're all busy, Andrew?’ she said.
‘No one has time to attend to you.
You're supposed to be making your guests feel welcome.’
‘They're not my guests,’ I told her.
‘They're all spasmo.’
‘Don't you use that word,’ she said.
‘Now get along and behave yourself.’
She forced me back into the hall, where I was bound to run into Father.
There was nothing for it: I would have to run away.
I had nearly got to the front door when Father appeared at the top of the stairs.
‘Andrew!’ he shouted in that horrible voice which means you're supposed to do what he says instantly.
But I opened the  door and bumped into one of the German secret policemen who was smoking on the top step.
‘Help me,’ I said.
‘He'll kill me if he catches me out here.’
‘Kill?’ the German said, like a parrot.
‘Andrew!’ called my father from inside.
I had a brilliant idea.
‘He's going to kill me,’ I said, ‘and I want to change sides.’
‘Sides?’
The German was so stupid.
‘You know, be a refugee,’ I said.
‘Who wishes to become a refugee?’
A tall thin man came out of the shadows at the bottom of the stone steps.
I ran down to meet him, but when I got there I saw that he had narrow eyes and a mean mouth and I didn't like him one bit.
I tried to run past him but he grabbed the collar of my coat.
‘Who wishes to become a refugee?’ he repeated.
His voice was mean too: mean and foreign.
‘Not me!’
I cried, trying to pull away.
‘It wasn't me.
It was Kezia.
It's all her fault.’
‘Kezia?’
His eyes were so narrow they looked like gun-slits.
He pinched my arm.
‘That hurts!’
I shouted.
‘What have you done with Kezia Lehmann?’
He pinched my arm harder — just above the elbow where it really hurts.
‘Let go of me!’
I yelled.
‘You've got it all wrong.
It's that ballet dancer.
She's upstairs with my sisters.
She wants to stay forever…she's, she's disloyal.’
‘Andrew!’
Father appeared above me on the top step and I wrenched myself out of the man's nasty fingers.
I ran away as fast as I could along the pavement.
I can run as fast as Magnus when I try.
I expected Father to chase me, but when I reached the corner and looked back he was just standing there talking to the thin man.
They seemed to be arguing.
I'll never go back, I thought.
He's not a proper father: he'd rather talk to a foreigner than come and find his own son.
I had to walk all the way to Magnus's house in the dark  because I didn't have any money.
And by the time I got there I was very cold and hungry.
You would have thought Magnus's mother would have been nice to me but I bet Father had already telephoned and told her lies about me, because she made me wait in the hall until Nanny came to collect me in a taxicab.
Father didn't even send the car.
It was humiliating.
Of course I was sent to bed without any supper.
What else would you expect after the rotten day I'd had?
But anyway, the foreigners wouldn't have left much.
I don't see why we can't have a proper meal after a do.
They go to all that trouble to feed strangers and then expect their own family to do without.
There was one good thing, though: in all the fuss I hadn't had to apologize to Kezia.
I'd got out of that because by the time I got home she was gone.
There was no one there but the family.
Ma had gone to bed with a headache, and Father was shut up in his study making telephone calls.
That was quite a relief too.
Claire wouldn't speak to me.
I tried to tell her about the horrible man on the doorstep but she wouldn't listen.
The next day I overheard her telling Mother about how that spasmo ballet company had cancelled the rest of their performances and gone home.
She said it was tragic because of Kezia, and the way she went on you'd have thought it was all my fault.
The way I see it — if I had saved the world from a lot of boring belly dancers I ought to be congratulated.
But nobody ever sees things the way I do.
It was going to be a rotten summer.
Totally spasmo.
A LITTLE LEARNING
SIMON BRETT
SIMON BRETT WRITES:
A few years back, I bought an old desk at an auction and, when I got it home, found that the drawers had not been emptied by its previous owner.
He, from the papers I found there, I deduced to have been an academic of some kind.
In a miscellaneous pile of documents, I came across the following essay.
It seems to have been submitted as part of his doctoral thesis by an American postgraduate student named Osbert Mint.
Keen that the fruits of his scholarship should be made available to as wide a readership as possible, I have made strenuous efforts to trace Mr Mint.
These efforts have proved — regrettably — to be unsuccessful, and the essay is therefore printed here for the first time without its owner's permission.
THE LITERARY ANTECEDENTS OF AGATHA CHRISTIE'S HERCULE POIROT
There is a popular misconception in academic circles that the works of Agatha Christie are simply popular jeux d'esprit which have no connection with the mainstream of English literature.
This attitude both belittles the quality of the author's work and also underestimates the wide reading and research which went into the creation of her most famous character.
Hercule Poirot did not spring fully-formed into life on Page 34 of his first adventure,The Mysterious Affair at Styles .
His genesis was part of a much longer creative process and must be seen as the  culmination of eleven centuries of English literary history.
Though Agatha Christie was properly reticent about the breadth of her reading, it is clear to the informed student of her works that they reflect a much broader and deeper literary frame of reference than is usually admitted to this particular author.
My essay will trace the pattern of references to other literary sources of which the author herself was sometimes no more than subliminally aware.
Though there were clearly classical influences on Agatha Christie's work — most obviously in the collection The Labours of Hercules — they are not within the province of this study, particularly since the subject has been expertly covered by other scholars.
It is my intention to trace only the English language sources for the creation of Hercule Poirot.
The first unarguable influence on Agatha Christie's writings can be found in one of the Digressions in Beowulf .
The killing in Hrothgar's meadhall described in the ensuing passage was clearly the origin of the many Country House murders which were to feature in Hercule Poirot's investigations.
(The language of the extract has been modernized to render it accessible to the general reader.
Those fluent in Anglo-Saxon may prefer to consult the original text.)
Felled on the floor limp lay the earl,
Blood from the blade blackening his back,
While all the warriors, muddled with mead-drinking,
Snored in their slumbers, lost like the daylight
That darkness has doused.
One of their number,
A murdering bondman — hated by Hrothgar
(Bringer of boons, mighty meat-giver)
And by He who made heaven (granter of goodwill,
Holy helper)— unfairly faked sleep.
Wakeful eyes worked, lurking behind lids,
Knowing that another, whose sword he had stolen,
A goodman not guilty, a worthy warrior,
Would be caught for the killing — unless
One much wiser, a righteous unraveller,
A reader of runes, a conner of clues,
Might see through the slaying, righting its wrong,
And finger the fiendish one.
Though it might be fanciful to assert that this passage heralds the arrival of Hercule Poirot on the literary scene, it is clear that the Digression prepares the way for the development of the whodunnit form, and particularly of the private detective, ‘the righteous unraveller’, whose task it will be to solve the murder.
Granting that the Beowulf reference, though tantalisingly close to unambiguity, cannot be unequivocally accepted as a primary source for Hercule Poirot, the directness of the next reference brooks no denial.
It is indeed remarkable — and perhaps a comment on the tunnel vision of many in academic life — that no previous scholars have looked for the Belgian detective's literary antecedents in the most obvious of sources, the Medieval Mystery Play.
The very word ‘Mystery’ could not provide a much heavier clue, and I am bold to assert that Agatha Christie's inspiration to write mysteries featuring Hercule Poirot sprang directly from her reading of the following extract from the Harrogate Third Shepherd's Pay in the Hull Cycle (‘as it hath been divers time acted by the Guild of Chandlers and Gardners upon the Feast of Corpus Christie,):
The three Shepherds wake to find the fourth Shepherd, Mak, lying still beside them.
1 Shep.
Now by good Saint Loy — and eke by Saint Beth, Why ye lie here, boy, so barren of breath?
2 Shep.
Aye, why curl up coy, so still on the earth?
3 Shep.
Oh, gone be our joy — for that stillness be death!
He is dead!
1 Shep.
Now deep is my dole, for lost is his life!
2 Shep.
And taken his soul — how sad be this strife!
3 Shep.
His purse it be stole.
We must go tell his wife.
1 Shep.
In his back there's a hole!
It was made by a knife!
How he bled!
2 Shep.
Someone foully hath played, some forsaken swine This murder hath made — by evil design!
3 Shep.
At whose door be it laid?
Who's the cause of the crime?
1 Shep.
Let's see whose be the blade?
By the rood, it be mine!
2 Shep.
So then thou must be blamed!
1 Shep.
Nay, by our lakin's grace!
I slept right through the night!
3 Shep.
Then why scratched be thy face?
Why these signs of a fight?
2 Shep.
Why be blood in this place?
On thy sleeve it be bright.
1 Shep.
Now, by Saint Boniface!
What ye think be not right!
I've been framed!
Oh, would one come, that could prove me guilt-free!
2 Shep.
Soft, now what be this hum?
And this light that I see?
An angel appears to them.
3 Shep.'TIS an angel!
Be dumb!
Nay, drop to thy knee!
Angel Nay, look not so glum!
I am come to ye three, As the scripture foretells.
2 Shep.
How his bald head doth shine!
Like an egg it be round!
2 Shep.
His moustache be so fine, I am nigh to a swound!
1 Shep.
Show this guilt be not mine!
Let the killer be found!
Angel Aye, that villain malign I will catch and confound — With my little grey cells!’
The next unarguable literary reference which Agatha Christie must have responded to is found in John Skelton's Speke, Parrot .
This poem is generally agreed to be made up of material from different dates and there are considerable textual differences between manuscript versions.
The most telling one, from  the point of view of this study, was found only as recently as 1893 in the Brestimont Collection.
It is actually entitled Speke, Porot and contains the following significant variants of the first three stanzas:
My name is Porot, a byrd of paradyse,
By nature devysed of a wonderous kynde,
Daintily dressed, so dylycate and precyse,
Blessed with a quyte exceptyonall mynde;
So men of all countreys by fortune me fynd,
And send me greate crymes to investygate:
Then Porot the culpryt wyl incrymynate.
Cravat curyously clynched, with sylver pyn,
Properly parfumed, to make me debonaire;
A myrrour of glasse, that I may prene therin;
Mustaches ful smartly with many a divers care
Freshly I dresse, and make blacke my haire.
Then, Speke, Porot, I pray you, full curtesly they say;
Porot hath a goodly brain, to ferrit out foul playe.
With my backe bent, my lyttel wanton eye,
Fancye and fresh as is the emrawde grene,
About my neck a sylke scarfe do I tye.
My lyttyll leggys, my spats both nete and clene,
I am essentyale on a murdre scene;
Oh perfecte Porot, the lyttyl clever sluthe,
The clewes wyl trace, and always fynde the truthe.
The evidence in this extract is conclusive, and it can therefore be definitively stated that Agatha Christie's source for the character of Hercule Poirot was Speke, Parot .
But the author's debts to English literature do not stop with John Skelton.
In her development of the character of Poirot, she was clearly influenced by her reading of Sir Philip Sidney's  Astrophel and Stella , and particularly of the following sonnet:
CXI
Why I haue ask'd you here
O Fate, O fault, O curse, O crime of bloode!
What caitif could haue caused so foul a showe?
What coward turn'd my smiles to sighes of woe?
What joye-killer haue forced my teares to floode,
And caused Loue's flowres to perishe in the budde?
What trecherie hath brought this man so lowe,
Stabbd deeper e'en than Cupid's darts can goe,
That from his hart the beat no more shall thudde?
Were Stella's eyes the motiue for this crime,
Or stolen rubies, iuorie, pearle and gold?
I might!— nay, will!— if you should graunt me time —
The secret of this heauy case unfold.
To shewe the villain and to make all clere
The reason is why I haue ask'd you here.
There are so many other examples of literature from the Tudor and Stuart period which influenced Agatha Christie that it would be invidious to mention any of them.
I will therefore move next to the Augustan Age and another undeniable source-work for the expansion of the character of Hercule Poirot, Alexander Pope's Essay on Detection .
Almost every line of this surprisingly underrated poem is relevant to the subject in hand, but I will limit myself to the following short extract:
As in the World's, so in Detection's laws,
All force respects the Universal Cause,
Which Logic's enemies does but confuse,
Confounding those who will not heed the clues.
For, from the first, a mighty endless chain
Links clue to crime, and crime to clue again.
One all-connecting, naught-excluding line
Draws Logic's threads within its grand design;
As when a bloodied sword, by Vulcan's skill
Framed to inflict on man the greatest ill,
Be found imbedded in some chilly corse,
Inhuman stabbed with more than human force,
The first thought is to find and clap in jail
The owner of the sword.
Of more avail
Might be to check the angle of the blow
And whether struck from left or right to know.
If from the left, you wrongly would indict
The owner of a sword who used his right.
The true Detective to such ploys is wise,
Nor lets the smallest thing evade his eyes.
Though falsely led, his true mind does not stray,
But follows through its thesis all the way,
Nor does forget, but mightily esteems
That One Great Truth: ‘All is not what it seems.’
That Agatha Christie's reading was wide-ranging cannot now be denied, but, even so, the source of one of Hercule Poirot's favourite ploys — almost, it could be said, his trademark, the gathering together of the suspects at the climax of one of his investigations — is surprising.
It was only after extensive reading through the writings of many authors that I came across the work which undoubtedly gave the author this particular inspiration.
Here, from a late volume of The Scot Musical Museum , is the poem which clinches my argument.
Though published anonymously, it is undoubtedly the work of Robert Burns:
CA' THE BURGIES TAE THE BOGGIN CHORUS.
Ca' the burgies tae the boggin.
Whaur the willie-paugh be troggin.
Seela' windieswi' the woggin,
My dearie-oh, my dork.
When Macporrit gang a-spoolin',
Wi' his ganglins in his troolin'
He waur mair a skilfu' doolin
Wi' a' ca'in' roon his ha'!
And his baughit of the hintree
Was sae bree on ilka wintree
That he niver freemed his fintree
Till he spoffer'd who doon tha'!
Ca' the burgies tae the boggin, &c .
I have now supplied sufficient evidence of Agatha Christie's erudition and remarkable range of source-material to silence the most sceptical critic of my thesis.
And I think I should definitely be awarded my doctorate as soon as possible.
OSBERT MINT, April 1967
APPENDIX I — THE NAME ‘POIROT’
The much-bruited suggestion that Agatha Christie selected the name Poirot randomly is patently ridiculous.
Apart from its assonantic association with the heavily symbolic ‘parrot’(discussed more fully above in reference to Skelton's Speke, Parot ), the name also reverberates with nuances from the French language.
The ‘poire’ or, in English, ‘pear’is an obvious subliminal  reference to the distinctive shape of the detective's bald head.
That shape is again shadowed in the French word ‘poirée’, which means ‘white beet’ and conforms with the frequently-mentioned pallor of the detective's complexion.
Though ‘poireau’, the French word closest in sound to the name Christie chose, with its double meanings of ‘leek’ and ‘wart’, appears to have no obvious connection with the detective, the word ‘poirier’, meaning a ‘pear-tree’offers a much more fruitful area for investigation.
Its sound provided the first syllable of Poirot's name ‘poir’, and for the second one need look no further than the French word ‘perdreau’, meaning ‘a young partridge’.
The unusual juxtaposition of these two words can only be a subconscious association in the author's mind with the well-known carol,The Twelve Days of Christmas whose repetitive chorus ends, ‘And a partridge in a pear-tree.’
The truth of this conjecture would seem to be confirmed by Agatha Christie's choice of titles for the 1938 volume,Hercule Poirot's Christmas and the 1960 collection,The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding and a selection of Entrees .
APPENDIX II — THE NAME ‘HASTINGS’
The name of Poirot's occasional assistant is no less carefully chosen than that of Agatha Christie's main protagonist.
His nomenclature has a very respectable literary history.
Shakespeare hinted at the essence of the character in Richard III , Act Three Scene One, when the young Prince of Wales, with a knowledge beyond his years, cries:
‘Fie! what a slug is Hastings.’
Goldsmith, at the end of She Stoops to Conquer has Hastings say:
‘Come, madam, you are now driven to the very last scene of all your contrivances.’
-surely a parallel prefiguring (together with the Burns poem) of all those occasions when Christie's Hastings would be delegated to assemble the suspects for Poirot's latest denouement.
And Hastings' habit of pipe-smoking was clearly taken from Thomas Hood, who in a poem of 1839 wrote:
‘Twas August — Hastings every day was filling.’
SIMON BRETT WRITES:
Though, as I mentioned, I was unable to make contact with Mr Mint, a letter accompanying his essay did make clear the unfortunate fact that its standard — or perhaps the startling originality of its thinking — did not meet with the examiners' approval.
Osbert Mint was not awarded his doctorate.
When last heard of — in the early Seventies — he had returned to the United States and was apparently working in a fast food restaurant.
GOOD TIME HAD BY ALL
ROBERT BARNARD
‘It was murder’, said the first housemaid firmly.
‘Murder by suffocation.’
‘Nonsense, Ethel,’ said Cook ‘We've never had murder in this house.’
‘Well, there's a first time for everything, as I m sure you remember, Mrs Cornforth…
There was veronal on the bedside table.
She was probably so drugged she didn't struggle.
As a rule it's difficult to suffocate people, even if they're sleeping.’
‘What would you know?’ demanded Thomas, the under-footman, jealous that it had been she who had found the body when she went into the bedroom with the morning tray of tea and biscuits.
‘A great deal,’ said Ethel with infuriating self-confidence.
‘I wasn't with Dr Mackenzie for two years for nothing.’
‘Oh, and I suppose he took you with him on his rounds, did he?
Had you by his side at his post-mortems?’
Mr Eames the butler put up his hand in rebuke.
This was becoming unseemly.
‘Let's have no more of this squabbling.
If it was murder we shall be informed in the Family's good time.
I wouldn't be surprised if Ethel isn't entirely wrong about the cause of death and the poor lady did it herself.’
‘What, after a night of passionate love?’ asked the irrepressible Ethel.
‘There's been nights of passionate love in this house that have left the lovers more depressed than ecstatic,’ said Thomas, who found the neurotic sex-lives of some of his betters incomprehensible.
‘Anyway, what call have you to say that Mrs Heatherington-Scott had had one?’
‘I know her.
She's been here before.
Always insists on a room to herself with a lock on the door.’
‘She'd no call to mention that,’ said Mrs Cornforth.
‘All the bedrooms in this house have locks.’
‘'Course they do.
The Prince of Wales used to visit.’
‘The old Prince of Wales,’ said Eames pedantically.
‘The last but two — King Teddy as he became.
You're too young to remember, my girl.’
‘But I've heard the stories!
Anyway, there she was in her own room, and no call if she didn't want to to open the door to anyone, not even her husband.’
‘Especially not her husband,’ said Thomas.
‘But the fact is, she did.
And the question is, who to?’
‘If she did,’ said Cook heavily.
Everything about Cook was heavy, except her hand with pastry.
‘I've heard no hevidence so far that the poor lady did.’
‘I did her room when she was here last year,’ said Mary, the second housemaid, and Ethel's great ally.
‘Going by form she'll have had someone in there with her.’
‘There'd been two heads on those pillows,’ agreed Ethel, ‘and two bodies between those sheets, however hard they tried to disguise it.’
‘You noticed a lot before you ran screaming down the corridor,’ said Thomas spitefully.
‘I noticed first and then I ran screaming.
I thought it would be expected of me.
Anyway, the forensic scientists will be able to confirm she had someone in with her.
Brilliantine leaves traces.’
‘Oh ho!’ said Thomas.
‘Lord Heptonstall, you mean!’
‘He uses lots of it,’ agreed Ethel.
‘But all the men use some.’
‘I don't know what's got into you, young lady,’ tut-tutted Cook.
‘You read too many of them detective stories.’
‘Well, they're more educational than Lucky Star or True Romance , Mrs Cornforth.’
Ethel thought for a minute.
‘I hope the police notice the mud.’
‘Mud?’
‘A bit of hard mud, very light-coloured, by the bed.’
This had them all looking at each other.
‘I didn't leave no mud when I cleaned the floor yesterday,’ said Mary.
‘She could have left it herself,’ said Mrs Cornforth.
‘When she never went outdoors yesterday?’ asked Ethel.
‘Or if she did it was no further than the grounds.
Too busy making a dead set at young Mr Merrivale.
Anyway, that wasn't Frensham earth I saw, not local.’
‘Sir William took some of the gentlemen shooting yesterday,’ Thomas pointed out.
Thomas had now got over his pique and was thoroughly caught up.
This was too good a thing to be distracted from by pique.
‘So he did, Thomas,’ said Ethell.
‘Harpington way.
Has anybody cleaned any boots today?’
‘Light mud,’ said Bob the odd-job boy, relishing his moment of glory.
Usually he was much put down.
‘Sort of clay-y like.’
They all looked at each other.
‘Which side of the bed was it, the piece you found?’ asked Mr Eames.
‘The far side.
Where the bedside table is.
The side she slept on.’
‘And where the window is,’ said Thomas.
‘And she's a lady who always sleeps — slept — with her window open.’
‘Was the door locked when you went up this morning?’ asked Mary.
‘Of course it was.
Otherwise whoever it was would probably have come in from the corridor.
I used my house key, the same as I did yesterday.
Hers was on the floor by the bedside table — she'd probably knocked it off when she had a glass of water, or when she took the veronal.’
‘That veronal must be strong,’ said Mary.
‘Otherwise she'd have surely woken up, with someone coming in through her window.’
‘Not her,’ said Thomas.
‘She was drinking and dancing till two or half past.
Not just last night either, but the night before as well.’
‘When I took the tray in yesterday morning,’ said Ethel, ‘she didn't register a thing.’
‘Well, she certainly didn't today,’ said Thomas.
‘So what you reckon is, she had her boyfriend in, and after he left someone climbed in the window and smothered her in her sleep?’
‘That's right.
She'd have been too far gone to hear.
She always was.
I had orders not to take in tea until half past ten.’
‘The gentleman who'd been in with her would naturally have gone back to his room well before people started stirring.’
‘Particularly if he was a married gentleman.’
‘Particularly,’ agreed Thomas, ‘if he was a married gentleman.
The question is, what do we do now?’
‘Draw up a list of suspects,’ said Ethel promptly.
‘Drat that bell.’
‘Thomas will see to it,’ said Mr Eames, who was beginning to enjoy himself.
‘Is lunch under way, Mrs Cornforth?’
‘Everything under control,’ said Cook, ‘in spite of hinterruptions and hupsets.’
She looked at Ethel, who had secured a notebook and pencil.
‘I suppose we're all on this list of suspects?’
Ethel shook her head regretfully.
‘No.
It would have been lovely, but it couldn't really be one of us, could it?
She's only been here two weekends, and none of us had worked for her in the past…
No, it couldn't be one of us.’
‘She could have seduced Thomas,’ suggested Mary.
‘The idea!’ said Mrs Cornforth.
‘Mrs Heathington-Scott would never've gone outside her class, and neither would Thomas.’
‘I'm not so sure about Thomas,’ said Ethel, ‘but she'd have  stuck to her own circle.
An exclusive lady, Mrs Heatherington-
Scott, not to say expensive as well.
Anyway none of us went to Harpington shooting yesterday.
Right.
So that means the eight ladies and gentlemen sleeping here last night.
Top of the list goes to the husband, of course.’
Ethel, who later in life wrote scripts for Mrs Dale's Diary and Upstairs, Downstairs , licked her pencil and wrote in a bold, well-schooled hand: Captain James Heatherington-Scott.
‘Why top of the list?’ asked Bob.
‘Because in a domestic murder the husband or wife is always the obvious suspect.
You'll know why if you ever marry.’
‘Why wait till they are away on a weekend?’ asked Mrs Cornforth.
‘Why not do it at 'ome?’
‘And be even more the obvious suspect?’ asked Ethel pityingly.
‘Besides, he may have been driven over the edge by her carryings-on.
Because carry on she did.
Though if you ask me he's a nasty piece of work who wouldn't bat an eyelid whatever she might do…
Then there's master and mistress.’
She wrote again: Sir William and Lady Warboys.
When Cook once more expanded her bosom to protest, Mr Eames put up his hand.
‘No, Mrs C. We must be scientifical about this.
All must be equally under suspicion, though we all know the master or mistress would never think of doing such a thing.’
‘Anyone any idea why the master and mistress ask the Heatherington-Scotts?’ asked Ethel.
‘They're a good twenty years younger, and they've only known them a year or two.
Yet this is twice they've been here — first last Spring, and now for the New Year party.’
‘I heard the master say that they were fun,’ said Mr Eames.
‘He likes young people with a lot of life in them.
Not that he'd ever for a moment think of…taking advantage, so to speak, of a young woman of loose morals like Mrs Heatherington-Scott.’
There was a brief moment of silence before Ethel spoke again.
Ethel knew a lot more about what the master would and would  not think of doing to a young woman than Mr Eames did.
‘Then there's Colonel and Mrs Swanton.
I should think we're all agreed about them.’
‘A nice gentleman,’ said Mary.
‘Always courteous, never too demanding, and generous with it.
His lady's a bit more fussy, but a real lady nonetheless.’
‘Right,’ said Ethel.
‘A thoroughly suspicious pair, if you went by detective stories.
Then there's Lord and Lady Heptonstall.’
There was another moment's silence.
‘I'm not one to speak ill of my betters, as you know,’ said Mrs Cornforth, ‘but her Ladyship's remarks within Thomas's hearing about my profiteroles Angels would not forgive!’
‘Mean, cross, nasty-tongued bitch, and his Lordship is if anything worse,’ agreed Mr Eames.
‘Mind you, it's the first time they've been here, and if I'm any judge it'll be the last.
Sir William and her Ladyship have been noticing things, I can tell you.’
‘Then there's Mr Merrivale,’ said Ethel.
‘Mr Raymond Merrivale.
I don't mind saying I think he's a lovely gentleman!’
‘Oh he is!’ said Mary.
‘It's always ‘I wonder if you'd mind’ with him — never ‘do this, do that’like it is with the Heptonstalls.
He's smashing.’
‘Smashing!’ said Cook disparagingly.
‘What kind of a word is that?
I suppose all this henthusiasm has nothing to do with the fact that he's a very handsome young man, has it?’
‘Everything,’ said Ethel.
‘The old sex urge, and don't run it down, Mrs Cornforth.
Still, he's a married man, and his wife is in her seventh month, from what I hear: that's why she had to send her apologies at the last moment…
Well, if you go by character it'll be the husband or one of the Heptonstalls who did it.
But of course you can't just go by character.’
‘No, you can't!’ said Thomas, coming back through the baize door positively pink with self-importance.
‘You've got to look at evidence , that's what you've got to do!’
‘All right, out with it,’ said Ethel.
‘What's happening  upstairs?’
‘Upstairs?
Bill is ministering to master and mistress and the house-guests, sick as a toad that he's missing all the fun.
It's outside that things are happening!’
‘Outside?
You mean round her window?’
‘That's right.
Five coppers from Addlesfield, and a French gentleman with moustaches you could uncork a bottle with who's staying with the Chief Constable.
I heard one of the constables say he was a tip-top detective from London.’
‘And what was he doing?’
‘He was looking at the marks of a ladder just under her window.
He asked me where a ladder like that could be found, and I took him round to the one that hangs on the side of the potting shed.
It had earth on one end.’
‘Be pretty funny if a gardener's ladder didn't have earth on it,’ commented Cook.
‘It corresponded!’ said Thomas, who as talking in exclamation marks.
‘They took it over to the rose-bed under her window and the marks corresponded.
And there was more of that light earth there.’
‘Why did he talk to you about that anyway?’ demanded Ethel.
‘I'd've thought he'd've talked to the gardeners.’
‘He wanted to talk to me anyway, the French gentleman’, said Thomas, oozing conceit.
‘He said he could see I was a young man with all his wits about him.’
Ethel's silent opinion was that Thomas's strong point lay very much lower down than his brain.
She said: ‘But he must have had some reason for wanting to talk to you.’
‘Because I was on last night.
That's why Bill is kicking himself.
He pulled rank and went to bed at half past eleven, leaving me on for the late-night drinks.
I was the one around just before they all went to bed.’
‘And?’
‘Well, like I told the foreign gentleman, there was dancing in the sitting room, and this Mrs Heatherington-Scott she was  dancing with Mr Merrivale.’
‘Oh — you told him that!’ chorused Ethel and Mary.
‘'Course I did.
You've got to be truthful, like in a court of law.
If they are innocent they have nothing to fear, that's what they always say.
I told him they danced very intimate-like, with her twigging his ear and whispering in it, and dancing closer and closer.
I was surprised because she'd been throwing herself at him all day and not getting anywhere much.’
‘And did you tell the foreign gentleman that her husband was going mad with jealousy?’
‘No I didn't, because he wasn't.
He was changing the gramophone records.
Same as happened last year with her and Sir Harry Dexter.’
‘Oh yes, I remember: she had him panting after her all right!’
Mr Eames was just getting up, convinced that juniors and upstarts were usurping the stage and it was time for him to be where the action was, when he was interrupted by the bell.
Soon it was time for luncheon, and the whole of the downstairs staff was occupied in one way or another.
Any conversation there was was snatched in odd moments of repose.
‘You were wrong about that foreign gentleman,’ said Mr Eames to Thomas in the kitchen between courses.
‘He's Belgian.’
‘Same thing.’
‘It is not the same thing.
Don't you remember ‘gallant little Belgium’ during the war?’
‘Mr Eames I'm only twenty-three.
I was born the year it started.’
‘Well, we'd never have called France ‘gallant’, I can tell you.
France and England never pulled together, for all they might find themselves on the same side.’
After lunch the Belgian gentleman talked to several of the below-stairs staff and they were severally repelled or enchanted.
Bill, the first footman, who had nothing to tell him, said his foot itched to kick him up the b.t.m., while Mary said she felt  she was being taken by one of those continental gigolos to the Strand Corner House, as a preliminary to being seduced.
‘You shameless hussy!’ said Cook, and thought accordingly worse of the foreign gentleman for arousing such fancies.
It was gone three before they could have another real talking-over of the crime.
They pooled the information they had gleaned or guessed from their several interrogations, and then began in again.
‘So far as I can see it's practically certain Mr Merrivale was in there with her early on in the night,’ said Ethel.
‘They're hardly making a secret of it, and after the exhibition they seem to have made, if Thomas is right, he couldn't deny it.’
Mr Merrivale, clearly, had lost favour.
‘I think the foreign gentleman thinks there may be more than one of them in it,’ said Thomas.
‘He keeps going on about ‘grey cells’.’
‘I've never been inside the local police station,’ said Ethel.
‘You wouldn't expect them to paint it pretty pink, would you?’
She thought, looking dubious.
‘It doesn't sound likely.
Why should there be a conspiracy?
Merrivale could have done it on his own when he was in there with her, and the gentleman who came in from outside didn't need a partner either.
Now, let's think a bit about this mud.’
She turned towards Bob.
‘How many pairs of boots were there this morning?’
Bob blushed at his unaccustomed prominence, but said promptly: ‘Four, like I told the foreign gentleman.’
‘The foreign gentleman won't have a notion how things are done below stairs.
There may be something he's missed.
Whose were they.’
‘The master's, Colonel Swanton's (I know because he takes size 12), Captain Heatherington-Scott's (he had his name in his) and one pair more.
I think they were that Lord Something's.’
‘They were,’ said Mary.
‘I found them outside his door when I took master and mistress their early morning tea.’
‘He may be a lord but he's no gentleman,’ said Mr Eames Loftily.
‘We are not an hotel.’
‘And the other boots would have been just inside the baize door as usual,’ said Ethel thoughtfully.
‘Given to one or other of us last night.
Anyone could have retrieved his…
Still, the fact that Lord Heptonstall had the use of his all night does rather direct the spotlight on him.’
‘What do you sound Like, girl?’ said Mrs Cornforth.
‘One of those books you read.’
‘There was one thing I remembered when the foreign gentleman was asking questions,’ said Mary eagerly.
‘He was ever so gentle and nice, but sort of piercing — went right through you —’
‘That's enough of that, my girl!’
‘— well anyway, I remembered the last time she was here this Mrs Heatherington-Scott made a set at Sir Harry Destry, like Thomas said, and — well, we all know what happened that time, don't we?
Anyway, I was dusting in the library on the morning they all left, and I remember Mrs H.-S. and Sir Harry walking into the library, he was looking very suspicious and upset, and both were talking very Low.
Well, I slipped out, of course, as mistress likes us to —’
‘They expect servants to be invisible, but they expect the work to be done all the same,’ put in Ethel.
‘— anyway they never saw me, but before I went I heard her say, in a slinky sort of voice.
‘It would be a pity if your wife got to know.
I believe she's delicate — the nervous type, isn't she?’’
The reaction was gratifying.
‘Blackmail!’ said Mr Eames.
‘That's what it sounded like,’ agreed Mary.
‘A bit of blackmailing on a small scale.’
‘Well!’ said Cook.
‘To think of someone in that station of life resorting to blackmail!’
‘Not unknown,’ said Mr Eames sagely.
‘I could tell you a thing or two about the Countess of Warwick and letters from King Teddy.
Had it directly from Sir Alan Lascelles's valet.
If  you can blackmail the R.F….!’
‘Anyway,’ said Thomas, ‘this really puts Mr Merrivale back in the spotlight, doesn't it?
If she started to put pressure on…’
‘Ah, but she wouldn't have, would she?’ said Ethel.
‘Not till just before they all left.
She'd have let him get in as deep as possible and then started the pressure…
Not that I've any time for him any longer— going on like that when his poor wife was near her time.’
‘That's exactly the time many gentlemen do go astray,’ said Bill.
‘I believe when Teddy was acting the goat in this house the Princess of Wales was carrying Queen Maud of Norway as she now is.’
‘I think you'll find,’ said Mr Eames, ‘that King Teddy acted the goat pretty well irrespective.’
‘Did I hear something,’ said Cook frowning, ‘about Lady Destry having been ill?’
Mr Eames was thunderstruck.
‘You're right!
It had gone completely out of my mind.
I heard last summer that she'd…
This needs to be looked into.
I shall telephone Sir Harry's butler.’
‘You never would, Mr Eames,’ said Mary admiringly.
‘That's two counties away!’
‘Desperate situations call for desperate measures,’ said Mr Eames grandly.
But as he departed for the pantry the bell rang for afternoon tea to be served.
It was five o'clock before they could hear the results of his conversation.
‘Terrible,’ he told them — and to be fair it was entirely without relish that he spoke.
‘Really shocking.
The lady had always been a bit flighty in her mind — nervous, delicate, taking odd fancies.
Last summer she had some kind of shock — nobody knows what.
Sent her completely overboard.
Bouleversed, as they say across the Channel.
Confined to an a.s.y.1.u.m.
Private, constant attendance, no expense spared.
Shocking!’
‘Diabolical!’ said Mrs Cornforth.
‘She deserved everything she got!’
‘The question is, how often she — they, it must be — tried it,’ said Mary.
‘Had they been bleeding Colonel Swanton or Lord Heptonstall dry?’
‘Or even master?’ put in Ethel.
‘As far as I can see only Mr Merrivale is in the clear’, went on Mary.
‘Even if he had been out shooting, he wouldn't slip into a lady's bedroom in muddy hunting boots.’
‘I wouldn't wear muddy hunting boots if I was going to climb in through a bedroom window and murder a lady,’ said Ethel.
The words took time to sink in — to herself as much as to the rest.
‘It's not as though a gentleman would only bring one or two pairs of shoes with him to a house-party.’
They sat there thinking.
Finally it was again Ethel who spoke.
‘It was a blind,’ she said.
‘That mud was a red herring.
It seemed to let Mr Merrivale out.
In fact it could simply have been broken off Lord Heptonstall's boots at any time during the night.
The ladder could have been put up against the wall any time of night —’
‘Going out by the gun-room window,’ said Thomas, ‘which master announced to all of them was faulty, and that was why Rover slept there.’
‘Very good with dogs, Mr Merrivale,’ said Ethel.
‘Yes, he went out, put the ladder against the wall briefly to leave traces, threw a bit of mud through the window, and the key, and scattered more mud around the rose bed.
It was a red herring.’
‘What do you think really happened?’ asked Mary.
‘I think she was dead before he left her room.
I think they had their fun, she took the veronal to sleep soundly, then when she was far gone he smothered her.’
‘But why?
You said yourself she wouldn't have begun putting the pressure on yet.’
Ethel shook her head in puzzlement, but a gleam had been coming into Eames's eyes.
‘I think,’ he said, ‘I've been forgetting something.’
He got up in his stately way and went over to his pantry.
He emerged with  an old edition of Burkes Landed Gentry .
It was very dog-eared, for he seldom took up any other book for his own amusement.
He thumbed through it till he came to Merrivale.
‘Merrivale, Sir John, Knight, father to our young Raymond…
Married Georgiana, widow of Sir Francis Destry, Bart…
Let's see: Destry, Sir Francis, deceased 1914, issue: Henry Edward…
They were step-brothers, Sir Henry and our Mr Merrivale, with only a year or two's difference in their ages.’
‘Brought up together, most likely,’ said Ethel.
‘It was revenge, revenge pure and simple.
Young Mr Merrivale came here to get it.
I do think he's noble!
I expect he hoped to have as little as possible to do with her, but when she made a dead set at him, as she did at all young married men, that was no longer possible.
He had to improvise.
That was what he came up with.
I don't mind saying I don't blame him a bit!
I always did say Mr Merrivale was a lovely young man!’
They were pulled up by the bell.
It was Mr Eames's, and in a moment he was back, and as much in a rush as a butler can be.
Drinks and snacks were required in the library.
Everyone was assembling there — family, house-guests, the Chief Constable, the Belgian gentleman.
For a time there was chaos.
Mr Eames and Bill and Thomas collected trays and glasses, decanters were dusted down, all variety of bottles were sought.
When they went up to the study Ethel and Mary waited outside with the little trays of sundries, catching glimpses of the people in the room, all of them nervously talking in high voices.
Bill came out swearing, on his way to look for sirop de casis .
Mary peeped in to get another look at those wonderful moustaches and said to herself that they were nothing like corkscrews, more like one of those curved oriental swords that would cut right through you.
Finally everyone was served.
Bill and Thomas came out, followed by Mr Eames, who shut the door behind him, but somehow not quite to — a thing never known to happen before.
He led Bill firmly to the baize door and down the stairs, never once looking back to see if he was being followed.
In the hall Thomas  looked at Mary and Mary looked at Ethel.
‘Better stay and listen,’ said Ethel.
‘Make sure he gets it right.’
CAUSE AND EFFECTS CATHERINE AIRD
‘Of course you must come with us, Henry, dear.
I insist.
Besides Margot will be so pleased.’
‘I really don't see why any hostess should be pleased to see a total stranger arrive at her dinner party.’
Henry Tyler had had an unexpected few days' leave and had descended on his married sister and her husband in the small market town of Berebury in Calleshire without a great deal of warning.
‘You're not a total stranger…’
‘To my certain knowledge, Wendy, I have never set eyes on anyone called Margot Iverson in my life before.’
‘I know that,’ said Wendy Witherington placidly, ‘but you're my brother and that's the same as my knowing her on her knowing me.’
Logic had never been Wendy's strong suit.
‘I still don't see why she should be pleased to see me on Saturday evening,’ said Henry Tyler mildly.
‘Because you're a man, that's why.’
‘And may I ask if she will be so delighted to see me because I happen to be a male member of the human race…?’
There was nothing in his face to show how much he enjoyed teasing his only sister.
‘Or is it only that I don't understand why as a consequence of being a mere male?’
Henry worked at the Foreign Office in London, where ambiguity had been raised to an art form.
Wendy's mind was a much more literal one.
‘Because you're an extra man, dear,’ she said.
‘Ah.’
‘And because of Arthur's Cousin Amy,’ went on his sister.
‘She always upsets the table.’
‘Dipsomania?’ enquired Henry Tyler with interest, ‘or is she just a clairvoyant?’
‘Don't be unkind,’ said Wendy severely.
‘Cousin Amy can't help being there.
She hasn't anywhere else to go but.
‘The Hollies’.’
‘She doesn't always have to upset the table, though, when she is there, does she?’ remarked Henry Tyler in a tone that at least one ambassador had been known to call ‘eminently reasonable’.
‘Arthur's Cousin Amy,’ responded his sister firmly, ‘works as a secretary at a girls' boarding school.
She's as poor as a church mouse, that's why she has to come to Arthur and Margot's in the holidays.’
‘And what happens,’ asked Henry mischievously, ‘when Cousin Amy isn't there and your friends have an extra man?’
‘Oh, that's no problem,’ said Wendy at once.
‘Margot just asks Miss Chalder to stay on.
She's Arthur's dispenser and receptionist.
Young but quite presentable.’
‘So Arthur's a doctor…’ divined Henry without too much difficulty.
‘Oh, didn't I say?
He's our general practitioner.’
Wendy giggled.
‘Actually, when she's not there Margot calls Miss Chalder their deceptionist .’
‘Always saying the doctor's out when he's in?’
Deception was another of the subjects that they knew rather a lot about at the Foreign Office.
‘That sort of thing?’
‘And saying,’ said Wendy, ‘that he's been held up at a confinement when he's forgotten all about somebody.’
‘Is he a good doctor?’ asked Henry.
It wasn't entirely an idle question since Wendy and Tom Witherington had two young children upon whom their bachelor uncle doted.
‘How does one ever know that, Henry?’
Wendy had more intelligence than her pleasant calm looks might have led the casual observer to suspect.
She wrinkled her brow.
‘There was  some trouble at the end of last year about a little gipsy child who died from a burst appendix.
Arthur said he'd never had their second message, and the fuss all died down, but he's always come when we've sent for him.’
‘Quite so,’ said Henry Tyler.
‘I shall look forward to Saturday evening then.’
‘And I shall telephone Margot,’ said his sister.
Later that evening Henry, who was a firm believer that time spent in reconnaissance was seldom wasted, raised the matter of the dinner party with his brother-in-law.
‘Don't worry, old chap.’
Tom Witherington was reassuring.
‘They do you very well at ‘The Hollies’.
Very well indeed.’
‘So Dr Iverson is a successful doctor,’ murmured Henry Tyler (which he knew was not the same as being a good one.)
Tom Witherington frowned.
‘Couldn't say, but he is sound on food and drink.’
‘How is it that their entertaining is so — er — reliable then?’
‘Oh, you mean how is it that they can afford the pukka style if he isn't successful?’
His brother-in-law's brow cleared.
‘That's easily explained.
W.H.M.’
Henry Tyler thought for a moment, ‘That's an acronym I haven't come across.’
Tom Witherington grinned.
‘I don't suppose it matters in the Foreign Office as much as it does in some other spheres.
W.H.M. stands for Wife Has Means…
Margot has the money and Arthur has the ideas for using it.
You'll see for yourself on Saturday.’
‘I can hardly wait,’ said Henry Tyler politely.
As dinner parties went, noted Henry on the night, it was neither large nor particularly intimate.
Ten people sat down in the dining-room at ‘The Hollies’ after partaking of a well-chosen sherry — a good Machamudo, Henry thought — in the drawing-room.
Margot Iverson had welcomed him most hospitably.
‘How nice to have someone here from the Foreign Office.
You can tell  us what they think of Il Duce.’
She was a plain woman with the apparent placidity of the overweight, but she didn't look as if she missed much.
Like those of all good hostesses, her eyes were everywhere.
‘I'm afraid,’ said Henry Tyler with every appearance of regret, ‘That's not my Department.’
Dr Iverson was equally welcoming, ‘What a pity it's dark.
Otherwise you could have seen the garden, although there's not much to look at at this time of the year.’
‘Arthur's garden is a delight,’ said Wendy at his elbow.
‘In the summer his vegetable garden is as neat and attractive as the one at Villandry.’
‘It's mostly my gardener I have to thank for that’, said the doctor modestly, ‘but, yes, I do take an interest.
Now let me introduce you to Major Anderson.
He's the Chairman of our local Bench…’
The announcement about dinner being served, Henry observed with approval, had come at just the right length of time after the sherry had been drunk.
It followed a brief absence from the room of the doctor.
‘Just checking on the claret,’ he boomed as he came back.
‘Edith's very good but there are some things that need watching.’
‘My cousin is something of a wine connoisseur, Mr Tyler,’ said Miss Amy Hall as he escorted her in to dinner.
The doctor's cousin was a thin anxious woman with her hair drawn in two neat earphones.
‘Now, tell me what you think of Haile Selassie…’
The first course had been awaiting them on the dining-room table.
Potted shrimps in attractive little ramekins, and prettily adorned with watercress, stood on plates at each place.
It was clear that the Major's wife was the chief lady guest, as she was seated on Dr Iverson's right, the Major sitting on Margot Iverson's right.
A Mr and Mrs Locombe-Stableford made up the party.
Henry  had already discovered that he was a solicitor and his wife a
power in the Red Cross.
Henry found himself next to the
Major's wife.
‘I hope you enjoy your visits to Calleshire,’ she said.
‘A very fine county.’
‘Indeed.’
Henry passed her some thin, crustless brown bread and butter and listened to a long story about fox-hunting.
Across the table he could hear Mrs Locombe-Stableford talking to the doctor about someone's gall-stones.
(‘Seven as big as marbles, the surgeon said.’)
Edith, the parlourmaid, cleared away the first course.
‘Jolly good tiger-frighteners, what?’ said the Major to Margot Iverson.
‘He usually calls them horses' doovers,’ sighed the Major's wife to Henry, ‘which is worse.’
‘Strange how we have taken to some French words and not others, isn't it?’ remarked Henry diplomatically as the parlourmaid came into the room with a pile of dinner plates and the vegetable dishes.
‘I hope you'll take to a good French claret,’ chimed in Arthur Iverson jovially.
‘One of the St Emilion hill wines.
Château Balestard la Tonnelle, and just ready for drinking…ah, thank you, Edith.
Put it down here.
Carefully, now…’
Obediently the parlourmaid lowered a serving dish bearing a large fillet of beef on to the table in front of the doctor.
He put his hands out to take up the carving knife and fork and Amy Hall murmured something to her neighbour about Arthur always having wanted to be a surgeon really.
‘My dear,’ he said to his wife, ‘aren't you going to tell our guests about our new addition to the dining-room?’
All eyes turned towards Margot Iverson at the other end of the dining table.
She almost pouted.
‘I wasn't going to tell them, Arthur.
I was going to show them later.’
‘Very well, dear.’
The doctor turned his attention back to the carving.
He was indeed good at it.
After having carefully  removed the browned edge of the fillet he sliced the meat quickly and evenly.
Edith took the plates to Margot Iverson's end of the table, where the vegetables were served, and then handed them in turn to the guests.
Henry passed the horseradish sauce and then the gravy to the Major's wife.
‘And salt?’ he enquired.
The career of one of his Foreign Office contemporaries had been said to have foundered after he said ‘Pepper and salt’ to the wife of a diplomat with uncertainly coloured hair and a poor command of the English language.
‘Now you really must tell us what you think of the Abyssinian question, Mr Tyler,’ Brenda Waters said as soon as Edith had withdrawn.
‘Dear lady, I am but an errand boy in the Foreign Service…’
At the other end of the table he could hear Margot Iverson exchanging stately platitudes with Mr Locombe-Stableford.
Henry Tyler would not have described her as a happy woman, but afterward he could not say that she had seemed at all unwell.
She certainly complained of nothing in his hearing.
Her moment came at the end of the first course when, without any apparent signal, the parlourmaid came back into the room.
‘There,’ challenged Arthur.
‘How did Margot summon up reinforcements?
Tell me that if you can.’
‘Perhaps,’ suggested Tom Witherington slyly, ‘Edith was listening at the door…’
‘Did you hear that, Edith?’ said Arthur Iverson.
‘Well, were you?’
‘No, doctor.’
‘Bush telegraph?’
The Major had served in Africa.
‘Oh, do tell us,’ pleaded Wendy Witherington.
‘We'll never guess.’
‘A bell-push under the carpet by my foot,’ said Margot Iverson calmly.
‘Arthur got an electrician to come in and do it during the week.’
‘Clever stuff,’ exclaimed Tom as Edith brought in the puddings.
She placed a hot Normandy pudding for the doctor to serve and a crème brûlée for her mistress to offer to those who preferred it.
‘A great nation, the French,’ said Mrs Locombe-Stableford, eyeing the puddings.
‘In some ways, yes,’ said Henry, a Foreign Office man to his fingertips even on Saturday evenings.
‘But not all.’
‘You mustn't forget Cook's special wine sauce with the Normandy pudding,’ said Margot Iverson.
‘She's very proud of it.’
‘Or the Barsac,’ said Dr Iverson.
‘I think the ladies will like it…’
It was late by the time the meal was done and later still when the company rose from the coffee cups in the drawing-room.
It was early, though, the next morning when Wendy Witherington came back from answering the telephone.
‘That was Brenda Waters,’ she said, looking shocked.
‘You won't believe this but Margot Iverson died in the night…’
‘No!
Surely not…’ exclaimed Tom.
‘What on earth from?’ asked Henry.
‘Brenda doesn't know,’ said Wendy, ‘but apparently poor Margot started being sick about one o'clock in the morning and then had a most frightful pain in her tummy.’
‘At least Arthur would have been there,’ said her husband.
‘Nothing like having a doctor in the house.’
‘He got very worried and immediately sent for one of the consultants from the hospital.’
‘I should think so…’ murmured Henry.
‘And the consultant wanted to know what she'd had to eat, of course…’
‘Of course.’
Tom Witherington looked very solemn.
‘…
And whether anyone else had been taken ill.’
‘Naturally,’ said Henry.
‘They were just going to check that we were all right when Margot suddenly got quite excitable and delirious — so unlike her.’
Henry nodded.
Margot Iverson had struck him as a very controlled woman.
‘And then…
’ Wendy's voice began to quaver, ‘her breathing got very slow.
Brenda says she was in a coma by the time they got her into the hospital.
And then she just died…oh, isn't it too awful?’
Both men nodded.
Wendy sniffed.
‘I think I'll just ring Phyllis Locombe-Stableford…’
‘No,’ said Tom Witherington quietly.
‘I don't think I would if I were you, Wendy.’
‘Why ever not?’
Wendy stared at her husband.
‘She was there too last night.’
‘That's why,’ said Tom.
‘And she may not want to talk about it.
Or have been asked not to by her husband…’ he put his arm round his wife.
‘I think you're forgetting something about old Locombe-Stapleford.’
She was close to tears now.
‘What's that?’
‘That he isn't only a solicitor.’
Tom went on steadily, ‘He's the Coroner as well.’
Beyond speech now, she nodded her comprehension.
‘Brenda said they were doing a post mortem this morning.
Oh, poor, poor Margot…’
Henry Tyler said, ‘I have to be back in Whitehall tomorrow, Wen.
I must be with my Minister at ten but I'll come back for the funeral…or if anyone else wants to talk to me…’
In the event the persons who wanted to talk to Henry Tyler went to the Foreign Office to see him — where they found his rank to be rather higher than that of errand-boy.
In fact he had his own office and a considerably larger area of carpet than anyone in Berebury suspected.
The two policemen who were shown into his room did not  appear to be daunted by this.
‘Detective Inspector Milsom,’ said
the senior of the pair, ‘and my assistant, Detective Constable Bewman.
We are making enquiries into the sudden death of Mrs Margot Iverson.’
Henry Tylor bowed his head.
‘Anything that I can tell you, Inspector, I will, but my acquaintanceship with Mrs Iverson in the event was brief.’
‘It is the event,’ said Milsom dryly, ‘which interests us.
You were, I understand, one of the guests on the fatal night…’
‘Indeed,’ said Henry, noting with the appreciation of an expert the inspector's choice of words.
‘And partook of the complete meal?’
‘Oh, yes, Inspector.
And very good it was, too.’
‘Save for Mrs Iverson, sir.
It didn't do her any good at all.
Quite the reverse you might say.’
‘Are you telling me,’ said Henry cautiously, ‘that Mrs Iverson — er — consumed….’
‘Ingested was the word the Home Office pathologist used, sir.’
‘Ingested that from which she died at that meal?’
‘It would seem so, sir.
And we want you to tell us everything you remember about it.’
Henry cast his mind back over the evening.
‘I think we all ate the same…’
‘That is one of the things that is making our enquiries difficult.’
Detective Inspector Milsom had his notebook at the ready.
‘And from the same dishes…no, I forgot.
The first course was on the table when we went into the dining-room.
Potted shrimps.’
He looked sharply at the policeman.
‘Shell-fish can be dangerous in their own right.’
‘The potted shrimps were put on the table by the parlourmaid immediately before the guests entered the dining-room,’ said Milsom.
Henry hesitated: but not for long.
‘Our host did slip out to attend to the claret…’
‘That was before the shrimp dish reached the dining-room’, said Milsom, revealing that he already knew a great deal about the evening.
‘It was — er — safely in the kitchen at that stage.’
‘And,’ said Henry as lightly as he felt the conversation warranted.
‘I suppose you are sure that Edith wasn't harbouring a grudge against her mistress.’
‘As sure as we can be,’ said Milsom.
Detective Constable Bewman stirred.
‘Besides, if you remember, sir, the potted shrimps had a solidified butter glaze on top.’
‘So it had,’ said Henry appreciatively.
The constabulary had certainly done its homework.
‘And Mrs Iverson would certainly have noticed if that had been disturbed.’
‘I think we can go a little further than that, sir.’
Milsom gave a faint smile.
‘Human nature being what it is, my guess is that any maid worth her salt would have put a slightly imperfect dish in front of anyone but her master or mistress for the cook's sake.’
‘Quite so,’ said Henry gravely.
He had forgotten the old joke about a policeman being the best kitchen range-finder in the world.
‘Well, apart from the potted shrimps I think I can assure you, Inspector, that one way and another all the other dishes were shared.’
‘This is what all the other guests say, sir, and that is what is puzzling us.’
‘What about after we all left?’ said Henry.
‘The experts assure us that symptoms occur between one and four hours after this particular substance has been ingested.’
The detective inspector went on, in tones totally devoid of emphasis, ‘Unfortunately Dr Iverson went out after the dinner-party to pay a late visit to a man with pneumonia about whom he was worried an so cannot tell us anything about the time immediately after the guests had left.
By the time he got home his wife was already beginning to be unwell.’
‘I see.’
Henry frowned.
‘Well, after the potted shrimps we had the beef — and very good it was, too.
‘I understand that Cook has an excellent relationship with the butcher.
She got him to send round the largest and best fillet he had,’ said Milsom.
‘The vegetables, as I recollect, Inspector, were Brussels sprouts and glazed carrots.’
The man on the Belgium desk at the Foreign Office was being driven to despair by what was coming out of Brussels at the moment but Henry saw no reason to say so.
‘We think we can give the vegetables a clean bill of health, sir.’
‘Finished up in the kitchen, were they?’ divined Henry.
‘I say, Inspector, what about the horseradish sauce?
It brought a tear to my eye.’
‘Home-made, Mr Tyler, by Cook, according to Mrs Beeton's recipe with cream, white wine vinegar, a little castor sugar and some mustard — and horseradish, of course.’
‘I have heard,’ said Henry slowly, ‘that on occasion — by accident, usually — aconite has been known to have been mistaken for horseradish.’
‘Picked by Cook herself in the kitchen garden,’ said Inspector Milsom with evident approval.
‘She says that when she asks the gardener for produce she feels she doesn't always get the best.’
‘Human nature doesn't always change, does it?’ said Henry absently.
They knew quite as much about human nature at the Foreign Office as they did down at any police station.
‘Besides, coming back to your problem, Inspector, nearly everybody had some of the horseradish sauce.’
‘Exactly, sir.
Our problem is that while Mrs Iverson appears to have ingested that from which she died at the dinner party there is no dish from which some or all the guests did not share.’
‘Difficult,’ agreed Henry, ‘and made more so, I imagine, by the fact that both the Coroner and the Chairman of the Magistrates’Bench were there.’
Detective Inspector Milsom said with deep feeling that this had not helped in the investigation so far.
‘They both insist that  there was no way in which their hostess could have been poisoned before their very eyes — and both the parlourmaid and the cook swear that she didn't take anything afterwards.
What with the doctor going straight out and the deceased going down to the kitchen to thank both staff for a very good meal there wasn't time — even if she took it herself, which is unlikely from all I hear.’
‘That means Edith and Cook liked her,’ said Henry at once.
‘And I understand there were no money troubles….’
‘None,’ said the inspector stoutly.
‘She was very well-off, was Mrs Iverson.’
‘And yet….’ began Henry.
‘Yes?’
The policeman leaned forward.
‘It does seem almost staged, doesn't it?’
‘Just what the chief constable said….’ the detective inspector lowered his head.
‘I'm sorry, sir, I shouldn't have said that.’
Henry Tyler waved a hand airily.
‘My dear fellow, we spend our time here working on things that shouldn't have been said, but unless they are,’ he added thoughtfully, ‘nobody gets anywhere.
That case of pneumonia?’
‘Genuine’, said the inspector.
‘The doctor had visited the man earlier in the day and said he would be back later that night when he thought the pneumonia would have reached its crisis.’
‘Mrs Iverson hadn't been beastly to Miss Amy hall, I take it?’
‘Kindness itself, I understand, sir.’
He coughed.
‘That doesn't mean that Miss Hall enjoys being a poor relation.
Very few people do, sir.
However, both staff agree Miss Hall fitted in as well as anyone could in the circumstances.
Cook is the most observant woman, and parlourmaids have to be of a noticing cast of mind, otherwise they wouldn't be any good for the job, would they, sir?’
Henry confessed it was something that hadn't crossed his mind before.
‘Like detective constables,’ said the inspector generously.
‘Constable Bewman here pointed out that each guest had their plate handed to them by Edith but I can't see how that would give the murderer any scope.’
Henry frowned.
‘She would have done it in a preordained way, of course,’ mused Henry.
‘The lady on the host's right first, and then the one on his left.
My sister was served after them, I think, and then Miss Amy and Mrs Iverson.’
‘That would have meant,’ said the inspector alertly, ‘that anyone who knew where you were all sitting would have been able work out who would get which plate in the pile.’
‘Oh, yes, Inspector.’
Henry Tyler smiled faintly.
‘It's an interesting little puzzle when you think about it like that.
The quickness of the hand deceiving the eye and all that.
Except that we don't know whose hand.’
‘Yet…’ responded Milsom.
Detective Constable Bewman scratched his head.
‘But even if you knew beforehand who was going to get — say — the fifth plate, how could you put poison on it and not on the other plates?’
‘Difficult,’ agreed Henry Tyler, ‘isn't it?’
‘But not impossible,’ growled Milsom.
‘According to the pathologist, the timing is wrong for her being poisoned except at the meal.
He's prepared to swear to that.’
Henry Tyler screwed up his face in an effort of recollection.
‘There were some glazed onions and Duchesse potatoes round the fillet…our host put those on the individual plates before he handed them to Edith.’
‘We thought of that, sir,’ said the inspector, a touch of melancholy in his voice.
‘Both were brought in from the garden — home grown — and never left the kitchen until Cook gave them to Edith for the table.
Apparently the doctor's very particular about his potatoes.
Never lets seed be used that's more than two years out of Scotland.’
‘Quite right,’ said Henry stoutly.
‘I think the same should go for the Scots race, too.’
‘Not everyone had the same pudding,’ said the inspector with a certain tenacity.
‘Some had one and some had the other.’
‘And some, Inspector, I fear, had both.’
‘And those that had the Normandy pudding,’ said Detective Constable Bewman, ‘had the wine sauce that went with it.’
‘It was a splendid sauce,’ said Henry appreciatively.
‘Consisting, I understand,’ said Milsom heavily, ‘of a small glass of brandy, ditto of Madeira, a gill of water, an ounce of unsalted butter and a little caster sugar.’
‘You should try it some time, Inspector,’ said Henry.
‘It was handed round,’ said Milsom, ignoring this frivolity, ‘by Edith in a sauce boat on a tray.’
‘No room for monkey business there,’ agreed Henry.
‘Or with the fruit and nuts.’
‘Two bowls of each were placed within easy reach of all the guests,’ said Milsom.
‘In theory, I suppose, the nearest piece of fruit could have been doctored, but I don't see myself how the murderer could have been sure the victim would have picked it.’
‘No.’
Henry noted how the detective inspector's speech had now widened to include words like ‘poison’ and ‘murderer’.
‘I can't tell you if Mrs Iverson had any port.’
He grinned.
‘I did and it was splendid.’
‘Vintage,’ said Milsom.
‘1912 and nothing wrong with it at all.’
‘Just as well to check though,’ agreed Henry gravely.
‘The doctor had decanted it himself,’ the policeman informed him, reddening slightly, ‘before the guests arrived.’
‘You can't be too careful with a really crusty port,’ said Henry.
‘Someone,’ said Inspector Milsom meaningfully, ‘seems to have been altogether too careful to my way of thinking.’
Henry Tyler nodded.
‘Careful and very clever, Inspector.
It takes a great deal of prestidigitatory skill to poison someone before your very eyes so to speak.’
‘That's not a word that I know sir but I think I take your meaning.’
‘We are talking of the art of the conjuror…’
‘Ah,’ said Milsom.
‘Where did the patter come in then?’ enquired Detective Constable Bewman.
‘You would have all been talking normally like, wouldn't you, sir?’
‘Yes…that is, I suppose so.’
Henry cast his mind back to the small talk of a small town.
‘Conversation was very general.
The nearest thing to a conjuring trick was the new bell-push that had been fitted under the carpet for Mrs Iverson.’
‘That was the doctor's idea, sir.
Cook tells me he'd seen it somewhere and wanted one for his wife.
The parlourmaid likes it because it saves her…’
‘Just a minute,’ said Henry, a thought beginning to burgeon in his mind.
‘You, Constable, said something about a conjuror's patter.’
‘You don't get that many silent ones, sir,’ responded Bewman stolidly.
‘Not on stage, anyway.’
‘It did occur to me that the doctor did choose an odd moment to draw attention to the bell's being there.
It would have been much more subtle just to have allowed his wife to demonstrate it when the time came and then to turn it into a talking point.’
‘Out of character you might say?’ suggested the inspector.
‘And what, might I ask, sir, was he doing at the time he was talking about the bell?’
‘Oh, he wasn't doing the talking at that point, Inspector.
It was Mrs Iverson who was telling us about it after he mentioned it.’
‘So,’ reasoned the inspector, ‘all the guests were looking at her?’
‘I suppose we were.’
‘So,’ said Milsom patiently, ‘what was the doctor doing while she was talking?’
Henry Tyler cast his mind back to the fatal evening.
‘He was  carving the fillet of beef.
He'd just begun.
He took off the first slice, you know the rather well-done, brown bit at the end, and laid it on one side of the serving dish and then he cut the next slice off for the first lady and so on.’
‘We can't work out how he could have killed his wife while he was sitting at the opposite end of the table,’ said Constable Bewman näively.
‘You have rather got it in for the doctor, haven't you?’ said Henry easily.
‘Most male murderers are widowers,’ growled Milsom.
‘What we don't like, Mr Tyler, is that Mrs Iverson was poisoned in full view of the Coroner and the Chairman of the Bench.’
‘Aye, there's the rub,’ as William Shakespeare so wisely said,’murmured Henry.
‘And Miss Chalder is a very good-looking girl.’
‘Ah, so that's the way the wind blows, is it?’ said Henry, his mind beginning to stray.
‘Mind you,’ he added fairly, ‘doctors are able to get their hands on poison more easily than most of us.’
‘Oh, didn't I say, Mr Tyler?
It wasn't a medical poison that was used to kill Mrs Tyler.’
‘No?’
If Henry thought that there was a contradiction in terms about the words ‘medical poison’ he did not Let it show in his face.
‘More of a horticultural poison,’ said the inspector, ‘although not intended as such.’
He consulted his notebook.
‘The substance was called ethylene chlorohydrin if that means anything to you, sir.’
‘I'm afraid not,’ said Henry regretfully.
‘Used to speed the germination of seeds and potatoes,’ said the inspector, ‘and as a cleaning solvent.’
‘And it's odourless,’ chimed in Constable Bewman helpfully.
‘So there was no need to have anything highly scented or smelling strongly on the table,’ said Henry at once.
‘I hope you never take it into your head to commit a murder, sir,’ said the Inspector.
‘You do seem to have an eye for essentials.’
‘And how much of this — er — horticultural poison does it take to kill a human being?’ asked Henry, ignoring this last.
‘Not a lot,’ said the inspector quietly.
‘Something under a fifth of a teaspoonful — say four or five drops — added to which it is highly soluble.’
‘It seems to me,’ said Henry Tyler, in the last analysis a Ministry man, ‘that this stuff, whatever it is, is something that ought to be put a stop to.’
‘Very possible, sir,’ said the inspector smoothly.
‘And after the fruit and nuts?’
‘We all moved back into the drawing-room for coffee,’ said Henry, ‘and I performed my arty trick with the cream and the back of a spoon.’
He looked up.
‘It's not a conjuring trick, Inspector.’
‘I'm glad to hear it, sir.’
‘It's a question of how to get the cream to float on top of the coffee.’
‘Very difficult, I'm sure, sir.’
‘Not when you know how.’
‘I think that is going to be the case with the ethylene chlorohydrin, sir.’
‘Er — quite, Inspector.
Well, with the coffee it's all a matter of putting the sugar in first and stirring well.
That increases the surface tension on the top of the coffee — or is it the specific gravity?— so that when you dribble the cream slowly down over the back of the spoon it stays on the top.’
‘And Bob's your uncle, so to speak?’ said the inspector, paying unconscious tribute to an old nepotism.
‘It worked,’ said Henry.
‘Whether it distracted everyone else long enough to slip five drops of something into Mrs Iverson's coffee, I wouldn't know, Inspector.’
‘But we would, Mr Tyler.
You see, Mrs Iverson never drank coffee.
And we have it on the authority of those sitting near her  that she did not drink it that evening.’
He coughed.
‘If I may say so your sister was particularly emphatic on the point.’
‘Good old Wendy,’ said Henry, then frowned.
‘I say, Inspector, that does rather leave every avenue explored, doesn't it?’
Detective Inspector Milsom assented to this sentiment with a quiet nod.
‘Every avenue that we can think of.’
‘What we want, then, Inspector,’ he said bracingly, ‘is a new avenue or fresh look at an old one.’
‘Either would do very nicely, sir.’
With an ironic smile Milsom said, ‘Which do you recommend?’
‘Oh, a new look at an old problem,’ said Henry Tyler at once.
‘We don't have new problems in the Foreign Office.’
‘The only matter which you have brought to our attention, sir, which seems to have escaped everyone else's notice was the — er — untimely mention of the footbell.’
‘Which doesn't get us very much furth…wait a minute, Inspector, wait a minute.’
‘Yes, sir?’
‘Suppose it does?’
Henry ran his hands through his hair in a gesture of excitement that his sister would have recognized well.
‘Suppose it was meant to turn all eyes towards our hostess?’
‘And to take them off your host?’ said Milsom astringently.
‘Exactly!’
‘Well?’
‘Well, if it was intended as a distraction, then that must have been the moment when he poisoned his wife.
That follows, doesn't it?’
‘It's a thought worth considering, sir.’
‘Watch out, Inspector, if you can talk like that in response to one of my brainwaves we'll have you working here.’
‘No, thank you, sir.
We've got enough troubles of our own in Calleshire.’
‘I think you're going to have one less in a minute.’
He brought his fist down on his desk with a bang.
‘Inspector, until  this moment I have always felt that the benefit of a classical education was over-rated.’
‘Indeed, sir?’
‘But not now!
Parysatis, wife of Darius, killed Statira, wife of Artaxerxes, in much the same way as Mrs Iverson was murdered.’
Detective Inspector Milsom leaned forward, his notebook prominent.
‘Tell me…’
‘Now I know what else it was Dr Iverson did when he went through to see to the claret before dinner.’
Henry rubbed his hands.
‘First he probably smeared a little horseradish sauce or even some colourless Vaseline on the righthand side of the carving knife.
Then he added a fatal dose of your ethylene stuff to it and put it back on the carving rest…’
‘With the other blade facing upward.’
Detective Constable Bewman could hardly contain his excitement.
Then his face fell.
‘But why didn't the first guest get the poisoned beef?’
Detective Inspector Milsom said quietly, ‘Because the doctor laid the first slice of the fillet — the piece that you don't give to guests — to one side of the carving dish…
Mr Tyler said so.’
‘But put it on his wife's plate later without anyone noticing,’ said Henry.
‘Only the left hand side of the carving knife touched the next piece of meat, while the right hand side had been neatly wiped on the outside piece, so everyone else's meat was unaffected.’
He sat back in his chair.
‘Parysatis did it with a chicken and I should have thought of it before.’
