THE SEVENTH BIRMINGHAM INTERNATIONAL film &television FESTIVAL 20 SEPT–5 OCT 1991 
Contents:
Introductions Festival Board Festival Staff
Opening and Closing Films Mid-Festival Special Screenings
Festival Fortnight of International Cinema
Bertrand Tavernier Retrospective A Tribute to Muriel Box
Working Title: the story so far World Premiere: UB40: A Family Affair
Third Cinema Focus
The Ghatak Tradition
Festival Films and Events Calendar
Booking Information
Television Weekend Conference Cities and Media Forum
Writers Talks: Guardian Screen and TV Writers, Royal Television Society lecture, Writers Workshops
Location Birmingham
Raymond Williams Memorial Lecture Eureka Audio Visual Opening Shots Forum Awards Dinner
Media Business Seminars Independent Producers Forum
Exhibitions; Screenings and Events at other venues
Children's Films Fifth and Sixth Form Screenings
A–Z of Films and Directors Film Festival Sponsors and Acknowledgements.
Inside:
Rik Mayall in DROP DEAD FRED This year's opening film
STEPPING OUT The Director of SHIRLEY VALENTINE teams up with the stars of EDUCATING RITA and CABARET
WHO NEEDS A HEART We premiere the brand new film from the makers of HANDSWORTH SONGS
THE COMMITMENTS Alan Parker's new film closes the Festival.
‘Wonderfully humorous, and bursting with life’
FREE YOUR ESSENTIAL GUIDE TO THE FESTIVAL
introductions
the City of Birmingham has great movie traditions.
The inventor of celluloid, Alexander Parkes, was a Birmingham man.
So too was Oscar Deutsch who set up the Odeon Cinema chain from Colmore Row in the 20's and 30's.
Sir Michael Balcon of Ealing Studio fame, who named the policeman George Dixon in the film The Blue Lamp after his old school is also a son of the city.
And as last year's retrospective of the films of Tony Garnett has shown, Birmingham's impressive movie traditions are continuing.
It is on this splendid foundation that the Birmingham International Film and Television Festival is built enhancing the City of Birmingham as a media city.
The Birmingham International Film and Television Festival enters its seventh year in 1991 acknowledged as an event of national and international importance.
The Festival also plays a role in the artistic renaissance of Birmingham, a profile confirmed by the continuing success of the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra, under its Artistic Director, Simon Rattle, the recent move of both the Birmingham Royal Ballet (formerly Sadler's Wells Royal Ballet) and the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company to Birmingham, the newly launched ‘Towards The Millennium’ annual arts Festival and the Arts Council of Great Britain's invitation to Birmingham to launch Arts 2000, as the UK City of Music in 1992.
The film and television industries are important ingredients of the city's culture and the Festival reflects this life-style in its informal atmosphere, giving endless pleasure to the many cinema goers from the city and to the numerous professionals who visit the city for the Festival.
I wish the Festival success for 1991.
COUNCILLOR BRYAN BIRD Chairman, Leisure Services Committee 
To the Festival with that 7 year itch
As a great movie fan, each year I try and keep a fortnight clear to spend time at the Birmingham International Film and Television Festival.
The Festival's come of age of late and I am more than happy that my sax playing has been the soundtrack for the Festival's cinema trailer in recent years.
For film lovers the Festival's the place to be in September.
It grows from strength to strength each year and the quality of the programme gets even better.
As a director myself of music films it's great to know the Festival is contributing so imaginatively to the re-emergence of Birmingham as a major city of culture.
After returning from a 30 month tour with UB40, I believe that Birmingham is establishing itself as Europe's leading city of the arts and media.
You can sense the creative buzz in the city.
I've set up my own production company now to harness the talent that's in the city and bring more media business to Birmingham.
I was going to call my new film ‘In Bed With UB40’ but Madonna got there first.
All the best to the Festival with that 7 year itch.
Brian Travers, UB40 
opening film
drop dead fred
Our opener this year has been a runaway success in the States where the box office success of this relatively low budget film has taken everyone by surprise.
The Festival now brings you the chance to see for yourself Rik Mayall and Phoebe Cates, in a tale of an imaginary friend with a difference.
Mayall plays Fred, the obnoxious character summoned up by a mixed up young woman with hilarious and chaotic consequences.
Rik Mayall's name was all it took to persuade Ate de Jong to direct the film: ‘I knew him from his work in THE YOUNG ONES.
He was great to work with — I'd do anything to work with him again.
It's a pretty bizarre film, but it's not dark or mean spirited in its intentions.
Fred has a vicious quality, but he's childlike.
He may bring problems but he also helps to solve them’.
DROP DEAD FRED is produced by Working Title, whose films we are celebrating throughout the Festival, so it's particularly appropriate that their latest success opens the Festival.
Expect the Young Ones crossed with Beetlejuice, Kevin Turvey meets the Female Brat Pack (Phoebe Cates, Bridget Fonda) and an example of how to make an Anglo-American film and make it work.
DROP DEAD FRED is set to be this year's A FISH CALLED WANDA!
closing film
the commitments
‘A richly realistic, pointedly perceptive portrait of the passions and pitfalls of the local band scene.
Wonderfully humorous, bursting with life and packed with enough solid soul music to make the blood dance in your veins’.
Mike Davies.
THE COMMITMENTS is Alan Parker's new film and represents a change of direction for him which has been phenomenally successful.
Somehow working with a young cast in Dublin has brought out the best in Parker as a director to create the film that is already being talked about as the best rock movie in years.
The story starts with Jimmy Rabbitte, a man with a vision.
His vision is to bring soul music to Dublin, and he sets out to bring together a band with raw potential and rough and ready talent.
He collects a motley crew of musicians and singers, drunken Deco, Dean with his uncle's sax, Billy, who has to have his drums redeemed from the pawnbrokers, Joey ‘The Lips’ Fagan, and the girls Imelda, Natalie and Bernie.
There are personality clashes in the band, and jealousies and rivalries spring up, but all dissent disappears when they perform.
But inevitably the break up occurs just at the band's moment of triumph…
‘Sex, soul music, dodgy clubs, animal drummers, smarmy record company bosses.
All wrapped up in irresistible humour and a zest for life.
THE COMMITMENTS makes you want to rush out, form a band and change your name to Otis Redding’.
‘As I write, we are editing and mixing the music.
With luck, we might have captured a little of the spit and spunk of the working class kids of Dublin's Northside.
Also, I hope we've caught the wit and wisdom of Roddy Doyle's original novel.
Our film is set in Dublin, Ireland, but it's about the hopes and dreams, music brings to young kids everywhere, from Fingas to Philadelphia and Memphis to Minsk’.
Alan Parker, May '91.
mid festival screenings
BOYZ ‘N’ THE HOOD
BOYZ ‘N’ THE HOOD, a powerful drama about coming of age in Black urban America, marks the feature film writing and directing debut of 23-year-old John Singleton.
It tells a poignant story about the community where Singleton grew up: of three friends growing up in a South Central Los Angeles neighbourhood, and of street life where friendship, pain, danger and love combine to form reality.
Tre (Cuba Gooding Jr), Dough Boy (Ice Cube) and Ricky (Morris Chestnut), are three young blacks brought up in an area where violence prevails.
Shot entirely on location in South Central LA, the film aims to give the first true picture of what life is like in the ‘LA Hood’.
It was not uncommon during production, for police helicopters to circle above nearby houses, for gang members to object that actors were wearing an opposing gang's colours, or for police cars to speed past the set in hot pursuit.
But in the midst of these distractions, another side of reality was filmed — the lives of the people in the community who don't make news.
It is that real-life drama that Singleton decided to explore and recreate on film.
One scene among many that captures the ironic mix of commonplace and macabre has two kids battling over a football, just a few feet away from a dead body.
This uncompromising look into the choices confronting young Black Americans has aroused considerable interest in the States.
‘It is my story, I live it.
What sense would it have made to have some white boy impose his interpretation on my experience?’
YOUNG SOUL REBELS
Chris and Caz are two soulmates who are disc-jockeys on a pirate radio station they run from the back of a North London garage.
Their lives take a startling turn when a friend is murdered in the local park.
Winner of the Critics Prize at Cannes 1991, YOUNG SOUL REBELS takes place during the summer of 1977, a significant year, being the Queen's Silver Jubilee.
British nationalism was in the air and patriotic sentiments ran high.
Punk was at its zenith and political and cultural oppositions were intense.
Parallel to the highly-publicised excesses of punk was an equally important but historically invisible development, the growth of black popular culture, particularly the development of soul music.
‘From MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE to SOUL II SOUL, Britain's black culture has seduced the rest of the globe.
It has shaped those fashions, sounds and images young people around the world perceive as the essence of being British.
And, from Rifat Ozbek fashion reels to Neneh Cherry raps, much of this black style has been exported on radio and television.
Thus primed, an international market is keen to see films made by young black Britons.
It is against this background and out of this environment that YOUNG SOUL REBELS came about.’
Cynthia Rose, Vogue Magazine
festival fortnight of international cinema
This year the festival brings you the chance to see a wide and varied selection of the films which will be remembered as the highlights of cinema in 1991.
Aside from our Opening and Closing Galas and special Mid Festival screenings, we will be putting the spotlight on the best films from the international festival circuit and some eagerly awaited new releases.
Amongst the British films selected are DAKOTA ROAD, the new release from the prolific Working Title company, a tale of sexual awakening set in the East Anglian fens; CLOSE MY EYES, Stephen Poliakoff's second film as director, which stars Saskia Reeves who is also in THE BRIDGE, a new film which takes an impressionist painting as the starting point of a tale of illicit passion in the repressive Victorian era.
We are also screening THE OBJECT OF BEAUTY, starring Andie MacDowell and John Malkovich in the cautionary story of two Americans stranded in London who discover themselves penniless, and how this affects their relationship.
The British production company Zenith were so impressed by Hal Hartley's first feature that they signed him up to make TRUST, which we will be screening at the festival.
And as part of the special mid-festival event, we will show YOUNG SOUL REBELS, Issac Julien's film about young black DJs in the London of 1977, which won the Critics Prize at this year's Cannes film festival.
Lastly, we are proud to be screening Derek Jarman's new film EDWARD II.
We are delighted to continue the festival tradition of presenting films by talented young Canadian directors: amongst the titles we will screen this year are HIGHWAY 61, by the director of last year's cult classic ROADKILL ‘H’, a harrowing tale of a young couple's fight to kick heroin; AN IMAGINARY TALE, a weird and wonderful fantasy from Montreal; plus two short films from the Canadian Centre for Advanced Film Studies, including John Greyson's new film THE MAKING OF ‘MONSTERS’.
From the States highlights include Kathryn Bigelow's new film POINT BREAK with Keanu Reeves and Patrick Swayze; AUNT JULIA AND THE SCRIPTWRITER, directed by Jon Amiel and starring Barbara Hershey and Peter Falk: the low budget smash hit JULIA HAS TWO LOVERS; PARIS TROUT, a powerful drama from the Deep South with Dennis Hopper and the ubiquitous Barbara Hershey.
The festival is also screening POISON, one of the most controversial American films for a long time, which has caused storms of protest in the States and will be a film that has everyone talking.
And our other Mid Festival Special Event is BOYZ ‘N’ THE HOOD, John Singleton's tale of kids from the black ghettoes of L.A.
From Europe, we present the films that have caught the eyes of critics and audiences at the major European film festivals.
Young Soul Rebels
Julia Has Two Lovers
Object of Beauty
Titles include Lars von Trier's EUROPA, shown in competition at Cannes: RECOLLECTIONS OF THE YELLOW HOUSE, which won a Silver Leopard at Venice and Claude Berri's film starring Gerard Depardieu, URANUS, screened in competition at Berlin.
Also screening are films from Japan and Korea: WHY DID BODHI DHARMA LEAVE FOR THE EAST?: the re-issued Kurosawa classic DERSU UZALA and CIRCUS BOYS, by talented young director Kaizo Hayashi.
DEATH IN BRUNSWICK is an Australian film starring Sam Neill, which Derek Malcolm named as one of the Best Ten Films in the Edinburgh Film Festival this year.
We are screening several of those titles, see if you can work out which ones they are!
Festivals are one of the few opportunities in the UK for screening short films, and we will be presenting not just this year's BFI New Directors shorts, but also programmes of short films from film schools in the UK and Canada, from the Arts Council funded schemes and films funded by the filmmakers themselves.
These short filmmakers are the people who will go on to be the Jarmans, Greenaways, Jarmuschs of the Nineties; see their work now and tell your friends you discovered them first!
There are many more titles, many more wonderful experiences of international cinema.
We hope that you will take the opportunity to enjoy one of the most exciting programmes available in Britain: the cinema of the world comes to Birmingham!
Boyz ‘N’ the Hood
FOR FULL DETAILS OF ALL FILMS SCREENED IN THE FESTIVAL PLEASE SEE THE FESTIVAL SOUVENIR PROGRAMME ON SALE FROM ALL VENUES AND AT OTHER OUTLETS THROUGHOUT THE CITY.
The Bridge
bertrand tavernier retro
One of the major retrospective strands of this year's Festival is a tribute to the French film director Bertrand Tavernier, whose latest film THESE FOOLISH THINGS starring Dirk Bogarde and Jane Birkin, has received critical acclaim and a warm reception from audiences.
Tavernier, who is a native Lyon, Birmingham's twin town, has had a life long love affair with cinema.
He originally studied law, before dropping out to devote himself to film criticism and assistant direction on films.
His book, 30 Ans du Cinema Americain has become a seminal text for cinephiles everywhere.
His films cover a wide range of subjects and genres, from the futurist science fiction world of QUE LA FETE COMMENCE and THE JUDGE AND THE ASSASSIN to the wonderful evocation of the modern day Cote D'Azur in THESE FOOLISH THINGS.
As a director his work embraces both the narrative traditions of French cinema and a critical awareness of the styles and conventions of Hollywood.
His homage to jazz music ROUND MIDNIGHT fuses these elements with Tavernier's unique ability to encapsulate time and mood.
‘For Tavernier, the cinema counts more than anything.
He would live in an attic and wear threadbare clothes provides he could go on seeing and making movies’.
This quote from Jean Aurenche, who co-scripted Tavernier's first three features, identifies the driving force which informs all the director's work, and has made him one of the leading European directors today.
We are delighted to announce that Tavernier, who will just have finished shooting his latest film will be in Birmingham on October 5th to talk about his work with The Guardian film critic Derek Malcolm.
This is a rare opportunity to listen to Tavernier's ideas about film and about the relationship between European and American cinema, a subject about which he has strong views.
Over the festival period we will be screening a selective retrospective of the director's work at the Triangle cinema.
This retrospective is sponsored by Barclays de Zoete Wedd with additional support from the British Council and the City of Birmingham.
Bertrand Tavernier and Philippe Noiret — Life and Nothing But
Watchmaker of St Paul
Sunday in the Country
‘I think my films are very, very French.
I feel they are rooted in something that has to do with culture, with a sense of history, a sense of past, a sense of tradition.
I believe in stories, not plots’ Bertrand Tavernier in the New York Times
BARCLAYS de ZOETE WEDD The British Council Birmingham-Lyon 40 years
a tribute to muriel box (1905–1991)
It was to her own surprise that Muriel Box, the director of 14 modest budget feature films between 1951 and 1964, found herself an inspiration and a role model for a new generation of women film-makers, critics and students.
She was ‘rediscovered’ as a film-maker in the early 80's, and a series of retrospectives and tributes culminated in 1990 at the International Festival of Women's Films in Creteil, where a programme of her work was feted by capacity audiences.
Her first husband was Sydney Box, the writer-director who became head of production at Gainsborough Studios; and her sister-in-law was the ‘Miss Box Office’ who produced the wildly successful ‘DOCTOR IN THE HOUSE’films over two decades.
But Muriel's climb to film direction was slow and gradual, and she began her apprenticeship as a typist and then continuity girl, rising throughout the studio hierarchy.
She wrote theatre plays, often for all women casts, which anticipated her work on Gainsborough films, with their dominant roles for women stars and strong appeal to women audiences.
After directing the Verity films, the company she and Sydney formed during the Second World War, she moved into independent feature production.
The Boxes were snapped up by Gainsborough Studios after winning a joint screenwriting Oscar for ‘THE SECOND VEIL’.
After Gainsborough closed, Muriel and Sydney moved to Pinewood, part of the Rank Organisation, and eventually (in spite of Michael Balcon's pronouncement that women were unsuited to be film directors) Muriel was directing features.
Her films are a wry and witty commentary on the 50's, that strange watershed in British history.
In spite of her own feminism and socialism her films are not propagandist or didactic, as she was very well aware that: ‘We were not engaged to indulge our own politics or socialism, however much we would have found satisfaction in doing so’.
What is remarkable is the extent to which she was able nonetheless to express intelligent analysis and genuine commitment even when working through apparently tame generic materials for Rank.
She made several ‘women's’ films for Rank, including STREET CORNER (1953) about the women police in Chelsea, which she always cited as a particularly enjoyable experience since it involved working with a mainly female crew and cast.
Another outstanding Box feature was SIMON AND LAURA (1956) a comedy about live television production starring Kay Kendall and Peter Finch whose wit and sharpness has not since been rivalled by films on similar themes.
Her films are by no means as simple as they may have first appeared.
They make deceptively subtle demands on their audience, and through all of them there runs a strong sense of humour.
Her last film ‘RATTLE OF A SIMPLE MAN’(1964) whose commercial and critical failure ended her career, can be seen as a woman's reply to the eulogies of the working class male celebrated by John Osbourne and his like, and it does so by poking fun at the ideology of the male and his crude sexism.
Ironically, this film stands up better today than many of its male social realist counterparts.
Caroline Merz.
We will be screening SIMON AND LAURA as a tribute to Muriel Box on Wednesday 25 September in the MAC at 9pm.
The screening will follow a Guardian Talk with Lynda La Plante, one of the few women to have established herself in television drama as a writer.
Simon and Laura
Muriel Box
selected filmography
working title: the story so far…
One of the real success stories of British film-making in the 80's was Tim Bevan and Sarah Radclyffe's production company ‘Working Title’, and that success is continuing into the 90's.
In partnership with Graham Bradstreet, Bevan and Radclyffe have, as a company and individually, produced a wide range of successful film and TV dramas and documentaries, making them one of the UK's most creative and innovative independent film and television partnerships.
Formed in 1984, ‘Working Title’ achieved their breakthrough with ‘MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE’, one of the most important films in the British cinema renaissance of the mid-Eighties.
But Bevan and Radclyffe quickly proved that ‘Laundrette’ was not a one hit wonder by going on to produce ‘WISH YOU WERE HERE’, which made Emily Lloyd a Hollywood hot property, followed by the powerful and moving ‘A WORLD APART’.
Chris Menges' directorial debut which received critical acclaim and festival awards throughout the world.
One of the strengths of the company has been their ability to produce films with a wide range of styles and subject, without losing their commitment to brave and adventurous film-making.
Their list of successes includes ‘PERSONAL SERVICES’(a Zenith production), ‘CARAVAGGIO’(produced by Sarah Radclyffe for the BFI)‘SAMMY AND ROSIE GET LAID’, ‘FOR QUEEN AND COUNTRY’, ‘PAPERHOUSE’ and ‘FOOLS OF FORTUNE’.
They have also set up their own television production company, WTTV, developing projects including ‘NEWSHOUNDS’ with Alison Steadman and Adrian Edmondson, which won the top prize in the Best Television Film category at last year's BAFTA awards.
They also produced ‘LORNA DOONE’ with Clive Owen, and are now working on a series based on the children's classic ‘THE BORROWERS’and a major drama series adapted from Armistead Maupin's cult novels ‘TALES OF THE CITY’.
‘Working Title’ have a slate of releases for 1991 which is more than impressive: in addition to‘ROBIN HOOD’produced by Sarah Radclyffe for 20th Century Fox, they have also completed two American based productions: ‘DROP DEAD FRED’with Rik Mayall and Phoebe Cates and ‘RUBIN AND ED’.
Meanwhile, in the UK, ‘LONDON KILLS ME’, ‘EDWARD II’ and ‘DAKOTA ROAD’were all recently completed.
They are currently shooting their biggest budget movie so far: ‘A MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART’ with the brilliant young New Zealand director, Vincent Ward, who directed the strange and wonderful ‘NAVIGATOR’.
As ‘Working Title’ continue to expand and develop, it seems a good moment to look back at some of their prolific and varied output, and we will be screening a number of titles from ‘MY BEAUTIFUL LAUNDRETTE’through the powerful drama ‘A WORLD APART’, scripted by Gillian Slovo, Ruth First's daughter, and underrated films like ‘PAPERHOUSE’to ‘ROBIN HOOD’, scripted by John Mcgrath, and then a number of their new releases: ‘EDWARD II’(directed by Derek Jarman), ‘DAKOTA ROAD’and ‘DROP DEAD FRED’, which has been a huge box office hit in the States.
filmography
in production
SCREENING at a glance
WORLD PREMIERE UB40 a family affair
Brian Travers, founder member of UB40, launched his film production company, Brian Travers Associates, with a great start, shooting UB40 live at Finsbury Park.
Brum based Brian Travers, producer and director of musical films for many years, and well known saxophonist in the internationally renowned band, UB40, has already made his mark on the music industry.
Now B.T.A. aim to utilise the wealth of talent in our city in film and video production.
Pre-production began whilst UB40 were completing the final leg of their 30 month World Tour, culminating in a twelve camera shoot on Saturday 21 June at Finsbury Park in North London.
Director Roger Pomphrey's documentary crew filmed UB40 at home in Brum and followed them down to London with their families and friends.
Once at Finsbury Park, the cameras caught them at the sound check, in interviews, backstage, and relaxing before the gig.
Uniting music and image, this unusual concert film provides insight into the staging of the event, the comments of the fans and the band.
Featuring many of their greatest hits, the film captures the Brummie Band at their best, before an audience of around 35,000 eager fans.
Brian Travers Associates are proud to show the world premiere of this new film in UB40's home town at the Birmingham Film and Television Festival.
SCREENING at a glance
third focus
‘colonial power, black politics, desire &music’
Over the last year thousands of films have been produced all over the world.
Yet what we normally get to see on British cinema screens represents a small slice of what is produced globally.
This has very little to do with the quality and entertainment value of the films themselves.
What gets investment and what is shown has far more to do with the economic stranglehold of the Hollywood studios and the distribution/exhibition chains.
This year's Third Focus programme aims to provide a refreshing range of films that have one thing in common; a commitment to entertaining audiences without insulting their intelligence.
Colonial power, religious belief, separation, racist oppression, migration, miscegenation, black politics, music, adventure, desire, passion, pleasure are the themes touched upon by some of the films being screened.
Set to kick off the programme at MAC on Saturday 29 September is the British premiere of MASALA an irreverent tragi-comedy set amongst Toronto's middle-class Asian community starring Saeed Jaffrey.
The Odeon New Street will be showing BOY'Z N THE HOOD a gritty look at the urban life of young African-Americans, and the Cannes award winning feature YOUNG SOUL REBELS which looks at sexuality, race and music in late seventies Britain.
The world premiere of WHO NEEDS A HEART, the new feature from award winning Black Audio Film Collective, on the life and times of Michael X is a festival must.
Desire, Christianity and colonial power on the Carribean island of Curacao are some of the themes of the stunning AVA &GABRIEL.
KASBA is a new film by Kumar Shahani, who will be here to take part in the Ghatak Tradition Forum (see opposite page).
AMA a magical realist adventure story is set in London, drawing successfully on African traditions.
Some of the documentaries screening are A PLACE OF RAGE, a portrait of two inspirational African-American women Angela Davies and June Jordan, and MYSTERIES OF JULY an elegaic investigation into the issue of deaths at the hands of the police.
Film crazed insomniacs will be pleased to know that Vokani Film Circuit is continuing its tradition of organising a BLACK FILM ALL NIGHTER at the Triangle.
Films need audiences as much as audiences need films, we look forward to seeing you.
Who Needs A Heart
Masala
Ava &Gabriel
A Place of Rage
third FOCUS television forum
in association with Vokani Film Circuit
Some recent research undertaken at the British Film Institute for a documentary on the history of black people and television has unearthed an interesting fact.
The earliest television broadcasts in the late 1930's featured black performers.
BBC Pebble Mill studios on Friday 27 September will be hosting an in depth look at more recent black participation, behind the scenes in television.
This historic forum will look at the development of Black-African, Caribbean, Asian — involvement in factual television, particularly in the last ten years, the era of Channel 4 and the specialist BBC Units.
BLACKS ON THE BOX will look at the movement of black programmes from off-peak ‘access’ magazine slots to less restricted prime time one-off specials and documentary series.
The forum will draw on experience of people who have worked within the industry as commissioning editors, producers and directors over the last decade.
The day will divide into a morning session on ‘Where We Have Been?’, and an afternoon session on ‘What's Happening Now?’
The event aims to bring together people working in television, students, trainees and those with an interest in the industry.
AS SPACE WILL BE LIMITED IT IS ADVISABLE TO BOOK EARLY.
Some of the speakers will be: John Akomfrah, Anita Bhalla, Behroze Gandhy, Narendhra Morar, Stella Orakwue, Trevor Phillips, Colin Prescod, Salim Salam, Parminder Vir, Onye Wambu.
Colin Prescod
Anita Bhalla
the ritwik ghatak tradition
a festival highlight
Today with the shaking up of the post-war world order the terms migrants, refugees, borders, national identity, have become part of the cultural agenda in Europe and North America.
For the Third World or rather the underdeveloped world these questions have existed for the greater part of this century.
India in 1947 saw the ‘largest migration in history’, for at the very moment of its independence, it was divided, its western and eastern regions became the ‘Muslim homeland’ of Pakistan.
Partition led to the migration of ten million people across the newly established borders.
During this period, it is estimated that half a million people were slaughtered in the communal violence that flooded the country.
This year's Third Focus is highlighting, through screenings and a discussion forum, the work of Indian film maker Ritwik Ghatak and the work of those he has inspired.
Ritwik Ghatak was born in 1925 in Dacca, East Bengal, the capital of present day Bangladesh.
He was amongst those who believed Partition was not historically destined.
While he was young, his family moved to Calcutta.
It was during the period of 1943–1945 that his political awakening took place.
These were the years of the anti-fascist movement, the Japanese attack on Britain's Asian empire, the British retreat and the Bengal famine during which two million people died.
By 1946, Ghatak had become a Marxist activist, this was the year that the communal rioting leading up to Partition began in earnest.
In the space of two days in mid August five thousand people were killed in Calcutta.
Out of a desire to protest against the ‘oppression and exploitation’ he saw around him, he began to write short stories, by the time of his death over a hundred had been published.
He was drawn to the work of IPTA (Indian People's Theatre Association), a cultural wing of the Communist Party of India, and worked with it as an actor — playwright — director till 1954.
In 1953, he was voted best actor and director for his theatre work, this was also the year in which he directed NAGARIK (THE CITIZEN), the first of the eight feature films that he completed.
When these films made over a twenty year period have, on rare occasions, been seen by Western audiences, critics have referred to him as neo-neo-realist or post-Brechtian film-maker.
These labels prove to be wholly inadequate, not to say misleading, for a film-maker who managed to bring together Indian mythological symbolism, folk and musical traditions in order to raise questions about identity, nation, race, and class in a unparalleled way.
He was very pragmatic about why he had been drawn to cinema ‘I came into films not because I wanted to make films.
Tomorrow, if I could find a better medium, I would throw away cinema.
I don't love films…
I have used the cinema as a weapon, as a medium to express my views’.
FORUM
Madam Gopal Singh, film writer and lecturer at Delhi University will be giving the Third Focus Forum keynote speech and introducing a screening SUBARNAREKHA.
Award winning filmmakers Mani Kaul and Kumar Shahani, who were students of Ritwik Ghatak at the FTII (Film and Television Institute of India) in the mid-sixties, will be forum participants, as will more recent graduates of the FTII Rajan Khosa, Mandira Mitra and Anup Singh.
Paul Willeman, former editor of ‘Screen’ and ‘Framework’will be Forum chair.
SCREENING
Screenings of Ritwik Ghatak's astonishing films CLOUD CAPPED STAR (MEGHE DHAKA TARA), E FLAT (KOMAL GANDHAR), SUBARNAREKHA and REASON ARGUMENT AND STORY (JUKTI TAKKO AR GAPPO) will be taking place throughout the festival.
The films A DAYS BREAD (USKI ROTI) and SIDDESHWARI by Mani Kaul, and MAYA DARPAN and KASBA by Kumar Shahani will be shown.
Rajan Khosa's BODHVRIKSHA, Mandira Mitra's AYONUA and Anup Singh's LASYA will be screened in a bill of Film &Television Institute Films.
When I first came across Ritwik Ghatak's films about ten years ago, I was puzzled.
I was very impressed by them, how to approach them.
It was only later that I discovered Ghatak was not only a director, but also, in his own, idiosyncratic way, a teacher and theorist of cinema.
As I have read his writings, often in photocopies lent to me by friends, or in the book on his work published in 1982, in India, I have not only come to appreciate his films in a more informed way, but I have also realized that his outlook on film-making is one which has begun to affect my own thinking.
There are three reasons why I think Ghatak's work is especially valuable.
First, there is a mixture of the personal and the political.
Ghatak was a committed Marxist, who began his career working in a political theatre company.
But his work is always marked by elements of his own life, culminating in his final film, JUKTKI TAKKO AR GAPPO, which is virtually a self-portrait, depicting his own problems with alcoholism.
Ghatak wanted to combine insights from Marxism with elements from India thought, as well as the work of Jung, with which he became increasingly fascinated.
All his political thinking is refracted in the films through personal dramas, which bear the stamp of his preoccupation with politics as something which is about individual people, rather than issues or abstractions like the masses of the nation.
‘Film is basically a matter of personal statement.
All arts are in the final analysis.
And film seems to be an art’.
Secondly, Ghatak always wanted to combine the global with the local.
He was quite at home talking about Eisenstein or Brecht, Shakespeare or Godard, but at the same time he was completely rooted in the specificity of Bengal, its history, its literature and its culture.
He can move from talking about Aristophanes to talking about Indian epics without any sense of discontinuity.
This global vision allows him to see foreign artists through Indian eyes and vice versa.
He reveres Tagore as the great modern writer of Bengal, but he looks at him disrespectfully, as if he was applying a Brechtian alienation-effect on him.
His Tagore is not a mystic or a Romantic, but a rogue, performing monkey, a user of four-letter words.
When Ghatak made a film about the partition of Bengal, about which he cared deeply, he was unsparingly honest, undeflected by nationalism in his vision of his nation.
As he himself put it, talking about his film, SUBARNAREKHA, ‘Refugee?
Who is not a refugee’?
Within moments, he is talking about Brecht's THREEPENNY OPERA pointing out how Brecht invented an abstract London, not in order to escape from the reality of the city, but to create a generalized framework which could be relevant to audiences in many different places.
So, his Bengal is also an invented framework, a device, and yet a device which, he hopes, will enable him to show more of the truth than simple realism could.
Finally, Ghatak tried to find a way between popular melodrama and the avant-garde.
He returns again to the ways in which melodrama is rooted in Indian popular culture.
It should not be despised, Bombay talkies, any more than Mizoguchi despised the melodrama he took from the Kabuki theatre.
On the contrary, it offers great possibilities.
Here too, Ghatak made use of Jung in his thinking about popular culture, looking for ways of using psychoanalytic concepts, ‘unconscious’ motifs and images, in order to affect the audience at a deeper, less conscious level than most committed film.
At the same time, Ghatak believed in experiment, in the need for an ‘experimental cinema’.
He was interested in the work of Norman MacLaren, the Surrealists, Godard.
He insisted that there were good reasons for such experimentation, from which film-makers anywhere could benefit.
At the same time, he remained committed to a popular cinema, a cinema of the slums and the villages.
Ghatak did not see any contradiction between these two approaches.
On the contrary, he seemed to think that popular art and literature were themselves full of devices which experimentalists were trying to recapture, as if ‘intellectual montage’ or ‘dream time’were implicit in folk fables, riddles and jokes.
Experimentalism was both a rediscovery and a quest for new.
‘Experimenters always have to be alert’.
It was because he was so alert, so curious about the world, about books and films, that Ghatak could never take the easy way out.
It is quite wrong to look at him as a marginal or failed artist, a tragic case, like his country of Bengal, even though he himself sometimes seemed to see things this way.
‘It is the nuances I am after, the elusive, fleeting nuances’.
Ghatak saw himself as groping, experimenting with each film, trying to find a new form to say something new, now picturesque, now documentary, now epic, now experimental, now melodrama.
Each film has something new to tell us, something from which we too can learn.
Ritwik Ghatak
PETER WOLLEN, FILM TEACHER AND FILM-MAKER GIVES HIS VIEW OF THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RITWIK GHATAK IN THE ARTICLE BELOW.
IT IS REPRODUCED COURTESY OF ‘SIGHT &SOUND’ MAGAZINE.
CLOUD CAPPED STAR (Meghe Dhaka Tara)
E FLAT (Komal Gandhar)
REASON ARGUMENT AND STORY (Jukti Takko Ar Gappo)
SCREENING at a glance
festival calendar
film
events
booking information
TICKETS
FESTIVAL EVENTS
FESTIVAL DELEGATE
£75.00 incl VAT Gives free admittance to all films (Apart from Opening, Mid-Festival and Closing films at the Odeon New Street) and all events (apart from Festival Awards Dinner Evening).
You will also be invited to Festival receptions as a Festival guest.
Please note that delegates must book tickets for screenings and events by 5pm on the day.
Delegates cannot be guaranteed tickets after 5pm.
Apply to MAC to become a festival delegate.
HOW TO BUY YOUR TICKETS FOR FILMS AND EVENTS
Tickets for all Festival films and events requiring tickets are available from MAC, The Ticket Shop, The Library Ticket Shop, The Town Hall, Alexandra Theatre, Hippodrome Theatre, ICC and the Repertory Theatre.
Box Office for the Festival opens on September 2.
Cheques should be made payable to MAC not the Festival.
Visa and Access are accepted for credit card bookings.
ADVANCES AND RESERVATIONS
Advance bookings for all events and films available through the booking outlets listed above.
Please note that apart from MAC, venues will not be taking advance bookings for their own events and screenings.
Postal bookings are accepted up to 48 hours before the screening or event.
Telephone bookings accepted up to 5pm on day of screening or event.
Tickets booked by telephone or by post can be collected up to 5pm on the day of screening at MAC.
If uncollected, they will be held on the door at the venue.
VENUES
FESTIVAL INFORMATION
The Festival Information Centre this year is situated in Paradise Forum.
Visit us for all information and to buy your Official Festival Programme.
There will be FESTIVAL INFORMATION POINTS AT MAC AND THE TRIANGLE.
VENUE INFORMATION
MAC offers a varied programme of events (theatre, cinema, dance and music performances, literary events, festivals and puppet shows) and courses (art, crafts, music, dance and drama) for adults and children.
The centre is located in beautiful parkland and has a bar, cafe and free parking.
For people with disabilities recent improvements have made the Theatre, Cinema reception, tickets office, cafe and bar fully accessible by wheelchair.
There is limited access to the rest of the Centre's facilities.
MAC also offers induction loops in the Cinema and a Minicom service.
For further information and advice please contact the Ticket Office.
TRIANGLE CINEMA is an arthouse venue situated close to the city centre at Aston University.
It has coffee bar facilities.
The Cinema has limited wheelchair access, and people with disabilities should contact the House Manager in advance.
An accompanying person can be given a complimentary ticket for the screenings.
ODEON NEW STREET has eight screens, most with Dolby sound.
Other facilities include air conditioned foyer, a licensed bar, shop and fast food servery.
They also have a Concert Ticket agency.
Please contact the Odeon management for details of access for people with disabilities.
OFFICIAL FILM AND TELEVISION FESTIVAL CATALOGUES ON SALE HERE PLUS ALL THE FESTIVAL FACTS
festival information centre paradise forum open: 10am–5pm.
television weekend conference 27–28 september 1991
the spoils of sport:
television &sport in the 1990s
WHAT IS SPORT WORTH?
ADRIAN METCALFE ‘IN CONVERSATION’ WITH BILL SINRICH
Are the values of sport commercial or ethical?
Will television dictate the future of sport or will the public demand deeper and wider coverage?
Can sport retain an ethical base or will its involvement with television mean that it becomes completely dominated and determined by financial considerations?
Adrian Metcalfe and Bill Sinrich are ‘In Conversation’.
Dorothy Hobson — Chair:
ADRIAN METCALFE Director of Programmes Tyne Tees Television
Adrian Metcalfe began his career in journalism as a news reporter with the Sunday Express.
In 1964, he joined ITV as a reporter and commentator for World of Sport.
He was producer and commentator for LWT's ‘Sports Arena’ before taking up in 1972, the post of Vice President Europe of US company Marvin Sugarman Productions.
In 1976, he established his own Independent Production Company, AMO (Adrian Metcalfe Organisation).
He became Channel 4's first Commissioning Editor for Sport when the channel opened in November 1982 and went on to become Senior Commissioning Editor with responsibility for a wide range of programmes including documentaries and children's.
In January 1989, he left Channel 4 to become Director of Programmes at Eurosport with Sky Television.
Born in Bradford 49 years ago, he was educated at Leeds and Magdelen College, Oxford, where he won an Athletics Blue.
In 1964, he won a silver medal in the 400 metres relay at the Tokyo Olympics.
BILL SINRICH Senior European Vice-President, Production and Development-Trans World International (UK) Inc-(TWI).
Born in New York City, 21/4/56.
A journalist with NBC News for five years since 1982, Bill joined TWI in February 1987.
Executive Producer of TWI's much heralded live coverage of England's Cricket Tour of the West Indies in 1990, for Sky/BBC.
Pioneered Channel 4's coverage of Women's Football and developed and produced the outdoor adventure series ‘Conquer the Arctic’ for Channel 4, ‘Chris Evert's Wimbledon Farewell’for the BBC and the two best selling Nick Faldo Golf Instructional videos.
Bill was also responsible for winning TWI the BSB ‘Sports Channel’ production contract, overseeing the development of the production team and Sports Channel output.
television weekend conference
This year, the Television Conference at the Birmingham International Film and Television Festival takes for its theme SPORT ON TELEVISION.
As terrestrial and satellite companies compete for sport and movies, the two major commodities which could ensure the future success of television, the conference will consider how the contest for the SPOILS OF SPORT will progress over the next decade.
How far will terrestrial broadcasters compete for the rights to SPORTS coverage?
How will BBC and ITV survive and how much will they need to bid against each other to acquire the major sports which audiences will wish to see?
Will the vast sums of money which are being asked for by the Governing Bodies of Sport mean that they will price themselves out of the market or will television continue to pay as they compete for audiences?
Sports and sporting figures are managed and packaged for television production and there is a fear amongst purists and some sporting fans that the spirit of sport will be lost in its relationship with television.
Can sport retain its ethics and its involvement with huge financial bids?
What will be the role of sponsorship in the future of Sport on Television?
Will new sports find it increasingly difficult to find a place on television and will television ever again be able to nurture the growth of new sport?
One session will look at the role of cities as major providers of huge new leisure facilities and sporting venues.
This could mean that they will become major forces driving forward the concept of sport, leisure, cultural and artistic movements during the 1990's.
For this to happen, cities will need to discuss and plan their events with television companies in order to ensure maximum mutual benefit.
How big are the audiences for sport on television?
The Women in Film group will produce a session with particular emphasis on Women as Audience and the Representation of Women in Sport.
Sport and the coverage of sport on television is a major part of the everyday life of the television audience.
Sport as part of ‘The News’ means that it has national significance and is part of the cultural heritage of the audience.
One issue which will be debated is the ‘ownership’ of sports coverage and the access to clips for News Programmes.
For many viewers, Television and Sport are inseparable.
How long could each survive without the other?
How long can they survive together?
Cities and media forum:
city television and channel 5
The Forum is sponsored by the City of Birmingham's Economic Development Committee with additional support from Central Independent Television and Telescope Video Graphics.
Over the last six years, the Cities and Media Forum has become an established part of the Festival and has played a substantial role in the debates about developing the media economies of regional cities in the UK.
In recent years, the Forum has also introduced to the British Film and Television Industry the concept of the Film Commission.
The 1990 Forum (Film and Commissions and the UK film industry) greatly assisted the formation of the national body, the UK Film Commission, which is headed by Sydney Samuelson.
The Cities and Media Forum is attended regularly by the growing band of media development agencies.
Many of these have adopted as a major part of their strategy over the last two years campaigns to attract bidders for Channel 5 franchises to locate in their cities.
With the franchise bids for Channel 3 close to completion and the date set for the advertising of Channel 5 franchises it is timely to look again at the possibilities in the new channel, and in particular at the potential for ‘city television’.
The arguments for the development of the media industries of regional cities has always had both economic and cultural aspects.
The 1991 Forum will look at Channel 5 both as an opportunity to provide employment and economic growth outside of London and the South East and as a means of making the non-metropolitan voice heard.
Despite the minimalist parameters for the new channel set out in the Broadcasting Act, in profound contrast to the remit of Channel Four when it began a decade ago, we want to make an issue of the new Channel.
We see the allocation of the scarce resource of our last terrestrial channel as a matter worth serious discussion, and seek in it an answer to the perceived shortcomings of the existing Channels.
We will look at the new Channel in relation to existing television whether broadcast, satellite or cable.
What new programming do we want to see?
Will the new channel be able to provide it within its economic constraints?
Will its strength be a new kind of local programming with its 31 transmitters and the possibility of ‘city station’ opt outs?
Is this possibility genuinely different from the existing regional models?
Will broadcasting survive the new franchise arrangements?
Will it be cable that provides truly local television?
Are Channel 5 and Cable in opposition or will they work together occupying new spaces in a completely new industry map?
What sort of programmes do we want to see in the nineties and beyond?
What sort of programmes will we see?
To answer these and other questions, we have assembled franchise bidders for the new channel, members of the ITC, programme makers, analysts, consultants, representatives of media development agencies, cable operators, and local television activists.
Let's talk about the Channel that we want and the television we would like to see.
Topics to be discussed include: Channel 5 campaigns, programme content, cable media maps of the future.
Cities and Media Forum 1990
The Guardian screen and television writing talks
The Festival's series of Writers Talks is in 1991 presented with the support of The Guardian.
LYNDA LA PLANTE — WEDNESDAY SEPTEMBER 25, 7PM AT THE MIDLANDS ARTS CENTRE — IS IN CONVERSATION WITH BETH PORTER.
With a career as an actress already established it was the success of Lynda La Plante's 12 part series for Euston Films, WIDOWS,(1982), which enabled her to concentrate full time on writing.
Nominated for two BAFTA Awards, WIDOWS was a critical and popular success turning assumptions about professional crime upside down from a woman's point of view (the widows).
Her novel writing (THE LEGACY and BELLA MAFIA) has also been acclaimed.
The success in 1991 of PRIME SUSPECT (for Granada, and starring Helen Mirren) again brought Lynda La Plante's writing talent on to the screens of 17 million viewers.
A police thriller with a difference.
Helen Mirren plays the role of Detective Chief Inspector Jane Tennison who for years has been the victim of sexual discrimination in the police force.
Heading a homicide enquiry is a prize which has always eluded her, until against all the odds she is appointed to head a case.
‘I gave her a gruesome murder to deal with…homicide is new territory for women — the need for capture and revenge is largely masculine.’
(Lynda La Plante).
In conversation with Lynda La Plante is Beth Porter (Script Executive, BBC Television Drama Series).
Lynda La Plante
One of the originators of the Z CARS series, the founder of 7:84 theatre company and writer of THE CHEVIOT, THE STAG AND THE BLACK BLACK OIL, THE BOFORS GUN, BILLION DOLLAR BRAIN and more recently, BLOOD RED ROSES, John McGrath has written for the stage, television and film.
His three plays about Scotland (THERE IS A HAPPY LAND, BORDER WARFARE, JOHN BROWN'S BODY) were produced for Channel 4 as part of a 9 hour trilogy on the popular history of Scotland.
He also adapted Beryl Bainbridge's THE DRESSMAKER for the cinema.
His most recent film work was the script for ROBIN HOOD (starring Patrick Bergin) which Working Title produced for Twentieth Century Fox.
(ROBIN HOOD is showing at the Triangle Cinema on Wednesday September 25).
John McGrath is in conversation with Mary Cutler (THE ARCHERS' scriptwriter and screen writer for Zone Productions).
JOHN MCGRATH — THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 26 7PM AT THE MIDLANDS ARTS CENTRE — IS IN CONVERSATION WITH MARY CUTLER
After an academic career Anthony Minghella has subsequently written for the stage, television, radio and film.
His work with Jim Henson has led to award winning series, THE STORYTELLER and LIVING WITH DINOSAURS, and his radio plays (HANG UP and CIGARETTES AND CHOCOLATE) have been equally acclaimed.
For television he has regularly contributed to Central's multi-award winning series INSPECTOR MORSE.
His first film, TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY, which he wrote and directed for BBC Films, is currently on release.
A British GHOST starring Juliet Stevenson and Alan Rickman, TRULY, MADLY, DEEPLY is screened in the Festival at the Midlands Arts Centre on September 30 at 9pm.
Anthony Minghella is in conversation with David Edgar (playwright, dramatist and essayist).
ANTHONY MINGHELLA — MONDAY SEPTEMBER 30, 7PM AT THE MIDLANDS ARTS CENTRE — IS IN CONVERSATION WITH DAVID EDGAR
John McGrath
American born Howard Schuman is one of the most original and idiosyncratic script writers working in British television.
Brooklyn born, he gave up academia in the 70's to work in theatre and write plays.
He has written for Thames, LWT, ATV, Granada, BBC, Euston and Working Title.
His innovative hit of the 70's ROCK FOLLIES is unrivalled as a series about the pop music industry.
More recently, he adapted David Lodge's SMALL WORLD for Granada and UPLINE for Zenith.
His five part serial, SELLING HITLER, Euston films starring Jonathan Pryce and Alexei Sayle was one of this year's television drama highlights.
SELLING HITLER hilariously documented the story of the publishing fraud of the century in ‘the Hitler Diaries’.
Howard Schuman has adapted for Working Title Armisted Maupin's TALES FROM THE CITY (1991) and written for Independents Birmingham, FUN AND DRAMA; LIFE AND DREAMS.
Howard Schuman is in conversation with Michael Eaton (writer of FELLOW TRAVELLER, SHOOT TO KILL and FLIGHT TERMINAL).
HOWARD SCHUMAN — WEDNESDAY OCTOBER 2, 7PM AT THE MIDLANDS ARTS CENTRE — IS IN CONVERSATION WITH MICHAEL EATON
black women writers workshop
The Festival has always been a popular meeting place for people interested in all areas of film and television, and this year we are pleased to host a one day workshop for BLACK WOMEN WRITERS.
This has been initiated by BBC Television, Drama Group and the Writers Guild and is coordinated by Women In Film.
The intention is to encourage new writing talent with a diverse and exciting mix of perspectives.
During the day the successful applicants will have their work analysed by industry professionals.
They will also view and discuss the recently completed work of a new writer.
The session will close with an opportunity to meet informally with drama commissioners.
Scripts discussed will be original screenplays or adaptations of the writers' own work.
Further details are available from:
scripting a feature film
the problems of writing a script from the writer's point of view.
A workshop with Hugh Stoddart.
A Birmingham Film and Video Workshop event in conjunction with the Festival.
MAC Sat 5 Oct.
‘I don't see television as an institution, nor as a continuum of programming into which my work must be fitted.
I think of it more as a novelist might think of a bookshop.
All my work, whether original or adapted, has been written more for personal reasons than to fit any perceived format or genre.
It can be argued that its success with critics and failure ‘at the box office’ both stem from that fact.
With REMEMBRANCE I wanted to avoid the central figure, the hero.
Each of several characters is followed through twenty-four hours and their lives touch only at certain points in the narrative.
Is this flying in the face of what makes good cinema?’
Hugh Stoddart
REMEMBRANCE was one of the first Film on Four projects.
Hugh Stoddart says of it now: ‘I thought of it as a film set in peacetime about the people who are the cannon fodder in wartime’.
Its opening during the Falklands War was an extraordinary coincidence.
It was given only six months in the cinema and then screened in the third week of Channel Four transmission in 1982.
A critical examination of REMEMBRANCE will form the basis of the workshop.
Hugh Stoddart has also written scripts for BEGGING THE RING, THE TRESPASSER, TO THE LIGHTHOUSE, HARD TRAVELLING and WE THINK THE WORLD OF YOU.
REMEMBRANCE will be screened for the public in the MAC Theatre Friday 4 Oct 9pm.
For further details of the workshop contact:
novel into screen — play: adapting nice work for television
BBC Pebble Mill Monday 23 September 7.00pm David Lodge's novels include CHANGING PLACES (1975), SMALL WORLD, shortlisted for the Booker Prize in 1984 and NICE WORK, Sunday Express Book of the Year in 1988, and also shortlisted for the Booker Prize.
His new novel, PARADISE NEWS, will be published on 30 September, a week after his talk.
A SOUTH BANK SHOW about him and his work will be broadcast by LWT at the same time.
SMALL WORLD was adapted by Howard Schuman as a television serial, produced by Granada TV, in 1988.
David Lodge himself adapted NICE WORK as a four part serial for the BBC, broadcast in the autumn of 1989.
It won the Royal Television Society's award for the Best Drama Serial of the year, and a Silver Nymph for the screenplay at the International Television Festival in Monte Carlo in 1990.
He wrote and presented a TV documentary about an academic conference, BIG WORDS-SMALL WORLDS, broadcast on Channel 4 in November 1987.
His first stage play, THE WRITING GAME, was premiered at the Birmingham Repertory Theatre in 1990.
A novelist adapting his or her work for the screen must also adapt to the different status of the writer in the production process.
David Lodge illustrates this fact from his own experience of adapting his novel NICE WORK, as a drama serial for BBC2.
A ROYAL TELEVISION SOCIETY event in association with the Festival.
In association with The Guardian, the 1991 Festival welcomes to Birmingham international and UK members of the Film Critics Association known as FIPRESCI, who have chosen the Birmingham Festival as the venue for their annual symposium.
It is appropriate that their 1991 conference takes place in the UK as the president elect of the association is Derek Malcolm, film critic of The Guardian.
FIPRESCI is a world-wide critics' organisation which includes most of the leading and distinguished writers on film among its members.
This will be FIPRESCI's first visit to Birmingham.
The two day forum will consider, amongst other issues, the current role of the film critic.
Given the changes in the film industry world wide, do critics have an influence in determining box office, taste and value?
Do their reviews have too much sway?
Is their responsibility to art cinema or are they mortgaged to the Hollywood estate?
Cultural gate keepers or disseminators of information?
Have new television channels, satellite cable etc. made the film critic redundant and fit for an academic existence only?
The relationship between film makers and critics; the perils of independent film-making; a foreign view of British films etc.
The International Association of Film Critics meets at MAC on September 26 and 27.
For more information of the symposium and of FIPRESCI please contact the Festival office.
the international association of film critics' symposium (FIPRESCI)
Howard Schuman and Alan Bennett on the set of Selling Hitler
Anthony Minghella
Truly, Madly, Deeply
David Lodge
location birmingham
EVENTS at a glance
As a location for drama production, the City of Birmingham and the region has an unrivalled tradition for both the popularity of the series produced, and originality of the subject matter portrayed, for example EMPIRE ROAD, GANGSTERS, SECOND CITY FIRST, ANGELS (all BBC), CROSSROADS, MUCK AND BRASS, BOON, SOLDIER, SOLDIER,(Central Television).
The city's two television centres have provided popular and award winning dramas for the network schedules and this success story continues in exemplary fashion under the direction of Ted Childs (Central Films) and Barry Hanson (BBC Drama, Pebble Mill).
The Festival series of four drama presentations, LOCATION BIRMINGHAM, is an opportunity for the general public to discuss with the producers, directors, writers and performers (if available) their series: the origins of the idea for the series, the production background, the writers' viewpoint, audience reaction, future plans etc.
FAMILY PRIDE — the UK's first Asian soap opera began its initial series in June 1991 with transmission on both Central Television and Channel 4.
The creation of Zia Mohyeddin, who handles executive production and a major role in the series, FAMILY PRIDE is filmed on location on the streets of Birmingham.
The series follows the lives of rich and successful families — in this instance, and surprisingly for television, the families are Asian who run an import/export empire.
At the heart of the series is BB who has built the business empire from humble beginnings, and who is played by Zia Mohyeddin, whose screen appearances include JEWEL IN THE CROWN, MOUNTBATTEN, ASSAM GARDEN etc.
BB's lifestyle and that of the other members of the family signals that they represent powerful and successful members of the community, a role-breaking change from the traditional depiction of Asians as exotica and outsiders in other television soaps.
In the middle of the series' first run this presentation will provide an opportunity to consider how successful FAMILY PRIDE has been in launching onto the region's and the nation's screens the UK's first Asian soap.
Tony Deep (associate producer, FAMILY PRIDE) and members of both the production team and the cast will be present to discuss the series.
Central Television's first series of CHANCER (1990) was an irresistible item on the television schedule for many millions of viewers.
A very strong leading ‘rogue’ character played with great guile by Clive Owen emerged out of a solid plot supported by the matchless acting skills of Leslie Phillips.
The face pace of CHANCER was another leading ingredient moving the story along briskly in the best of popular drama traditions.
Having saved the sports car company and turned himself in at the end of series one, Clive Owen led off the second series in 1991 completing the last days of a prison sentence and abandoning the city slicker lifestyle for a battle to save a bankrupt stately home.
The producer, Sarah D Wilson comments…‘the public and press reaction was so strong that we developed another seven programmes to conclude the story.
We had recently finished with the Douglas car company but wanted to keep the series topical and so developed a new setting in which our hero uses his amoral cunning to preserve part of Britain's disappearing heritage’.
A success both in front of the box and on the critics' pages CHANCER created a vogue out of a rogue — the identity of Stephen Crane (Clive Owen's role) catching the attention of the country and reflecting the social changes in the early 90's as the enterprise culture began to take a tumble.
Leading the presentation of CHANCER will be Ted Childs (Executive Producer, Head of Central Films), Sarah D Wilson (Producer), Simon Burke (writer), Alan Grant (director).
At the time of printing it is not possible to confirm Clive Owen and Leslie Phillips will be present.
Please check with the Festival office for details.
Dorothy Hobson, Director of Birmingham Media Development Agency, will chair the discussion.
(Clive Owen also features in the film, CLOSE MY EYES, directed by Stephen Poliakoff, which is screened on October 2 at 9pm at MAC).
The BBC drama series, KINSEY, starring Leigh Lawson is featured in the section on the Media Business Seminars.
KINSEY centred on a Birmingham solicitor and assumed cult-viewing status in its first run this year.
SPECIALS is a new police drama series for BBC1 produced at BBC Pebble Mill.
The first transmission is on October 2, 1991.
The discussion of SPECIALS in the Festival on October 4 will be an immediate opportunity for the production team, the police force.
The discussion will take place actually on the set of SPECIALS in the BBC studio.
SPECIALS focuses on the lives of five ordinary men and women who are part-time officers in the Special Constabulary (the fictitious Division ‘S’ in West Midlands).
As part-time bobbies they juggle homes, careers and their ‘special’ beat which mixes crime fighting and community policing.
‘SPECIALS is not another helping of car chases, sieges and shoot-outs.
It is a realistic human drama focusing on the problems faced by these very ‘special’ police officers’.
Brian Degas and Harry Robertson who devised, wrote and produced SPECIALS will discuss their new series with a senior police officer of national standing, and with members of the cast.
Michael Eator, Royal Television Award-Winner for SHOOT TO KILL, will chair the discussion.
Family Pride
Specials
Chancer
raymond williams memorial lecture
alan fountain speaking on television and emancipation
Raymond Williams (1921–1988) described himself as ‘Welsh European’, novelist (BORDER COUNTRY, SECOND GENERATION, THE VOLUNTEERS) and dramatist; founder of the New Left and later active in the Socialist Society; a lifelong commentator on culture, media, the arts and contemporary affairs (eg. THE LONG REVOLUTION, CULTURE AND SOCIETY, COMMUNICATIONS, TOWARDS THE YEAR 2000).
The Festival's tribute to the work, teaching and writing of Raymond Williams will this year feature Alan Fountain who has been invited by the Festival and the Department of Cultural Studies at the University of Birmingham to give a special talk in his memory.
In previous years the lecture has been given by John McGrath (1988), Simon Frith (1989) and Judith Williamson (1990).
The theme of the talk will be: TELEVISION AND EMANCIPATION.
Alan Fountain is a Senior Commissioning Editor at Channel 4, where he is responsible for Independent Film and Video.
Alan Fountain was deeply involved in independent film culture throughout the 1970's, at East Midlands Art, on the BFI Production Board and as a writer and director.
From Channel 4's inception, he has encouraged talents that never previously found a place within the mainstream television, in particular through the workshop movement, but also on an international scale through regular features and documentaries from the Third World.
In his position as Commissioning Editor Alan has introduced to Channel 4's schedule THE ELEVENTH HOUR, PEOPLE TO PEOPLE, CINEMA FROM THREE CONTINENTS, THE MEDIA SHOW, OUT ON TUESDAY and TELEVISION WITH A DIFFERENCE.
On October 5 1991, ‘SOUTH’, a new series on Channel 4 begins, originating from Channel 4's work with film and programme makers in the Southern hemisphere over the last eight years.
Alan Fountain's lecture will in part draw on the philosophy behind this new series.
eureka audio visual:
Eureka Audiovisual is a Brussels-based organisation representing 27 member countries in Greater Europe.
The impetus to create Eureka Audiovisual was the recognition that television and cinema in Europe were dominated by non-European programmes.
This imbalance has led to Eureka Audiovisual establishing the following priorities for its work; the exchange and broadcasting of European works; training, to encourage competition among European companies; to assist countries with small production bases and minority languages; to promote new technologies; to create more networking opportunities for the industries of cinema and television.
As a flexible voluntary programme Eureka Audiovisual aims to give new impetus to the European market by promoting the establishment of networks of partners based on concrete projects, from the creation to the distribution of audiovisual and cinematographic works.
Karl-Gunnar Lidstrom (Brussels) will introduce the work of Eureka Audiovisual at a special presentation on Wednesday, September 25, 7pm at the Grand Hotel, Colmore Row.
(by special invitation only).
A presentation and introduction to the work of Eureka Audiovisual
opening shots: a forum for new directors
The Opening Shots Forum for New Directors is sponsored in 1991 by BAFTA/SHELL, the UK joint venture to promote British Film and Television.
The 1991 Opening Shots Forum considers the opportunities for new directors in a period of great change for the film and television industries, but also in a climate of fast dwindling resources.
The Forum will focus on four main topics — A VIEW FROM THE BROADCASTERS (reflecting on the range of schemes now available in the regions for new directors, for example, BBC Bristol's 10x10; TVS/Southern Arts — Take One;— Shoot First etc); NEW FICTIONS, NEW WRITERS — where are the opportunities for new dramas and new ways of telling tales?;
NEW AESTHETICS FOR NEW DIRECTORS — finding and funding new film and television directors which also points the way to the styles, subjects and emotions of the British film and television culture of the future,— LOW AND BEHOLD!
LIMITED BUDGETS; UNLIMITED RESOURCES? how will the new wave of regional film commissions and media development agencies (in Edinburgh, Liverpool, Newcastle, Birmingham etc.) be able to assist new directors, producers and writers, who restrained by limited budgets will want access to facilities, assistance on locations, regional support etc.
Each session will be led by a panel of participants representing the UK's film and television industries.
The Festival hosts the regional launch of the British Film Institute's 1991 New Directors programme (September 21, 6.30pm, MAC Cinema).
Now in its 4th year of production the BFI New Directors scheme is firmly established as an important way of locating new film and television makers.
media business seminars 1991
Wragge &Co
A success in the 1990 Festival was the series of Media Business Seminars which were sponsored by Wragge &Co solicitors.
The series continues in 1991 offering a Birmingham perspective on current media issues.
These lunchtime seminars in the heart of the Birmingham business quarter are designed for the growing network of media enterprises in the city.
Each seminar is led by guest speakers with a specialist knowledge of the topic.
The Media Business Seminars will take place in Wragge &Co's conference room at Ingleby House, 11–14 Cannon Street (12.30pm–2pm).
This year's seminars have a European flavour, including an introduction to the European Commission's MEDIA programme and a presentation of the aims of the European Script Fund.
The music business is also the focus for one of the seminars.
A discussion on the portrayal of legal life in Birmingham, KINSEY completes the quartet of seminars.
The European Commission's MEDIA programme's main thrust is to enhance the strength of the national audio visual industries to member states by encouraging greater collaboration between them and wider distribution of their products.
Support is offered for script writing (European Script Fund), animation (CARTOON), independent production (EURO-AIM), independent producers (EAVE) etc.
All the MEDIA projects are run on the basis of offering limited seed money to be used as a means of attracting further funding.
This will be the first time that an introduction to the range of MEDIA initiatives will have taken place in the city.
Lori Keating, who was the MEDIA programme UK press consultant in 1989, and who now heads up Mediation UK, will be the seminar's main speaker.
The European Script Fund is the only one of the MEDIA programme initiatives to be based in the UK (in London).
Christian Routh, the Fund's Selection Co-ordinator, will discuss the aims and objectives of the European Script Fund.
As raising development finance for fiction projects is the most difficult stage of production for independent producers and writers, the European Script Fund provides seed money to European producers and writers in an attempt to redress the imbalance between indigenous production and the great amount of imported fictional material in European cinemas and television.
The Script Fund is committed to the notion that without encouraging indigenous European stories of interest for its own audiences, our screens will continue to be overwhelmed by imported products and our national audio-visual industries will suffer.
The grand total of awards made since the European Script Fund opened its doors in April 1989 has been 236 from over 2200 submissions received.
A total of £3 million has now been allocated to European applicants.
Gordon Harris (of Wragge &Co) leads the seminar on Music in the Film and Television Industries when the current issues for independent producers, broadcasters and music companies will be addressed as they relate to copyright , clearances, liaison with PRS, MCPS, record companies and the musicians union.
Examples from recent television and film productions (eg. Young Soul Rebels) will be considered.
Following the 1990 pattern when the final seminar took a Birmingham focus, the 1991 series of Media Business Seminars closes with a discussion based on the BBC drama series, KINSEY (starring Leigh Lawson).
KINSEY was one of the successes of the year, not least for its semi-criminal claim-game milieu but also for its imaginative shooting of day and night time in the city.
But what did it say about legal life in Birmingham?
The producers and writer of KINSEY discuss the series under the chairmanship of Roger Taylor, Chief Executive, City of Birmingham.
Leigh Lawson as Neil Kinsey
Peter Ansorge
Tony Kirkhope
independent producers forum
‘Independents and broadcasters: the challenge of the Nineties’.
It is still not clear how much the Broadcasting Act has changed the face of television.
Until the franchise process is complete for both Channel 3 and 5 even a preliminary sketch is difficult.
Will regional programming continue under Channel 3 as it did under ITV?
Will Channel 5 be regionally based, and will it support a network of city stations with its 31 transmitters.
One thing is for certain— the role of the independent producer is secured.
What is not certain is what shape independent production will take and where it will be located.
Do regional broadcasters need regionally based independent producers and do regionally based producers need regional broadcasters?
This forum will look at these in three sessions:
THE NEEDS OF THE INDEPENDENTS
Local independents and independents from other regions outline what they want from broadcasters.
THE NEEDS OF THE BROADCASTERS
Local and national broadcasters outline what they want from independent producers.
THE LEGAL AND FINANCIAL INTERFACE
Legal and financial experts look at the crucial interface between broadcasters and independents including commissioning policy, pricing, contracts and rights.
The Forum is presented in association with KPMG Peat Marwick, and takes place on Wednesday 2 October, 11am at Peat House.
experimental film and video at the IKON GALLERY
Screenings of recent work from a variety of schemes funded by the Artists Film and Video Committee at the Arts Council.
They are followed by discussions with some of the film-makers.
Ikon Gallery Tues 24 Sept 6.30pm.
CENTRE focus events
CENTRE FOCUS will be organising the following screenings and events in conjunction with the Festival: ARCHIVE CONFERENCE: ‘MAKING HISTORIES: the present and future value of film and video archives’.
In collaboration with Birmingham Library Services.
premieres
CENTRE FOCUS at the IKON Friday 27 6.30pm until 8pm A chance to see some of the work from independent film and videomakers in the West Midlands region and meet the people involved.
Work shown will include:
CRASH VIDEO: pop videos from John Humphries and Crash Video
FREEDOM: A film about artistic liberty in a fascist state be Hussein Mirshani
‘O’: site specific three screen projection for a canal site by Colin Pearce
STUDIO 9: pop promos Video from Anne Parouty and Sebastian
THE WALRUS: A drama documentary by Dominic Frank Plus work from the Wolverhampton Lighthouse Media Centre Admission Free
CENTRE FOCUS is the West Midlands Independent Media Forum, supported by Birmingham City Council.
Video lives
A series of programmes about cultural identities by contemporary video and film-makers organised in collaboration with Birmingham Library Services.
IDENTITY AND MUSIC
Birmingham Museum Thur 26 Sept 12.30pm
Introduced by Pervaiz Khan.
The following titles will be screened:
UTTERANCE: The music of Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan.
The history and origins of Qawaali music through the songs of one of its most acclaimed exponents.
(Director: Pervaiz Khan)
VOICES: A video which explores the views, concerns and experiences of young Asian people in Southall.
(Director: Prem Singh)
RAM TV: Why is so little reggae played on TV and radio?
(Director: Freddy Walters, Handsworth Viewpoint)
SILVERSHINE: Life and music of Jazz saxophonist Andy Hamilton (Sunandan and Yugesh Walia: Endboard)
IDENTITY AND HISTORY
Birmingham Museums Sat 28 Sept 2pm
Peter Harvey in discussion with Vokani Film Circuit.
The following videos will be screened:
BLACK SKIN, WHITE MASKS Part 2.
A film interpretation of the book which satirises black assimilation into white society.
(Director: Calvin Brown)
JEMIMA AND JOHNNY: The friendship of a black girl and white boy exposes British racism in the Sixties.
(Director: Lionel Ngakane)
TEN BOB IN WINTER: A comedy of manners set against the lives of West Indian immigrant workers in London in the sixties.
(Director: Lloyd Reckord)
BLUE TOO: The attitudes and aspirations of a boy growing up in modern Britain are explored using ‘Little Black Sambo’.
(Director: Peter Harvey)
This event is in collaboration with Vokani Film Circuit.
IDENTITY AND WOMEN
Ikon Gallery Thur 3 Oct 6pm Tamara Wyss will be speaking about her own work and the other videos screened:
SEARCHING FOR MR MOSES:
The film documents a journey in search of Moses Mendelssohn, 18C philosopher and grandfather of the composer, which becomes a journey through two hundred years of German Jewish history and the film-maker's own family.
It is a film about the outsider in history, identity and assimilation and the price for it.
(Director: Tamara Wyss)
SISTREN IN PHOTOGRAPHY:
A highly acclaimed documentary by the women's film cooperative, about black women photographers in Birmingham (Director: Second Sight)
MEASURES OF DISTANCE:
An artist's feelings of separation from her family, as seen through a series of fragmentary communications between the artist and her mother.
(Director: Mona Hatoum)
This is a Centre Focus event in collaboration with Birmingham Museums and the Ikon Gallery.
Wide Angle screening day
A programme of innovative short films and videos made at Wide Angle this year.
MAC Hexagon Mon 23 Sept 10am until 4pm
arts council film and video at the festival:
The Arts Council presents an exciting programme of new work at this year's festival.
As in previous years, the Festival will be the launch for the new programmes made for the Black Arts Video Project, three of which this year come from Birmingham and West Midlands based filmmakers.
Three new shorts commissioned by the jointly funded Arts Council/Channel 4 ‘Eleventh Hour’ scheme, are being screened as part of the main festival programme and three other films form part of the programme at the Birmingham Museum and Arts Gallery which accompanies the festival.
In addition, there will be a series of screenings at the Ikon Gallery of new experimental work, followed by discussions with some of the filmmakers.
black arts video:
exhibitions IKON GALLERY
Saturday 21 September to Saturday 2 November
Since the 1960's, Adrian Piper has been an influential video maker in the United States.
In her performances, gallery installations and video work, she explores questions of sexual, racial and ethnic identity.
She has made a crucial contribution to the race and representation debate in the U.S. Through works of self-investigation and transformation Piper explores her own racial identity and forces viewers to question their own values and beliefs.
The work of this major artist has never been seen in any depth in Europe.
Given the current debates around cultural diversity and the exciting nature of work being produced by black artists in the U.K. this is an excellent moment to introduce Adrian Piper to a British audience.
mac THE CENTRE FOR BIRMINGHAM
(FOYLE GALLERY)
Saturday 14 September–Saturday 21 October
To mark the nationwide Japanese Festival, an exhibition of work by two artists of that nation.
Yukki Yaura's display of traditional Japanese ink drawings encompass traditional subjects such as landscapers, figure painting, flowers and birds.
Taja's work comprises slab built sculptural ceramics, with brightly coloured decoration, reflecting the simplicity of Japanese painting.
The Festival will be screening a number of Japanese films at the Triangle and MAC, see programme for details.
BULL RING ARCHIVES
(Bar and Gallery) Tues 24 Sept to Fri 18 Oct
Photographs of Birmingham's famous (or infamous depending on your viewpoint) market place and landmark, soon to be lost, as the Trust who owns the site plans to redevelop.
The Bull Ring Archive was founded in 1989 to complete a unique and compelling chronology of life in The Bull Ring.
The festival will be screening PARADISE CIRCUS, Heather Powell's film about the development of Birmingham's city centre from the viewpoint of the women who live and work in the city.
North of Vortex
Making of ‘Monsters’
childrens films
childrens morning movies
Three films which use the sea as their background will be screened at the Odeon Cinema New Street on Saturday mornings.
TREASURE ISLAND Director: Fraser Heston UK 1991 132 minutes
Set against the sweeping backdrop of adventure on the high seas, TREASURE ISLAND charts a boy's search for treasure in a time of danger and piracy.
Odeon New Street Saturday 21 September 10.00am
THE GOLDEN SEAL Director: Frank Zunoga US 1983
The story of an extraordinary friendship between a boy and a seal.
Odeon New Street 28 September 10.00am
WHEN THE WHALES CAME Director: Clive Rees UK 1989 99 minutes
A magical tale, which tells of man's disrespect for the natural world around him, as seen through the eyes of an elderly recluse and two young children on the Isles of Scilly at the outbreak of the First World War.
Odeon New Street 5 October 10.00am.
In Association with Puffin Books.
To celebrate 50 years of Puffin, the famous publisher of childrens' literature.
We will be screening, in conjunction with the Puffin Book Club, a series of films for schools at the Midlands Arts Centre.
Dates will be: Wednesday 25 September 10am Tuesday 1 October 10am Thursday 3 October 10am
The screenings at Midlands Art Centre will be free to schoolchildren and teachers should contact the Festival Office for Details.
childrens film and television: discussion event
This will take place at the Midlands Arts Centre at 5pm on Thursday 3 October, and the discussion will be led by Terry Staples, who programmes the childrens films for the London Film Festival, and Lewis Rudd, Controller Young Peoples' Programmes at Central Television, with other invited educationalists and childrens' programme makers.
This is an opportunity for anyone with an interest in film and television for young people to express their views on the current programmes and films available.
Lewis Rudd has had responsibility in his television career for DO NOT ADJUST YOUR SET (Thames), WORZEL GUMMIDGE (Southern Television), and at Central Television (YOUR MOTHER WOULDN'T LIKE IT.
A COUPLE OF CHARLIES and PRESS GANG).
He also founded the Junior Television Workshops in Nottingham and Birmingham.
Sandra Hastie, producer of PRESS GANG, will also participate in the discussion.
PRESS GANG (produced by Richmond Films for Central Television) was honoured with both a Royal Television Society Award and a British Academy Award in 1991.
PRESS GANG is Central's cult drama series based on a team of news hungry teenagers.
fifth and sixth form screenings
This programme of screenings focusses on films which explore areas of race and gender in a thought provoking way.
Each film will be introduced, and placed in context, and there will be discussions after the screening.
Teachers wishing to bring students to the screenings should contact the Festival Office on 021 766 6707 for further information.
Screenings are scheduled as follows:
films on central
For the whole of the festival period Central Television will be joining in and adding a new screen with a difference.
From Saturday 21 September to Saturday October 5th, in its late night/early morning slot, Central will be screening movies with connections to the festival.
For the first week the FILMS FROM THE URBAN JUNGLE series echoes the city themes of the festival, from the Cities and Media conference to the presentation of Tavernier films which celebrate the city of Lyon, Tavernier's birthplace, and Birmingham's twin town.
In the second week, the theme is THE SPORTING LIFE to link in with our Sport and TV conference event, taking place the mid-festival weekend.
films from the urban jungle
WEEK ONE
DATE: Saturday 21 September TIME: 0205 SCREENING: DESPAIR (1979)
Dirk Bogarde, Andrea Ferreol.
Bogarde plays a Russian emigre who runs a chocolate factory in Germany just as the Nazis begin to take power.
The film is adapted by Tom Stoppard from the novel by Nabokov.
Directed by Rainer Werner Fassbinder.
DATE: Monday 23 September TIME: 0025 SCREENING: THE VULTURE (1982)
George Caerhalmi Hedi Temessy Zita Perczel.
When a taxi driver is robbed by two wealthy women, he seeks revenge, outraged by the unjust crime and the refusal of the police to believe his story.
Directed by Ferenc Andras.
DATE: Tuesday 24 September TIME: 0035 SCREENING: TAKE THIS JOB AND SHOVE IT (1973)
Robert Hayes Barbara Hershey David Keith.
Workers at an old fashioned brewery, upset by a take-over, decide to start their own employee-owned brewery.
Comedy.
Directed by Gus Trikonis.
DATE: Wednesday 25 September TIME: 0015 SCREENING: BIG CITY (1937)
Spencer Tracy Luise Rainer.
Tracy is a cab driver who finds himself struggling against the power of the city's corrupt taxi bosses.
A.K.A. Skyscraper Wilderness.
Directed by Frank Borzage.
DATE: Thursday 26 September TIME: 2310 SCREENING: THE KREMLIN LETTER (1970)
Richard Boone Bib Anderson.
A complex espionage thriller set in Moscow and full of treachery and double dealing.
An all-star cast includes Orson Welles and George Sanders.
Directed by John Huston.
DATE: Friday 27 September TIME: 0105 SCREENING: HELL ON FRISCO BOY (1955)
Alan Ladd Edward G. Robinson.
The story of the exposure of organised crime and its dramatic implications in the underworld of San Francisco.
Directed by Frank Tuttle.
DATE: Saturday 28 September TIME: 0120 SCREENING: SMILE JENNY YOU'RE DEAD (1978)
David Janssen John Anderson.
This was the pilot for the Harry O detective series.
Janssen plays a private eye who, while investigating a murder, gets emotionally involved with the prime suspect.
Directed by Jerry Thorpe.
DATE: Sunday 29 September TIME: 0030 SCREENING: FEDORA (1978)
William Holden Martha Keller.
A film producer tries to persuade a famous actress back to the screen.
Based on a short story by Thomas Tryon.
Directed by Billy Wilder.
films from the sporting life
WEEK TWO
DATE: Monday 30 September TIME: 2240 SCREENING: NORTH DALLAS FORTY (1979)
Nick Nolte Mac Davis.
One of the best American Football films ever made.
Nolte is a declining star in a world he increasingly discovers is more about money and power than sport.
Directed, produced and written by Frank Yablans.
TIME: 0145 SCREENING: THE CROWD ROARS (1932)
James Cagney Guy Kibee.
The tough world of motor racing finds Cagney competing against his brother for glory and the girl.
Directed by Howard Hawks.
DATE: Tuesday 1 October TIME: 0035 SCREENING: ONE IN A MILLION — The Ron Le Flore Story (1978)
LeVar Burton Madge Sinclair.
The true story of a major league baseball star who went from the street corner to stardom and then to armed robbery but is saved from destruction by a one in a million chance.
Directed by William A. Graham.
DATE: Wednesday 2 October TIME: 0050 SCREENING: FOOTBALL CRAZY
Joan Collins Landa Buzzanca.
Collins is the amorous object of a football referee's fantasy which affects his professional life on the field.
DATE: Thursday 3 October TIME: 0010 SCREENING: AMERICAN FLYERS (1985)
Kevin Costner David Grant.
Two brothers compete in a cycling marathon but one of them is dying.
Directed by John Badham.
DATE: Friday 4 October TIME: 0205 SCREENING: RAGE ON ICE (1986)
Fast and furious ice hockey action combines with the human drama of the players in this Canadian/French production.
DATE: Saturday 5 October TIME: 0015 SCREENING: BANG THE DRUM SLOWLY (1973)
Robert de Niro Michael Moriarity.
Two professional baseball players find their lives drawn together in unusual circumstances.
Directed by John Hancock.
A–Z of film and directors
film festival thanks
Screen and Television Writing Talks at the Birmingham International Film and Television Festival Sept 20–Oct 5, 1991
Wednesday, 25 September, 7pm:
Lynda La Plante, writer of the successful and popular series Widows , and this year's major police drama with a difference,Prime Suspect , talks to BBC Television script executive, Beth Porter.
Thursday, 26 September, 7PM:
John McGrath, founder member of 7:84 theatre company and writer of Blood Red Roses ,The Dress-maker and Robin Hood , talks to Archers' script writer and screenwriter for Zone Productions, Mary Cutler.
Monday, 30 September, 7pm:
Award winning writer Anthony Minghella who has recently finished directing his first film Truly, Madly, Deeply,will be in conversation with writer and dramatist David Edgar.
Wednesday, 2 October, 7pm:
Writer of television classics such as Rock Follies, Video Stars,and Upline , Howard Schuman who also penned the recently televised Selling Hitler can be seen in conversation with writer Michael Eaton of Fellow Traveller and Shoot To Kill fame.
The Guardian in Conversation:
Celebrated French director Bertrand Tavernier will be in Birmingham straight off the set of his latest film for a retrospective look over his career and films with the Guardian's film critic Derek Malcolm.
The talk will immediately follow a screening of Tavernier's most recent box office hit These Foolish Things at:
Derek Malcolm will also be acting as the President Elect of the ASSOCIATION OF INTERNATIONAL FILM CRITICS' (FIPRESCI), which the Birmingham International Film and Television Festival is delighted to welcome to the Midlands Arts Centre for its annual symposium on Thursday, 26 September and Friday, 27 September, from 10am onwards each day.
(Admission free)
