My story starts in front of the main noticeboard in the School for Italian Studies about ten years ago.
It was the beginning of the summer term and on the noticeboard was that term's list of the morning lectures for the first-year undergraduates.
This noticeboard had already played a significant part in my life: nearly thirty years before then it had displayed the result of my own first degree (second-class honours); a few years later had come the perfunctory notice saying my doctoral thesis had been accepted by the college; and shortly after that an even briefer note to the effect that I had joined the teaching staff.
Then, for a quarter of a century, I displayed notices there myself: announcing seminars or little trips to galleries, requesting the return of books and so on.
At the start of every summer term for goodness knows how long, my name had appeared five times on the new lecture list.
The first-years, after a first term filled with the medieval period and a second with the Renaissance, were now going to learn about the Baroque.
The titles of my lectures had not changed since the early sixties: Bernini, Borromini, Carlo Fontana, Sculpture I and Sculpture II.
This undemanding life-cycle had never been disrupted and I read the new lecture list partly just out of habit and partly for the simple pleasure of seeing my name in print.
This time, however, there was a change.
The titles of  my lectures were all the same, but my name appeared beneath only four out of the five of them.
Under ‘Bernini’ was the name Professor Charles Howard, who was and still is the school's Director.
I stood amid a gaggle of laughing students in frozen silence, and read the list over and over again.
‘Morning, Dorothy, what's up?’
It was David Knell, one of my colleagues.
‘I've been stabbed in the back.’
Everyone stopped laughing and looked at me.
‘What do you mean?’
David stammered.
‘What's the matter?’
I said nothing, but turned away and walked as quickly as I could towards the stairs and down to the student canteen in the basement.
I desperately needed a cup of coffee.
I can see that I may have a little difficulty explaining this first part of my story, especially to anyone not acquainted with the often bizarre rituals of academic life.
Let me first explain Charles Howard.
He had become Director of the school at the start of that academic year.
His previous experience had been as assistant boss of one of the smaller London museums.
During the final year of office of the previous Director, Ralph Youngman, Charles had given a series of public lectures at the school on Canaletto.
These had gone down rather well, and as our Baroque painting specialist was leaving at the same time as Youngman, voices were raised to say here was perhaps both the lecturer and the administrator we were looking for.
A Youngman protégé could take over the old boy's lecturing responsibilities and everything would fit together rather nicely.
Charles, a relative unknown not long beforehand, became the natural choice for the top job.
Unfortunately for Charles, the Director's job turned out to be beyond his actually rather limited  administrative abilities and, unable to assert himself in that field, he busied himself in the teaching side of things.
Waiting in the wings, there was a young colleague of his from his museum days, Paul Spence, a sculpture man.
Charles wanted his protégé in and as I was the resident (and unpopular) Baroque sculpture specialist, I happened to be in the way.
During the second term of that academic year the knives were drawn.
Paul was invited to give a series of public lectures at the school, and word got around that I was on the verge of retirement and Paul would be happy to take my place.
‘I hear you're thinking of retiring,’ David Knell informed me over coffee one morning.
‘Who told you that?’
‘Oh, I heard it around,’ he said vaguely.
‘Well it's absolute rubbish,’ I said.
‘I am thinking of doing a little more writing now, but talk of retirement is nonsense.’
Being told when you have just turned fifty that it's time you retired does rather hurt.
So did the next rumour.
‘I hear you're planning to retire so you can concentrate on writing,’ Charles told me over tea one afternoon.
‘I have no intention of retiring at all.
I merely told David Knell that I might write more in future.’
Colleagues stopped talking to me, afraid no doubt that being on the wrong side of the new Director might prove contagious.
Paul ‘popped round’ for tea more frequently than was decent for a visiting lecturer, and he seemed to get on very well with everyone.
He was, and is, a distinctly affable chap, whereas I came across as cold, prickly and generally difficult.
Anyway, on the first day of that summer term, I remember sitting alone in the cafeteria, slowly drinking  my cup of coffee, and listening as all around me people welcomed each other back from their holidays.
Charles Howard had just delivered me a colossal snub.
Bernini was arguably the most important architect and sculptor in my period and Charles had effectively indicated that I was not competent to lecture on him.
At some point that day, everyone would look at that noticeboard and they would all understand the implications behind what he had done.
I had been humiliated in front of my public.
Nothing like this had ever happened to me before and I was determined to make a swift counterattack.
‘Hello, Dr Streeter, how was your holiday?’
It was one of my students.
‘Fine thank you, Carla.
How was yours?’
Carla seemed surprised by my sudden interest in her personal well-being.
‘Oh, fine thank you.
I went to Florence to do the Uffizi.’
I smiled a smile that was meant to signify interest in this excursion, but Carla was far too intelligent to believe it showed anything of the sort.
‘I'll see you at two-thirty then, Dr Streeter.’
‘Will do.’
I had gone for coffee in the student room in order to avoid my colleagues.
However, my presence was clearly unsettling its regular inhabitants so I decided it was time to make a move — and time to confront Charles Howard.
I remember how leaden-footed I felt, climbing the two flights of stairs to Charles's office.
I knew that, in the cold light of day, he held all the aces.
He was the Director: he could lecture on whomever he liked.
And we both knew that hardly anyone would be prepared to speak out and argue my case.
I remember trying to think of all the troops who would line up behind me, and realizing that there was only Anne.
Dear Anne Collins, ten years younger than me, taught early Renaissance painting and was just about my only real friend there.
However, any protest she made was far more likely to lose her friends then gain me any.
Sadly, for reasons of social class, she was not particularly well regarded either.
I reached the door of Charles's office and knocked.
‘Come in!’ he shouted from within.
That was his first mistake: he could not now avoid talking to me.
I marched in and strode over towards his desk.
Charles looked startled.
Clearly he had not been expecting a confrontation.
‘Charles, what is the meaning of this outrage!’
‘Oh, er, hello Dorothy.
Can this wait?
I'm really rather busy at the moment.
I've got a meeting in a few minutes and I —’
‘No it can't wait.
Why have I been treated in such a cowardly and despicable manner?’
‘What on earth's the matter?
Sit down for a minute.
What's the problem?’
I remained standing.
‘You know perfectly well what the problem is.
Why have you taken the Bernini lecture away from me?
I want an answer, right now!’
The directness of my attack clearly took him aback.
‘Oh that,’ he said.
‘It's only a first-year lecture.
I can think of more upsetting things in life.’
‘I'm upset, as you put it, because you didn't even have the courtesy to warn me that I might not be giving a lecture that's due in eight days’ time.
That is no way to treat a senior member of staff and you know it.’
‘Look, I just felt that it was time for a change, that's all.
And I thought there'd be less fuss if I —’
I exploded.
‘Less fuss!
Who's the house expert on Bernini?
What is everyone going to start thinking when they see how you've cut the ground from under my
feet like this?
What are my students going to think for goodness' sake?’
He was hesitating, but I had now shot my bolt.
‘Charles, I'm not going to let you get away with this.
I'm taking this matter to the highest authority.’
He spotted the chink in my armour.
‘You already have.
The problem is you can't accept that fact.’
‘Don't you be patronizing with me.
I'll take it all the way to the Senate if I have to.’
‘Look, do you really think that the Senate of the University of London is going to care two hoots about a footling little first-year lecture?
You're making a mountain out of a molehill, Dorothy.
All that's happened is I decided I was going to give the Bernini lecture this year.
If you've got some new material on him that you want to share with us, I'm more than happy to arrange another lecture for you later in the term, but frankly, as you've apparently given the same lecture on him for the past ten years, I can hardly be accused of interfering with academic freedom, can I?’
‘Who on earth told you that?’
(It wasn't quite true.)
‘I can't remember now.
Look, I'm going to be snarled up in another meeting in a few minutes.
Can we discuss this tomorrow?
How does ten-thirty suit you?’
I stood him up.
For one thing, I was genuinely upset by what had happened; for another, I knew it was pointless expecting him to change his mind.
I was diplomatically ill for a few days and then I returned to my normal work.
Already, though, an idea had settled in my mind.
Why not resign?
Even contemplating walking out over such a small matter may seem ridiculous, but within the context of that small world, the dispute was a major one.
Also, and I don't want to go on about this, I was a lonely person in those days and I had very little else to think about.
Anyway, on with my story, for soon other pressures were to be brought to bear.
First, there was the peer pressure from my colleagues.
Some of them turned out to be not as indifferent to my plight as I'd feared they all would be, and a few murmured that if I did really feel strongly about the way I had been treated, I should indeed take the matter up with the Senate.
This sympathy (and attention) hardened my resolve not to be put upon.
However, as a corollary to this, my increasingly strident expressions of discontent put considerable pressure on me to live up to my rhetoric.
‘Will she take it all the way or won't she?’ became the talk of the senior common room.
From being a peripheral figure for most of my working life, I now had to adjust to being on centre stage.
Charles also found himself in a difficult position.
He now had to think of a decisive way of finishing what he had tentatively started or he too ran the risk of losing face.
His biggest problem was that because of the way things work in academic life, regardless of whether or not I changed my lectures from one year to the next, I was just about unsackable.
From his point of view, therefore, I had to resign.
Four weeks into the term, another little notice appeared on the noticeboard.
‘Paul Spence has kindly agreed to give a few revision classes on seventeenth- and eighteenth-century architecture to final-year BA students: Tuesday…’
‘Do you know what they are going to be about?’
Carla asked me.
‘No I don't.
I'm sorry, Carla, I really don't.’
This time I decided to have my coffee in a little cafe not far from SIS.
I can still remember how good that coffee tasted, and how different it tasted from the common-room coffee I was used to.
I can still see myself sitting there, relaxed and comforted by the warm drink, and then there was that moment when I decided I would resign.
A mixed feeling of excitement and fear flowed through me as the idea took control.
Nothing much  had happened in my life since the publication of my Carlo Fontana book nearly twenty years earlier (though even that, as only three hundred copies were sold, was hardly a riot).
This, maybe, was my opportunity to escape from the torpor into which I had sunk.
At last people were going to see the real Dorothy, the real live woman behind that starchy old madam who'd sat in the corner for all those years, hiding from the world in general.
I look back on those emotions with wry amusement but also with a certain amount of self-respect.
We are, after all, allowed only one life in this world and I'm glad I'd decided not to let mine just drift away.
When that first cup of coffee was finished, a ball of fear nestled in the pit of my stomach.
I quickly ordered a second cup and the dreams returned.
I would work for one of the major charities, perhaps, or maybe go for a job in publishing.
That seemed like the most sensible idea.
I would write to all the publishing houses that regularly produced art books and offer my services to them.
All my specialist knowledge, all that accumulated wisdom of the ages, would surely come in useful to someone.
Also, academic life had not exactly left me well-off and it seemed like a good idea to try to earn a slightly larger salary so that I would have something to put towards my eventual retirement.
I now had to start thinking about things like that.
Anyway, more importantly, this was my last chance to escape.
I walked back to SIS.
Liz, the receptionist, peered at me over the top of her pink-rimmed spectacles.
‘Professor Howard has been looking for you,’ she informed me.
‘Oh good,’ I said.
I was starting to feel light-headed.
‘Where is he?’
I asked.
‘In his office,’ she replied, and she then returned her attention to her newspaper.
She picked up her pen and  rested its point on the page.
Liz did not want to speak to me, I noticed.
Liz had written me off.
Oh well!
I climbed the stairs to Charles's office.
There seemed to be people about, but I wasn't sure.
I knocked on his door.
‘Who is it?’
‘He's learned something,’ I mused to myself.
‘Dorothy,’ I answered.
‘Can I come in?’
‘Just a minute.’
There was a sound of scuffling from within.
‘Maybe he's got a girl in there,’ I thought.
I heard someone coming towards the door.
I half expected some floosie to open it but no, it was Charles.
‘Ah, Dorothy, do come in.’
He walked back towards his desk and, dutifully, I followed him.
All that scuffling had been to move an armchair round to the front of the desk.
There was to be no eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation this time.
Without waiting for him to invite me to do so, I sat down.
The chair was comfortable but low and I found myself in the disconcerting position of having to look up at him while we spoke.
‘What do you want to see me about, Charles?’
This caught him off balance.
‘What do you mean?’ he asked, flustered.
‘I thought it was you who wanted to see me.’
‘At your bidding, Charles, only at your bidding.’
‘Ah well, in that case, I'd better let you know that I've asked Paul Spence to do some of the revision classes for your part of the course.’
‘I know, I've already read the notice.’
A thought suddenly struck me.
‘Do you mean his revision classes are meant to take the place of some of mine?’
‘Er, play it how you like.
You're right, it would be pointless for the two of you to overlap.
Ask Paul and see what he wants to do.’
‘But Charles, these are my students!
What on earth has it got to do with him in the first place?
You're going behind my back again.
It's got so bad that I don't even know what to say.’
Charles appeared somewhat embarrassed by his own behaviour.
The hidden speech was coming, I could tell.
He moved the pen lying on the blotter in front of him slightly to one side.
‘Dorothy, I'm trying to clear it with university administration that Paul should join our staff.
I think he's got an awful lot to contribute to our period and I, personally, would very much like him here.
It would mean a reduced workload for you so I honestly can't see why you're so set against the idea.’
‘Well it's the first I've heard of it, frankly.’
‘Oh, it's been around the common room for some time now.’
‘You've been trying to ease me out, Charles.
That's what's been going around the common room and that's what all this adds up to.’
‘Well, what are all these rumours about you wanting to retire?’
‘You tell me what they're about.
You started them.’
‘That's not fair.’
I examined his face.
He looked extraordinarily weary.
Getting rid of me had proved too much for him and he was now trying to force through a muddled compromise.
Sadly, it was not going to work.
‘What if the Senate doesn't agree to fund an extra member of staff?’
I asked.
‘I don't know.
I think we've a pretty good case though — the Renaissance has three people.
Theirs is a much more popular course, admittedly, but we must have some sort of chance, somewhere along the line.’
He gazed despairingly down at his blotter.
Charles was out of his depth and floundering.
He needed  someone to throw him a lifeline and I decided it might as well be me.
‘You don't mean all this personally, do you, Charles?’
He looked up, his face awash with relief.
‘No I don't.
You're right, I don't.
I'm glad you can see that, Dorothy.
I'm not trying to hurt you, I promise you.
I…’
He looked down again.
At this point, I desperately wanted to leave the room.
How could I ever work for this man again anyway?
And how would he be able to bear having me around, working for him?
It went quiet for a while, then we were both rescued by a knock on the door.
‘Come in!’
Charles shouted.
It was the Deputy Director.
‘Oh, sorry to disturb you both,’ he said, warily, ‘but someone from the Senate has just rung up, Charles.
A Miranda somebody.
Could you ring her back when you've got a moment?
I've got the number here.’
He started to walk towards us, then he hesitated.
‘It's all right, I was just leaving,’ I said, and I stood up.
‘Thank you, Charles.
I'll think about what you've just said.’
‘Oh, er, do, Dorothy.
Thank you.’
He hurriedly ushered me out of the room.
I was now at a bit of a loss as to what to do next, so I wandered upstairs to the room that housed the books covering my subject, just to check up on a few things.
However, I was wasting my time — my gaze slid across the surface of the pages like marbles on a shiny table-top.
Was this really the end?
I kept asking myself.
Had it all come down to this?
I decided that the best thing to do was to go home.
I returned the book to the place on the shelf where I had found it and walked quietly out of the room.
I had just about reached the stairs, when suddenly a white  door to my right burst open and a group of students tumbled out, shrieking with laughter.
When they saw me the laughter stopped.
I looked at them, they looked at me, and I turned and hurriedly made my way downstairs.
Gathering speed all the time, I rushed outside and hailed a taxi.
‘I'm in everybody's way,’ I kept telling myself.
‘It's no use.
I'm just in everybody's way.’
When I arrived home, I sat down at my desk and wrote a letter.
Dear Charles, I have decided to resign from my post at the School for Italian Studies.
My intention is that I should leave at the end of the year.
I wish you and everyone else at the school every success in the future.
Yours sincerely, Dorothy Streeter
The news of my resignation was not announced until after the finals exams — at Charles's request.
When the news did become public, colleagues who had avoided speaking to me when the going got tough reappeared and said how sorry they were that I was leaving.
More sympathetic souls cautioned me against hasty decisions, but the ripples subsided fairly quickly.
Life did, after all, have to go on.
On the last day of that term, my final-year class all came up to my office to give me a ‘thank-you’ present.
It was a book of photographs of London between the wars — a slightly tactless gesture as I was only eleven when World War Two was declared, but the sentiments were, I sensed, sincere, so I was touched by their kindness.
‘Are you going to stay in London after you've retired?’
Carla asked me.
‘I don't know.
That's a little way off yet.
I'm probably going into publishing when I leave here.’
‘Oh,’ she said.
‘I'm thinking of doing that!’
I smiled.
‘I'll maybe see you on the circuit then,’ I said.
‘I hope things go well for all of you,’ I added (with uncharacteristic generosity), ‘and thank you for the present.
I shall enjoy it.’
The little ceremony was over.
They all bade me farewell and that was that.
Once they had left, I locked myself in, went back to my desk, sat down and buried my head in my hands.
‘Don't you dare cry,’ I mumbled to myself.
‘Listen to me, you stupid bitch, don't you dare cry.’
Carla, inevitably, did get her job in publishing.
It was through a family connection, I think — anyway, as expected, she never had to ask me for a reference.
I (again inevitably) decided to leave job-hunting until after I had actually left SIS.
My final term there seemed rather uneventful after the previous two, and only Renaissance Anne showed any signs of concern about my impending departure.
In truth, I found her rather a pain on the subject and merely parried her constant questions about my job-hunting activities.
As usual, she was rather more in touch with reality than I was.
‘Stay in teaching, Dorothy, it's all you know.’
‘That's why I want to get out of it.’
‘Yes, but at fifty?’
‘I do wish everyone would stop writing me off just because I happen to be fifty.’
It wasn't until the final two weeks of term that it really hit me that I was actually going to have to go.
I remember the shock of realizing that this was my last ever second-year class, then my last ever third-year class, and then people started asking me about my leaving party.
‘Why don't you invite Paul Spence?’
Anne suggested.
‘Whatever for?’
‘So that you can leave with dignity.’
I invited Paul Spence.
At the party, I was presented with a gold wristwatch in a cobalt-blue presentation case — a wonderfully absurd gesture which nearly had me in tears.
To my considerable surprise, nearly everyone decided to come.
In my mind, I had pictured Charles, Anne and myself standing in the middle of an otherwise empty common room, sherry glass in hand, desperately trying to think of something to say to each other.
Not so, though.
Almost as many people turned up for me as had for Youngman.
In his speech, Charles praised my ‘sterling contribution’ to the school and shortly after it Paul came up to me and made the touching suggestion that I should give some classes in the summer term — if I was still free.
I remember looking him straight in the eye at this point in order to try and fathom the motives behind his proposal.
‘Anyway, Dorothy, I must dash,’ he said, embarrassed.
‘It's my wife's antenatal class this afternoon and I've got to look after the other one.’
‘They have lessons in everything these days, don't they?’
I observed.
He grinned.
‘We'll always need teachers, that's for sure.’
I smiled and held out my hand.
‘Good luck, Paul.’
He shook it.
‘Thanks.
The same to you.’
One of the great unanswered questions in my life is why Mrs Spence was going to antenatal classes that afternoon when, as she had already had one child, she presumably had a pretty good idea of what to expect.
She was a somewhat intense woman who probably rather enjoyed such gatherings, but I've often wondered if she secretly used them as a ruse to get her husband home to mind the little one while she nipped out for a breather.
Anyway, I digress.
After Paul left, the party broke up quickly, as though everyone felt that the business of the day had now been concluded.
I, in my role as hostess, lingered to the end and soon there was only Anne and myself left.
‘Did you get The Times Educational Supplement this week?’ she asked me.
‘Yes, but there wasn't anything in it.’
‘I noticed a teaching job in Sheffield that didn't look too bad.’
‘I keep telling you, Anne, that's not the sort of thing I'm looking for.
I'm still thinking of going into publishing.’
‘But as I keep trying to tell you, publishing is not that easy to get into — especially at your sort of salary level when you've no experience.’
‘Money's not a problem.’
‘Yes, but nobody's going to consider you for a junior post any more.’
‘I'm not at all sure that I'd want one.’
Statements like that used to worry Anne.
‘Are you sure you're being realistic?’ she would say, and the conversation would then cease.
Her advice was of course extremely sensible.
Sadly, I didn't listen.
Immediately after leaving SIS, I took a long holiday in Italy.
I finished up in Rome, home to so many of the works I lectured on, and on my last night there I took a walk down to Bernini's Trevi fountain in order to throw in the coin that would ensure that somehow I would one day return.
All around me there were young couples, arm in arm, doing the same.
I watched the waters for a while.
‘Bernini,’ I said at length.
‘They used you, you know.
They wanted blood and they got it.’
Usually when I'm in a crowded place like this, I feel very lonely, but not this time.
It did not really matter  who we were or where we had come from; the fountain united us all in a common purpose and that was enough.
I remember the strange feeling I had when I left the square that night, a feeling of finality.
Looking back, that square was my gateway to the real world — and the gate could only work one way.
I spent that night in a straitjacket of fear.
In fact, such was my dread of returning home, I nearly managed to miss my plane, but somehow the clockwork motor inside me brought me back in one piece.
On the doormat, there were a few late Christmas cards plus the inevitable letter from the bank, but no offers of job interviews.
As I had never actually made a cold application for a job before, I didn't really know what to make of this.
I had also never before been without a pattern to the future, and I was starting to realize that it might not all be quite so easy as I had imagined.
Months passed.
A detailed description of that period would be impossible, as nothing of any substance happened.
I applied for the occasional post that I thought might be interesting, but never heard anything back.
Unemployment had then just begun its big rise but there were still jobs going — I was just being silly about which ones to apply for.
My resolve not to go back into education hardened, if anything, rather than softened, as I became more and more determined that the sacrifice I had made was not going to be in vain.
Then, inexplicably, I had been out of work for over a year and my few friends were drifting away.
And, somehow, my savings, carefully built up over the years, were starting to run dry.
Falling out with Anne finally spurred me into activity.
She also turned out to be the last close friend I had for an awfully long time.
She came round for dinner one evening.
I had prepared an unimaginative tunafish salad for the two of us  in order to show off my new personal austerity programme.
While we were eating, Anne started on a familiar topic.
‘You're still applying for the wrong jobs,’ she said, with more than a hint of exasperation.
‘I keep telling you but you won't listen.
Jobs are scarce at the moment, so you've got to be realistic.’
‘Ever since I resigned, I've had to put up with this incessant, ‘You've got to be realistic,’ from you.
Realistically, I had no future left at SIS, so what did I do?
I got up and left.
Realistically, I've been applying for the sort of job that will pay me enough money to keep me going when I retire.
I've only eight working years left now and with all my savings gone, I simply can't afford to work for nothing.
If I'm not careful, I'm going to have nothing to fall back on.’
‘Yes, but how many of these wonderfully high-paid jobs have you been offered over the past eighteen months?’
‘There's no need to rub it in.
You don't know how difficult it is.’
‘I do know.
That's why I keep telling you to apply for teaching jobs.’
‘Yes, but as I keep trying to get through to you, I don't want to teach any more.
That's why I left SIS in the first place.’
‘But you've got to earn a living, Dorothy.
You'll be living on fresh air soon if you're not careful.’
‘I know that, thank you.
That's why we're having tunafish this evening instead of poached salmon.’
I always was rather patronizing towards Anne.
‘Yes, but you can't pick and choose now.
You've got to take whatever's going.
How else are you going to support yourself?
You're like me, Dorothy, you've got no family.
We're talking about how you're going to survive and it's as basic as that.’
‘You don't have to worry about me becoming a burden on you, you know.
I'd rather sleep in the gutter than let that happen.
I'm quite capable of looking after myself and I don't need you to tell me how.’
Something inside Anne snapped.
‘Oh, for goodness' sake!
I've had just about enough of this.
Ever since you left SIS, you've done nothing except mope around and complain.
You complain about your friends never coming to see you, but when they do come, you give them such a hard time it's hardly surprising they stay away.
And you're still dreaming this impossible dream about you and some fantastic job in publishing.
I mean, if it was there, I'd have it!
Those sort of jobs just don't exist for people like you and me.
They're for those upper-class twits who turn up halfway through seminars and who never bother to get their essays in on time.
You and I are teachers.
That's what we're trained to do, and nobody, but nobody, is going to train us to do anything else.’
‘As I keep saying, I don't need you or anybody else to tell me what I can or cannot do.’
‘Yes you do!
I'm not getting through to you, am I?’
‘I understand perfectly what you're saying.
You're saying that I'm pretty hopeless at everything, but somebody might, just might, be prepared to put up with my teaching.’
‘No, I'm not saying that at all.
You're perfectly capable of teaching; it's just that you've now got this thing about it.’
‘I remember when you first started at SIS.
The boot was on the other foot then, wasn't it?
But what do you care now?
You're all right Jack and I should be lucky for what I can get.
Well sorry, Anne, but I know too much about you to take this drivel.’
She threw down her knife and fork.
‘Right!
That's it.
I'm leaving.
Sort out your own life.
I've had enough of it!’
She quickly left the room, took her coat off the hat-stand in the hallway and left.
That was the last time we spoke.
I can still remember the click of the latch as she shut the door behind her.
I sat with my head in my hands for a while, then I went over to my desk and took out a small framed photograph of Anne and myself which I always hid before she arrived.
It was of the two of us leaning up against the Arch of Titus in Rome — we had bullied some fellow tourist into taking it for us.
It's a lovely photograph — I still carry it around with me.
We both look so happy and relaxed in it.
Then, as now while I write this, tears were running down my face.
I knew she wasn't coming back.
When she first arrived at SIS as a student, Anne had an affair with some chap in her year and when it broke up, she decided she wanted to leave.
It was me, her personal tutor at that time, who persuaded her to stay.
Over the years, Anne had put up with an awful lot from me and she had now finally decided she couldn't take it any more.
I couldn't, and don't, blame her.
Anne is abroad at the moment, doing some research, but she left a message with someone that I'm to give her a ring when she gets back.
I'm a bit apprehensive about seeing her again, but I'm sure she'll have fun seeing the old hag in her new colours.
Coincidence or whatever, in the newspaper one day the following week, there was an advertisement for an art history teacher at a boys' public school (that's a private one in this country) in Oxfordshire.
I applied for the post and was interviewed by the headmaster, a man of about my own age who was ‘mad on Puccini’, and consequently thrilled to bits when I recognized 
‘Nessun Dorma’ from Turandot which he insisted on singing to me.
‘We've never had a woman on the staff before,’ he informed me (forgetting the cleaners and caterers).
‘It will be a whole new adventure for us.’
And, I realized, for me too.
Berkeley School had taken on a little more than they had bargained for.
The nearly half a year between my interview and my starting there passed without incident.
Truth be told, I can't really remember what I did do in those six months.
Over the summer I did read a few books and tentatively prepare a few classes, but it was indisputably a pretty lacklustre performance on my part.
I had managed to convince myself that, after a lifetime of teaching at university level, this was all going to be painfully easy.
I decided to keep up my flat in London and find fairly basic lodgings locally.
The idea of leaving London for good— with its galleries, the opera and everything — was just too much for me.
I would go home for weekends, if I felt like it, and during the holidays.
It amuses me that eight years ago I had two homes — but I digress again.
Berkeley took boys between the ages of thirteen and eighteen, most of them boarders.
The fees were high and the atmosphere rarefied.
‘Our boys’ were being nurtured in the belief that they were the leaders of tomorrow, the ‘happy few’who would one day be running whatever had now taken the place of the Empire.
‘Also, we need to give an especially big Berkeley welcome to Dr Dorothy Streeter, who's joining our art department,’ intoned the headmaster during my first  school assembly there.
‘You're all to do your best to make her feel she's one of us.’
‘How?’
I wondered, as I looked round at the massed ranks of chaps, young and old.
‘What on earth am I doing here?’
I asked myself.
‘What on earth can have possessed me to take a job like this?
Now look at me.
Stuck in the middle of the Oxfordshire countryside with hundreds of noisy incomprehensible children and colleagues who make me feel about as comfortable as a walk in the rain.
I must have gone stark raving mad.’
‘Finally, if you have any problems, my door is always open, so don't be put off by it.’
We all filed out of the assembly hall.
My brief was to teach art and history of art to all age groups.
I had no experience of teaching art to anyone, but the headmaster assured me that it simply involved giving the boys some paints to play with and then telling them to get on with it.
He expressed the hope that my presence would ‘give a boost to the standing of art history in the school’, but unfortunately that wish was pie in the sky.
Art classes were seen as ‘free’ periods by the boys and any suggestion of serious work was unwelcome.
My slide shows did go down reasonably well, if only because while the lights were out, they had the chance to change places under cover of darkness in the hope of confusing you know who.
This game was a little disheartening, not so much because of the disciplinary problem, but because it showed all too clearly that few if any of them were actually listening to what I was saying.
My one colleague in the department was Jeff.
Jeff came into teaching via the practical side of art.
He shared his pupils' impatience with the history side but he was far too polite ever to express this prejudice in my presence — and he was pleased that there was somebody else in the department who was prepared to cover  that part of the teaching.
Jeff still rates as one of the nicest people I have ever met.
The boys all liked him, too — and some of them resented being placed under my care because of the fun they knew they could be having next door.
‘Rapids might look more exciting, but still waters run deep,’ Jeff used to say to them.
‘You can learn a lot from Dr Streeter, so give her a chance.’
The rest of my new colleagues were less sure about what to make of me.
It took many of them an awful long time even to introduce themselves.
In their defence, I'm not the most approachable woman in the world and many of them were simply unused to female company.
In any event, the biggest problem for us all was my own state of depression.
I'm pretty sure that by this stage I was suffering from what medical people mean when they talk about ‘clinical depression’.
However, I never tried to get professional help, and that may well have been a mistake.
Depressed people can of course make hasty and unwise decisions, and I made one such decision when, during my second term at Berkeley, I decided to give up my London flat.
I had lived at the same place in Hampstead for over twenty years and so, as a sitting tenant, my rent was pretty cheap.
However, as you know, most of my savings had vanished while I was unemployed and when I was offered a very nice flat near the school, the financial advantages of making that my single home base seemed overwhelming.
In addition, I no longer saw any of my old friends while I was up in London and my Hampstead flat felt rather empty without them.
‘Adjust, Dorothy,’ I kept telling myself.
‘What was that Anne kept telling you?
‘You've got to be realistic.’
Well, be realistic and accept what has happened.’
The new flat was smaller than the old so I had to sell  some of my furniture.
However, all told, I was rather pleased with my new home.
‘It will do,’ I used to say.
‘It will definitely do.’
Back to the school.
Jeff had a hard time with me.
It isn't easy coping with a person who is twice your age and beset by problems you have no hope of being able to understand.
He could have complained to the top about my basic lack of professionalism but instead he went out of his way to try and help — and sometimes got pretty short shrift in return.
The rest of my colleagues also sensed my unhappiness.
Some of them tried to make amends for their own earlier contribution to this state of affairs and moved to include me more fully in the life of the school — a few even started to invite me back home for meals and things.
Dorothy, I realized, had become a problem, and I resented that.
‘How have you found us?’ the headmaster asked me — masochistically — one warm summer's afternoon as we sat watching a cricket match.
‘Set in your ways.’
‘Oh well played!’
He broke off to applaud a little ball striking a boundary rope not far from us.
‘Someone will have to explain this game to me one day,’ I said, mournfully.
‘It's quite simple really,’ the headmaster assured me.
‘It's designed around the principle that participation is more important than winning.
Twenty-two athletes spend five days for the most part watching their teammates do all the work, and at the end of it all, everyone is quite happy to settle for a draw.
It's rather marvellous, really, when you think about it.’
‘People do lose sometimes.’
‘True, but they have a pleasant time in the sun while they're about it.
What do you mean by us being set in  our ways?’ he asked, the tone of his voice changing when he put the question.
‘You tend to treat life as if it were a game of cricket, for one thing.’
‘Do we really?’
‘No, but you have a maddening habit of pretending you do.’
He smiled and was silent for a moment.
His next comment was measured in delivery.
‘Would I be right in saying that we haven't provided you with what you were looking for when you came here?’
‘What am I supposed to have been looking for?’
‘That's rather what I'm hoping to find out.’
The headmaster was getting a little too close to the bone for my liking, so I decided to go on the defensive.
‘Is there something about my work that's been bothering you, Headmaster?’
‘No, you've got the wrong end of the stick entirely.’
He paused again.
‘Look, Dorothy, I hired you because I thought you might shake the place up a bit, so if you are unhappy here, that's at least partly my fault.
Stevens, tuck your shirt in!
I'm not asking for a few soothing words to calm my conscience; if I can, I want to help.
We would all, I think, like to help.
It's just that none of us actually knows how to go about it.’
I was silent for a moment then I looked away.
‘You've no need to worry,’ I said.
‘I'm fine.’
‘If you ever do want to talk about it, please do come and see me.
It may be that I can't help, but…’
In retrospect, the greatest disservice Charles Howard ever did me was the way he had somehow made it impossible for me to trust this man.
As he had just said, he did genuinely want to help.
The headmaster was silent for a while, then he stood up.
‘Forgive me, Dorothy, I must get back to my office.’
I made no reply.
He walked off and I gazed blankly at the cricket match.
The summer holidays that year saw me at my most apathetic — and my most miserable.
In fact, I went for the entire two months without seeing anyone.
The Michaelmas term saw me at my most hostile.
The boys had now decided on a nickname for me: Mona, after Leonardo's Mona Lisa.
Mona graffiti started to appear everywhere and the craze was fuelled by my own furious reaction whenever I discovered some new example of the genre.
I remember one particular occasion when, on finding ‘Cheer up Mona’ written on the blackboard when I arrived to take a class, I went absolutely potty, threatening dire punishment on the whole class — the entire school almost — unless the culprit came forward.
‘But it was there when we got here, Miss.’
‘How many times do I have to tell you, Hawkins, my name's Doctor Streeter, not Miss Streeter; now come up here and wipe that filth off.’
‘Yes, Dr Streeter.’
I simply could not understand the boys' sense of humour.
Although I can now see the inherent sense in glueing a book to a table, then the point was just beyond me.
And the noise they would make as well— it was driving me crazy.
‘It's no good, Jeff.
I can't stand this any more.
I've got to get out of here.
I'm just not cut out for this.
I'm sorry, it's no good.
I've just got to get out of here.’
‘Dorothy, you're nearly fifty-four, aren't you?
I don't mean to be rude, but how on earth are you going to find another job the way unemployment is now?
It's not like it used to be.
No matter how talented you are, at your age employers just aren't going to want to know.’
‘I was unemployed for nearly two years before I came  here, I do know what it's like.
I'm sorry, Jeff, I didn't mean to be patronizing.’
‘My fault, I forgot.
But what are you going to do?’
‘There's still work going in London — I'll try down there again.
I belong in London anyway.
It's a world I can understand, Jeff — not this place.
I just can't fit in here.’
‘There's a lot you could contribute if you did stay.
I think you should give us another try.’
That brought tears to my eyes and I turned away so that Jeff wouldn't be able to see them, then fought them back.
‘Look, Dorothy, I know it isn't easy for you here, but I honestly don't think you're going to have better luck anywhere else.
You've got to be realistic.’
I do wish he hadn't said that last bit.
Suddenly I thought of Anne and felt impelled to rebel.
‘You're wasting your time, Jeff.’
I turned to face him.
‘Thanks, pet, but there's nothing you can do.
Look, I'll survive, don't worry.’
He looked crestfallen, but he smiled.
‘We all do until we die.’
‘Leave a silly old woman alone, Jeff, she's got things to do.’
He turned and walked towards the door.
‘Jeff.’
‘What?’
‘I meant it when I said thank you.
You can't imagine how much of a help you've been to me.
I've been difficult material to work with, haven't I?’
He smiled.
‘I reckon I know how Leonardo da Vinci must have felt.’
We laughed and he left.
I did resign.
I thought long and hard about it but in the end I decided it would be for the best.
Although Jeff making me laugh at myself was the beginning of  the end of my depression, it wasn't enough to persuade me to stay.
What tipped the balance against that was my continuing dreadful performance in the classroom.
Anyway, Jeff had now given me something new — something really important to me.
It was something I wanted to try out somewhere else.
My colleagues seemed genuinely worried by my decision and many of them tried to convince me to change my mind.
‘What can we do to persuade you to stay?’ the headmaster asked.
‘Nothing, but I do appreciate you asking.
Thank you.’
On my final day at Berkeley, my fourth-form pupils presented me with some flowers and a small mounted copy of Claude Lorrain's ‘Hagar and the Angel’.
My talisman.
‘We know you don't like reproductions, Dr Streeter,’ Barnett said rather nervously, ‘but we wanted to give you something to remind you of us.
It's only a little thing, anyway.’
‘Thank you.
Thank you, all of you.
I'll treasure this.
I really don't know what to say.
Where did you get the flowers?’
I half expected him to say they stole them from somebody's garden but…
‘Matthews and I got them in town, Dr Streeter.
I had to strap them to my bicycle, which is why they look a bit battered.’
‘Oh don't worry, they're beautiful.
They're fine.
Thank you.’
I remember a tear running down my cheek and me trying to smile it away.
‘Speech!’ one of the boys shouted, and we all laughed.
‘I'm going to miss you,’ I said.
‘Thank you, I'm going to miss all of you.’
Jeff made his rescuing entrance.
‘Nobody's ever given a member of staff here flowers before,’ he observed with a twinkle.
‘I've been given this beautiful little picture as well,’ I said, and I smiled up at him.
He smiled back.
A troubled smile.
‘Need any help clearing up?’ he asked, drawing the proceedings to a close.
‘That would be nice, thank you,’ I said.
I took the flowers over to one of the sinks and put them in it.
Behind me, the boys collected up their things and quietly left the room.
Rather than watch them go, I stayed by the sink and gazed out over the playing fields.
‘I'll miss you,’ I said softly to myself.
It hit me just how right Anne had been when she said that teaching was the only job I knew — and how horribly ill-equipped I was for anything else.
‘Dorothy, it's time we went to Final Assembly.’
‘Coming.’
We walked out into the sun together and across to the school hall.
All of a sudden I started to laugh.
‘What's up?’
Jeff asked.
‘Nothing,’ I said.
‘It's just the vision of Matthews and Barnett buying those flowers.
I'm not being unkind, I'm sure they can also see the funny side of it.’
‘You can t say people haven t tried.
‘No,’ I said.
‘I can't.’
Berkeley did after all turn out to be my last dalliance with the education system.
If I had elected to stay there, I probably would not have become homeless five years later.
However, it is important to remember the gap.
My becoming homeless was not a result of my dropping out of a system which probably would have supported me until retirement age; it was the result of a chain of events which took place much, much later.
Blame me for becoming poor if you like — I admit, I blew it — but the responsibility for the way our society treats its poorer members is not exclusively mine.
One immediate result of my departure from Berkeley was my giving up my flat by the school and going back to London.
I was disappointed to find that accommodation was scarcer and more expensive than I thought it would be and the best that I could afford was a large first-floor room in a bedsitter house on Ladbroke Grove.
I assured myself that it would be only temporary and I would soon be in a flat again, but ‘temporary’ turned out to be five years.
I was acutely aware of the urgent need to find some work to do, so I combed the national and local newspapers to see what was on offer.
I resolved to take the first thing that came along and from that base to look further afield if need be.
I was given a couple of interviews straight off which, though unsuccessful, were  useful practice and I felt confident that something would soon turn up.
About three weeks after I started looking, I came upon an advertisement for a receptionist to work at a local authority office building, not too far from my new home.
It seemed about par for the course, so I applied, was interviewed and then offered the job, all in reasonably quick time.
It all seemed to have gone remarkably smoothly.
The job paid quite well and I could perhaps at that stage have afforded somewhere slightly better to live, but I'd got used to my new home and I was still keen to try and build up some savings again.
The building I was now working in housed a number of statutory and voluntary social-services organizations.
My job was to operate the telephone switchboard, sort the morning post, direct house-callers to the appropriate organization, and that was about it.
The telephones kept me just about busy but the potential for job satisfaction in the tasks I was required to do was almost nil.
This was, I kept telling myself, just a staging post.
It does, however, hold the distinction of being the second-longest-running job that I have held to date.
I was there for about three and a half years.
Writing about the last two jobs felt strange, largely because of the muddled emotions they still arouse.
Writing about this one feels strange simply because there isn't that much to say.
I was the inevitable, anonymous receptionist you meet when you walk into almost any large building.
You say hello to her, you assume she has been reading your mail or listening in to your private telephone calls (actually I never did either), and you tell her when you do not wish to be disturbed.
And, if you are just visiting, you blame her if the person you have come to see isn't there, or keeps you waiting, or whatever.
To most people, a receptionist is an obstacle to be negotiated, and that was unfortunately how I was made  to feel for much of the time.
There were an awful lot of nice people working in the building, but there is sometimes a certain tone in your voice, a clouded look in your eye, which gives the impression that you're more likely to be a client than a colleague.
I was bored and lonely; they were suffering from compassion fatigue.
We very rarely mixed.
Bored and lonely, yes; depressed, no.
I was more or less resigned to the way things had turned out and just got on with life.
In point of fact, my mind started to wake up a bit during this period.
I started to read newspapers and magazines more, and, for just about the first time in my life, I began to take an interest in current affairs.
This new hobby developed during an interesting period for the British press.
The majority of the newspapers had become woefully compromised in their support for the government and good investigative journalism was one of the casualties.
In its place we have had ever more examples of newspapers pandering to people's baser instincts by covering the private lives of television actors and the like — the so-called ‘human-interest’ stories.
The result of all this has been that proponents in the press of the fashionable pro-government doctrine of ‘new realism’ have somehow found themselves spending most of their time constructing and then reporting on a fantasy world.
Bored and lonely, yes, but I had a reasonably pleasant time of things all the same.
I went out to the theatre and the opera a lot, and when I had some time off, I was usually able to get away somewhere.
In times past, I had tried to get across to the continent as much as possible, but now, while other people were going abroad for the first time because of all the cheap travel around, I was (without intending to be anti-social) doing exactly the opposite and taking a look around the British Isles.
All this did, of course, cost money, but  if you've had even a comparatively small amount of that and then lost it, you do tend to realize how transient the whole thing is and not worry so much about getting it back again.
Besides, I didn't think I could now save enough to make a significant difference to my standard of living when I retired, so I decided I might as well enjoy it while I had the chance.
In retrospect, I would probably have saved a little bit more, but there it is — I did manage to save a little bit anyway.
I had been employed at Jersey House for about two and a half years when I was approached to see if I might like to do a little cleaning work to earn some overtime.
This would involve staying behind after office hours to empty some bins and hoover around a bit.
I said yes, but filling all my early evenings with this would prove rather inconvenient on those occasions when I wanted to go out, so we agreed a system whereby I would do some of the work first thing in the morning and the rest of it just after I closed down the switchboard.
This suited everyone else, as some people like to come in early, others to leave late, and we all managed to work around each other.
I kept this extra stuff up until I finished there.
By this time, I was already leading a life which ten years earlier I would have assured you that I could never have tolerated.
There was snobbery in this, of course, but also a simple ignorance of life outside the ivory tower in which I then dwelt.
However, at this new point in my life there seemed — as of course there was — nothing remarkable about what I was doing.
It was my desire to be active, to earn my way in life, which encouraged me into these new fields, that is it was a positive impulse which drove me on.
As for the glamour attached to some jobs and not to others: forget it, it's a sham.
For let me tell you something: I've respected myself far more for doing cleaning jobs well than for  doing teaching jobs badly — and it is entirely appropriate that I should do so.
If you look up to the university lecturer or down on the cleaner, either way you're not facing up to the truth about us all.
On with the story.
On a Wednesday there was a rumour flying around Jersey House that the building was going to be sold; on the following Monday, the rumour was confirmed as fact.
The local authority that owned the premises was ‘privatizing’ it, i.e. making a quick profit while there were still a fair few years on the lease.
All the organizations that worked there were offered alternative accommodation, which they were all sensible enough to accept.
The small number of us who were attached to the building itself either retired or were offered work elsewhere with the authority.
I was offered a cleaning job that I didn't much like the look of so I left quietly before the final curtain.
If I'd been a union member I might have held out for a better offer or some redundancy money, but I wasn't, so that was that.
I took a short break, and when I came back, I went round the local job centres to see what was going.
The second one I visited was the centre on Edgware Road.
I took down a few reference numbers from a noticeboard headed ‘Cleaning’ and then waited for my turn.
‘How can we help, Mrs Streeter?’
‘It's Miss,’ I said.
‘I'm looking for cleaning or receptionist work — whatever's going, really.’
‘Have you any experience as a cleaner?’
‘Part-time.
I was the full-time receptionist there as well.’
‘Any other experience?’
‘This and that.’
He picked up the telephone.
The first number on the list was a posh-sounding hotel.
‘Can I speak to Mrs Travers, please…
Ah, it's the  Edgware Road Job Centre.
Do you still have any vacancies for chambermaids?…
Fifty-eight-year-old woman with some experience…in an office…she was made redundant.’
(He put his hand over the receiver.)
‘What happened?’
‘They sold the building.’
‘Apparently, the offices were sold to another company…
Nine-thirty tomorrow morning.’
(He put his hand over the receiver again.)
‘Interview, nine-thirty, tomorrow morning.
That OK by you?’
‘Fine.’
‘She'll be there.’
And, in record time, I got the job.
I started the day after the interview.
The work — cleaning guest rooms — was low-paid and pretty routine.
I stuck it for about a year and then moved on to another, slightly better hotel to do the same thing for marginally more money.
The move was really just a change for change's sake — I was simply bored to tears by it all.
As it turned out, rather too much excitement was just around the corner.
At the first hotel I worked in, I had shared an ‘office, with one other cleaner — a taciturn alcoholic who taught me how to keep my head down — but in my new job, there were five of us who shared the same poky little room.
Consequently, first thing in the morning when we were all trying to get ready, we constantly got in each other 's way.
The atmosphere was, however, cordial, if not convivial, and the talk was of what grandchildren were up to or what Dr So-and-so said about this or that particular problem.
Shortly after I arrived, there arose a new topic for conversation.
There had been a rash of petty thefts in the hotel and we were all warned to be vigilant.
Who was the thief?
No one, to my knowledge, ever found out.
When we were first warned, I didn't really pay much attention to what was being said about it — the same problem had flared up at both Jersey House and the hotel I'd just left but in neither case had there been prolonged cause for concern.
‘You've been very quiet about this, Dorothy.
What do you think?’
‘I don't know.
There are so many people who come and go in a place like this, it could be anyone.’
‘Someone must be doing it.’
One of the things we had been told was to carry any  valuables we had around with us so that they couldn't go astray.
While we were all getting ready for work one morning, a few days after the above conversation, one of the other girls (Martha) transferred a fifty-pound note from her handbag to the pocket of her apron, which was at that point still hanging by the door with everyone else's.
In the bustle of everything, none of us noticed her do it — there was no reason for us to.
We all wore these aprons as a uniform and to protect our own clothes while we were working.
Why Martha transferred the money before she put her apron on I don't know — I suppose it's just that everyone has their own little routines for doing things.
Anyway, we were all soon off to start another morning's work.
The existence of this note wasn't in fact revealed until Martha made a comment during our mid-morning coffee break.
‘I've had a fifty-pound note stolen.’
We all looked up.
Martha was rummaging through her pockets.
‘Hang on,’ she said.
‘Let me check my handbag.’
The search through her handbag brought no success.
We all watched her, unsure of what to say.
‘Maybe you left it in your trolley,’ one of the others volunteered.
‘No, I'm sure I put it in my apron pocket, but I can't have done.
I must have left it in my handbag and somebody's stolen it.’
‘Best to check your trolley, just in case.
We'll have a look round in here.’
Martha went out to check her trolley and the rest of us, somewhat half-heartedly, searched the room.
‘Silly idiot for bringing all that money in with her,’ another of the girls muttered.
‘I expect she's left it at home,’ I said.
Martha soon came back, visibly distressed.
Our supervisor, the level-headed Mrs Long, was called.
When she arrived, she listened to the story of what had happened, teased out the relevant details, then announced that the police would have to be called and went off back to her office to do the necessary.
Once she had left, I reached into my apron pocket for my packet of cigarettes.
I felt my hand touch something feathery and I pulled it out to see what it was.
It was a fifty-pound note.
I stood there staring at it for a moment, unable to believe what I saw.
‘What's the matter, Dorothy?’ somebody asked.
‘I've got that fifty-pound note we're all looking for.’
‘What!’
‘Where did you find it?’
Martha asked.
‘In my pocket.’
‘What do you mean, in your pocket?’
I looked across at her.
‘In my pocket, just now,’ I said.
‘Well what were you doing with it?’ she asked, aghast.
‘I don't know, I just found it.’
I looked down at the money again.
‘You must have put it there by accident,’ I said.
‘What do you mean, I must have put it there, you must have put it there.
You stole it!’
‘I didn't steal your money, you stupid bitch, you must have put it in the wrong apron.’
‘Call me a stupid bitch, you fucking cow — you're the one who's the thief.’
I let the money slip through my fingers on to the floor.
Something inside me had snapped.
I went across and grabbed her by the lapels.
‘Call me a fucking thief one more time and I'll smash your fucking face in!’
She gave me a slap and I gave her one back.
Then we were wrestling and the other three rushed to separate us.
‘Get Mrs Long,’ one of the girls was ordered.
Her departure meant there was only one person left restraining me.
I shook her off and staggered out of the office, down the stairs and into the lobby.
There, I tore off my apron and sat down in one of those ridiculously soft chairs you always find in such places.
I had desperately wanted to rush outside and leave the whole wretched affair behind me but something told me I had to stay and face the music.
‘Why did that stupid idiot put her stupid fifty-pound note inside my pocket?’
I wondered as I fumbled around inside my apron for my cigarettes.
Then I noticed the tag on the collar.
‘No,’ I said to myself.
‘No, it can't be.
It's not right.
It can't be.’
I had, of course, been wearing Martha's apron.
I felt sick.
I felt the courage draining out of me.
Mrs Long appeared.
Could you come down and see me in my office, please, Dorothy?’
‘Sure.’
I followed her downstairs.
Everyone we passed seemed to be staring at me.
‘All I want to do is get to the bottom of this,’ she assured me as we entered her office.
‘Sit down and try to relax for a minute.’
She nodded towards a chair on the near side of her desk.
It was a rather rickety affair that creaked embarrassingly when I sat down in it and ever after when I moved.
Once Mrs Long had also sat down, she posed the obvious question.
‘What happened?’
‘I put Martha's apron on by accident this morning.
She'd put a fifty-pound note in it and so she thought that it had been stolen.
When I found it, there was an argument and we went for each other.’
‘When did you discover your mistake?’
‘About the apron?
Just now.
I thought she'd put the money in my apron by mistake and that's why we had
‘Can I get this straight?
First thing this morning, Martha put a fifty-pound note into the pocket of an apron you subsequently wore, thinking it to be yours.’
I nodded.
‘It's as simple as that.’
‘When did you discover the money?’
‘Just after you left.’
‘When I left to call the police, you mean?’
‘Yes, just after that.’
‘How come you discovered the money at that particular moment?’
‘I put my hand in my pocket to get my cigarettes.’
‘What happened after you found the money?’
‘Well, as I say, I thought she'd put the money in my apron by accident.
She started calling me a thief and it all went on from there.’
‘Who actually started the name-calling?’
I was silent for a moment, trying desperately hard to remember events that had happened only a few minutes earlier.
‘I think it was me who started it,’ I said.
‘I'm not sure.
Somehow it all seemed to get out of control.’
‘Who hit who first?’
‘I made a grab for her and she then slapped me.’
‘Then you slapped her back?’
‘That's right.’
(‘How did she know that?’
I wondered.)
‘Look, this is all my fault,’ I said.
‘She was in an impossible situation, I…’
Mrs Long stood up.
‘There are a few details I want to clear up with the other girls,’ she told me.
‘Can you hang on here for a few moments?’
‘There's no hurry.’
She left.
I sat there, numbed by what had happened.
Nothing seemed to make sense.
I'd never done anything like that before.
Mrs Long returned.
‘Dorothy, I think the best thing would be if you went home now and reported to me here, first thing tomorrow morning.
I want to discuss this with my superiors, but I think it's only fair for me to say that it may well be difficult for us to keep you here.’
‘I never stole anything, you know.’
She gave me a half-smile.
‘I don't think you did, either, but unfortunately it's now more complicated than that.’
The rest of that day was just awful.
I could not believe that I'd been so stupid, or that such a simple mistake was about to have such dire consequences.
I wandered aimlessly around the National Gallery just for something to do and then went home.
One thing I can remember about that evening was that I couldn't eat anything.
I couldn't bear to have the television on either — I just sat there in silence, trying to work it all out.
What on earth had got into me?
The night was sleepless, the morning cold.
Breakfast was a cup of coffee and I then went off to keep my appointment with Mrs Long.
‘I'm sorry, Dorothy, but we are going to have to ask you to leave.’
‘I understand.
Do you mind if, technically speaking, I resign rather than you sack me?
It's a personal thing.’
‘Er, no, I can't think of any reason.
Hang on, I'll need another termination form.’
She pulled out a file from a drawer in her desk, took out a fresh form and began to fill it in.
When she had finished, she passed it over so that I could sign it.
I read it through, then crossed out where she had written ‘Miss’ at the top and wrote ‘Dr’instead.
Mrs Long looked puzzled.
‘I didn't know you were a doctor,’ she said.
‘Of philosophy rather than medicine.
I used to be an art historian.’
‘Oh, that's interesting!’
She smiled and pointed to the wall to her right.
‘What do you think of my painting?’ she asked.
It was a reproduction of Monet's ‘Wild Poppies’.
‘I actually rather like Monet — especially his earlier stuff.’
‘Who did you say it was by?’
‘Claude Monet — one of the Impressionists.’
‘Oh.’
She smiled again.
‘It must be wonderful to know things like that.’
‘It has its uses.’
I passed back the form and just about managed a smile myself.
‘Well, Mrs Long,’ I said.
‘I think that is just about that.’
She stood up and held out her hand.
I stood up and shook it.
It seemed rather an odd thing to do, but perfectly in tune with the occasion.
‘I hope you have better luck at your next port of call.’
‘So do I. Goodbye.’
‘Goodbye, Doctor.’
She meant it as a compliment but it made me sound like her GP.
I made my way up to the lobby with those final two words of hers ringing around inside my head, and all sorts of other doctor phrases started to enter my mind — people calling me Doctor Streeter, popular songs with the word doctor in them — and then all of a sudden I started to cry.
I stumbled out of the hotel and into the middle of the road, narrowly missing being killed by a taxi.
I remember the screech of the horn and the blur of the car as it passed in front of me.
Somehow, I reached the other pavement safely.
Tears were streaming down my face — everywhere.
‘Goodbye dear,’ I suddenly said.
‘Daddy would have loved to have come as I said, but he just can't get any time off at all at the moment.
Now, are you sure you're going to be all right?’
My voice was strident and shrill.
A startled passer-by gave me as wide a berth as possible.
I ran down the pavement to get as far away from the hotel as I could, then I sat down in a doorway and continued crying.
Slowly the tears subsided and gradually I began to pull myself together.
I had nearly got myself killed back there: what on earth did I think I was playing at?
The people back at the hotel didn't know me.
They didn't know I wouldn't steal money like that.
People always blame the stranger when something like that happens — why should it be any different for me?
I became conscious of where I was and what I was doing so I quickly stood up and dried my eyes.
This was not the way to behave.
I had to get a grip on myself and put this whole wretched business behind me.
I walked on further down the street and when I spied a suitable coffee shop, I went in, sat down and ordered myself a soothing cuppa.
It was expensive and funds were running low.
I was going to have to be careful from now on.
I was, I must emphasize, determined to find another job — and as quickly as possible.
However, although unemployment was starting to come down, especially in the south-east where I was living, it was still generally pretty high.
I had two additional problems: my age and getting a reference from someone.
I didn't want to risk Mrs Long, and Mrs Travers knew where I had moved on to, so giving her name could cause problems as well .
Basically, if I wanted another job I was going to have to lie — and I wasn't very good at that.
‘Maybe I should have stayed and fought?’
I wondered.
No, I'd never been given that option.
But  anyway, there was work around.
I was bound to find something somewhere.
The next couple of days passed without incident.
Day three was another crisis day.
This time it was my landlady's turn to drop a bomb.
‘Hello, Miss Streeter.
I've got some news for you.
I'm about to sell the house…
Well, with prices the way they are I'd be crazy not to…
No, the estate agent reckons it'll be converted into flats, so I expect the new owner's going to want you out.
You look shattered, What's the matter?
Look, you don't need to worry about it — at your age the council will give you something if you can't find anything yourself…
What?
Sacked!…
Well it's ‘easy come, easy go’ in those places, you should put it behind you and carry on with life, that's the best thing.
Rough when it happens, though.
Get all your benefits sorted out and then start looking around again.
I'm not going to chuck you out and go for vacant possession or anything, life's too short for that.
I'm really sorry about all this happening to you at once like this.
I mean, it's like what they say, trouble always comes in threes, doesn't it?’
Mrs Hill was right about that last point, anyway.
A day or so later, I came down with a very nasty bout of influenza.
It was partly brought on, I'm sure, by the worry of all that was happening.
The illness did, however, convince me to accept another of the points Mrs Hill had made and I decided to apply for social security money.
During my earlier periods of unemployment I had always, on a point of pride, provided for myself out of my savings.
However, these were now too low and my prospects too poor for me to continue along that track.
My illness kept me out of action for a fortnight so it was fully three weeks after the demise of my job before I finally went down to my local Department of Employment offices and ‘signed on’.
Somewhat naïvely, I had expected it all to be sorted out then and there, but the chap just took my name, gave me a form to fill in and told me to come back a few days later for a full interview.
I was surprised to learn that my claim could not be backdated, but I wrote those first three weeks' money off to inexperience.
Anyway, the important thing was I was now safely inside the system.
My full interview seemed to go reasonably smoothly so at the end of it I asked how long would it take for my money to come through.
She said not more than a month.
‘A month!’
‘Keep your mouth shut,’ I told myself.
‘If you argue it will take even longer.’
She gave me another form to fill in for housing benefit.
I took this down to the town hall the following day and then set myself to the most urgent task in hand: trying to find another job.
I didn't go after anything fancy, but somehow I seemed to keep muffing up the interviews.
I was too anxious — far too anxious — and this put my interviewers on their guard.
They were suspicious about my past, my age and a picture of me that simply did not add up.
I was a risk, and a risk they could all get by without taking.
Looking for work costs money.
That point may seem obvious but I don't think whoever worked out the amounts given in state benefits ever took it into account.
Clean clothes, fares to and from the interview, possibly something to eat or drink when you're far away from home, even going around the job centres — they all cost money.
All these little bits and pieces were starting to add up and I was getting nowhere.
Admittedly I was depressed again — no, not depressed exactly, low would be a better word.
My plan for how  I was going to live out the rest of my days had just been torn up in front of my face and I needed time to adjust.
A little luck would not have come amiss, either.
The house was sold very quickly and the new owner immediately gave us all notice to quit.
Many of the residents moved out shortly after Mrs Hill announced her intention to sell, and in fact there were only four of us left when the new landlord took possession.
Another two moved on shortly afterwards and it was then that the intimidation began.
In cases of harassment, the law seems to be very much on the side of the landlord.
Even if you do manage to prove that he has been harassing you, there doesn't appear to be much general acceptance of the fact that intimidating someone in this way might actually constitute a serious crime.
Property, it seems, is more important than people.
At the start of my period of being harassed, I went down to my local law centre to see what help they could give me.
They told me the legal position and asked how hard I was prepared to fight.
I said I did not know — I didn't know what I was letting myself in for.
They told me to keep in touch and call them if I felt they could be of assistance.
The nature of the intimidation was at first quite subtle.
I don't want to give any details just in case it gives other landlords ideas.
My own landlord did, in fairness, give me veiled offers of money (bribes) to move elsewhere but in all honesty I simply wasn't streetwise enough to figure out what exactly he had in mind.
Also — and I'm quite prepared to admit this — because of all the problems I was having trying to find work, just at that moment I really didn't want the bother of hunting for a new home.
That, if need be, could be sorted out at a later date.
Anyway, there was hardly an atmosphere  of trust between the two of us so the idea of me ‘dealing’ with him was not a comfortable one.
Passive harassment became more and more active.
The other person in the house moved out and I was on my own.
Let me update you on my social security saga.
It took six weeks for the first amount of money to arrive.
The rent cheque was, to my surprise, a few pounds short of the amount I was actually paying — certain deductions had been made for lighting and other odd things that were technically included in my monthly rent.
I went to see them about this but they told me it was up to the social security people to make up the difference.
I went to see them as well and they told me to fill in another form.
All this begging for money was time-consuming and degrading so I decided to concentrate on finding work.
Then I received another blow.
They stopped my unemployment benefit.
I went down to find out what had gone wrong.
Apparently, because my employment had officially been terminated by me, I had arguably made myself voluntarily unemployed and was therefore entitled to benefit money only after a certain period.
They weren't sure if this applied in my case but they were investigating the matter.
‘How long is this all going to take?’
They would let me know as soon as possible.
‘Yes, but days?
Weeks?
Months?
Years?’
It would be as soon as possible, but they couldn't say exactly how long.
No longer than a fortnight, hopefully.
‘What am I supposed to live on in the meantime?’
They couldn't make emergency payments themselves, but if I went down to the social security office…
‘Look, I've been bounced around like a rubber ball  between you people for a couple of months now.
When is someone going to straighten this out?’
As soon as possible.
‘Could you please at least tell them it's quite urgent?
I'm rapidly running out of cash…yes, I know, the social security people.’
I was now at the stage of selling things to keep the cash flow going.
Most of the things I had were dated and not worth very much, so I found myself selling off my past as jumble and bric-a-brac.
This did grate rather, but how else was I supposed to survive?
I did go down to my local Citizens' Advice Bureau to see if they had any ideas, but all they could do was pass on the news that there was a squeeze on the social fund (the emergency payments fund), so I was well advised not to expect too much if I did decide to try the social security people.
Depressed?
No.
Heavy-hearted?
I was certainly becoming so.
The Department of Employment reinstated my benefits (joy!) and then stopped them again.
This time it was just a computer error they thought — apparently a fairly common occurrence when there's been some form of disruption to a claim.
Unfortunately, a strike was also affecting things.
They would of course let me know what was going on as soon as possible.
My landlord did get me out eventually.
After the big stick came the carrot: he offered to pay my first month's rent at a hostel he knew.
The manager there was quite happy to take people on social security so I wouldn't have any trouble about that.
I was even offered a van to help me move.
I declined the offer of a van, but otherwise accepted the inevitable.
The hostel could be tolerated for a month or so and during the interlude I would concentrate all my efforts on finding somewhere more permanent to live.
The money I was going to save on rent over the  next month could be put towards a deposit on something — always assuming the Department of Employment did eventually pay me my due — and then I would be able to start again.
Things could, I decided, be worse.
The place that my landlord had recommended was the Palace Hotel.
Now the Palace Hotel was many, many things, but it wasn't, by any stretch of the imagination, a palace — or, frankly, a hotel.
This much I could see from the outside when I went down to have a look at it.
I went in, explained the position I was in and asked if I could see one of the rooms.
‘What do you think this place is, love, the Ritz?
It's either take it or leave it.’
I passed over the cheque my landlord had given me.
He examined it carefully.
‘If this bounces, you're out on your ear, OK?’
‘We're both going to have to trust him.
May I see the room now?’
‘That's up to you, you've paid for it.’
He handed me over a key.
‘But listen, I don't take that kind of lip from anyone, understood?’
‘I'm sorry if I offended you.
I've had a rather difficult time of it of late and it may be affecting my attitude to people.’
‘I've heard every story in the book, darling.
Your room's on the first floor.’
‘Thank you.’
‘You're welcome.’
When I saw the room, I immediately wanted to call the whole thing off, but the chap already had the cheque and I was on a hiding to nothing with my landlord so I would just have to put up with it.
‘It's only temporary,’ I kept telling myself.
I went back downstairs.
‘I'll move in tomorrow,’ I told the man on the desk.
‘As you like,’ he said.
The following day I hired a van, loaded up my possessions and then handed over my keys to the landlord.
It was a rather extraordinary moment.
Stripped of his power to inflict harm on me, he seemed terribly ordinary.
He promised to forward my mail and wished me luck.
I wished him farewell and left without further ceremony.
As I walked down the front steps for the last time, a feeling of elation swept over me.
I could put all that fear behind me now and get going again.
After I'd checked to make sure that the back of the van was locked, I jumped up into the driver's seat and rammed the key into the ignition.
‘OK baby, let's roll,’ I said, and with a roar and a lurch, I was on my way.
There were two scheduled stops on my journey: the first was a company that was going to hold my bulkier items in storage (a firm that my now ex-landlord had told me about which had some spare space in a  lock-up in a basement car park); the second was of course the Palace Hotel where I was going to drop off everything else.
It was when I got back to my new room there that I first came across my new neighbours, Jane and Mark Walsh, and their two children, Sonja and Darren.
I caught my first glimpse of Jane through their open door.
She was trying to straighten an anorak around Sonja's pitifully slight frame.
Sonja was as usual being difficult and her mother was trying to strike an impossible balance between calming her down and getting her to do as she was told.
‘This is a zoo,’ I muttered to myself, failing to realize that I was now also supposedly less than human.
I dumped my things and then left again.
After returning the van to the hire company, I went for a long walk in Hyde Park.
It started to rain so I went down to Apsley House at the bottom right-hand corner of the park with the intention of having a look at the paintings there.
However, there was an entrance fee and I was beyond the stage of paying those so I decided to try and shelter somewhere else.
The question was where?
I couldn't afford anywhere to hide — what was happening to me?
In the end, I trudged down to Victoria railway station and sheltered there.
By early evening, I was just too bored to stick the place any longer so I went back to the hotel.
When I arrived back outside my room, I met Jane coming along the corridor from the other direction, clutching little Darren in her arms.
She smiled.
‘Hello,’ she said.
‘I'm Jane Walsh — I hear you've just moved in next door.’
She was so extraordinarily pleasant it knocked me quite off my balance.
‘Er, yes,’ I said, and I offered her my hand.
‘Dorothy Streeter.’
The handshake was a stupid idea as she was still holding Darren, but she let him slide down to the floor and we shook.
‘How long have the council told you you've got to wait?’
‘Council?’
‘You are homeless, aren't you?’
‘Er, yes.
Yes, I suppose I am.’
Suddenly I felt extraordinarily relieved.
I'd accepted that I'd joined the club — and there were some really nice people in it.
‘Aren't you on the council-house waiting list then?’
‘No, not yet.
They haven't even got my benefits sorted out.
Look, you must excuse my appalling manners.
Would you like to come round for a cup of tea?’
‘Ooh, that would be lovely.
Let me get the little ones to bed and I'll be right round.’
Everything of mine at that stage was still packed, but I had set aside a separate box for tea and coffee things so tea was easy to arrange.
‘This is where they herd the humans, girl,’ I said to myself.
‘You're the same as them.
Stop thinking you're some great displaced intellectual all the time.
You're a human being, just like everyone else.
Why have you never been able to accept that?’
After about half an hour, Jane reappeared.
‘They get worse and worse, those kids,’ she said, forcing a smile.
‘Oh, you haven't had a chance to unpack.
Do you want me to come back another time, I —’
‘No, no.
Sit down.
Excuse the mess.’
Jane laughed.
‘If you want to see a real mess, try our bathroom.
Have you seen it yet?’
‘No, the pleasure still awaits me.
Milk and sugar?’
‘Yes, please.
One please.’
Jane sat in the chair.
I passed her a cup and then perched on the bed with mine.
‘So how did you end up here?’ she asked me.
I told her the story.
‘There's not a lot you can do when you come across someone like that,’ she said.
‘These days anyway.’
‘Man is the hunter; woman is his game: The sleek and shining creatures of the chase.’
‘What was that?’
‘Tennyson,’ I said.
‘A bit inappropriate perhaps.’
‘How do you know about Tennyson?’ she asked, smiling.
‘I used to teach.
A long time ago now though.
I'm a cleaner now.’
‘I bet you'd never leave a place in a state like this!’
I laughed.
‘I still can't believe I'm here, you know.’
‘Yeah, it's hard at first.
Mind you, this place is just average as hostels go.
Average-sized rooms, average-sized cockroaches — watch out for them, by the way.’
I grimaced.
‘How about you,’ I asked.
‘How did you get here?’
‘Mark used to work in the newspaper industry, but he got kicked out when they brought in all the new technology you hear about.
When that happened, we couldn't keep up with the mortgage payments so we lost the house.’
‘Couldn't he find another job?’
‘Not with a big enough wage, that was the problem.
Not at all, actually.
He's got a bad knee and without the union to keep him out of hard physical work he's stuck really — he's got no qualifications or anything.’
I smiled.
‘You must think the whole world's against you at the moment.’
‘We'd be happy with just a council flat but there aren't any going these days.
I mean, I'm not saying I want us to be living at the top of a tower block on some vandalized estate but there's more to life than this, I know there is.’
‘How long have you got to wait before they'll offer you something?’
‘They said it would be as soon as possible — but it takes years for some people.
Mark's getting registered as a disabled person, which should help speed things up, but I don't really know, I reckon the world just wants to forget about us.’
‘You've got two children, haven't you?
Or have you got more?’
‘Just the two.
Little Darren gets ill really easily at the moment and as for Sonja, she's just gone mental — I can't understand her any more.
It's being cooped up in this place I know, but her brain is just…’
She fell silent and a tear started to run down her cheek.
I saw her as she was: a mother unable to protect her children.
‘There just doesn't seem to be an end to it,’ she said.
‘I'm sorry, look at me crying like this.’
‘That's all right, it's good to have a cry sometimes.
Would you like some more tea?’
She smiled through her tears.
‘Thanks, I'd love another one,’ she said.
I gave us both a refill.
‘I like the way you called your children Sonja and Darren,’ I informed her.
‘One Russian, one American — that was very diplomatic.’
She laughed.
‘I hadn't thought of it like that.
I'll have to remember that one for Mark.’
The tears on her face were a different colour now.
‘How about a Chinese name for the next one?’
I suggested.
‘Everyone would think I'd been messing around!
I'd like another one, actually, but I can't see it happening now.’
‘Look on the bright side.
You managed two more than I did.’
‘You've never been married then?’
‘No, I've kept myself to myself for most of my life.
It's funny, I was just thinking.
This is the first time I've had someone round to tea in years, and it happens on the very day I become homeless.
How do you explain that?’
‘It's been the other way around with us.
We used to have lots of friends but they all seem to have gone now.’
‘That happened to me when I first became unemployed, oh nearly nine years ago now…’
The conversation continued for a couple of hours.
The Walshes had been caught in a strange yet powerful trap and it was difficult to see how they were going to be able to break free.
That night I lay awake, listening to the sound of children crying and thinking hard about the position that I myself was now in.
It made me feel very afraid.
I was homeless.
In less than a year I would reach retirement age and I had nothing to fall back on.
I was now at the mercy of others and nobody in a position of authority had, so far, shown any great desire to help.
For the next few days I was horribly inactive, gripped by a lethargy that I could not for the life of me understand.
Fear was there, certainly, and also an inability to come to terms with what had happened, but there was something more.
I see now that finally, critically, and most insidiously of all, I had started to lose my self-respect.
‘You deserve this,’ I remember telling myself.
‘This is all down to you, girl, and don't you dare forget it.’
As the days went by, I did start to try the newspapers and job centres again — anywhere in fact that I thought might find me either a job or a home.
However, a new home was now the big one.
Ironically, the hostel was charging so much in rent that while I did have to stay there, I was better off on the dole with the housing  people picking up the bill than in cleaning work and having to pay it myself.
‘It's a joke isn't it?’
Jane said one day.
‘The guy who owns this place is milking the system and we're stuck here.
The government would save so much money in the long run if they built us all homes instead of putting us up in this dump; it's ridiculous.’
‘Council housing doesn't fit in with their way of thinking, that's all it is.
Throughout history you come across stacks of politicians who would rather let any number of people suffer than admit to one lousy mistake of their own — they're in all parties, not just our current lot.’
‘They should all be forced to spend a week here — it would do them a world of good.’
‘It might do some, but it's a week here with nowhere to go afterwards that's the real problem.’
Jane laughed.
‘They'd probably need to go for a week in the Bahamas afterwards, just to get over it.’
‘Or forget about it.’
My next move was a desperate one.
I'd had enough.
I had to get away.
Go somewhere.
Anywhere!
Although I hadn't seen her in over thirty years, there was one person in the world who might help me: my sister.
This is the most difficult part of my story for me to tell.
I have made one promise to myself about this book.
I am going to send it to Sarah when it's finished and the final word on its fate will be hers.
I have somehow to make the biggest and most important, heartfelt apology of my life.
I don't know how to do it — I never have known.
But I have to try.
I don't know how to approach this, but this is me, Sarah, your pathetically vile big sister, not able to find the words, but hoping you can see what I'm trying to do — what I'm trying to say — and please, please believe me when I say that I'm not trying to run away from what I've done, but if I  could change somehow — obliterate — one thing I've done in my life, one truly awful thing that I have done, it would be this.
This is what happened.
I remember being insanely jealous of Sarah when she got married.
It was as though I had been deprived of my rights, as elder sister, to the first go at something.
However, there was more to it than that.
There were no decent men on my own horizons and I already feared that I would be spending my life alone.
At the wedding, everyone but everyone came up to me to say, ‘It won't be long before it's your turn too,’ or something similar, and each time somebody said it, I grew increasingly resentful.
In those days, spinsterhood was seen as a mark of personal inadequacy, and I, as they probably all realized, was being left on the shelf.
Sarah fairly quickly became pregnant.
Despite this happy event, the marriage seemingly got off to a rocky start.
I saw a lot of both her and John in those days as I saw my parents most weekends and they often went round on Sundays as well.
John and I got on — and I was happy to join in with the general ‘Sarah's being difficult’ refrain.
I don't want to make a meal of this.
John came around to my flat after work one day, one thing led to another and we went to bed together.
The affair lasted about three weeks then he broke it off and confessed to Sarah that he had been seeing someone else.
She apparently threatened to leave him unless he told her who the person was.
Anyway, he told her.
I know about this bit from a telephone call from John — and I can still remember the click as the line went dead at the end of that conversation.
That, I knew, was it as far as my family was concerned.
My mother came up to London the very next day and told me that I was never to go home again, I was never to contact Sarah again and, above all, I was never, ever to see John again.
She brought with her in the car anything of mine that she had been able to find in the house (plus a few things that just reminded her of me) and they were all dumped in my front hall.
‘What about Dad?’
‘He's as upset as the rest of us, naturally.’
‘But doesn't he even want to say goodbye?
I mean —’
‘He is no longer your father and you are no longer his daughter.
That's all there is to it.’
My father did in fact sneak up to see me a few days later.
He confirmed that he did think it would be for the best if I dropped out of family life, and in my heart, I knew he was right.
It was the only time I can ever remember seeing him with tears in his eyes.
‘I'm sorry, Daddy, I didn't mean anything, I…’
‘I know, pet.
If you ever need anything, you know…’
‘I know.’
Sarah sent me a Christmas card that year.
In it, she told me she'd had a daughter.
Her note ended with the words: ‘I know it's not all your fault.
I wanted you to know that.
Love, Sarah.’
It must have taken her an awful lot to write those words, and they were why I felt I could go back and see her now.
My sister still lives in Berkhamsted, where she and I had grown up and where she and John had subsequently made their home.
A very old friend of the family wrote to me when each of my parents died, and from her I had learnt that Sarah had decided to have no more children after Emma, and that Emma had gone to medical school so she is presumably now a doctor somewhere.
My parents both died before I left the School of Italian Studies so I had heard nothing about my family for over ten years.
However, I knew that Sarah and John had to be still around.
On the Saturday of my third weekend at the Palace Hotel I looked their address  up in one of the telephone directories in my local library.
On the Sunday, late morning, I took a train up to see them.
I resolved to explain the situation to them as briefly as possible, make a plea for money and then very rapidly leave.
The train arrived at Berkhamsted station.
Although their house was still some distance away, I decided to finish the journey on foot.
It was a walk full of surprises.
So much had changed, so much was new, and yet so much was still my childhood Berkhamsted.
I was so caught up in what I was seeing that it was only when I reached the top of the close where they lived that I started to think again about what I was doing there, and it was then that my feelings of fear started.
I slowly made my way down the road.
Sarah's house was at the other end of it and I could see a couple of cars parked outside what I was sure was their home.
Maybe Emma was visiting for the weekend?
Maybe some other friends had come over?
It hadn't occurred to me that Sarah and John might not be alone, but here, now, I would have to be introduced and explained away somehow.
What did Emma know about me?
What on earth would she think of me?
I suddenly became aware of what a mess I looked.
Why was I doing this to them?
I thought I saw someone moving in the front room.
Instinctively I turned away, and then I realized I was walking in the opposite direction, then running, almost tripping over my own two flat feet.
Soon I was round the corner again and on my way back to the station.
Tears were flowing down my face.
There were no old memories around me now, just the blur of a new and frightening world.
When I arrived at the station, I took the next train back to London.
A new plan of action started to take shape.
I would go to Rome; Rome, where I had spent so many happy days in the past, would be my final  resting place.
I hadn't enough money to get there by conventional means but no matter.
Once I'd got on to the continent I'd walk there if I had to.
There was nothing left for me now — nothing.
I arrived back at the Palace Hotel and started to pack.
There was just my two suitcases and my travelling bag.
The suitcases I would check in at the left-luggage office at Paddington station, the bag could come with me to Rome, and Jane could inherit all my bits and bobs.
‘Rome?
Why Rome?’ she asked when I popped round with the box of odd things to say goodbye.
‘I've got friends there,’ I replied.
(I meant buildings, not people.)
‘A holiday's probably just the thing for you, you know.
How long are you going to be gone for?’
‘For good.’
‘You mean you're moving there?’
‘Sort of.’
‘Hey, look, you are going to be OK, aren't you?’
‘Yes, sorry — my way of talking.
Look, I've brought you some things so you can have a cuppa on me.
There's also a wristwatch in there somewhere.
It's in a dark-blue case.
It was given to me as a present so I'd feel funny about selling it myself, but you could maybe buy a pair of shoes for Sonja with it or something.
The rest is just junk, really, I —’
‘What's going on, Dorothy?
What's been happening?
You look really pale, you know.’
‘I've had enough and I'm going to try my luck in a country I can actually understand.
If that's a sign of madness, I've gone completely crazy, but it can't be worse than this.
Look, could you grab hold of this box before my arms drop off?’
She took hold of it and put it down on the floor.
Then she looked me in the eye and smiled.
‘You seem to think you know what you're doing,’ she said.
‘It does sound crazy to me, though, I'll grant you.
Who was the watch from?’
‘A mad professor I used to know.
I reckon it's done all it can for me now.’
‘When are you going?’
‘Now.
I'm all packed up and ready for off.’
‘Will you at least let me walk you down to the station?’
‘Of course.’
Mark reappeared from somewhere.
‘Dorothy's off to visit some friends in Italy,’ Jane told him.
‘She's going to try her luck out there.’
‘How are you going to get to Italy?’ he asked me.
‘Hike, I suppose.’
He grinned.
‘You're mental, Dot.
Lovable, mind you, but mental.’
I laughed.
‘I'd best be going,’ I said.
‘I'll need to check out first and then dump some things at Paddington before I go.’
‘You've paid in advance for another week or so, right?’
Jane interjected.
‘Yes, why?’
‘Well, why not leave the keys with us and then if you can't get away, you can perhaps come back here — or if everything goes OK we'll use it as a playroom or something.’
‘Fine by me, but won't Bryant smell a rat when he sees me walking out with all this?’
‘Well you can say you're visiting relatives or something.
If you've already paid for the room, what's it to him?’
I smiled, and was lost in thought for a moment.
‘Will you let us give you a hand with your bags, Dot?’
Mark asked.
‘What about your knee?’
He grinned again.
‘I'll carry the little one,’ he said.
‘You girls can take the others.’
We laughed.
There was quite a gang of us that went down to the station — four Walshes and me.
Fortunately Bryant wasn't at his desk so no awkward questions were asked.
The walk to Paddington was a comparatively short one and, slow as we were, we accomplished it in fairly quick time.
Once we were in the main concourse, I put down my suitcase and turned to say goodbye.
Jane and I embraced.
‘Good luck, girl,’ she said.
‘I really hope there's something out there for you.’
‘Bernini's out there,’ I said.
‘Is Bernini a he or a she?’
Mark asked.
‘A he — but it's not what you're thinking.’
‘Why not?
I'd go for it if I were you,’ he said, and he gave me a little peck on the cheek.
The children waved solemnly and we all said our final farewells.
I watched them go and then went to check in my suitcases.
‘I'm going to miss them,’ I missed to myself.
It was time to get going.
I made my way down into the tube station and on towards the Circle Line.
My destination was Victoria station where I would try and catch a boat-train to France.
Victoria, however, brought disappointment.
The next boat-train was to Ostend — a bit further north than I had anticipated travelling, but that wasn't the problem.
The problem was a very narrow entrance to the platform and a very efficient-looking ticket inspector.
I decided to try the ‘little old lady who's lost her ticket’ routine, but I was rumbled immediately and directed politely but firmly to the station manager's office.
I stayed for a while about twenty paces away from the platform barrier, numbed by the realization that I had fallen at the first hurdle.
But no I hadn't, not  necessarily.
There was another boat-train service that left from Liverpool Street station on the Harwich to the Hook of Holland run.
Why not give that one a go?
Without really still thinking that I had any chance of success, I went back down to the Circle Line and journeyed on to Liverpool Street.
When I arrived there, there was a train for Harwich just about to leave.
Again, there was a problem of a ticket barrier, but this time someone in front of me was arguing with the inspector so I was able to pass unhindered.
I remember my feeling of elation when I climbed aboard the train.
In no time at all it jerked forward, and there I was, on my way.
It wasn't long before the guard came to see us.
‘Tickets, please.’
Dutifully, I looked in my bag.
‘I'm terribly sorry, I don't seem to be able to find mine.’
I could see in his eyes that he knew.
‘Where are you thinking of going, love?’
‘Rome.’
‘Eh?’
‘Via Harwich.
Would you mind desperately if just this once I paid at the other end?’
‘We never met, OK?’
And with that he continued on his way.
Now that the deed was done, I had a chance to reflect on what was likely to happen.
The excitement of the adventure started to dissipate and I was left with the cold reality of knowing that I was on a train with hardly any money, no ticket and nowhere to go.
Out of the window I could see darkness falling.
It was now early autumn and it would be winter soon.
It was starting to look as though, whether I liked it or not, I simply might not survive.
We arrived at Harwich Parkeston Quay.
I watched  the other passengers go on towards the passport control and the futility of my own expedition was now only too clear.
The station cafe was still open so I decided that I might as well go in there.
The cafe turned out to be a strange garish world of sandy yellow.
I bought my statutory cup of tea and sat down.
Gradually my eyes got used to the glare and I was able to make sense of my surroundings.
The decor of the place was sort of pastiche California: sandy-coloured walls, low-hanging lights, brightly coloured pop-art posters and a sprinkling of lush green flowerless plants.
Artificiality was everywhere.
The linoleum tiles in the middle area of the floor were rimmed by some new type of carpet, there was a false ceiling and false blinds had been hung on the walls.
The table-tops were imitation wickerwork and there was a pointless trellis pattern on the curtains.
Only the flowers in the vase on the table in front of me seemed real.
I gazed at them for a while and then buried my head in my hands.
‘Why me?’
I kept asking myself.
‘I know I'm not perfect, but why me?
I just don't understand this.
This is hopeless.
I just can't understand what's going on.’
‘Cheer up, love, it may never happen.’
I looked up.
A chap with short brown hair was smiling down at me.
I smiled weakly back.
‘I think you'll find, young man, it already has.’
‘It can't be as bad as all that.’
‘I'm afraid it can.
Don't worry, I'll be all right.’
He went away and I started to look down at my hands again.
A few moments later, he returned with a mug of coffee and placed it in front of me.
‘Compliments of the chef,’ he informed me.
I smiled again.
‘Thank you,’ I said.
He went away again.
I took the mug in my hands.
It was warm, so wonderfully warm.
I took a sip and the warmth went down inside me.
I took another one and then just sat there, warming my hands on the mug and staring at the coffee.
The young man had broken the spell.
I was now better able to concentrate and better able to take stock.
Travelling on would be impossible.
Staying would also be impossible in the long run but that young man would let me stay for a little while — until the restaurant closed, anyway.
That wouldn't be time enough to think but at least it would give me a chance to calm down.
After a few minutes, my friend reappeared.
‘Something wrong with the coffee?’
‘No, it's lovely, thank you.’
‘Don't you like coffee, then?
I'll get you something else if you like.’
I smiled.
‘No, really, it's fine.
I just wanted to warm my hands a bit that's all.’
‘Hang on a sec.’
He went over to pick up a coffee for himself, then came back over and sat down.
‘Want to talk?’ he asked.
I smiled again.
‘I'd find that a bit difficult at the moment.
I've got rather a lot on my mind.’
‘Yeah, you do look pretty shaken up about something.’
‘I'm homeless,’ I said, hesitatingly.
‘I've got no money and nowhere to go.
I came here because I wanted to get away, only…’
‘Don't worry.
We'll try and help you.
Just stick around here until we can think of something.
We're closing soon, but give us a chance, OK?’
‘Thank you…
Who are you, if you don't mind me asking?’
‘My name's Steve.
How about you, what's your name?’
‘Dorothy.’
‘Like the little girl in The Wizard of Oz , right?’
I laughed.
‘And you're Steve,’ I said, trying to think of a suitable Steve to name him after.
‘Steve Adorable.
Steve, the adorable stevedore.’
We both laughed.
‘That's good, that,’ he said.
‘I'll remember that one.
How come you're homeless anyway?’
‘I was kicked out by my landlord and put in this hostel which was just awful and I had to get away so I came here — I don't know why, really, I…’
‘This was all in London, right?’
‘Yes.
Sorry, I'm not explaining myself very well, am I?’
‘It's all right, I know what you're saying.
But why Harwich?’
‘They let me on the train.’
He grinned.
‘You were reckoning on trying your luck abroad, yeah?’
‘I had this crazy idea of trying to get to Rome.
I used to teach Italian architecture many years ago and, I don't know, I like it there I suppose.’
‘You used to be a teacher?’
‘I was a university lecturer at one time.
That was where Rome came in.’
‘You were once a university lecturer?
You're joking!’
I smiled.
‘No, it's true,’ I said.
‘So how come you're now homeless?’
‘It happens.
The university bit was nearly ten years ago.
I've done more normal jobs since then.’
‘Yeah?
Like what?’
‘Oh, I've been a schoolteacher, a receptionist, a chambermaid, all sorts of things really.’
‘Don't worry, a lot of people come here with funny stories behind them.
Look, you just hang on here a minute, I want to have a word with Katrina about something.’
Steve disappeared again.
Before long, a young woman appeared: short, with short blonde hair and pale-blue eyes.
She brought with her another two cups of coffee and a packet of sandwiches.
‘Do you mind if I join you?’ she asked.
She spoke with a Dutch accent.
‘No, not at all.
Is all that for me too?’
‘The sandwiches are and one of the mugs of coffee.
You seem to have been doing rather well out of those.’
‘I'm building up quite a collection, aren't I?
Whereabouts are you from?’
‘Near Amsterdam.
You?’
‘Near London.’
She settled down to my right where Steve had just been sitting.
‘Try and eat something,’ she said, offering me the sandwiches.
‘I'm not sure that I can at the moment,’ I said apologetically.
‘I've got a rather funny feeling at the bottom of my stomach.
Thank you, though, it's very kind of you.’
‘I'm sure that not eating has been one of your problems,’ she informed me.
‘Try some, and then if you don't like it, well it's too bad you know.’
Dutifully, I took a nibble from one of the sandwiches.
‘My name's Katrina by the way.’
‘Dorothy,’ I said.
‘Dorothy Streeter.’
‘I hear things aren't going too well for you at the moment.’
‘Er, well, I've nowhere to go and it's causing me something of a problem.’
‘Well if you've no place to go you should stay here.
Does that sound sensible to you?’
I smiled.
‘Eminently,’ I said.
‘But unfortunately I've nowhere to stay here either.’
‘That's all right.
We'll find a hotel where you can go for the night and then tomorrow you can come back here and talk to Kathleen.
She'll know exactly what you should do.’
Katrina put her hand on my shoulder.
‘Don't worry, Dorothy, you're lucky.
There are some really nice people here.’
‘You've all been very kind.
Look, I've no money for a hotel so I'd better make my own arrangements for tonight.
It's not that I want to offend you or anything, I…’
‘Whatever you like.
But I definitely think you should come and meet Kathleen tomorrow.
She's an exceptionally nice woman.
It's just, this isn't her shift, you know.
Anyway, what is this about you having no money?
Are you completely broke at the moment, or…’
‘No, I've got a little bit, but I don't want to waste it on a hotel.
I don't think I'll get much sleep tonight anyway so I might as well save it for food or something.’
‘It's up to you,’ she said.
She looked worried.
‘I think we should try and find you something tomorrow, though.
Kathleen will know what to do.’
She seemed comforted by this thought.
Kathleen evidently ran things around here and nothing could be done without her say-so.
I had to make a choice, and I decided to trust them.
‘What time will Kathleen be here tomorrow?’
‘She comes in first thing, but steer clear until about nine o'clock so I can have a chance to explain things.’
‘I don't want to put you out of your way or anything, I…’
Her hand touched my shoulder again.
‘Hey, don't worry about that.
You and I have something in common you know.’
‘What?’
‘We both only got as far as Harwich.’
I smiled and she took her leave.
‘You can stay here until we close up for the night,’ she said.
‘Then you'd maybe better go into Dovercourt or something.
See what you feel like.’
She disappeared, then reappeared behind the counter and whispered something to the girl who was on duty there.
She in her turn disappeared out the back.
Katrina had obviously been assigned to ‘Dorothy watch’.
I sat quietly for a while finishing my most recent cup of coffee.
What was I going to do between then and meeting Kathleen the following morning?
There wasn't a lot of choice.
The best thing would probably be just to walk around to keep warm and then to snatch a little  rest in a doorway somewhere if need be.
One night out wouldn't hurt me, and tomorrow would be another day.
The future depended on decisions I could not possibly predict, but at least I had now been offered a shadow of a lifeline, and that, for the moment, would have to do.
The catering assistants started to wind down the evening's proceedings, and Katrina and one of the other girls (Bridget) came out from around the back to tidy up the customer area.
They started by clearing the tables and arranging the wooden chairs on the fixed padded seats around the wall.
Suddenly, Katrina dropped to her knees and began scrabbling around on the floor.
‘Chewing gum,’ she informed Bridget, picking at it with her fingernails as she did so.
Bridget made a sympathetic comment and then went off to busy herself with another chore.
Without thinking, I got up and went over to see if I could lend a hand.
‘Haven't you got some of that special stuff you can freeze it with?’
I asked.
‘Sorry?’
‘You can buy some special stuff which freezes it so it comes off more easily.
Attacking it with a nailfile is the next best thing — hang on, I'll show you.’
I went back to my handbag to get my nailfile, then returned to where Katrina was kneeling and crouched down beside her.
A piece of chewing gum had been trodden into the funny carpet border around the edge of the room.
Without further ado, I set to work.
It was an absolute brute but eventually I did manage to dig it all out.
Katrina was impressed.
‘Hey, you're good, you know,’ she said.
‘Why don't you give me a hand with the rest of the work?
You might enjoy doing something like that.’
I smiled.
‘Sure,’ I said.
‘Why not?’
Bridget had just fetched the vacuum cleaner.
Katrina went over and had a quick word with her, then she beckoned towards me.
‘Dorothy, you do the hoovering and I'll finish the tables.
Have you ever used one of these before?’
‘Yes.
Many times.’
Bridget looked slightly bemused by the whole thing but wasn't going to argue.
She disappeared out the back again and Katrina and I had a blitz on the cleaning, finishing up behind the counter.
‘We're a good team, you and me,’ she said.
I smiled.
‘Yes, I enjoy this sort of thing.
I was never any good at lecturing so it's nice to be good at something.’
‘Yeah, Steve said you used to be a university lecturer.’
‘That was all a long time ago now.’
‘Hey, you must be really bright, you know!’
I couldn't help laughing at that.
‘I was one of their less incandescent members of staff — they just about kicked me out actually.’
‘Don't knock yourself.
I mean, you use words like ‘incandescent’ and ‘eminently’.
I wish I could do that.
I'd really like to be able to speak like you, you know.
You may be homeless but at least you're not a dumb blonde like I am.’
‘Er, is there any more clearing up that needs doing or are you done now?’
‘No, it looks OK.
Look, you will come back tomorrow, won't you?
I mean, promise me that.’
‘I'll come — but don't try and put any pressure on this Kathleen of yours.
Something like that could easily backfire on you if you're not careful.’
She just laughed.
‘You wait and see,’ she said.
‘You know, Dorothy, I think you're OK.
I think if you come  and see us tomorrow, we may yet surprise you.
I know we're a bit mad but we try our best.’
And with those words ringing inside my head, I went out into the night.
Once I was outside, I suddenly felt awfully tired.
It had been, I realized, an extremely long and tiring day.
I decided to abandon my earlier plan of just walking around until dawn and instead to try and find somewhere where I could get some sleep.
I had, as I have said, hardly any money left, so with no new sources of income on the horizon, the sensible thing to do was to sleep rough.
I left the station and started down the road to Harwich town.
A little way along, I saw a path running up the bank to my left and on the top of this bank there was a rather eccentric mock-Gothic porchway.
Curious, I went up the path to have a look at it and I discovered to my no great surprise that it marked the entrance to a churchyard.
The porch was only a tiny little thing but at least it had a roof and the floor was clear of rubbish.
‘Why not?’
I thought to myself.
I wouldn't be able to stretch out, but at least I could sit there.
And it would only be for one night.
I had a furtive look round then I went in and settled myself down.
The floor was a bit damp but I could put up with that.
Waves of sleep then started to wash over me and I dozed fitfully until dawn.
The feeling I had when I rose the following morning was a strange one.
It was the feeling that I had survived, and that maybe, with help, I was going to continue to  survive.
I felt hungry, cold and dirty.
Hungry and cold would have to wait until I could go back to the cafe, dirty was obviously going to be more of a problem.
I decided that the best thing to do was to leave the porch just in case anyone came along, and to kill the time I needed to kill somewhere else.
Going back to the railway station was for the moment out of the question, just in case I bumped into someone who recognized me.
What I actually needed to do was somehow to disappear.
The memory of those few hours is etched on my mind.
They were typical of part of what it was like to be homeless — having nowhere to go; having to avoid all representatives of authority; feeling tired and generally run-down; and needing to have my wits at their sharpest at a time when they had become critically undernourished.
People of all shapes and sizes became my biggest threat and a vital potential source of assistance.
And there was all that seemingly interminable, lonely hanging around.
Feeling conspicuous — embarrassed about my very existence but resentful of what had happened.
Eventually I ended up in the Sealink arrival lounge.
I could have been any little old lady waiting for a relative to arrive from Holland.
Nobody was quite sure.
In any event, I was a little old lady so I was left in peace.
At nine o'clock, on the dot, I went down to the station cafe to face whatever was going to happen.
When I arrived at the counter I asked for Katrina.
The person on duty disappeared out the back and I went to sit in the same seat where I had sat the night before.
It wasn't Katrina who next appeared, it was a slight woman of about my own age, Kathleen.
She stood for a moment on the other side of the room, sizing me up (and me sizing her up), and then she came over to speak to me.
‘Hello, you must be Dorothy.’
‘Yes, that's right.’
‘I'm Kathleen Harris.
I think we'd better have a talk.
Would you like some tea?’
‘Er, yes, thank you.’
The inevitable two cups of tea appeared and Kathleen sat down.
‘So what happened to you?’
‘I became homeless in London so I got on a train and ended up here; that's all there is to it, really.’
‘How did you lose your home?’
‘My landlord chucked me out.
He put me up in a hostel, but it was filthy and I…,
‘You're shaking, girl.
Have some of that tea.
It might calm you down a bit.’
I sipped the tea.
‘You said you were thrown out by your landlord.
How did that happen?’
I told her the story.
‘Why couldn't the police have helped you?’
‘In court it would have been his word against mine, so what can you do?
Anyway he owned the place and in most people's eyes he had every right to chuck me out.
Me being made homeless is a minor detail.’
She patted me on the shoulder.
‘Cheer up.
You're still in one piece.
‘This is all rather difficult for me,’ I said.
‘I don't like being a burden on people like this.’
‘How much money have you got left?’
‘Just over eight pounds.’
‘Are you on social security?’
I smiled.
‘Sort of.
My benefits have been suspended.’
‘Why on earth has that happened?’
‘They think it's a computer error — but they're still checking on it.’
‘Can't you get an emergency payment of some sort?’
‘Not any more.
They're cutting back on those, apparently.’
Kathleen looked stumped.
‘Look,’ she said, ‘somehow you need to get back inside the system.
I tell you what I'll do.
I'll give the Salvation Army a ring and see if they can help you.
At least they'll know —’
I raised a hand.
‘No,’ I said.
‘Please, no.’
‘Why not?’
I was silent for a moment.
‘Thank you for trying,’ I said slowly, ‘but I don't really see that there's anything you can do to help.
I think it would be best if I went somewhere else.’
‘Where are you thinking of going?’
I smiled.
‘To see my favourite fountain,’ I said.
‘Dorothy, you're not thinking straight.
Have you had any breakfast this morning?’
‘No.’
‘Well, look.
I'll get you some sandwiches and some more tea and once you've eaten we can get down to some practical thinking about what you can do next.’
‘I don't want to impose on you people, I…’
She'd gone to get the food.
She called out to me from across the room.
‘I'm not sure what you'd like.
How does ham and egg sound?’
‘Fine, really I…’
‘Tea or coffee?’
‘Coffee, please.
Thank you.’
She came back with what I'd asked for.
‘Right.
I'll catch up with you again in a few minutes.
No, better still, I'll stay here to stop you running away.’
She fetched herself a packet of sandwiches from the counter and then came back to where she had been sitting.
‘Feed the fever, starve the cold and stuff the diet, that's what I say.’
I laughed.
‘I've actually lost quite a bit of weight recently,’ I said.
‘Every cloud, as they say.’
‘Someone should send Katrina on a cookery course.
These are terrible!’
‘She's a good-un that one.
What's the story behind her?’
‘Oh, she's been here since the beginning of the year — she came over to start a new life after she'd had problems back home.
I hear you gave her hand with the clearing up last night.’
‘She was having trouble with a piece of chewing gum and it was my way of saying thank you.
I used to be a professional cleaner — I don't want to get her into any trouble, I…’
‘I'm glad she had the presence of mind to help you.
Are you about to retire or something?
I still can't quite work out how this all adds up.’
‘No, I'm still looking for work.
I'm sixty next year but I'd like to carry on for as long as possible.’
‘I'm sixty-one, don't worry.
Can't you get some more cleaning work or something?’
‘It's not only the age problem.
I left my last job in rather strange circumstances and that doesn't help things.’
‘What happened?’
I told her that story.
‘You've been in the wars rather, haven't you?’
‘All these things recently, I don't know if it's just bad luck or me being stupid or what.’
‘You being poor seems to be the immediate problem.’
‘How am I supposed to start again at fifty-nine?
I want to work again — to keep up my self-respect more than anything else — but it's been finding somewhere to live.
It's been hopeless.
I can't explain it to you.’
‘Where did you sleep last night?’
‘In a folly.’
‘In a madhouse!
Where?’
I smiled.
‘No, in a Gothic folly — a porchway somewhere.
Sorry, a folly is a technical term I used to use in my art history days.
I wasn't thinking.’
‘This was at the church just down the road from here?’
‘Yes, it was the best I could do at short notice.’
‘I've just remembered something.
I'm sorry to have to ask you this, but are you an alcoholic at all?’
‘No.’
She was silent for a moment.
‘Look,’ she then began by saying, ‘there must be some sort of council accommodation for people like you.
I'll check to see what's on offer and in the meantime, how would you like a day's pay here?’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Well I've got a couple of people off so we're down this morning.
A bit more cash in your purse might be a good idea and you said you wanted to work.
How about it?’
‘Thank you.
That's very kind of you.’
‘As I say, I'll ring up the town hall and see what they say.
The situation might not be as hopeless as you think.’
I smiled.
‘You're welcome to try,’ I said.
‘But don't get too upset if you don't get anywhere.
I'm not expecting anything.’
‘You won't survive without hope, you know.’
‘That depends on what you mean by hope.’
She smiled.
‘Yes, I suppose it does.
Come on.
Come and meet the rest of the crew.’
The morning crew were a little surprised to find they had a new colleague but none of them was unduly perturbed by the intrusion.
I spent the rest of the morning being shown some of the routine duties of a catering assistant.
The shift was in fact half over by the time I  started and I wasn't really able to do much of any value.
Despite this, at lunchtime Kathleen presented me with four hours' pay and pressed me for a few more details to help her with her enquiries.
‘The room you've got at the Palace Hotel is causing something of a problem,’ she informed me.
‘Technically you should go back there, but I think you've already decided against that.’
‘If you'd ever been there you'd know why.’
She was silent for a moment.
‘Dorothy, I don't know quite how to put this, but is there something you're not telling me that might help me understand this a bit better.
It's just, you're my idea of someone who this sort of thing would never happen to.
I mean, you've got an education, you're prepared to work, you've got the right background and everything…if you could explain more I might be able to help more.’
‘It's simple.
I ran out of money and places to stay.
That's all it took.’
I could feel tears welling up in my eyes.
‘It's not what you're thinking, Kathleen, I haven't done anything wrong — I promise you.
I'm just homeless, that's all.
Find me a home and I'll be fine.
I can find the job.
Look at all the things I've done — I'm not being choosy.
All it took was this fifty-pound note and people not giving me another chance…’
She reached out to touch me again.
‘OK, OK, I'm sorry.
Look, I've got to get back to some people I spoke to this morning.
Keep your chin up, girl, we're not lost yet.’
I smiled.
‘A bit homeless maybe.’
‘That's the spirit.
Give me until five o'clock this evening.
See what you think of Harwich in the meantime.’
I wandered off to Harwich.
The walk was a bit up hill and down dale and it rather tired me out.
One memory stands out — the sound of a child crying which  I heard when I was walking past some flats.
It made me think of the Palace Hotel.
‘How far have I really got?’
I wondered.
‘And where do I go now!’
The thing that I found most striking about Harwich was that there was so much sky around.
In comparison with London, everything seemed to be in miniature.
I felt like Gulliver in Lilliput — or maybe Mother Courage in Toytown.
When I arrived back at the cafe, I found Kathleen in a perplexed mood.
‘The system seems to be rather inflexible,’ she said testily.
‘I had hoped that I might be able to find you some accommodation around here, but apparently it's the duty of your local council in London to rehouse you and nobody else wants to pick up the bill.’
‘Well Kensington isn't going to do a lot either so that solves that problem.’
‘Why are they being so inefficient?’
‘Saves them money, as you say.’
She was silent for a moment.
‘Look,’ I said.
‘The best thing for all of us is for me just to go back to London.
If there is a solution to all this, that's where I'll find it.’
‘Where will you go?’
‘I don't know.
But…
’ I couldn't think of anything else to say.
I looked at my feet and Kathleen turned away.
‘Look,’ she said.
‘I need to have another think about this.
I've only known you since first thing this morning and I haven't had time to take everything in.
The thing that I'd like to do and that I really wish I could do is give you a job here but Personnel have said I'm already fully staffed.’
She turned back to face me.
‘I want to help you, Dorothy.
I want you to believe that.
Can you give me one more day to come up with something?
I'll  sleep on it tonight and tomorrow we'll go all out to get you somewhere.
Is that all right?’
‘Sure,’ I said with a smile.
‘But I'll make a deal with you.
We'll give it your one more day and then I'll go and plague someone else.’
‘How will you spend tonight?’
‘Alone.’
She smiled.
‘I'll see you tomorrow,’ she said.
There were an awful lot of tedious hours for me to kill that evening.
I went back to the porch and hid my night bag behind a headstone and then left for another long walk to Harwich.
That second night in the porch was enough and I resolved to move on the following day, whatever happened.
The following morning at nine o'clock I went back to the coffee shop, just to show that I was still around.
‘How did you sleep?’
Kathleen asked me.
‘Not too well.
You?’
‘Hardly at all.
I'd better get on with my telephoning.
Why don't you stop here for the morning?
I'll get you some magazines.
It's a bit chilly out.’
‘Thank you.
That would be nice.’
She rejoined me at lunchtime and seemed in more optimistic mood.
‘The basic position is this,’ she said.
‘The best bet looks to be you going into a Salvation Army hostel, them sorting out your benefits, and you using the hostel as a base from which to find something else.
It won't be the greatest place you've ever lived, I know, but at least it's going to be dry and…’
I was shaking my head.
‘What's the problem?’ she asked.
‘Look, you've got to get back inside the system somehow.’
‘I know what it's like in there and I'm not sure it's a place I want to be.’
‘What are you saying?’
‘I'm saying I'm not spending the rest of my life in a Salvation Army hostel or a DHSS hotel or any other kind of hostel.
I have that choice.’
‘But it would only be temporary.’
‘Until when?’
‘Until they can find you a council flat.’
‘But the days of them are gone.’
‘There are still some going and you're bound to get preferential treatment of some sort.’
‘Why?
Because I've had to spend a couple of nights in a porchway?’
‘Because you're a genuine case.’
I laughed at that.
‘The hostels of London are stuffed full of genuine cases.
Why pick on me?’
‘Well with us backing you we might be able to swing something.
You've got to be positive, or you'll never get out of this mess.’
I paused for a moment, then said, ‘Kathleen, let me tell you what I think would happen if I did as you say and then you tell me where I'm going wrong.
I go into a Salvation Army hostel right, and then that's it, problem solved.
What was that you said?
‘At least it's going to be dry.’
Well that's what everybody is going to think.
She blew it and at least we've given her somewhere out of the cold.
Well I'm sorry but that's not good enough.
Look at how wealthy this country is.
Look at all the billions that have come in from North Sea oil and privatization.
Look at all this new technology there is around now, and then tell me we can't afford to give everyone a proper home.
Why should I let society off the hook by accepting rubbish when it's more than within their means to treat me with dignity?’
‘But maybe society isn't going to treat you with dignity, maybe that's all gone now.’
‘And you're prepared to accept that.’
‘All right.
So you're stuck with rubbish.
Or rather  you're stuck with a lot less than you could have.
But these Salvation Army people will at least try.
They'll do their best.
There may not be much they can do, but what else is there going for you now?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Exactly.’
‘That doesn't make it right.’
She paused to think.
‘I'm sorry if you think I'm getting at you, Kathleen.
I'm not.
But before I go, I wanted you to understand what's happened to me.
The welfare state doesn't work any more.
That wartime spirit has gone now.
What's that expression you hear youngsters using now?
Looking after number one.
That's how it's become.
Progress is not inevitable.
People forget things.
Things can get worse and that's what's happening now.’
She was still thinking.
‘There were a lot of problems with the welfare state,’ I said, ‘but that was no reason for trying to do away with it.’
I could see an idea coming into Kathleen's head.
‘Blow this!’ she said suddenly.
‘You might have a point here somewhere.
Look, can you give me another couple of hours?
I want to try something.’
‘OK, sure.’
‘Have you ever seen Les Misérables ?’
‘Pardon?’
‘Les Misérables , the musical.’
‘No, why do you ask?’
‘Early on in that, the hero's homeless and somebody puts him up for the night.’
She looked me straight in the eye.
‘I don't have the courage to do that, Dorothy.’
There was a pause.
I smiled.
‘Neither would I,’ I said.
‘What's this new scheme of yours?’
‘I'll tell you later.’
I wandered around for a bit and then came back  again.
I bought myself a mug of tea at the counter in order to pay for something for a change, then I sat and waited for Kathleen.
About half an hour later she reappeared.
She looked, I don't know, determined, that would probably be the best way of putting it.
‘Dorothy, do you remember a story in the news some time ago about a chap who had somebody who was homeless living in the shed at the bottom of his garden?’
‘Kathleen, if you think I'm going to live in the shed at the bottom of your garden you're…,
She raised a hand.
‘No, no, don't worry.
It's slightly better than that.
Listen, let me start at the beginning.
I've had another word with Personnel and they say that even though I can't have any more full-timers, I can have a part-timer to help me with making the sandwiches in the morning and clearing up last thing at night.
All we have to do is combine the two.
You work here for an hour at either end of the day, sleep in this funny little store place I've found you and during the day you can try and find something more normal.
Once you've got a little bit of a base, you'll be able to get going again.
What do you say?’
I was stunned — absolutely stunned.
The scheme had an interior logic to it but in order to see it you had to be, let me see, stark raving mad, I suppose.
‘What do you mean by a ‘funny little store place’ exactly!
‘I've got the key, come and see.’
I think the exact location of this store room should remain a secret.
Anyway, we arrived there.
‘It belongs to the Customs and Excise mob,’ she told me.
(I thought she was joking about that, but actually she wasn't.)
‘They're not using it any more so they've said I can use it for canteen stuff.
It's not much more  than a broom cupboard, I know, but what do you think of it?’
I was peering into the gloom.
‘It's filthy,’ I said.
‘Well, you're a cleaner — what's the problem?’
‘Er…’
Funnily enough, I was starting to like the idea.
This was potentially just about the safest ‘skipper’ in Britain.
‘You could lose your job for this, you know.’
‘Stuff it, I'm sixty-one, what do I care?
Nobody's going to know officially and it's not as if there are hundreds of you or anything — I mean, so what if somebody does find you?
What's it to them?
Hopefully you won't have to stay here for very long anyway.’
‘How much are you thinking of paying me?’
She told me.
An idea suddenly dawned on me.
‘Hey, would I be able to get cheap rail travel?’
‘I might be able to swing you a season ticket, why?’
‘You know, this might work.
I could work here then go up to London during the day and try to get things sorted out.
How much would the season ticket cost?’
‘It's a quarter of the full fare.
There might be problems with you only being part-time.
If you did get one, you'd be permanently broke, which isn't quite what I had in mind.
Still, I take your point about London.’
She paused for a moment.
‘I don't see why I can't fiddle the season ticket.
In for a penny, in for a pound, that's what I say.’
‘Are you sure about this?’
‘I'm game if you are.’
I looked back into the cupboard.
There was just about room to lie crossways, but not front to back, and there were no windows.
The door would have to be left ajar for air and that might alert passers-by.
However, it definitely had potential.
‘I've got a funny feeling about this,’ I said.
‘I think we should do it.’
‘That's the spirit!’
‘Well, you only live once.’
‘Look.
You can start work now, clearing this out.
Then it will be first thing tomorrow morning for making the sandwiches.
You know, this isn't as silly an idea as it sounds.’
‘Well at least it's not too far to go to get to work in the morning, I'll give it that.’
She laughed.
‘You've got the right attitude to life, Dorothy.
I reckon you'll fit in here.
Everyone will think you're just part of the furniture.’
I smiled.
‘You never know,’ I said.
‘Let's hope so.’
The following day, Kathleen brought in some blankets and some candles.
A season ticket soon followed, paid for by Kathleen but a regular amount was deducted from my wages to pay her back.
After a further few days I brought my suitcases up from London.
One was kept in Kathleen's office and the other one, which had my regular clothes in it, I kept with me in my broom cupboard.
A new pattern of life now quietly started to emerge.
I refer to this part of my life as my grey period.
It starts, I suppose, with my first meeting Steve and ends some months later with another chance encounter.
Grey is the colour of pavements — and of the walls of the centres for homeless people which I sometimes visited during the day.
It's the colour of windows and blankets, of the winter sky, and of the wind, the rain and the sea.
Grey is the colour of the mist that shrouded my thoughts during this period.
It is a colour of tiredness and cold — a neutral colour, that gives us light and hope but which blocks out the sun.
Incongruously, this was also a very happy period for me in many ways.
The people at the coffee shop readily accepted me as one of their own.
For one hour in the morning and one at night, I was always there, seven days a week, doing my stuff and then disappearing off either to London or my broom cupboard.
I was part of  the furniture, yes, but I was more than that: I was part of the family.
And I drew a lot of strength from that.
Up in London, I started to sort out various logistical problems.
It was a matter of discovering which day centres offered what services — where I could go, for example, to have a shower or clean my clothes, or maybe have a cheap meal.
Survival was the name of the game and I was managing to do just that.
Why I didn't try to do more than this for so many months is an important question which I need to make some attempt to answer.
There were of course some major practical problems in the way of me relaunching myself — my age, for instance.
If you remember, I'd had trouble enough when I was fifty convincing people to take me on and now at fifty-nine or sixty there were hardly any employment opportunities left open to me.
What it came down to was this: if I was going to do anything I was going to have to take on another part-time catering or cleaning job.
However, after an uncomfortable night with hardly any sleep, a rudimentary wash at the station, an hour's work, a long train journey, a long walk to a day centre for a shower, and then with another long walk ahead of me, the return train journey, a further hour's hard work and another uncomfortable night, day in, day out — I'm a sprightly so-and-so but something else on top of all that did seem like perhaps too much of a good thing.
The sheer timing would also have been an enormous problem.
Facilities for homeless people are of course open only at certain times of the day and I hadn't the money to go anywhere else.
Any job I took would also have to be fitted around me travelling to and from Harwich.
It would have all been perfectly possible in ideal circumstances — but circumstances were far from ideal.
Inevitably, a sort of bunker mentality quickly set in.
I was after all surviving — and that was nothing to be  sneezed at, the way things had gone.
The safest course of action seemed to be to shore up the bunker and make sure I did nothing to upset the fragile eco-system that was supporting me, for however much we wanted to disguise it, I had nothing to fall back on.
Finally there was the grey.
I was tired, cold, hungry and disillusioned.
I hadn't given up, but that was an ever-present temptation which had to be fought.
The extraordinary piece of good fortune that I had been given was the opportunity to fight it my way.
I have given a great deal of thought as to how much I should actually tell you about this period and what just to leave to your imagination.
One obvious thing to do would have been to write about the facilities available to homeless people (or the chronic lack of them in key areas like medical help); however, I have decided against doing that.
For one thing, the criticism could easily rebound on the people who run these places, when in most cases they know how bad things are themselves but they can't do much about it.
The poorest people in our society are left with the poorest facilities — and that's probably the same wherever you go.
I am also very aware that all this is relative.
For one thing, I was extremely lucky in that the winter during which I was homeless was apparently the mildest this country has had for twenty years (though it was quite cold enough for me) and that was by no means the only remarkable piece of good fortune that I had.
In addition, when I look at the plight of the millions of people who've been made homeless recently because of flooding in other parts of the world, it does make me realize how lucky we are as a society that homelessness is still on a much smaller scale here than it is in some countries.
What is this ‘homelessness’’ anyway?
Homelessness to me is a lack in any particular individual's case of  whatever their community considers to be a home, i.e. it is an economic not a psychological state.
Dispossession can, however, induce a psychological reaction, not least because the mind is trying desperately to make sense of what's happening.
I can see this in my own case, where losing a job or a home has in certain instances reopened old wounds.
However, to say that events that happened when I was in my late twenties somehow predisposed me to homelessness would be absolute nonsense.
If this was how things worked, just about every war veteran that ever was would ‘inevitably’ end up homeless because of their past.
Who do I mean when I talk about ‘the homeless’?
I mean people who are sleeping in parks and doorways, in derelict buildings and under railway arches.
I mean people who are living in the old common lodging houses and in government resettlement units, people living in squats and dingy bed-and-breakfast hotels, and families living cooped up with their relatives because there's nowhere else for them to go.
I mean young people, old people, black people, white people, men, women and tiny children.
I mean people like you, whoever you are, wherever you're from and whatever you do.
I also have more than a thought for the people who do have homes but who are living in conditions of appalling squalor, for battered wives and abused children who stay at home because there's nowhere safe for them to go, and for the husbands who choose to stay with their families in the north rather than abandon them for crazy periods of time because they could find work only in the south, And while we're on the subject, I'm sick and tired of listening to government and commerce saying it's ‘uneconomic’ to locate businesses in the north of Britain when we're currently importing billions of pounds’worth of consumer goods from the other side of the world.
I don't want to ‘politicize’ the homeless in a way that makes them look like the front-line infantry fighting a barbaric government, which is a line some people have taken, simply because when you're out there, it just isn't like that.
However, it is true that government policies (or lack of policies in some areas) have contributed significantly to our problems and some of the changes that are now in the pipeline will almost certainly make matters worse.
There are an awful lot of people monitoring the situation, pointing out to the ‘powers that be’ where things are going wrong and suggesting solutions.
At the moment, they don't seem to want to listen.
This is wrong.
We are one of the richest countries on earth.
We can afford decent housing, education and health-care for everyone.
The building bricks are there.
What's needed is a little thought — and a little heart.
There are of course some positive signs around but also a danger that I want to alert you to: a growth in what I will call ‘designer caring’.
Let me try to explain what I mean.
‘Designer’ seems to be the buzz adjective of the eighties.
It has been the word used to describe the style of today, a style that pervades everything from clothes to waste-paper bins.
The problem is not so much the look itself, but the attitude behind the style that appearances (and labels) are everything.
Add together a susceptibility to flashy packaging and a lack of any real interest in the substance of other people's problems and you're on the way to producing a ‘designer carer,.
They focus not on areas of need but on areas where they want to be seen to be giving, and that's usually where the spotlight happens for the moment to be falling.
They give in order to look good and to feel good but not to do good.
To an extent, this has always been there, but it's important to raise the issue here because the most unfashionable person to help is often the person who is dying on your own doorstep.
A common cop-out is to say this is all too difficult so I'm going to get my head down and forget about it.
Well yes, it is difficult, but so what?
If this bit does refer to you, open your eyes, take a look around you, see what's going on and do something.
And do it now .
Last April, Kathleen informed us all that she was going to retire in the autumn.
Her husband was due to retire then and they had decided that they would both give up work at the same time.
This meant that there was now effectively a time limit on how long I was going to be able to stay in my broom cupboard.
It must be pointed out before we go any further that my friends in Harwich had a rather distorted picture of my life in that they only ever saw the best of me.
All my efforts were concentrated on keeping up appearances during those two hours of the day when I was with them.
I never overstayed my welcome and always dreamed up some excuse if any of them suggested meeting me outside working hours.
It wasn't that I was being purposely unfriendly, it was just that I had decided that my best chance of survival lay in my being as unobtrusive as possible.
Then, one day in May, Kathleen dropped a bombshell.
We had agreed at the start of this thing that pressing the Harwich local council for housing would probably be more trouble than it was worth: if one of their inspectors had decided to check my circumstances with the port authorities, the customs people would inevitably have found out about the way in which I had been using their cupboard (and would have had a pink fit, probably).
However, once Kathleen had taken her  decision about her own future, she decided that the risk had become worth taking.
Unbeknown to me, she made some enquiries, and then one Friday, while I was sitting in the coffee shop having a quiet read of a newspaper someone had left, she appeared by my side.
‘Dot, I think things are finally going to start moving forward.
Harwich Council have offered to rehouse you.’
I was so surprised I stood up.
‘What do you mean?’
I asked.
‘What's going on?’
‘They can give you a flat, girl.
You'll have to go into a local hostel temporarily — but that's only so they can check on a few things.
Don't look so worried, they're serious.
They can actually offer you somewhere.
I'm sorry to spring it on you like this but I didn't want to get your hopes up.’
I had to sit down again.
‘What sort of place are they going to put me in?’
I asked after a pause.
‘A flat.
They said definitely a flat.
The idea of the hostel is just to get you off the streets, so to speak.
All this is going to be over soon.’
‘Er, yes, I suppose so.’
‘We'll have to ring up their housing unit sometime today to arrange an interview.
Have a coffee or something.
You look as though you could do with one.
Hang on, I'll get it for you.’
She went over to fetch a cup of coffee.
I sat there trying to remember all the details of what she had told me.
What sort of flat was it?
What sort of a hostel?
Once again, my life seemed to depend on the very words she spoke.
I felt powerless.
It felt as though someone was pulling my lifeline away from me and I was flailing around, trying to grab hold of it.
Suddenly, the cafe stopped being the place where I worked and once again it became the bizarre oasis that I'd happened upon all  those months earlier.
And suddenly, I was that same, frightened Dorothy all over again.
Katrina was in that morning.
She noticed that something was up and she came over to see me.
‘What's wrong?’ she asked.
‘Nothing.
Nothing's wrong.
I've had rather a surprising piece of news, that's all.’
‘Why, what's up?’
‘Kathleen may have found me somewhere to live.’
‘Hey!
That's wonderful news!
Whereabouts?
What sort of a place?’
She sat down beside me.
‘Well,’ I said.
‘I don't really know.
Some sort of a flat in Harwich, I think she said.
She's going to ring someone up to find out more about it.’
‘Somewhere round here?
That would be ideal, wouldn't it?
I mean, you must be thrilled to pieces, no?
However did she find it?’
‘I don't know.
I really don't know.’
She patted my shoulder.
‘Hey, don't knock it.
This sounds all right, you know.
I'll see if I can find out more from Kathleen.’
She disappeared.
A thousand thoughts were jostling around inside my mind.
It was all extraordinarily confusing.
I simply couldn't cope with what was happening.
I noticed the time.
I could still catch the early train if I left immediately.
I got up and walked quickly out of the coffee shop, up over the footbridge and on to the other platform — jumping on to the train just as it was about to go.
I had no idea what I was doing.
I was going to go back to London and see what happened then.
I was, however, sure about one thing: I didn't want to have to take that flat.
‘You know, Dorothy, you and I have one thing  in common,’ I remember saying to myself in a Dutch accent, ‘we both only got as far as Harwich.’
I don't know how many times I'd done the Harwich-to-London run, but the journey seemed different that day — like a well-known view captured in a freshly painted picture.
‘What on earth am I going to do now?’
I wondered.
I usually picked up my money on Friday evening so I was running a little short.
Unless I went back to Harwich, I was going to be flat broke in a couple of days and just at that moment the last thing I wanted to do was to go back to Harwich.
Conserving what little money I had was therefore my number-one priority.
I would have to live on cheap or free food, so what I really needed to do was to go and see some nuns.
The train arrived in London.
Even though I knew what I had to do, once I got outside Liverpool Street station, I just wandered off aimlessly.
I had started to feel very tired and I decided to try and find somewhere to have a sleep.
Without really being conscious of what I was doing, I ended up heading roughly north.
This was my first day in about eight months without my lifeline and I felt horribly alone.
If you have already thought up a sensible solution to my problems, that puts you one up on me as I was then, because I was completely flummoxed by the whole thing.
I kept wandering around for a few hours, with no idea where I was or where I was going, then somewhere along the line I chanced upon an open space where there was the odd bench scattered here and there and I used one of these for my lie-down.
For some strange reason, I slept like a baby.
I woke up late afternoon sometime with a funny taste in my mouth.
This would best be sorted out, I decided, by a cup of tea.
Not too far away, I found a street with some shops and, thankfully, a cafe.
I went in, bought my cuppa and  sat down.
The tea tasted horrible but at least it gave me the chance to have a little think.
‘What on earth am I going to do now?’
I kept asking myself.
Unfortunately, there was a row of mirrors on the wall opposite me.
I chanced a peek at myself.
I looked absolutely awful — and I felt pretty dreadful too.
‘I passed by death,’ I mumbled to myself.
Memories started to haunt me again.
Memories of my childhood, memories of the School for Italian Studies, memories…
‘It's time for us to close now, love.’
I looked up and deep into the eyes of the cafe proprietor.
‘But I've nowhere else to go.’
‘Well you can't stay here, love, we're closing.’
I got up and walked quietly out into the early evening.
It was still light.
I now needed to make some sort of a decision.
‘Head back into town,’ I told myself.
‘Let's get back into familiar territory, then we can think up what to do next.’
When I reached the Old Street roundabout, it was time to pick an ultimate destination — which basically meant choosing somewhere to stay for the night.
St James's Park, famous for its bird-life, would be as good a place as any.
‘Me and all the other old ducks,’ I muttered to myself.
That cheered me up a bit.
I would spend the night with some dumb creature friends.
What was that Katrina had once said to me?
‘At least you're not a dumb blonde like I am.’
‘I'm twice as dumb as you are, girl,’ I mumbled.
Why hadn't she been able to understand?
And why hadn't Kathleen understood?
And why couldn't I find another Steve Adorable?
I started on my way to the West End.
The weather  was overcast but the chances were the rain would hold off.
‘It had better,’ I thought to myself.
The shelter provided by my broom cupboard suddenly seemed extremely attractive.
‘I've been very lucky,’ I realized.
‘I couldn't really have been more lucky.’
Maybe that luck was now finally going to run out.
Eventually I arrived down near Leicester Square, found a cafe that was still open and bought myself another cup of tea.
I was in cinema- and theatre-land — the part of London that never sleeps.
Through the cafe window I watched London nightlife pass by.
I watched the party-goers, the punks, the pimps, the prostitutes, the princely and the poor.
I watched a world that should have been behind glass and yet I was the one who was behind glass and reality was theirs.
I tried eating a sandwich with my second cup of tea and I just about managed it.
Serious inroads had now been made into my pitiful cash reserves and tomorrow I would be penniless.
I stayed in the cafe for as long as I felt I could and then went back outside.
‘Yes, this is the real world,’ I said out loud — too loud actually; someone gave me a funny look.
I started to wander again, in and out of second-hand bookshops, and then into an amusement arcade.
I was very tempted to gamble the little money I had left in order to try and accumulate some more — tempted also to have a go just for the thrill of it.
But I held back.
‘These machines are designed to make you lose, you twit,’ I said to myself.
I went back outside again.
I kept just killing time until it had gone eleven o'clock and all the cinema-goers had gone in for the late shows, at which point I decided to call it a day.
When I got down to the park, the combination of the cold and my long sleep that afternoon made me feel too restless to  contemplate actually going to sleep again, so I just sat there on one of the benches, thinking.
What would everyone back at the cafe have thought when, for the first time in eight months, I hadn't shown up for work?
Were they worried at all?
I honestly had no idea of what they might be thinking or what to make of it myself.
I thought back over all the good times — all the laughs we had shared — and all the wonderful things they had done to try to build me up and keep me going.
Why couldn't I let these people help me?
I resolved to go back and then decided I couldn't.
I had let them down and was no longer worthy of their friendship.
I decided that they simply wouldn't have understood why I'd done this and would now feel too hurt and abused ever to want to see me again.
I got up and started to walk around.
I started to think about my childhood again, about my parents and my sister.
Would my mother now think I'd suffered enough, I wondered.
Was that what she had wanted, all those years ago — for me to suffer?
Or was there something else she had wanted, some sign of repentance maybe?
Did she not realize just how awful it had made me feel?
Had she really simply wanted nothing more to do with me?
‘I'm pretty hopeless at relationships, aren't I?’
I said to myself.
I sat down again and lapsed into dreamland.
I became conscious again at about dawn.
I got up and had another little walk around, finishing up just over the road from Buckingham Palace.
‘What a daft world this is,’ I mused to myself.
I reckoned that the Queen would probably have agreed with me — she'd always come across as a decent sort.
What was I going to do next?
I would definitely need to try to find some help from somewhere.
There was a church just to the north of there that had a reputation  for being helpful towards homeless people — I'd try my luck there.
First things first though: I could do with a morning cup of coffee.
The easiest way of solving that problem was to go down to Victoria station.
I dawdled around for a while and then headed south.
Railway stations are almost home to me now, I realized, when I eventually arrived at Victoria.
I picked up my coffee and savoured a sit-down in the canteen.
‘Could I go back to Harwich?’
I wondered.
What would happen if I did?
Would I become a burden to everyone again?
I really didn't want that.
Above all else I didn't want that.
They had become my friends and there was no way that I would now go back to being their problem dependant.
I wandered back north towards the church.
My plan was to sit around and wait for one of the parish team to appear and then to ask them for their advice.
Accordingly, when I arrived there, I settled down in a pew at the back and nodded off.
After a while, I was woken by the noise of preparations — something happening.
I chose to ignore it and continued to doze.
Then I remember seeing this plumpish girl, dressed in something dark moving towards me.
I remember seeing that smile and hearing that impeccably cheerful voice.
‘Excuse me, we're about to have a wedding.
Do you think you could come back later?’
A wedding!
My plan was shattered — my whole life had just been shattered.
Where on earth was I going to go now?
‘You would be, wouldn't you?’
I said, and looking her straight in the eye, I asked: ‘Why is everybody picking on me?
Why don't you pick on somebody else for a change?
Why does it always have to be me?’
I smiled and looked at my feet.
‘It's not your fault, dear,’ I said, then I looked up.
‘I'm sorry, I didn't mean to startle you.
Do you think you could pull me up and then point me in an easterly direction once we're outside?
I'm starting to lose my bearings a bit— and my ball-bearings as well , come to that.’
She laughed.
‘What a wonderful expression!’ she said.
‘Oh, sorry.
I didn't mean to laugh.
Look, what you probably need is some fresh air.
Would you like to come and sit out the back with me for a minute?’
I couldn't figure her out.
Was she serious?
I didn't know what to say, so I just held out my hand and she heaved me up.
‘There are some benches there.
Why don't we go and sit down for a few minutes and then you can decide what you want to do next?’
What got me was the way she made this rather bizarre suggestion seem so utterly reasonable.
‘All right,’ I said.
‘I'm game if you are.’
She laughed.
‘Oh, by the way, my name's Jenny,’ she informed me.
‘Dorothy,’ I said.
‘Dorothy Streeter.’
She bowed.
I was tempted to curtsey in return but I wasn't sure if my knees were up to it.
‘Follow me,’ she said, unnecessarily.
We trooped off  round the back of the church and up into a small raised garden where there were indeed some benches.
Jenny selected one and we sat down.
Neither of us spoke for a few moments, then she asked: ‘Do you mind if I stay here for a little while?’
‘No, do what you like,’ I said, more than a little surprised to find that our roles of ward and chaperone had now been reversed.
A thought then suddenly struck me.
‘Don't you want to go to the wedding?’
I asked.
‘No, not really.’
‘Oh.’
I paused for a moment, then added: ‘Why did you come, then?’
‘I had to.
I'm supposed to be an usher — or an usherette in my case, I suppose.’
‘Forgive me.
I think I must be missing something.
Why don't you want to go back inside, where all the fun is?’
It went quiet again.
Then she started to speak slowly.
‘I'm not sure that I approve of what's happening, that's all.’
‘Whyever not?’
‘That's rather difficult for me to explain.’
I was still trying to work this girl out.
‘Do you want to talk about it?’
I asked.
She smiled ruefully.
‘Ignore me,’ she said.
‘I'm just being moody, that's all.’
The conversation flagged again.
For some reason, I wanted to keep it going, so I chipped in: ‘This wedding of yours is a bit inconvenient for me, actually.
I was hanging around at the back of the church because I wanted a word with the vicar.
The trouble is, he's going to be tied up with all this now.
Still, I can't win them all, can I?’
‘It isn't my wedding.’
‘Ah,’ I said.
‘I think you've just told me what your problem is.’
She smiled.
‘Yeah, maybe I'm just a bit jealous, that's all.’
‘Who's the groom, if you don't mind me asking?’
‘An old flame.’
‘And the bride, is she your sister?’
‘No, she's just an old flatmate of mine, that's all.
There's nothing funny about it.’
‘Listen to me, Jenny.
I have got your name right, haven't I?’
She nodded.
‘Listen to me, Jenny.
If I only ever give you one piece of advice in life — which is highly likely on the face of it — it's stay away from that man.
I once made the mistake you're thinking of making and I've never got over it.
You and him are finished now and there's the end to it.’
She smiled again, more cheerfully this time.
‘Don't worry, I wasn't thinking of messing around with him.’
‘Fair enough.
But don't forget he may be thinking of messing around with you.’
‘He wouldn't.’
‘Are you trying to tell me that neither of you are flesh and blood?
On the evidence I've seen so far I rather doubt that.’
The smile was now back in fashion.
‘No, we were both flesh and blood all right.’
She swivelled round to face me.
‘What was your big mistake?’ she asked me.
‘Oh, I had an affair with my brother-in-law donkey's years ago.
It wasn't the sort of stuff that love stories are made of, to be honest.’
‘Did your sister ever find out about it?’
‘Yes, he told her.
What exactly he told her I don't know, but that's all in the past now.’
‘Do you still keep in touch with her?’
‘No, but we live at a sort of peace with each other, which is good.’
‘Lisa was my best friend until she and Andy started going out together — we even shared a flat together at  one stage.
Andy and I had already split up before their thing got going, but even so, it makes you think a bit .’
‘You still think he's technically yours, don't you?’
She laughed.
‘You're a perceptive so-and-so, aren't you?
I wasn't expecting all this.’
‘I used to be an art historian,’ I said.
‘You're always having to be perceptive in that line of work.’
‘An art historian!
You mean you used to be a museum curator or something?’
‘Worse than that.
I was a university lecturer.’
‘You mean you went from being a university lecturer to being a tramp?
Oh, brilliant!’
I laughed.
‘It wasn't quite as simple as that.
Anyway, professional people can end up homeless just like anyone else.
It isn't a closed shop, you know.’
‘Oh sorry.
I didn't mean to make light of your problems.
It's just from the way it came out, I thought you meant you decided to jack it all in and hit the road.
I suppose it wasn't quite like that.’
I laughed again.
‘No, it wasn't.
But no offence taken.
You get used to people's misconceptions after a time.’
‘What did happen, then?
How come you've ended up here?’
‘I left lecturing to try and see what the big wide world had to offer, but things never worked out.
Then last year, everything just started running against me for some reason.
I'm not sure that I know how to explain it to you.’
‘Look, this is a really interesting conversation.
Would you mind if I bought you a coffee or something?’
‘No, thank you — that would be very nice.
Don't you think you'd better see the body buried before you do anything else?
I'm quite happy to wait.’
‘You're probably right.
Bad manners otherwise or something.
Look, you stay here and I'll be back as soon as it's over.
Don't run away, whatever you do.’
And  with that, she ran off.
Sounds of movement behind me suggested she was just in time.
‘It won't be long,’ I said to myself.
‘She'll be back.’
I didn't have the faintest idea how this girl could help me but I knew that she was going to try.
I sat waiting patiently for the wedding to end.
It was in fact rather a nice day and my spirits were starting to rise.
Investing all this hope in a girl I hardly knew was, in retrospect, highly dangerous, but I was in that sort of a mood.
Jenny reappeared soon enough and she suggested that we nip down the road to a little pâtisserie she knew, which of course we did.
The shop had a little bar-type area at the back where people could sit.
Jenny bought two coffees and two buns and we went and sat down.
The conversation was wide-ranging, but gradually I told her the full story of what had happened to me over the previous year or so.
‘I still can't understand why you won't take the flat,’ she said.
‘I mean, I can understand you not wanting to go into a hostel, but from what you're saying, a flat's the sort of thing you want, isn't it?’
‘Well, I'd still like to get married, but if someone actually proposed to me I'd probably run a mile from that as well.’
She laughed.
‘Would you take the flat now, then?
They'd probably still give it to you.’
I shook my head.
‘It's Harwich that's the real problem.
I know I'm not in a position to be choosy, but I can't cope with the idea of living there — it's just beyond
me.’
‘Where would you like to live?’
‘London, I suppose.
I don't have that great an affection for this place but at least it's a world I know.’
‘Have you always lived here, then?’
‘No, I was brought up in Berkhamsted and I spent a  couple of years living in Oxfordshire not so long ago, so I'm not completely inflexible about this.
That place was more rural, though.
Part of the trouble with Harwich is it's neither one thing nor the other.’
‘You will go back and see your friends, though.’
‘Tomorrow.
I'll go back tomorrow.’
‘Brilliant!
A toast I think.’
She raised her coffee cup.
‘To new beginnings,’ she said.
‘To new beginnings,’ I echoed, and as our cups touched, we both smiled.
‘How about one for the happy couple?’ she suggested.
‘To absent friends,’ I said.
‘To absent friends.’
She took a sip of her coffee, then continued: ‘I think I'm going to get over him, you know.’
‘That's the spirit!’
She laughed.
‘This sure beats the boring old wedding breakfast,’ she said.
‘You know what you're really lucky to be missing?
All those people coming up to you and saying, ‘Don't worry dear, it'll soon be your turn too,’ or some similar rubbish in that vein.
I remember having that at my sister's wedding.
It drove me spare.’
‘Yeah, I've had some of it already.
In fact ever since the pair of them started going out together they've been going on about having to find poor old Jenny a new man.
I wouldn't mind so much but it was me who had to make all the moves when Andy and I first got started.’
‘Leave them to it,’ I said.
‘Carry on with your own life and forget about them.’
‘We've so many friends in common, that's the problem.
Sorry — problem's a bit of a silly word to use in the light of what's happened to you.’
I smiled.
‘I'm sure the language can cope,’ I said.
‘Funnily enough, that's been one of the nice things about Harwich: people haven't overburdened  everything with all my troubles and they've just been themselves.
Anyway, there are others worse off than me, I'm under no illusions about that.’
‘Listen, what are you going to do about tonight?
Do you want to check into a hostel just in case it rains or would you rather have another night in the park?’
‘Er, that would depend on the hostel.
They're pretty grim, a lot of them.’
‘I'll tell you what.
If you like I'll ask around back at the church and see if I can find out what's on offer.’
‘I thought you were part of the set-up there.’
She laughed.
‘No.
I'd just come for the wedding.
It's rather ironic, really, when you think about it.’
I laughed too.
‘OK,’ I said.
‘But don't take it to heart if I don't follow your advice.
I can be a bit awkward about things like this.’
‘You're the one who'd end up getting wet.’
We arranged to meet on a bench outside the Royal Academy at five o'clock.
I spent most of the intervening period in the National Portrait Gallery.
Anyway, at shortly before five I made my way to the forecourt of the RA.
While I was sitting waiting for Jenny, a number of well-dressed women of about my age filed past me, some of them evidently wearied by their afternoon of serious picture-watching.
‘That was how I was once,’ I mused to myself.
‘I wonder what really separates us now?’
Suddenly it struck me just how much protection my past had given me, particularly the university lecturer bit of it.
Before long, Jenny showed up.
‘Great,’ she said for some inexplicable reason.
‘How's it going?’
‘Great,’ I replied.
‘Didn't you get that the wrong way around?’
‘Pedant.
Look, I've found a hostel that will take you  for one night.
It's run by a private charity and they don't normally accept referrals from outsiders but they didn't want to be too dogmatic about that.’
‘What sort of a place is it?’
‘A converted private house.
You won't get your own room or anything but it's free and probably better than nothing.’
‘One more night,’ I murmured to myself.
‘OK,’ I said.
‘Let's give it a whirl.’
‘Brilliant!’
The next thing on Jenny's mind was food.
‘Where would you like to eat?’ she asked me.
‘Shouldn't you be going to a party?’
‘I've been excused for the moment.
What do you fancy?’
‘Anything that isn't sandwiches.’
We went off to a little restaurant she knew near Leicester Square.
Jenny, as I had already worked out, was a woman of some means and she clearly wasn't bothered by the fact she was having to subsidize me.
I'd taught many similarly wealthy girls during my lecturer days, so fortunately I didn't feel uneasy about this and just let her carry on.
She insisted on having wine with the meal, and as I hadn't had a drink in a long time, it made me feel rather tipsy.
‘Jenny, you're mad.
You go to all the trouble of finding me a bed in a night shelter and you then get me so drunk they'll refuse point-blank to let me in!’
‘Have you ever been an alcoholic or anything like that?’
‘No, you don't understand.
People have got the wrong idea about this one.
Alcoholism is a social thing, not a homelessness thing — I mean, I knew a few university lecturers who were alcoholics, but they all had homes to go to — or still had, last time they ever spoke to me.’
‘Have you met any other university people out and about?’
‘Not knowingly.
It isn't a very common job, that's the problem.
I've met one or two schoolteachers, but then again they're a bigger group in society as a whole.
That's one of the things I've done, actually.’
‘This was when you were out in the wilds of Oxfordshire, right?’
‘Yes.
Have I already told you about that one?
Sorry, my mind's going or the drink's getting to me, one of the two.’
‘I'm sure you could still get a bit of teaching work, you know.
At least you would earn more than you are now.’
‘I'm too old.
I'm already past the statutory retirement age and besides, I've enjoyed being with the people in Harwich so I'd like to stick with them if I can.’
‘Are you still worried about how that boss lady's going to react when you get back there?’
‘Kathleen?
Yes I am, rather.
I really don't know what's going to happen, to be honest.’
‘I reckon they'll just be relieved to see you're still in one piece.’
‘I'll find out tomorrow.’
I paused for a moment, then added, ‘Would you mind if I had some pudding?’
‘No, of course not.
What do you fancy?’
I studied the menu.
‘I think I'll try some of their ice cream.
I haven't had any for years — not since I last went to Rome probably.’
‘Brilliant!
We'll both have some.’
She summoned a waitress.
I sat back and relaxed for a moment.
The calm was a strange one — a distant memory.
It was like that feeling you get when the sun first hits you after breaking through the clouds.
‘Dorothy, I've been thinking.
Would you mind if I made a few housing enquiries for you?
Sometimes a  fresh pair of eyes isn't a bad thing in a situation like this.’
I smiled.
‘Sure,’ I said.
‘Why not?’
The ice creams came and we tucked in.
‘Cold and delicious!’
Jenny exclaimed.
‘You know, Dorothy, you and I will just have to dine together more often.
Starting with breakfast tomorrow, I think.
Just in case you have a bad night and decide not to go back.’
I laughed.
There seemed to be no real point in arguing with her.
‘I'll want to catch quite an early train from Liverpool Street.
Are you sure you'll be up in time to get there by nine o'clock?’
‘Cheek!
What time's your train?’
‘There's a boat-train that goes at about half-nine, I think.’
‘OK, we'll make it half-eight just to be on the safe side.’
‘Aren't you going to be tired after the party, though?
I won't be offended if you can't make it.’
‘Don't worry, a bit of body-popping won't kill me.’
‘What on earth is body-popping?’
‘It's a sort of dancing.
Why, what did you think it was?’
‘Well, you are on the big side and for a moment I had this vision of you…’
We both collapsed into helpless giggles.
Coffee was next, and then it was time for the bill.
‘How strapped are you for cash?’
Jenny asked me.
‘Can I lend you some at least until you pick up your wages tomorrow?’
‘Er, I'm not sure I'll have enough for the tube fare to Liverpool Street, but the rest I can manage.
Thanks.’
She gave me the tip she'd put aside for the waitress and then raided her purse again to replace it.
This done we made our way out of the restaurant.
‘I'm heading down to Victoria,’ she said.
‘How about you?’
‘I think I'll start on my way north.’
(Pause.)
‘Jenny…thank you.’
She laughed.
‘Don't be silly,’ she said, and she bounced off.
I watched her go and then, shaking my head, I turned and walked the other way.
I was soon in Leicester Square, which was already packed with people who'd come for an evening out.
All around me there were cinemas.
Cinemas, cinemas everywhere.
‘I bet none of them are showing anything as daft as this,’ I mused to myself.
The shelter that Jenny had found for me was in Camden Town, not too far away, so in order not to arrive there before it got going for the evening, I dawdled a little, window-shopping.
Up on Tottenham Court Road there were all the gadget shops, all displaying their various ranges of radios, record players, compact-disc players and videos — all of which seemed to be housed in bewilderingly similar sleek black boxes.
‘All is conformity now,’ I thought to myself.
‘All is conformity.’
On I went.
The irony of the scenario was well appreciated by yours truly.
The me who said she'd never stay in a hostel again was now on her way to a night shelter.
And that same me, who twenty-four hours earlier had decided she could never go back to Harwich, would be on her way there tomorrow.
‘What do I know,’ I mused.
The idea of going back still made me nervous, though.
What if it didn't work out after all?
‘I hope you haven't bitten off more than you can chew, Jenny,’ I muttered to myself.
I had to go back.
I'd spent too much of my life running away as it was.
I arrived up in Camden Town and asked in the tube  station for directions to the shelter.
Somebody knew and I was soon outside the front door.
I knocked.
‘Hello, how can I help?…
Yes, we've been expecting you.
Come in, come and sit in the front room.
Would you like some tea?’
‘Please, thank you.’
He showed me into the lounge.
Somebody else was already there, a man idly reading a newspaper.
He looked up when I came in.
‘How's it going?’
I asked.
‘All right.
You?’
‘Not too bad.
Do you know much about these people?’
‘I've been here before so I know a little bit.
How about you?’
‘I don't usually come up this way, it's all a bit new to me, actually.’
‘This lot are OK, don't worry.’
He put the newspaper to one side, then added: ‘Sit down, take the weight off your feet.’
‘Thanks,’ I said.
‘I will.’
The conversation then continued.
We ended up trading memories of Paris in the fifties and England before the war.
The young man who made the tea sat with us, occasionally contributing to the conversation.
The atmosphere was warm and peaceful.
More people arrived: more experiences were shared.
Stories of a bitter world, told without bitterness or self-pity.
I started to feel drowsy.
‘Does anyone mind if I go to bed?’
I asked.
‘No, go when you like,’ the tea provider said with a smile.
I wished everyone goodnight and he led me upstairs into a small dormitory room.
‘Crash out over there,’ he suggested, pointing to the far corner of the room.
‘Thanks,’ I said.
‘Someone will remember to wake me up early tomorrow, won't they?’
‘Yeah, we won't forget.
Ciao.’
‘G'night.’
I went over to the bed, climbed on top of it, put my head on the pillow and fell asleep.
I slept fitfully but well enough, disturbed only by the comings and goings of my companions.
As promised, one of the project workers gave me an early shake and I had time enough for a coffee before I needed to set off to meet Jenny.
The girl who woke me also made my drink.
‘What sort of accommodation have you got in Harwich?’ she asked, as we went off to sit down in the lounge.
‘A little store room — I call it my broom cupboard.
It's home, though.’
‘So what were you doing up here in London?’
‘I come up here every day.
I work part-time at the station coffee shop at Parkeston Quay so I get cheap rail travel.’
‘It must still be pretty expensive, though?’
‘Well, it gets me out of the house.’
She paused for a moment.
‘It's a bit of an odd way to live, isn't it?’
‘True.
But it's how I've survived.’
She smiled.
‘You've had some trouble up there, haven't you?’
‘A bit.
That's what I'm going back to try and sort out.’
‘Look, if it doesn't work out, come back and see us and we'll try to do something for you, OK?’
‘Thanks, I appreciate that.’
She saw me off.
The journey to Liverpool Street station was just a trundle around the Northern Line from Camden to Moorgate and then a short walk, and I accomplished it in good time.
In fact, I saw from the station clock that I had timed my arrival just about perfectly.
So had Jenny.
She came up to me with, I noticed, slightly less bounce in her step than there had been the previous day.
‘Me or the party?’
I wondered.
‘Hi!
How was the shelter?’
‘Fine.
How was the party?’
‘Awful.
Just awful.
I don't even want to talk about it.’
I smiled.
‘What time did you get to bed?’
I asked.
‘Can't remember.
Breakfast,’ she said emphatically.
‘What we really need now is breakfast.
Did they give you any at the shelter?’
‘Only a cup of coffee.’
‘Brilliant!
Let's get some.’
We went off to the canteen.
I was in a familiar world and I was able to explain to Jenny how everything was done.
‘Do you get a discount?’
‘Not here, no.
Why?
Are you short of money?
I'm sorry, you have been subsidizing me rather a lot lately.’
She waved a hand furiously.
‘No.
No!
Nothing like that.
I was just wondering, that's all.
Who else showed up at the shelter?’
‘Oh, it was a good mix last night — we all had a nice chat.
Tea or coffee?’
‘Coffee.’
Jenny paid and we went to sit down.
‘Dorothy, for when I start looking at various housing options, what sort of thing are you actually after?
If you were given ‘carte blanche’ so to speak, what would you go for?’
‘A flat of my own would be the ideal thing still.
When something happens and I can't look after myself any more the situation will be different, but at the moment what I'd really like most is my independence back.’
‘Some sort of Housing Association thing maybe.’
‘Possibly.
The main thing is I don't want to go back into the private sector unless I absolutely have to.
There's going to be new legislation soon which will make it dead easy for landlords to kick tenants out and I've had enough of all this as it is.’
‘What we need to do is set up a regular lunch date so everyone knows what's happening.
I know it's basically to suit me, but how easy is it for you to get down to Victoria?’
‘Very.
Look, don't hold out too much hope that you're going to be successful in this.
I'm not expecting anything, I promise you.’
‘Well, there's no harm in trying.
Tell you what.
Let's meet for lunch tomorrow by Little Ben at one o'clock.
You can tell me how you got on today and I can start making some enquiries.’
‘Who or what is Little Ben?’
She laughed.
‘The clock outside the front of Victoria station.
It's like Big Ben only littler.
Great!
That's all sorted out.
When's your train again?’
‘It's slightly earlier than I thought it was but we're OK still.’
We finished our breakfast.
‘Would you like some newspapers to read on your journey?’
Jenny asked me as we got up to leave.
‘That would be very nice.
Thank you.’
A couple of papers were duly bought and after that we parted company.
The bounce was now back in Jenny's step, I noticed, as I watched her head off towards the tube.
She had evidently decided that things were going to be all right.
On the way back to Harwich, the newspapers did a marvellous job of keeping my mind off things, and it was only on the last leg of the journey that the butterflies started to flutter again.
Meeting Jenny the following day at least gave me something else to hang on to, but I still hadn't the faintest idea how everyone was going to react.
I arrived to face the music.
Waiting for me behind the counter was Katrina.
She quickly disappeared out the back and came around the front to greet me.
‘Dorothy!
We've been so worried about you!
Are you all right?
Come and sit down and tell me what's been happening.’
‘Where's Kathleen?’
‘She's gone to London to look for you.’
‘What!’
‘Don't worry.
She only went down this morning.
Hey!
We've been really worried about you, you know.’
‘How are we going to be able to get in touch with her?
Look, seriously, do I need to get on the next train back to Liverpool Street and go and find her?’
Katrina laughed.
‘We'll have the pair of you spending the day waving at each other from railway trains at this rate.
It's all right.
She's ringing in around lunchtime.
Listen, you sit down, I'll get a couple of coffees and we'll have a chat, OK?’
I sat down and Katrina soon joined me again.
‘Whereabouts in London has she gone to look for me?’
‘No idea.
I don't think she knew either.
She's a really lovely woman but she's not very bright about things like this.
I mean, I would have gone to London to look for you too, but it's sometimes easier just to telephone,
‘How do you mean?’
‘I rang that night shelter you were at this morning  and the girl I spoke to told me you were on your way.
I got some phone numbers out of the Salvation Army yesterday.
They seemed really nice, you know, I don't know why you're so much against them.’
‘I don't fancy the idea of living in one of their hostels, that's all.’
Tears were coming into my eyes.
‘I'm sorry that I've got you all so worried.
I…’
‘Hey, don't be silly!’
She put her hand on my shoulder.
‘You're all right, that's all we care about.
You don't have to take that flat in Harwich, it was only an idea.
Anyway, what have you been doing these past two days?’
I told her what had happened.
It wasn't long before Kathleen rang.
‘Tell her to stay there!’ she ordered Katrina.
‘She's not to move.
I'm holding you responsible for this young lady.
You're not to let her out of your sight!’
Steve Adorable rolled in about lunchtime and he too needed to be told everything.
‘Life's never exactly dull when you're around, is it Dot?’ he said.
‘It has its moments.’
‘You should write it all down, you know.
It would make a good book, this would.’
I laughed.
‘By the way,’ he warned me.
‘Kath was going a bit mental yesterday.
She might have quietened down a bit by now, but you know what she's like.’
Steve's hopes were unfounded.
When Kathleen arrived, she burst into the coffee shop like a tornado.
And she was crying.
I couldn't believe it.
She was crying.
‘There you are!
Honestly, girl, if you only knew where I'd been to try and find you!’
‘Where did you go?’
‘To that vile city of yours!
I can't for the life of me understand what it is you see in it.
It's filthy!
Absolutely  filthy!
I've never seen such a mess!
And that stupid underground.
They don't know their north from their east from their west from…,
We gave each other a long hug.
By now, I was crying even worse than she was.
‘I'm sorry, Kath, I didn't know what I was doing.
I just got so scared, you know, I'm sorry, I…’
‘It's all right, Dot.
It's over now.
Anyway, what on earth have you been up to all this time?’
We're now into my blue period.
If grey was the colour that characterized the first phase of my time at Harwich, blue characterizes this next phase.
Blue, the colour of the sky on a sunny day.
The colour of railway trains, of a catering assistant's uniform, and of the unshapely denims that Jenny used to wear out of office hours, in defiance of anything that suited her.
It's also a colour of cold — and we haven't had much of a summer this year — but at the same time it reminds me of the warmth and tranquillity of a Claude Lorrain.
It is a colour of peace.
It's reliable, it's safe, and it's secure.
During my blue period my life also seemed to become a lot more structured than it had been for a while.
Things seemed to have more of a sense that they were leading somewhere.
This was partly because of events that were going on around me: Kathleen building towards her retirement and, as was to become highly significant, Katrina deciding that she wanted to make a move as well.
‘I'm going to be doing this for the rest of my life if I'm not careful,’ she told me one day.
She had decided that she wanted to go to London, take some A-levels up there, and then, she hoped, go on to university.
‘Why not go to some evening classes around here?’
I asked.
‘I just think it's about time I moved on, you know.
London is different to me than it is to you.
To you it's just home, but to me it's the place I've been trying to get to.
Staying here is almost like still being back in Haarlem.
It's like I never really broke free, you know.’
‘Why didn't you try Amsterdam?’
‘It's only just up the road, and besides, they take your money off you in Amsterdam.’
‘They make you homeless in London.’
We were both smiling.
It was me who spoke next.
‘Have you got any particular schools or colleges in mind?’
‘No, do you have any ideas about that?
I mean, who was good when you used to teach?’
‘Tell you what, I'll ring around some of my old university friends if you like and see if they know of anywhere.
It probably won't get us very far, but you never know, one of them might come up with something.’
‘Could you?
That would be really useful, I think.’
I certainly could.
I did not, to be honest, think I would have much success — it's not the sort of thing that I would have known all those years ago — but the idea of ringing up a few of my former colleagues was just irresistible.
Now, who should I try first?
Charles Howard.
I had to start with Charles Howard.
Kathleen offered me the use of her office telephone and so, one morning, I settled down to make some enquiries.
The person on the SIS switchboard was, I am sure, Liz of old, but when I announced who I was there was no acknowledgement of recognition on her part.
‘I'll see if he's in his office for you.’
A few moments later she came back to me.
Charles was prepared to take my call.
‘Dorothy!
What an extraordinary surprise!
How are you?’
‘Fine, Charles, how are you?’
‘Beset by these blasted cuts at the moment.
Have you  heard?
The Senate wants to merge us into University College and we've been told we'll have to get rid of some of our staff — it may all be very neat and tidy for the bureaucrats, but it's going to be absolutely disastrous for some people.
Anyway, what are you up to these days?
Are you still a schoolma'am?’
I laughed.
‘No, I'm working at a caff in Harwich.’
‘You're in catering?
I imagine you'd be rather good at that.’
‘It's all right.
How is everyone, in spite of things?’
‘Oh, fine.
The atmosphere's a bit tense, understandably — listen, what can I do for you?’
‘I need some ideas, Charles.
I have a young friend in her early twenties who wants to do some A-levels at a reasonable nightschool in London.
Arts type of things.
I'm really just trying to find out if anyone knows of somewhere decent.’
‘Can't think of anywhere myself, let me think for a minute.
Actually, the best thing would be if I could get back to you.
I'll put the word around and see if anybody can come up with something.’
‘I work rather odd hours but you can always leave a message for me here at the cafe.
Just a minute.
The number is…’
It wasn't Charles who left a message, it was, to my great surprise, his one-time protégé’ Paul Spence.
I felt oddly nervous when returning the call.
‘Paul, how are you?’
‘Fine thanks, how are you?’
‘Not too bad.’
‘I hear you're in catering these days.’
‘That glamorizes things rather.
Do you have some news for me?’
‘Yes, I've been making some enquiries about nightschools.
Listen, are you ever up in London these days?
I thought we might perhaps have lunch.’
‘That would be lovely, thank you.
Any time would be fine.’
‘Let's arrange it now.
How about next Thursday?’
‘Sure.
Why not?’
‘I've recently found this really nice Greek restaurant.
How does Greek food sound?’
‘Terrific.
Thank you.’
When we met up as planned, it soon became apparent that Paul had in fact researched the matter in hand extremely thoroughly, and I had an impressive number of addresses and names of contacts to take back to Katrina.
‘You've been to a lot of trouble over this, Paul, thank you.
It's very kind of you.’
‘It was the least I could do.
What's this catering lark you're into?’
‘Oh, just some part-time work in a coffee shop.
It keeps the wolf from the door, that's all.’
‘Do you still dabble in art history?’
‘No, I gave that up as a bad job years ago.’
‘Or got eased out by me, to put it bluntly.
None of us have ever forgotten about that, you know.’
I smiled.
‘It's water under the bridge now,’ I said.
‘It sounds as though life's not been too easy for you since then.’
‘There've been good things and bad things, but I've survived.
How about you?’
‘I don't know.
That's a difficult question.’
I laughed.
‘How do you mean?’
I asked.
‘I think a part of me probably died when I took your job, though it may have been just the settling-down thing.
Anyway, I wanted it all badly enough, didn't I?’
I smiled.
‘How's the family?’
I asked.
‘They're all fine.
Still just the two kids.
The school fees have been a bit of a pain, but everyone finds that.
By the way, while I think of it, Anne was just about to  leave the country when you rang, but she says when she gets back in September you're to give her a call.’
‘How is she?’
I proceeded to catch up on the last ten years of what everyone had been doing.
‘You know, it really is strange to hear about you all again.
It's like stumbling across a whole world that you thought had gone for ever.’
‘It's on its way out, I think.
Did Charles tell you about the proposed merger?’
‘Yes, what will you do if it goes through?’
‘I'm not sure.
I'd like to try and do something completely different, but the trouble is, what?’
‘I'd pay off the school fees first if I were you.’
He laughed.
‘Yes, you're probably right.
Looking at it realistically, I think I'll either go back into the museum side of things or carry on with what I'm doing now.
It's pretty uninspiring, really.’
‘At least you're good at it.’
‘Ever popular anyway.
You know something, Dorothy?
You've changed.’
I smiled.
‘Really?
How?’
‘I don't know.
You seem somehow, er…younger, I suppose.’
I laughed at that.
‘It's because my hair's longer.
You look a bit more care-worn, but I expect that's the children.’
He smiled.
‘Just old age, I think,’ he said.
‘It's catching up on me.’
The information Paul provided turned out to be extremely useful.
One of the colleges he listed invited Katrina up for an interview and she seemed to like it there.
‘The man who interviewed me was just so English,’ she informed me.
‘He said not to worry about the language problem, which was nice of him.
Because they're  a private school, they can take anybody they like — which is me in this case.’
‘They've definitely offered you a place?’
‘Yes.
I was surprised.
He didn't even want to consult with one of his colleagues.
And my father's said he's going to help me with the fees, so it's all going to work out.’
I smiled.
‘When do your courses start?’
I asked.
‘September.
That's when I'll be leaving here now.’
‘I'm going to miss you.
This place won't be the same with both you and Kathleen gone.’
‘Things might have changed for you too by then, you know.
Have you heard anything?’
I hadn't.
The subject of a flat in Harwich had of course never been raised again.
Both Jenny and Kathleen were up to various things and I'd been having a go myself, but although my name was appearing on more and more waiting lists, nothing substantial seemed to be happening.
There was one bright spot, however.
Because I'd passed the magical sixty years of age mark, I was now officially an old-age pensioner and that apparently made me technically ‘vulnerable’ under the provisions of the Homeless Persons Act.
In consequence, according to the rule book, I now had to be taken seriously.
When positive news did come, it again seemed to arrive out of the blue.
I was meeting Jenny for lunch.
‘Ever thought of Colchester?’ she asked me.
‘How do you mean?’
‘As somewhere to live.’
‘Er, not really, no.
Why do you ask?’
‘The Salvation Army are looking for someone to put in a training house they've got there and —’
‘A training house!.
What on earth is one of those?’
Jenny laughed.
‘It sounds a bit like an indoctrination centre, doesn't it?
Actually, as far as I can gather, it's  just their jargon for a bedsit house.
One person living there has to be a Sally Ann person of some sort, but otherwise it's just everyone with their own room but sharing kitchen and bathroom.
If you're vaguely interested I can arrange an interview with the lady I spoke to on their resettlement team, but if you don't like the sound of it…’
I was indeed rather dubious about the whole idea, but we hadn't been getting very far and there seemed to be no harm in just finding out some more about it.
We rang up from Victoria station and arranged to meet Jenny's contact the following afternoon.
And of course, we duly kept the appointment.
‘It would probably be best if I started from square one,’ the contact opened the proceedings by saying.
‘Someone has left us a private house in Colchester in their will and we've decided to use it as a training house.
It's only just been finished but the plan is to have four people living there — three clients or whatever and one person sponsored by us, probably a member of staff.
Everyone has their own room with a little fridge and a kettle, but you do have to share kitchen and bathroom.’
‘What role does your member of staff have in all this?’
I asked.
‘It's kept down to an absolute bare minimum.
They have to keep a logbook but that's only a check to make sure that nobody's leaving a mess in the common areas and we only have it because we've found that some residents can have problems because they've become deskilled in certain things.
It's like people sometimes have problems when they come out after a long stay in hospital — or the same sort of thing anyway.
The worker's really just there to check that everything's going OK.
The emphasis in the structure of the household is on independent living so the expectation is you'll come and go as you please.’
‘You mean as long as I clean the bath, he or she will leave me in peace, right?’
‘Er, yes.
That's the idea of the thing.
There is actually a television room as well, I think, but if you do want to keep yourself to yourself that's fine.
The fewer people there are to argue about which channel to watch, the better, I should think.’
‘How long would I be able to stay there?’
‘We'd expect you to stay a couple of years, but obviously there's going to be no pressure on you to move on at the end of that period.
If you do find something better, great, if not, stick around.’
Jenny was bursting to say something.
‘What do you think, Dot?’ she asked me.
‘Could I see the place before I decide anything else?’
‘Sure.
One thing, though, the other residents have to ‘vote you in’ as it were— it's just to make sure we don't set up any violent personality clashes, that's all.
How do you feel about everything I've said, generally?’
‘As I say, I'm quite a private person, but if that's OK with everyone else I suppose…
You can't really tell without seeing it, though.’
‘We can arrange a visit as soon as you like.
Would you like Jenny to go along as well as?’
I looked at Jen.
‘I'd honestly prefer Kathleen to come,’ I said, hesitatingly.
Jenny laughed.
‘Don't be silly!’ she said.
‘Make a day out of it.’
I was silent for a moment, then I asked: ‘Is there a telephone somewhere?
I'd like to give her a ring if I may?’
The house was fine.
I went with Kathleen to see it a couple of days later.
My fellow residents turned out to be a chap in his late thirties who was trying to put his life back together after the death of his wife and various other things, and a chap of about my age who had also run into problems after his wife died.
The Salvation Army worker living there was a young girl, Sharon, so that balanced the house up a bit.
‘Yeah, if you want to keep yourself to yourself that's no problem,’ Pete, the man of about my age, said.
‘We'll take you as we find you.’
‘Another thing is I work odd hours, which means I'm up and about at funny times of the day.
I'd try not to disturb anyone but you know what it's like, you can —,
‘Oh, don't worry,’ Peter interjected, ‘that's just part and parcel of everything.
I do a bit of security work myself and Keith's after whatever he can get, so we're all up to something.’
‘You've got to live your life too, you know,’ said Keith with a grin.
We said we'd ring them up that afternoon to see what everybody thought.
I myself felt the meeting had gone pretty well — the house itself was nice and we all seemed to get on very well together.
Kathleen and I went off for some lunch and we then went to have a look at the castle.
‘It isn't exactly the Tower of London,’ I said, ‘but it'll do me.’
We went to find a call-box.
‘How do you feel about it?’
Sharon asked me over a slightly crackly line.
‘I'd like to take it if I may.
How do you all feel?’
‘We'd love to have you here.
When do you want to move in?’
‘I don't know.
Tomorrow?
Or would that be too soon?
Next week maybe?’
‘Tomorrow would be great.
About what time do you think you'll be ready to come?’
‘Mid-afternoon — would that be all right?’
‘Perfect.
See you then.
'Bye.’
I put the receiver down and rested my head against the back of the kiosk.
‘It's over,’ I said out loud.
‘I'm free!’
I turned to face Kathleen.
She was smiling like a Cheshire cat.
We had a good long hug.
‘It's going to be all right now,’ I told her.
‘It's going to be all right.’
She patted me on the back.
‘Easy as pie, wasn't it?’ she said.
‘Yes, in the end.’
‘Come on.
Give everyone a ring.’
Katrina first.
She uttered something loud and incomprehensible in Dutch and told me she'd meet me at the coffee shop later.
Jenny poured forth a stream of ‘brilliants’’ and said she was going to drive down to Harwich that evening.
I managed to dissuade her from that and we settled on lunch together the following day.
Kathleen and I then took the next train back to Harwich and when we arrived, it seemed like half the port wanted to know what had happened.
Everyone went wild!
We shut the place up early that evening and then all went round to the pub for a further celebration.
I'd never  seen what people drank before so that was interesting — nor did I realize quite how many of the youngsters smoked!
Anyway, when things had calmed down a bit, Kathleen made a quiet suggestion.
‘Dorothy, when Katrina leaves, how about taking over her shift and working full-time?
It doesn't look as though Steve's going to get my job so we might start to have problems with things like your season ticket if we're not careful.
I know the money's not brilliant but it's better than freezing to death on a state pension.’
I was quiet for a moment.
‘Sure,’ I then said.
‘Why not?’
This is all going to cut you off from London a bit, but I don't see that there's really any other way at the moment.’
I smiled.
‘C'est la vie.
By the way, have you ever seen the musical Les Misérables ?’
She looked taken-aback.
‘Yes I have,’ she said.
‘Why?’
‘You mentioned it during one of our first meetings so I've always had a hankering to see how they've done it.
We'll do something else, though.
When I get my first wage packet let's blow it on an outing somewhere.
What do you think?’
‘Les Misérables was quite complicated, so I'd actually quite like a second go at it.
I say we hit Paris, how about you?’
‘Vive la France!’
That night was my last one in my broom cupboard.
The following morning I worked as usual and then asked Kathleen if I could have a couple of days off.
Of course.
Give me a ring when everything's sorted out.’
I borrowed some money from Katrina, packed my suitcases and my travelling bag, and took them off down to London.
I checked everything in at the left-luggage office in  Liverpool Street station, and then went off to make a couple of telephone calls.
The first one was to the house in Colchester to ask if they'd mind if I delayed my arrival by one more day.
‘No problem,’ said Keith.
‘What time do you want to come tomorrow?’
‘Mid-morning if that's possible.’
‘You're deliberately making things easy for us.
I'll see you tomorrow morning.’
My next call was to the company that had been holding some of my things in storage, just to warn them that I was coming round.
When I got there, I found to no great surprise that very little had survived in any reasonable condition.
‘Do you want us to get rid of it all for you?’ the man asked.
‘There are some personal bits and pieces that I'd like to hang on to but you can chuck the rest, I should think.’
‘Yeah, sure.
Shame about it all really.’
‘They're only things.’
‘Yeah — too right, love!
Are you wanting to take any of it now?’
‘No, I need to have words with a friend of mine who's got a car before I do anything else.
When I've found out when she can come and give me a hand, I'll give you a ring.’
My next stop was lunch with Jenny.
She was, needless to say, all agog.
‘What's it like?
I want to know everything!’
‘It's a really nice house, and the rest of the people living there are very easy-going so…no problem.’
‘It's quite trendy moving to Colchester, you know.’
I laughed.
‘Well, if it's true that I'm getting younger it'll probably suit me in that case.’
I proceeded to pass on as many details as I could remember.
‘When are you moving in?’
‘Tomorrow.
There are some other things I want to do tonight.’
‘There's a mischievous look in your eye, Dot.
What are you up to?’
‘I'm going to start writing a book.’
‘What about?’
‘Me.’
‘Ye — s!
Oh brilliant!
Am I going to be in it?’
I laughed.
‘You can't avoid it, dear.’
‘Are you going to blow the whistle on the whole lot — I mean, the university people as well?’
‘I'll change a few names but that's about it.
Anyway, the people at SIS are big enough to take it and I respect them for that.’
‘What are you going to call this masterwork?’
‘Part of the Furniture .’
‘Why that?’
‘Ah-ha.’
The end of the last chapter was, you might think, a suitable place to end the book, but it wasn't, properly speaking, the end of my blue period.
Taking up residence in Colchester went very well — though I was a bit surprised to find that the ‘de-skilling’ process mentioned by the resettlement officer had indeed affected me to some extent.
I hadn't realized just how much I'd got out of the swing of things but everyone helped as much as they could and I soon adjusted back again.
Kathleen, absolute brick to the end, has let me keep my season ticket for London so I've still been able to pop down there during the day when I feel like it — and the rail staff at Colchester have been quite happy to let me have a break in my journey.
‘You hang on to that, love.
They can afford it.’
In any case, once I got more and more into the swing of writing, I started to spend more time at home doing that.
Jenny gave me a house-warming present of a radio so I've been able to listen to music while I write — and it's been such fun!
About three weeks after I moved in, she invited me around to her flat for supper one evening.
I'd never been to her place before.
It's near the bottom end of Ladbroke Grove, almost due south of where I used to live up until about this time last year.
Where Jenny lives  is very much the smart side of town and the flat is gorgeous.
‘It belongs to my flatmate's parents,’ she said, by way of an apology as she showed me around.
‘It's an amazing place, isn't it?
And they ask me for hardly any rent, which is the other nice thing about it.’
‘There's no justice in this world,’ I said.
She laughed.
‘You know, I pay less than half what people are charged for staying in a night shelter.
Crazy, isn't it?’
‘How long have you lived here?’
‘Since Christmas, just about.
It gets a bit crowded when Camilla's boyfriend is here, but they're on holiday at the moment.’
The tour finished in the kitchen and she started to busy herself around the cooker.
‘We're having fish,’ she informed me.
‘It's supposed to be less fattening.’
‘You're not back on a man-prowl, are you?’
‘Pathetic, isn't it?
This sauce, by the way, is going to be absolutely brilliant — oh sorry, I've got to stop saying that, haven't I?
How are you getting on with your new housemates?’
‘Fine.
They've been a great help, actually.
Everyone's
‘How about the book?
How's that going?’
‘OK, I think.
It's amazing some of the things that have come back to me.
Do you need a hand with anything?’
‘No, I'm fine.
Do you really think they'll close down your old college?’
‘Probably.
They've got to shut something and it's as good a candidate as any.
It's sad in some ways.
Small teaching centres like that can be really effective sometimes.’
‘Is anyone going to get the push à la Dorothy, do you think?’
‘Not in quite the same way as me, probably.
Funnily enough it's not the people like me who usually do get the boot in academic life, it's the people with real talent who generally have a hard time.’
‘Why's that?’
‘Partly common or garden jealousy, I think, and partly because they tend not to get involved in all the politics that goes on.’
‘Where I work's the same, just about.
Mind you, I do all right so I can't complain.’
‘That doesn't necessarily follow.’
She smiled ruefully.
‘On the subject of life not being fair, I met someone else who was homeless the other day.
I did all the usual stuff — I gave her some money and stuck her on a tube train to a night shelter, but while I was walking out of the tube station, I thought to myself, ‘you complacent bitch’’ you know.
It reminded me of when I used to give people money just to make them go away again.
There isn't an enormous difference, let's face it.’
‘It's grounded in something more now.’
‘What should I have done?’
‘I don't know — it changes with every person you meet.
The trick is, I think, to do the ‘compassionate’ thing.
Compassion's an interesting word — when you break it down it literally means ‘to suffer with’.
If you really want to help someone, I think you have to make an effort to suffer with them — to see it from their point of view — and then to do something.’
‘I felt I could do that with you, but it was more difficult with her — partly because she was about the same age as me probably.’
She started bringing the food over.
‘I know you don't like homeless people being stereotyped as a bunch of alcoholics,’ she began, ‘but did you ever meet any of the real meths drinkers?’
‘People do have a fascination with that, don't they?
An alcoholic is a pretty unglamorous thing to be, actually.’
She smiled.
Who have you met among the homeless that's surprised you?’
‘There are a lot more youngsters with the problem than I thought there were.
They keep getting these ridiculous benefit cuts as well, which just defeat me actually.’
‘You know why I think they do it?
While I was up at university, an awful lot of students from wealthy backgrounds were fiddling the dole somehow, and I reckon that the politicians and civil servants think that all they're in fact doing is cutting their own children's pocket money.
It hasn't occurred to them that some people might actually have to survive on any money they're given.’
She poured us a glass of wine each.
‘Well they need to wake up to reality a bit.
Thank you.
Another classic bit of government fantasy-think is the Community Care programme.
They chuck all these people out of mental hospitals on the excuse that everyone in the community is spontaneously going to start looking after them — and surprise, surprise, they start turning up on the night shelter circuit.
It costs a lot in human suffering, but saves money, which is what matters now, supposedly.’
‘Oh brave new world,’ Jenny murmured.
‘Mankind is beauteous indeed.’
‘Pardon?’
‘It's the rest of that quote.
‘How beauteous mankind is.
O brave new world, that has such people in it.’’
Jenny raised her glass.
‘Here's to us girls,’ she said.
I laughed.
‘To us girls.
And to the future.’
That just about wraps it up.
My blue period officially ends when we have a big leaving party for Kathleen and Katrina in a couple of days' time but in fact it probably ends just about now.
So, what are you going to make of all this?
Well, however it struck you, it's a slice of life and I hope you found it interesting enough just for that.
What good can it do?
I don't know, but maybe tomorrow you will come across someone who is homeless — maybe in desperate need of help, maybe asleep and just wishing, for the moment, to be left in peace.
That person may have been a university lecturer, a teacher, a receptionist, a cleaner, a waitress or anything.
She may have made a mess of her life; she may have faced problems beyond your comprehension.
One thing is certain: she is human — one of God's children and equal in His eyes to you.
Do whatever you believe in your heart of hearts is God's will, and that will be that.
I'm not setting myself up as a model for anyone.
This applies just as much to me as it may do to you.
And by the way, if you think that all homeless people have it as easy as I had it, then you are living in dream world.
The book now goes on to my sister and what happens next is up to her.
I honestly can't for the life of me figure out how to express the rest so I hope you'll forgive me if I stop here.
The words just won't come any more, so I'm going to put my biro down and go off to the post.
