Gardeners' World
BBC Advice, Ideas and Inspiration from your BBC experts
September 1991 £1.30
You can win a great new patio
Pippa Wood How to cope with a slope
Bulbs plant now for spring blooms
Geoff Hamilton's weed solution
Autumn on display How to create a colourful show of late blooms
Apples our pick of the crop
BBC Gardeners' World
Regulars
Garden News
Dates for the dairy, news and reviews and brand new colourful seed mixtures for you to try for free.

And anyway…

The grass is always greener when 700 people haven't tramped across your lawn, reflects Alan Titchmarsh.

Over the fence
Share your gardening views and stories on our readers' letters page.

Garden clippins
We take a peek into the gardening notebook of Radio 5's Richard Jackson.

Action for September
Time to start planning ahead; be prepared and follow our garden schedule.

Next month
Our October overview shows you what's in store in next month's magazine.

Readers' original gardening tips
Has your clever idea won a £50 cash prize this month?

Turn to our page of tips.

Beechgrove garden
As the TV series nears the end of its run, the trio of BBC experts at Aberdeen have some final words of advice and topical tips for gardeners north of the border.

Gardening in tomorrow's world
A glimpse of the future with Dr Phil Gates; could a fungus become the gardener's best friend?

Question time
Our BBC experts track down elusive edging and special spades among other queries.

TV and Radio Guide
Don't miss your favourite gardening programmes and presenters with our four-page guide to the month's broadcasts.

Organic gardening
Green gardening
Waging war on weeds Geoff Hamilton finds that close planting beats the weeds, and a spot of pond maintenance keeps nature's own living pest controllers happy in the organic gardens at Barnsdale.

Organic advice
Another batch of green-tinted tips from the experts at the National Centre for Organic Gardening.

Practical Project
Planting by numbers
Our easy to follow, illustrated guide shows you how to create a lively border of perennials for a welcome display of late summer colour.

Plants
Colour creations
The heavy mob Nigel Colborn demonstrates a light touch with heavy soil as he picks out plants that positively enjoy feet of clay.

Specialist spotlight
Apple appeal Graham Rice takes the graft out of choosing apple rootstocks and varieties as he visits a specialist fruit tree nursery.

Portrait gallery
Rays of sunshine Simple yet stunning, perennial daisies captivate Roy Lancaster's  discerning eye this month as he profiles some of his favourites.

Flower garden
Little wonders Early miniature bulbs bring a breath of spring to the garden; Anne Swithinbank shows that good things come in small packages.

Gardens by design
Design project
Straight and narrow Part one of David Stevens' new series sets out the plans for his transformation of a long, narrow garden.

Houseplants
Take the plunge
Follow Daphne Ledward's signposts to success with indoor bulbs for winter colour, plus our step-by-step guide for glorious hyacinth blooms on Christmas morning.

Living with houseplants
Carol Kurrein has more advice for the budding greenery genius in your home.

Gardens
Out of the woods
Geoffrey Smith profiles trees both native and exotic, and explains how a garden tree and its companion planting forms a focal point for the eye and, just as importantly, for wildlife.

TV special
Cope with a slope If you've got the inclination, she's got the advice; Pippa Greenwood gives a new and refreshing slant on overcoming the problems of a sloping garden.

Kitchen garden
Joy Larkcom explains the value of living, green manures to soil
enrichment.

The 60-minute vegetable plot
Roy Lacey returns from holiday just in time to foil the advance of an army of weeds on his hour-a-week garden larder.

Vegetable grow guide
Perfect peppers can be yours as this month's cut-out-and-keep growing guide focuses on ‘Gypsy’, ‘Bellboy’ and their capsicum colleagues.

The Victorian kitchen garden
Though such drastic and dangerous procedures as nicotine fumigation may be a thing of the past, today's organic gardener can still learn much from Harry Dodson's traditional methods of pest control.

Competitions and offers
Competition
Win a patio A superb new Bradstone patio is waiting to be custom-designed and built in your garden in our great new competition.

Competition
Win a Renault Clio Solve part two of our plant identity parade and you've the chance to win a fantastic new car.

Subscriptions and binders
You never miss an issue with our brilliant 15-for-12 subscription offer, so why not treat yourself to a specially-priced binder to keep them in, too?

Back issues
Our first six issues are the gardening collectors' items of the year.

Order the numbers you missed with our special coupon.

Welcome…

Coping with a slope is a major headache for thousands of people.

While the inclination may vary from a modest rise to a mountainside, there are a few golden rules you can follow.

When Pauline and Chris Lloyd of Dudley moved house then took on a new garden with a 1 in 3 slope.

They didn't know where they were going to start.

When television's Gardeners' World heard of their plight they set about lending a hand.

This month Pippa Greenwood shows the results of their work in a special feature with some great tips of her own.

Get set for a bulb bonanza too.

Whether you're looking for bowls of bulbs to brighten the home or the best miniatures for a rock garden, now's the time to start work and Daphne Ledward and Anne Swithinbank are here to pass on a host of colourful ideas.

And finally, a very warn Gardeners' World welcome to Richard Jackson, who presents Garden Clippins on BBC Radio 5's Saturday breakfast programme.

Richard is joining us every month to pass on tips, ideas and news from the world of horticulture, and add a touch of humour too.

Until next month, happy reading and good gardening. 
Dovecote deliberations in this month's Question Time, p80
A friendly fungus, p79
Violets don't shrink from a heavy soil — Nigel Colborn on clay, p26
Apple growing made as easy as pie
Anne Swithinbank's brilliant bulbs for early colour, p64
Pests of the past on p45
Robins mark out territory in this wildlife garden, p30
NEWS AND VIEWS
Garden news
Your monthly guide to news and views from the world of gardening
Complimentary colours
One-colour borders have been enjoying renewed popularity recently, and Mr Fothergill's Seeds has come up with the perfect quick answer to monochrome gardening.

The new Colour Schemes seed mixtures come in five different colour: yellow, orange, pink, blue and white.

They cost £1.99 each and contain three sachets of seeds in shades of the chosen colour, graded by height into small, medium and large varieties.

We have joined Mr Fothergill's to offer 200 sets in each colour to our readers: a total of 1,000 packets to give away!

Each packet includes a leaflet giving full instructions for successful cultivation.

Send your address and colour choice (one colour only per applicant) on a postcard to: Colour Schemes/ BBC Gardeners' World Magazine Offer, c/o Mr Fothergill's Seeds, Gazeley Road, Kentford, Newmarket, Suffolk CB8 7QB.

Winners will be drawn after September 7.

Set sale for Scotland
If you're always admiring unusual bulbs you seen in botanical and National Trust gardens, but don't know where to get them, head for Greenbank Gardens this month.

On September 14 and 15 the staff and friends of Greenbank hold a big sale of unusual bulbs for discerning gardeners.

Greenbank is at Clarkston, Glasgow.

Tel: 041–639 3281.

Redistribute your reading matter
If you've snapped up one our handsome binders you'll find, towards the end of the year, that because we've been able to pack so many pages into Britain's newest, brightest gardening magazine, things are getting, well, rather full.

Easy the congestion with a very special binder for our pull-out-and-keep Gardeners' Manual, and keep this invaluable reference work together and always to hand.

See our offer on p50.

Show your onions
Around 22,000 visitors are expected at the North of England Horticultural Society's autumn show on September 13 and 14.

This year the show includes the National Kelsae Onion festival and terrific nursery exhibits.

Tickets for Friday cost £5 between 10am and 4pm; £3 from £4 to 8pm.

Saturday: £4.50 at any time between 9.30am and 5pm. 
Did you know…

Plant collecting has been going on for thousands of years.

Although the Victorian era is considered to be the great age of plant collectors, the ancient Egyptians recorded plant collecting expeditions in their hieroglyphics.

The earliest of these was in 1495BC, when frankincense trees were brought back from the Horn of Africa for Queen Hatshepsut.

Apple pie order
Learn everything you ever wanted to know about apples while tasting cider and trying out some scrumptious apple recipes at Priorwood Garden, Roxburghshire on September 29.

The Apple Day runs from 2–6pm and includes an apple question time session, with experts on hand to identify your mystery apples and diagnose any problems.

Priorwood Gardens are at Melrose, Roxburghshire.

Tel: 031–336 2157 for further details.

Grandad's rosy new hebe
This attractive new hebe is appropriately called ‘Rosie’, after the grand-daughter of John Tooby (above), of Bransford Nurseries.

‘Rosie’ grows 30cm high, and about twice as wide, in well-drained soil in sun or part-shade, and is hardy.

It will be available from garden centres this autumn.

For any further information, contact Bransford Nurseries.

Tel: 0886–32369.

Don't miss…

See Suttons Seeds' trial grounds at Ippleden, near Newton Abbot, Devon on their open days: August 30 and 31, 9.30an-4.30pm.

Suttons experts will be there to answer questions, too.

A town and country show
The Town &Country Garden exhibited by the Sunday Express in association with BBC Gardeners' World Magazine at the Royal Show can be seen again this month.

Designed by Faith and Geoffrey Whiten, it features both paved and lawned areas, with terracotta pots, a raised pond, colourful borders and a handsome summerhouse.

The Town &Country Festival at the RASE Showground, Stoneleigh, Warks is on August 24–26.

Tel: 0203–696969 for details. 
Torbay tip
The Torbay Flower Festival runs from August 23 to 26 on Paignton Green, Devon.

Catch nursery exhibits and question time sessions 10am-6pm Bank Holiday Monday.

Price £2.

Topical topiary
Fancy shapes and pointed pyramids are all part of the famous gardens of Levens Hall.

They were laid out in the formal style 300 years ago by James II's gardener, Guillaume Beaumont.

Since Beaumont's days, there have been just ten head gardeners down the generations.

Levens Hall opens regularly through the season, and on September 23 for the National Gardens Scheme.

Levens Hall is 5m south of Kendal, in Cumbria.

Did you know…

The sting of a nettle works in just the same way as a hypodermic syringe.

The cell walls in the ‘stings’ on the stems contain silica, a glass-like substance; they puncture the skin, and then the irritant poison is released.

Floral arts
Gather the blooms of late summer and early autumn to create flower arrangements of the past.

Jane Newdick's recently published book, Period Flowers , draws on inspiration from medieval times onwards to make inspiring flower arrangements great and small.

Price £16.95 from Charles Letts.

Autumnal delights
The Royal Horticultural Society's Great Autumn Show is their second largest show after Chelsea, held in their old and new halls in Greycoat St. SW1.

As well as fine produce displays, the show will be packed with nursery exhibits and the best of autumnal flower displays.

The show is on September 17 (11am-7pm, tickets £3.50) and September 18 (10am-5pm, £2.50).

Tel: 071–834 4333. 
And anyway…

Phew!

We finally did it.

The garden was flung open the day before yesterday and I'm still reeling.

You may recall that earlier in the year I burdened you with my worries.

Well, after much deliberation and a family pow-wow or two we decided we'd give it a go one Sunday afternoon, between the hours of 2 and 6pm.

We decided not to do teas, you may remember.

Then one lady wrote and said that the ladies of the local church should do it for us.

If they refused we were to let her know and she'd write to the bishop.

Thankfully, it didn't get that far.

One of our neighbours rang to say she'd booked the village hall and she and her ladies would be doing scones and tea.

The proceeds would be in aid of the same charity as our garden opening.

Then the local Lions rang up.

Where were the cars going to park?

In the village hall car park, was the answer.

The Lions would provide us with signs and men to act as car park attendants.

Slight unease on my part.

This thing was growing.

Was the garden up to it?

For two days beforehand, my lady-who-does-in-the-garden and myself worked flat out.

Weeding, edging, mowing, prinking, pruning; we did the lot.

Piles of stones were moved by hands blistered by besoms.

Shrub roses were trussed to let people pass; signs erected to divert visitors from the non-scenic compost heap.

The night before, the man from the Lions rang.

He hadn't seen any posters in the village.

Would people know about the opening?

I worried all night, lest the listing in the local paper and in the Order of St John country handbook had not been enough.

I'd refrained from advertising any more for fear that we would be overwhelmed.

Had I actually erred on the discreet side?

The day came.

I woke to the sound of torrential rain.

Eventually it stopped.

At about 1.40pm cars started to appear and people were seen walking up the road.

The garden became like an ants' nest as snaking rows of people clambered up our hillside.

At 2.45 the car park started overflowing into neighbours' drives.

Have you ever seen your garden absolutely full of bodies?

It's quite a sight.

By 5.45pm it was all over.

We'd been visited by 700 people.

Nothing was pinched, nothing was moved.

I have not found one cigarette end or one piece of waste paper.

People left smiling and as I passed one lady on her way down the hill she grinned at me and said ‘Perfick’!

We are shattered and so is the garden.

But after slaving over something for ten years, it is rather nice to show it off a bit .

Would we do it again?

You bet.

Alan Titchmarch 
Sharp choice for pruning
Gardeners know the value of a really sharp knife for pruning as well as propagating.

These sharp tools are from Sandvik's range of gardening knives.

From left: the curved P20 pruning knife features a carbon steel blade (£11.99), as does the P11 budding knife (£10.99); the S4 pruning knife is in stainless steel and comes with shackle and strap and its own mini-sharpening steel (£12.99).

For your local stocklists, contact Sandvik.

Tel: 021–550 4700.

Spring pansy
There was an overwhelming response to our May competition to name the new pansy from Suttons Seeds.

The judges sifted through over 8,000 entries and finally picked the name ‘Spring Ovation’ as the winner.

Seven readers wrote in suggesting this name, so one entry was drawn out of a hat: Mrs Joan Davis of Chipping Sodbury, Bristol is the winner of an Al-Ko shredder. 
Win a patio
Paving the way
In this month's competition you could win a prize patio worth £3,000, designed and built by a Chelsea medal-winner
Whether yours is a family garden which has to sustain the rigorous attentions of children, a more sedate garden for entertaining al fresco , or a small city garden with little room for more than a couple of raised flowers beds, a patio can give your home and lifestyle a whole new dimension.

High quality paving
Bradstone, leading producers of high quality paving and walling products, is pleased to offer out prizewinner the opportunity to do just that in this exciting competition to win a patio worth £3,000.

Part of your prize will be a consultation with celebrated Chelsea medal-winning builder Alan Sargent, who will listen to your requirements and advise on the most suitable design.

You may prefer a large and simple paved terrace area, or something smaller, incorporating raised beds and a barbecue.

With Alan's guidance, you will choose from the Bradstone range of paving and walling.

Authenticity and quality are the Bradstone trademarks; many of its paving and waling products are taken from natural stone masters in order to reproduce the varying surfaces and edge details of quarried or weathered stone.

Colours are natural too, from the buff-coloured Wetherdale paving, reminiscent of York stone, to the weathered red Riven paving designed to complement brick.

Spring into action
Your new patio will be designed and built in time for spring when you can really enjoy it to the full.

Two runners-up will win Bradstone Riven paving and Cotswall walling to construct a planter seat, an instant way to add colour and character to the garden.

How to enter
Below are six requirements for a patio which we want you to place in order of importance:

A
Near to house
B
Sunny aspect
C
Slip-resistant
D
Sheltered from the wind
E
Easy to maintain
F
Paving design complementary to house
Send your answers (for example , 1=E, 2=A and so on ) and your name and address on a postcard to: BBC Gardeners' World Magazine /Bradstone Competition, PO Box 55, Wetherby, West Yorks LS23 7ET to arrive by first post on Friday September 13, 1991.

The first entry drawn after the closing date which matches the judges' decision will win. 
Patio built using Bradstone Wetherdale paving and brick-on-edge coping
Authenticity is one of Bradstone's trademarks
Over the fence
Your chance to air you news, views and, of course , those gardening anecdotes
Letter of the month
An alternative use for peat alternative My mum buys your magazine, and I read about Geoff Hamilton's cocopeat trials.

We have cocopeat in our flowerpots and it is very good, but there is one drawback Geoff didn't mention.

Birds, especially blackbirds, like using the fibres for building nests.

They went along all our pots getting the fibres out.

They even tried next door, but when they discovered our neighbours don't use cocopeat, they came straight back again!

Helen Care (11), Grays, Essex 
Standing up for koi: well-fed fish leave tadpoles in peace
Gooseberries are top of the crops when trained as standards
End mowing misery with with gravel in the garden
Koi controversy
I would like to take issue with Geoffrey Smith about koi in the garden pond (The living pond, June).

Mine don't eat tadpoles, perhaps because I feed them regularly.

In fact, we have watched the fish take tadpoles into their mouths, then swiftly eject them.

One morning there were over 2,000 tadpoles in my pond (I was bailing them out temporarily because the liner had a leak, so I was counting them too!).

During March there were at least 14 pairs of frogs, plus toads (and spawn).

Dragon flies and damsel flies are regular visitors.

As we live only a short distance from the Thames, we have to keep a net over the pond, as two years ago we lost 18 fish to a heron.

Magpies also use marginal plants to watch for fish.

As you may have gathered, I am a pond fanatic!

Mrs J Margetts, Kennington, Oxford
Setting a royal standard
Why is Prince Charles's support for organic gardening and farming continually ridicules by the daily newspapers?

As we gardeners know, a very high percentage of gardens are now tended this way.

It's no longer thought of as cranky or old-fashioned, as the press tries to make out, but as a much-needed way of helping to preserve this world by finding alternatives to chemicals and peat-cutting.

Mrs S R Monk, Essex
Born with green fingers
Two years ago our garden was just a desolate area of rubble left by the builders: now I dread ever having to leave it.

My 18-year-old son has transformed it, miraculously in such a short time, into a garden which is the envy of neighbours.

Best of all, the wildlife is back; ladybirds, butterflies, birds and bees, even frogs are all to be seen.

He seems to have a natural ability which encourages plants to grow well.

Would I be right in thinking that there really are people with ‘green fingers’ and should we be doing more to encourage our younger generation to take an active interest in the garden?

Norma Gee, Basingstoke
So grateful for gravel
I never thought I'd say that a sneak thief had done us a favour.

However, having carelessly left the shed unlocked, our mower and strimmer were stolen and, as we are both getting on a bit , we decided we would take up the lawn and put down gravel instead.

Oh, the bliss of it!

No more mowing and everything else.

Now I know what law-maintenance gardening is — fantastic!

Mrs Jean Wilson, Sheffield
Gooseberries shape up
I would like to let the lady looking for standard gooseberry plants (Question Time, June) know how I obtained mine.

I bought a really cheap gooseberry bush from a local store, making sure I picked one with good straight uncut stems (I think its variety was ‘Leveller’).

I cut all but the strongest, straightest stem away close to the base and planted the resulting ‘twig’ in a pot of good compost.

I staked it and nipped out sideshoots as they appeared, exactly as one would when making a fuchsia into a standard.

When it reached about 3ft I pinched out the top to make it branch, which it did most satisfactorily.

It now looks very well in a 15in pot, staked against wind damage and regularly fed, and in its first year yielded a crop of more than 3lb of berries.

This year it looks as if I will have even more.

A real success story, don't you agree?

Shelagh Williams, Cheltenham, Gloucestershire
More sweet pea wrinkles
With reference to the article in June on breaking dormancy in sweet peas: experiments conducted over a period of several years at New College, Pontefract certainly seem to bear out Anne Swithinbank's remarks.

There does indeed seem to be little advantage in damaging the coat of modern varieties of sweet peas.

However, it has also been observed that those with wrinkled testa (coats) appear to be slower to germinate and may well benefit  from piercing, scratching or abrasion.

I hope this may of interest to other gardeners.

Martin V Dawson, Pontefract, W Yorks
Tips for Titchmarsh
May I suggest that Alan Titchmarsh does one or all of the following in order to fill his pool in summer (And anyway…

, July).

1 Plans a series of barbecues 2 Plants quantities of sun-loving plants (see Nigel Colborn, August) 3 Buys new garden furniture with a view to relaxing in the sun in style 4 Cancels foreign holiday in view of expected superb weather at home 5 Offers his garden to his local theatre company for its summer season of outdoor plays.

In my experience, any combination of the above ensures continuous rain for the next three months!

Angela Blanchard, Keighley, W. Yorks
Pools win
I enjoyed the articles on water gardening in the July issue.

When starting my pond, I was overwhelmed by the generosity of friends and neighbours with all sorts of pond plants.

Now, five years later my pond is well-stocked with plants and fish, and I am able to give out plants in turn.

Each spring sees frog spawn followed by tiny frogs — a tremendous bonus, because my snail and slug problem has been greatly reduced without a single pellet!

Rob Perdue, Hampshire
Cup that cheers camellia
We have alkaline soil, and so the growing of camellias, rhododendrons, pieris etc is not easy.

In these days of concern for the environment I am unwilling to use peat (though I did try it some years ago and found my plants made little headway anyway).

However, cold tea, and emptying the teapot around the plants has a tremendous effect; my camellia has glossy new leaves and two new flowers, and a tiny pieris is also pushing its red bracts through.

The trouble is that I am not a tea-drinker, and so my plants get only the occasional treat when guests visit.

Perhaps we could instigate a national drive to recycle on a grand scale — from restaurants, BR etc — and sell them as a peat alternative!

Joan Chapman, Avon
The editor writes: The tannic acid in tea will certainly acidify your soil, making it more agreeable to lime-hating plants.

However, it is difficult to generate sufficient supplies!

Where to write
Send your letters to: Over the Fence, BBC Gardeners' World Magazine , 20–26 Brunswick Place, London N1 6DJ.

Each letter published will win its writer a £10 National Garden Gift Token, exchangeable at 1,500 garden centres, nurseries and shops all over the UK and any Interflora shop.

Identity parade
Name the plants and win a car
In association with Renault and the Horticultural Trades Association, we are proud to present the second instalment of our fantastic six-part competition to win a stylish new five-door Renault Clio RT 1.4.

And there's a fabulous £1,500 worth of HTA National Garden Gift Tokens, redeemable at garden centres, nurseries and garden shops, to be shared among our monthly prizewinners.

How to enter
Pictured here is our second pair of the HTA's Plants of the Month for 1991.

We are publishing pictures of two of these in each issue until January 1992.

The first five entries drawn after September 7 1991 to identify these two plants correctly will win £50 of National Garden Gift Tokens.

Answers to each part of the competition will be printed two months' later.

But that's not all.

Remember to keep a note of your answers, because in our January issue we will be asking you to name all twelve of the HTA's 1991 Plants of the Year.

If your correct entry is the first to be drawn you'll be driving away a fantastic new Renault Clio RT 1.4 voted Car of the Year!

Send your entries, to arrive by September 7 1991, on a postcard to: BBC Gardeners' World Magazine /Renault Competition, PO Box 55, Wetherby, West Yorkshire LS23 7ET.

To catch up with the first part of the competition, the August issue can be obtained from our Back Issues Service, see p51. 
A pond is soon established and will give years of pleasure
Favourite flowering shrub for early spring, vigorous and hardy
Slow-growing, conical conifer, with glaucous blue-green leaves
Garden clippings
In the first of a new series, Richard Jackson of Radio 5's Morning Edition looks at the quirky side of gardening life
Sweet scent of success
There are many personal reasons for choosing a rose and for me, scent is one of the most important.

I asked Roger Pawsey of Cants, Mark Mattock, Gareth Fryer, Ken Grapes of the Royal National Rose Society and Robert Harkness, five of the country's leading rose experts, to name their personal choice of the most highly scented hybrid teas and floribundas.

Top of the poll came:

Margaret Merril
A delicate blushing white floribunda.

Fragrant Cloud
The famous dusky-scarlet hybrid tea
Velvet Fragrance
A classic hybrid tea with rich, dark velvety crimson flowers.

Paul Shirville
Another hybrid tea, a subtle peach pink with romantic, ruffled petals.

Korresia
A floribunda with bright gold-yellow, wavy-edged petals.

To find which of the five is the most fragrant, we'll be holding a studio sniff-in on Morning Edition at 8.45am on Saturday August 31.

So do listen in!

Show for the smart and crafty
Some gardeners will do anything to win prizes (marrows filled with lead shot to add weight, for instance ), but there's one show where cheating is positively encouraged.

It's the Alternative Flower Show held annually in the village hall at Beadness, near Ainwick in Northumberland.

Categories include Superweed, Hanging's Too Good For It (for hanging baskets), and The Most Mis-shapen Potato.

The craft section includes Heaviest Scones (cement was used last year) and The Fruit Cake With The Most Fruit At The Bottom.

This year's show takes place on Saturday 31 August between 2 and 4.30pm, but don't hang about — at 6pm sharp the Over 60's Karate and Flower Arranging Class takes over, or so I'm told.

I believe every word.

Strawberry taste on trial
This month we're starting a trial to discover the best-tasting strawberries.

We've asked Ken Muir, of the famous fruit nursery, to select eight varieties of strawberry for the test.

He's chosen Royal Sovereign, Tenira (his own favourite), Elsanta, Cambridge Favourite, Honeoye, Korona, Bounty and a new variety, Pegasus.

We're looking for ten volunteers to take part, each of whom will be sent five plants of each of the eight varieties to grow.

The plants will be despatched at the end of September, with full cultural instructions.

We'll ask the testers next summer which, in their opinion, are the best-flavoured.

If you'd like to take part, write to Richard Jackson, Morning Edition, BBC Radio 5, Broadcasting House, London W1A 1AA, stating why you would like to participate.

We'll read out the names of the chosen testers on the programme on Saturday September 21.

In search of oddity
There is just one problem with that essential book Gardens of England and Wales Open to the Public 1991 — there are over 2,600 gardens to choose from.

Since most sound idyllic, I seek out those with that little extra something.

Who could resist ‘One acre of reclaimed wilderness populated by a variety of plants that can withstand ignorant malpractice, all planted by the ad hoc topsy school of garden design’?

Or the ‘washing-line garden’ or ‘new derelict secret garden’?

Sussex gardens offer a glimpse of sheep, while Norfolk gardens go one better with hydraulic rams!

If my wife manages to elbow her way past me to the book first, she's immediately led astray by extras like ‘free use of private beach’, ‘heated swimming pool’ or ‘wine-tasting’.

And she'll travel miles for ‘Cream teas’… 
Tune in to Richard Jackson on Radio 5's Morning Edition every Saturday at 8.45am.

gardeners' Diary
Action for September
The month of berries, harvests and the autumn equinox, with the days getting noticeably shorter and the nights longer and cooler
The Flower Garden
Even before autumn sets in, gardeners start thinking about spring and putting in bulbs for next year
•

Plant spring-flowering bulbs.

Put them between shrubs and herbaceous plants in beds and borders.

Choose dwarf varieties to plant in rock gardens.

•

Take out faded annuals to make room for spring bedding plants.

In mild areas and on light soils start sowing hardy annuals.

•

Plant evergreen hedges between mid-September and mid-October.

Water newly-planted shrubs regularly during prolonged periods of dry weather.

•

Plant out hardy biennials such as wallflowers.

Set them out with a trowel in well watered ground.

•

Harden off cuttings of rooted pinks, planting out the strongest growing in the batch.

•

Continue to dead-head or cut down spent flowers of herbaceous plants where necessary.

•

Feed dahlias fortnightly with a liquid fertiliser to maintain blooms and build up stout tubers.

Ensure plants are well staked.

•

Control mildew on Michaelmas daisies and roses with Nimrod-T (ICI).

Ensure plants are well watered in dry weather.

•

Roses may still need to be sprayed against black spot and rust.

Use a proprietary fungicide such as Murphy Tumbleblite (Fisons) or Systhane (pbi).

Remove and burn any blackspot-infected leaves.

•

Take rose cuttings from strong shoots, 9–12in long.

Put in a V-shaped trench 6in apart above a layer of course sand.

Fill trench with light soil and water well.

Ensure that they don't dry out.

•

Plant Iris reticulata in groups 2in deep and 2in apart.

Plant Iris unguicularis in free-draining, poor soil in a sheltered position.

•

Prune weeping standard roses by cutting back stems which flowered this year.

•

Tie in the new shoots on climbing roses, bending them over horizontally to encourage flowering side shoots.

•

Prepare the ground now for planting hardy evergreen shrubs.

Work in plenty of well-rotted manure or garden compost into the planting area, and a handful of bonemeal fertiliser for every sq yd to assist root establishment.

•

Continue to water ornamental plants in containers and hanging baskets as necessary.

When flowering is over clean containers and put away until next year, or pot up with winter pansies. 
•

This is a good month to buy new climbers at the garden centre.

Planting now will give them a damp season to get the roots established before next spring.

•

Dig over, remove weeds and add manure to prepare new borders for planting.

More miniatures
Now is the time to start taking cuttings of miniature roses.

Take 3in-long shoots of this season's growth and trim to just below a leaf bud.

Dip the base into a hormone rooting compound and insert into a free-draining compost.

Keep your cutting shaded and pot on when well rooted.

Overwinter under cover and plant out in late spring.

Dead-head day lilies regularly for continued flowering.

Once flowers are over, cut the faded stems back to ground level.

Plant daffodils in informal groups; don't plant tulips until November
Plant bulbs of Iris reticulata in the rock garden for spring blooms
Remove and burn leaves on rose bushes infected by blackspot
Ponds and water life
Fine September days with the last of the summer sun present the ideal time to build a new pond
•

Supplies of live food start to decrease in September, so remember to feed fish.

They don't feed when the water is cold however, and will survive through winter without feeding.

•

When feeding fish, give them high-protein food and a supplement of dried daphnia each day.

•

This is a good month to construct pools, while there are still some fine days left to complete the work before winter.

•

Hardy bog plants propagated earlier can be set out in their permanent positions at the poolside.

Lawns and turf
This is a good month for sowing seeds lawns, but make sure the ground is fully prepared first.

•

Scarify the lawn vigorously by raking in two directions with a spring-tined rake or scarifier to remove debris and thatch.

•

Lawn can be treated with a proprietary autumn fertiliser.

Don't be tempted to use up the remains of a summer lawn fertiliser, which will contain too much nitrogen.

•

Spike compacted areas with a garden fork, hollow-tined fork or mechanical aerator to encourage vital air exchange at the roots.

•

Mowing can usually be done less regularly during September as the grass starts to grow at a slower rate.

Raise the height of cut accordingly.

Planning ahead
Charles Patman
Plant dwarf spring flowering bulbs such as Anemone blanda , chionodoxa and snowdrops to form carpets of colour beneath established shrubs.

The anemones will prefer being planted in full sun, as their flowers don't open so well when put in a shady position.

Towards the end of the month, begin to strip down hanging baskets and replant them with winter-flowering pansies to provide colour through the darker winter days.

Pot up the summer's fuchsias and geraniums and store them in a frost-free position over winter.

Tune in to Charles Patman on BBC Radio Peterborough.

Quick guide to September
Flower garden
•

Plant spring bulbs, but leave tulips until November
•

Plant wallflowers in well watered ground
•

Control mildew with fungicide and regular and regular watering
•

Tie in new shoots of climbing roses horizontally
•

Feed dahlias fortnightly to build up strong tubers
•

Take cuttings of roses
Greenhouse
•

Take cuttings of fuchsias and pelargoniums
•

Remove painted shading from greenhouse windows
•

Continue to ventilate and damp down when necessary
•

Bring potted primulas and other plants indoors
•

Plant up pots of bulbs
Kitchen garden
•

Sow winter lettuces
•

Harvest plums, allowing dessert ones to ripen first
•

Hoe the beds, weekly to keep weeds under control
•

Protect developing cauliflower curds
•

Harvest onions and ripen in a dry, sunny spot
•

Earth up around leeks and celery to blanch them
•

Lift and store remaining maincrop potatoes
Lawns
•

Scarify lawns vigorously
•

Spike compacted areas with a fork or special aerator
•

Mow less frequently
•

Treat lawns to an autumn fertiliser for root growth
Dead-head any remaining spent flowers on waterlilies
Spike compacted lawns with a garden fork to improve aeration
House and greenhouse
This is a month of changeover in the greenhouse, with this year's plants providing cuttings for the next
•

September is an important month in the greenhouse, with seeds and cuttings being prepared and plenty of bulbs ready to be planted.

•

Continue taking cuttings of fuchsias, regal and zonal pelargoniums, and abutilon.

Take cuttings of heliotrope, coleus, impatiens and the shrubby forms of calceoaria.

•

Wipe off the shading paint from the glass at the beginning of the month in Scotland and the north, and the end of the month in the south.

•

Potted primulas and other plants that have been standing in frames can be brought into the greenhouse now.

•

Re-pot arum lilies intended to flower in the winter.

Use one plant per 5in pot, or three per 8 or 9in pot.

Use a proprietary peat or coir-based potting compost or John Innes no3.

•

Propagate lily bulbs from healthy scales.

Place them on a sandy layer over seed compost in trays, adding more sand to cover all but the tips.

Stand the tray in gentle warmth and keep the compost moist.

•

Bring pot-grown chrysanthemums into the greenhouse by mid-September and spray plants with a good combined fungicide and insecticide.

•

Continue to ventilate the greenhouse as necessary, watching out for hot September days and chilly nights.

Temperatures can fluctuate a great deal at this time of year.

•

Make up pots and bowls of bulbs for Christmas and easter flowers.

Use a proprietary bulb fibre which will encourage good root growth.

•

In some areas artificial heat may be needed from late September, so check now that your greenhouse heaters are in good working order.

•

Sow antirrhinums, calendulas, clarkias, cornflowers and nemesias to be ready for early summer displays next year.

Autumn clean-up
Fred Friar
Now is the time to have a really good clear up in the greenhouse.

Remove spent tomato plants as soon as possible and put the old compost on the garden as a mulch; don't save it for using again next year.

Clean pots, staging and all surfaces with a solution of Jeyes fluid.

By cleaning out the house you can make room for overwintering plants.

Trim back fuchsias brought in from the garden and pot them up in a peat and sand mixture.

All the leaves will drop away, and should be cleared up, rather than left to rot, or they will encourage pests and diseases to build up in the greenhouse.

Tune in to Fred Friar on BBC Wiltshire Sound
New lawns from seed
1
The dug-over, weed-free site should be consolidated by raking and treading down all over with the heels.

2
Repeat the raking and treading process until a firm, stone-free level site is achieved, and rake once more .

3
Divide the area into manageable squares.

Sow at a rate of 1 — 1–1/2oz of seed per sq yd , as evenly as possible.

4
Sow a good 3in beyond the edges of the intended lawn and very lightly rake over with a spring tine rake.

Make the most of lower light levels by cleaning the glass.

Wipe off shading paints used over summer
Pot up bulbs of Nerine crispa .

Take offsets to grow on separately
Reorganise staging to make room for over-wintering plants
The kitchen garden
There is plenty of produce to be gathered in the kitchen garden, but remember to order new fruit trees as well .

•

Plums can be harvested as they begin to show colour.

For eating, leave to ripen fully on the tree.

Prop up heavily-laden branches to prevent them breaking.

•

Harvest pears, cooking apples and dessert apples as soon as they have ripened.

•

Sow a row of turnip ‘Manchester Market’ to grow for green tops which can be harvested in early to mid-winter.

•

Write off for fruit catalogues from the specialist nurseries, and prepare your order for new fruit trees and bushes.

•

Earth up the stems of leeks and trench celery to blanch them.

Eat self-blanching celery as soon as possible as it does not keep well for long periods.

•

Harvest remaining crops like potatoes and beans, clear away salads that have run to seed.

Put all the waste vegetation on the ever-hungry compost heap.

•

Continue planting new strawberries in well prepared soil.

Ensure the plants have been grown from certified stock which is free from virus by buying from a reputable supplier.

•

The end of August is your last chance to summer-prune cordon apples and pears.

•

Place cloches over parsley to keep it growing strongly into autumn.

Pot up a hew clumps and bring them into the kitchen.

•

Bend a cauliflower leaf over to cover and protect the young curd.

•

Leave a few marrows on the plants to ripen fully, raising them up through the foliage into the sun by resting on bricks.

Harvest before the frost, and store in a cool place until required.

Marrows will store in good condition for many months.

•

Sow Japanese onions in the north at the end of August and in early September in the south.

•

To prevent winter brassicas rocking in the wind earth up soil round their stems.

•

Lift any remaining maincrop potatoes.

Check for signs of damage and only store those in perfect condition in paper sacks in a cool, dark place.

Ensure the store is frost-free.

•

Place a greaseband round the trunk of apple trees to catch the wingless female winter moth as it crawls up the tree from the soil in an attempt to lay its eggs.

•

Harvest onions and lay out in a dry sunny spot to fully ripen.

Then clean off soil, dried roots and foliage, storing the onions in a cool, dry and frost-free site.

•

Endive plants will be ready for blanching.

Cover them with a bucket or large flower pot, or place a dinner plate on a crown of foliage.

Allow about three weeks to blanch fully.

•

Sow winter lettuce in rows, covering seed to a depth of 1/2in.

Water in and, when germinated, thin to around 8in apart.

Choose hardy varieties such as ‘Kwiek’ and ‘Valdor’ (butterheads).

Ready for the fruit harvest
Derek Cox
A daily check of the fruit trees is necessary to ensure you manage to collect fruit at its peak harvest condition.

Apples such as ‘Merton Knave’ and ‘Laxton's Fortune’ are very poor keepers and should be picked and eaten as soon as they are ripe.

Pears are best picked before they are quite ripe.

Twist the fruit slightly to one side and, if almost ripe, is will part from the tree.

Early plums should all have been picked by now , although ‘Marjorie's Seedling’ will be ripe from mid-September.

Tune in to Derek Cox on BBC Radio Leicester.

The fruit store
Before storing apples and pears, check that the store is free from mice and that the trays are thoroughly clean.

Allow timber containers to absorb some moisture outside first, so they don't draw it from the fruit and cause it to shrivel.

Pick fruit just ripe, harvesting preferably in the coolest part of the day.

Complete summer pruning of cordon and espalier apples trees
Ripen marrows by raising them out of the foliage and resting on bricks
Blanch endives by covering with a bucket, a large flower pot, or a dinner plate for three weeks
Plums intended for eating should be left to ripen fully on the tree
Harvest onions and lay them out in a dry, sunny spot where then can finish ripening before being stored
Houseplants
Take the plunge
Christmas may seem far away, but for a show of blooming indoor bulbs to gladden the festive season, September is the month to get to work.

Daphne Ledward picks out her favourites for us.

Though it hardly seems possible, spring-flowering bulbs are on sale again, and if we want to bring some winter cheer to the home we should be planting them now.

Hyacinths, narcissi, crocuses and certain types of tulips are the most widely planted bulbs for indoor displays.

However, many others are equally suitable.

Snowdrops, Roman hyacinths (which have smaller, more open flower heads and two or three stems per bulb), Iris reticulata and Iris danfordiae can be followed in flowering sequence by scillas, chionodoxas and muscari.

Bearing in mind that it takes approximately 12 weeks from planting to flowering, it is possible to grow bulbs of many species and varieties to flower at the same time for a spectacular display, and also plant for a succession of flowers if potting up is carefully timed.

Buy bulbs for indoor flowering as soon as they become available.

Choose large, firm, healthy specimens that are not visibly diseased or damaged and plant quickly, before they show signs of sprouting, as this can affect subsequent growth and flower quality.

To be sure of having bulbs in  flower at Christmas, it is advisable to buy specially prepared ones which have been temperature-treated for early flowering.

Hyacinth bulbs are the most widely available in prepared form, but prepared narcissi and tulips can also be found.

Certain tender varieties of narcissi, like ‘Paper White’ and ‘Grand Soleil d'Or’, are naturally early flowering and do not need a natural or artificial cool period in order to flower quickly and healthily indoors, but they cannot be planted outside afterwards.

Bulbs without compost
Some bulbs will flower without conventional planting, which can be fun.

For instance , Colchicum autumnale (naked ladies or meadow saffron), bulbs of which are available now, will flower if placed dry on a sunny windowsill.

After it has flowered the bulb can be planted out in the garden in the usual way.

Hyacinths can be grown over water in special hyacinth glasses.

The bulb is placed in the narrow neck of the glass which keeps it dry.

The base of the glass is filled with water which just touches the bottom of the bulb.

It sends roots down into the water, and the leaves and flowers then develop as normal.

Pebble dash
Narcissi can also be planted on pebbles.

Choose a watertight container at least 5in deep and cover the bottom with pebbles.

Arrange the bulbs close together, almost touching, on top of these, and place more pebbles around them to keep them stable.

Add water to just below the base of the bulbs.

Place the container in the dark in a cool place for 8–10 weeks, checking from time to time to see if the water needs topping up.

The bulbs will send roots in among the pebbles.

After the cool period, treat the bulbs exactly as if they were growing in compost.

Traditionally, however, indoor bulbs are planted in shallow ceramic or plastic bowls without drainage holes, but it is not really  necessary to use specially designed containers.

Providing the planting is done correctly, a variety of receptacles can be used: old baking bowls, fruit dishes, even chamberpots.

Ordinary plant pots can also be planted with bulbs.

These make cultivation slightly easier as with drainage holes, there is less risk of overwatering.

A special diet
If your container has no drainage holes, it is essential to plant in bulb fibre, which is a compost of peat or a peat substitute with crushed oyster shell and charcoal added to keep the compost sweet.

However, if drainage is provided, a standard potting compost may be used instead.

Flowers will look at their best if bulbs are placed close together in the bowl, but they must not touch each other .

The fibre or compost should be well moistened before use.

It should be damp enough to hold together when squeezed in the hand, but not so wet that water still runs out through the fingers.

Place the bulbs on a layer of fibre, then work in and gently firm more fibre around them.

Large bulbs should be only half-buried; with smaller ones, the tips should be just below the compost surface.

Do not mix different species of bulbs, or different varieties of one species, in the same container.

They are likely to flower at different times and the effect will be untidy.

If you want a mixture of species and colours, grow individual bulbs separately in plant pots and then plant up an arrangement using bulbs which have reached the same stage of development and look to be just about to flower.

Plunge power
It is essential that bulbs spend a period of time in cool, dark conditions before flowering (this is known as plunging) to ensure that a good root system is produced, otherwise stunted growth and deformed flowers can result.

Older gardening books may recommend a cool cupboard indoors for plunging.

But with central heating, it is now not always possible to provide an ideal plunging environment within the home.

An alternative is to put the planted-up bowls in black polythene sacks ties at the top and keep them in a cold greenhouse or cool, frost-free outhouse, garage or shed.

Underground safe
Another solution is to dig a hole in the garden, place the bowls in this, and cover them with a thick layer of leaf mould, peat or peat substitute, but the bowls must have drainage holes or they could become waterlogged during heavy rainfall.

Check the bowls periodically and give them enough water if necessary to keep the compost evenly damp.

After 8–10 weeks, when an inch or two of growth has appeared (prepared bulbs should need only six weeks), the containers can be brought indoors.

For a few days they should be given a cool, shaded position; after that as much light as possible.

Water regularly; never let the compost dry out completely, though you must beware of overwatering.

Be ready with thin canes to support hyacinth blooms in particular if they start to bend and droop under their own weight.

Keep them cool
Flowering bulbs will last much longer in a cool room or position rather than a hot one.

Always bear in mind that when they flower outdoors at their natural time the temperature is unlikely to reach 60°F (15°C) for more than a day or two.

This temperature may be too low for comfort in a regularly used living room, so try and find a cooler spot for a longer display.

For hyacinths in bloom at Christmas, start your preparations in late September.

Choose good quality prepared bulbs and plant them close together, but not touching, to approximately half their depth in good, moist bulb fibre in suitable bowls.

Put the bowls in a dark place where the temperature does not exceed 45°F (°C).

If there is no suitable spot indoors, put the bowls in the garden and cover with 6in of peat or a peat substitute such as cocofibre, excluding rain with polythene sheeting if the bowls have no drainage holes.

Remember to check on them from time to time and water them carefully if the compost seems dry.

At the end of November, when the shoots should be about 1 — 1–1/4in high, the bulbs can be gradually acclimatised to living room conditions.

The flowers should open and be at their glorious, fragrant best for Christmas.

The bulbs can be planted in the garden afterwards to flower outdoors the following year.

Daffodils &narcissi
Carlton
yellow
Cheerfulness
cream, tazetta
Dove Wings
cream/yellow, miniature
Dutch Master
yellow
February Gold
yellow/miniature
Fortune
yellow/orange
Geranium
white/orange, tazetta
Golden Ducat
yellow/double
Golden Harvest
yellow
Grand Soleil d'Or
yellow, tazetta, early
Jack Snipe
white/yellow, miniature
King Alfred
yellow
Minnow
cream/yellow, miniature
Mount Hood
white
Paper White
white, tazetta, early
Peeping Tom
yellow, miniature
Scarlet Gem
yellow/red, tazetta
Spellbinder
yellow/white
Suzy
yellow, miniature
Tête-à-Tête
yellow, miniature
Texas
yellow/orange, double
White Lion
white, double
Hyacinths
Amethyst
violet
Bismarck
sky blue
Delft
porcelain blue
Jan Bos
red
Lady Derby
pink
L'Innocence
white
Ostara
dark blue
Pink Pearl
rose pink
Rosalie
rose pink
Crocuses
Blue Pearl
pale blue with golden throats, miniature
Cream Beauty
cream with yellow throats, miniature
Early Perfection
amethyst
E P Bowles
lemon-yellow, miniature
Enchantress
blue
Goldilocks
yellow, miniature
Kathleen Parlow
white
King of the Blues
blue
King of the Stiped
amethyst/violet with lighter stripes
Pickwick
grey/lilac with purple stripes
Purpureus Grandiflorus
purple
Remembrance
blue/purple
Snow Bunting
white with mustard throats, miniature
Snow Storm
white
Zwanenburg Bronze
gold with bronze-tinged exterior, miniature
Stiped Beauty
violet stripes on white
Vanguard
lilac
Yellow Mammoth
yellow
Tulips
Aladdin
red and yellow, lily-flowered
Apeldoorn red, Darwin
hybrid
Bellona
yellow, single early
Boule de Neige
white, double early
Cape Cod
apricot edged yellow, botanical
China Pink
pale pink, lily-flowered
Dante
vivid blood-red, double early
Golden Apeldoorn yellow, Darwin
hybrid
Gordon Cooper salmon pink turning to scarlet, Darwin
hybrid
Guiseppe Verdi
carmine striped yellow, botanical
Keizerskroon
yellow/red, single early
Murillo
white flushed pink, double early
Orange Nassau
blood-red, double early
Pandour
yellow/carmine, mottled leaves, botanical
Peach Blossom
pink/white, double early
Pink Beauty
rose flushed white, single early
Red Emperor
scarlet, botanical
Shakespeare
red, mottled leaves, botanical
Van der Hoeff
yellow, double, early
Van der Neer
violet, single, early
Water Lily
ivory white with gold base, carmine tinged, botanical
West Point
yellow, lily-flowered
Yellow Empress
yellow, botanical
Growing Christmas hyacinths
1
In late September plant healthy prepared bulbs to half their depth in compost-filled pots with drainage holes.

2
In the garden, mound peat or peat substitute over the pots.

Check from time to time and water if the compost is dry.

3
In late November, bring the pots into a greenhouse or cool place to acclimatise, ready to be taken indoors.

4
Plant up arrangements in bulb bowls and planters choosing bulbs which are at the same stage of development.

The flowers of Narcissus ‘Tête-à-Tête’ last particularly well
The greigii hybrid tulips such as ‘Cape Cod’ are always brightly coloured with striped or mottled leaves
Plunge power ensures a blooming good Christmas
Growing hyacinth bulbs over glass is a fascinating experience
Tazetta narcissi such as ‘Scarlet Gem’ bear their flowers in clusters
Fragrant, silvery Crocus ‘Blue Pearl’ has a golden-yellow throat
Strong stems support the finely-cut blooms of tulip ‘West Point’

The marvellous deep indigo colour of hyacinth ‘Blue Magic’

Colour Creations
The Heavy Mob
So many plants thrive on sticky clay soil that it's no barrier to a beautiful garden, says Nigel Colborn
Which would you rather have in your garden — sticky clay or thin, hungry sand?

Given the choice, and assuming that precious few of us are blessed with the ideal soil type, it is probably better for garden land to err on the heavy side.

As song as you look after them, heavy soils will never let you down in a drought, will be naturally fertile and can be made to suit the widest range of plants.

Roses, for instance , dote on sticky soil.

Perennials, even quite shallow-rooted species, tend to grow more robustly in clay loams than on chalk or sand and, given adequate drainage, almost all shrubs thrive on fairly stiff land.

Wetland plants will be in their element, so long as they are given generous mulches to keep the moisture in.

Heavy soils vary.

The calcareous clays, such as East Anglian boulder clay, are alkaline and therefore will not suit azaleas or rhododendrons.

But the acid or neutral clays which are found in many parts of Britain are as good for lime haters are are acid sands.

Planting plans
Designing a beautiful garden is no more difficult on clay than anywhere else.

For a formal theme, neat-growing trees such as the clay-loving acers can be planted at regular intervals along a brick path to create a little avenue.

The plants beneath help to ensure the right conditions by covering the soil surface, reducing evaporation and hence keeping it moist and workable.

For a low-growing, striking herbaceous colour scheme, try a blue and gold theme with lemon balm, forget-me-nots, creamy violas and the gorgeous ice-blue Veronica gentianoides .

In an informal planting, willows, ferns and rhododendrons can be combined to give a series of displays, changing the mood through the season.

Ferny foliage will make a soft contrast to the  spikiness of sword-like leaves, either of yuccas, on drier soils, or of Siberian irises in the damp.

Plants tend to grow big and lush on heavy soils, a feature worth enhancing by going for vigorous species.

Roses, especially ramblers like Rosa filipes ‘Kiftsgate’, need plenty of headroom but are sensational in bloom and in fruit.

Old shrub roses, particularly centifolias, enjoy clay, but flower only once a season.

Repeat-flowering shrub roses include hybrid musks such as ‘Penepole’ or ‘Buff Beauty’, and any of the rugosas.

Look for fragrant ‘Roseraie de l'hay’ (purple-red) and ‘Blanche Double de Coubert’ (white).

Outstanding perennials, especially for alkaline clay, include the comfreys.

The common wild species is a course-growing monster but Symphytum x uplandicum ‘Variegatum’ has surpassing beauty in the cream zoning of its leaves.

Hostas love moist clay but suffer very badly from slugs which are always more abundant than on lighter soils.

Other good perennials include cranesbills, particularly Geranium malviflorum , monardas such as ‘Cambridge Scarlet’ or purple ‘Prairie Night’ and any of the violets, Viola labradorica , as pretty for its purple foliage as for its violet spring flowers, looks absolutely superb in a mauve colour scheme.

Grasses will help to build up the feeling of luxuriance and they add their own special grace when they sway about in the breeze.

Exceptional grasses for heavy soils include the 6ft-high Miscanthus sinensis and the smaller Molinia caerulea , whose dead winter stems turn parchment yellow.

The dreaded gardeners' garters, of Phalaris arundinacea ‘Picta’ manages to creep all over the place but is far too lovely a plant to write off just for that reason.

Plants for acid clay
With acid clay, you can enjoy a number of extra-special plants that are harder to maintain elsewhere.

For example , the gorgeous blue poppies, though by no means lime-haters, will always colour better in acid conditions and need soil which has been enriched with leaf mould and retains its moisture.

Azaleas and rhododendrons will cope well with heavy soil, provided the drainage is adequate.

Slow-growing Kalmia latifolia , a North American member of the rhododendron tribe, loves moist soil.

This plant's exquisite pink and white blooms look much like sugar icing cake decorations.

The riot of summer vegetation is wonderfully dramatic on heavy soils, but there is a down side: things can go very flat in winter unless you plan carefully.

For year-round interest, firs like Abies lasiocarpa appreciate heavy, moist soil, although A. koreana is my personal favourite because it produces cones at an early age.

Willows like to wallow
Willows love the wet.

From a vast range in many shapes and sizes, you could select the dwarf Salix lanata for foliage, the larger S. fargesii for winter twigs, and another small willow, S. hastata , for its silver catkins.

Autumn colour is easy to achieve with such shrubs as Rhus hirta (often listed as R. typhina ).

Try the cut leaved form ‘Laciniata’ and the related smoke bushes, Cotinus coggygria and Cotinus ‘Grace’.

Ornamental cabbages may be bit bizarre, but they love heavy soil and will make a brilliant late display.

If you feel like going completely over the top, why not grow some rhubarb chard near your gaudy cabbages?

If you don't like the results, you can always eat them!

Coming towards winter, birds have usually scoffed the berries of Viburnum opulus by late autumn, but the big, bottle-shaped hips of Rosa moyesii last until Christmas and holly berries should persist well into the New Year.

At ground level, bergenias, hellebores and, of course , snowdrops all love heavy soil.

Spring can return with tulips, most of which enjoy a well  drained, heavy soil.

They may be joined by the gorgeous lime-green flowers of Smyrnium perfoliatum , a plant which is either a satisfactory spreader or an invasive pest, depending on your point of view.

Cultural tips
Drainage is one of the most important features of your soil.

You can improve soil structure and drainage by incorporating organic material such as compost, and make soil more porous by digging in grit or bonfire ash.

Cracking in dry weather can be prevented by mulching and ensuring there is a good ground cover.

However, if cracks do appear, you should try brushing a mixture of peat or compost and coarse sand into them.

Cautions
The higher the clay content, the more sticky the soil and the more care you must take.

Never be tempted to dig so deep that you bring up raw clay, but work assiduously on the top few inches only, gradually improving the soil deeper each year.

And don't try walking on your borders, particularly when they are wet, or you risk causing compaction and damage.

Making clay work for you
•

Heavy clay is made up chiefly of tiny soil particles which bind together tightly and cling to the water around them, making the clay sticky and difficult to work.

•

The poor drainage that results can be helped significantly by digging in shovelfuls of sharp, pea-sized fruit, together with plenty of well-rotted organic manure or compost.

•

Preparing the soil in this way means that you are less likely to suffer from too many plant deaths where the roots of young plants have found it impossible to penetrate the soil.

•

Once the planting has been done, cover the soil with a thick mulch of crushed bark, peat or leaf mould, which will gradually break down into the soil and help to improve its texture.

•

Mulching has the added benefit of keeping moisture in the soil during dry weather, when clay is liable to dry out and crack.

It will also prevent the surface from forming a hard, impenetrable cap.

•

Clay soils can be neutral, acidic of limey, according to regional geology.

Test your soil's acidity before buying plants that are pH sensitive.

•

Avoid working clay soil in wet weather, as standing on it will cause compaction.

A buyer's guide to clay lovers
Most of the plants mentioned are widely available, but some may prove more difficult to find. 
Topical tip
Ornamental cabbages can make a lovely late display, and they adore heavy soil.

Rhubarb chard grown nearby will make the scene even more spectacular.

Both can of course eventually be eaten. 
Shrub roses such as ‘Roseraie de l'Haÿ’ really thrive on clay soils
The choice of trees for clay includes conifers, acers and birches
Soft surrounding planting sets off spiky, yellow-bloomed bog irises
Primulas and Berberis darwinii make attractive companions for springtime colour on clay
An avenue of acers creates vertical interest in a formal plan, but potentially large varieties will need to be pruned back in later years.

Wildlife Garden
Out of the woods
Trees in the wild are home, larder and playground to a host of living creatures.

With careful selection you can recreate your own wildlife haven.

Standing under an ancient oak I am intensely aware of the sheer concentration of life in the leafy canopy overhead.

Flecks of sunshine dappling fissured bark are a reminder of summers past during the tree's slow progress to maturity.

In the garden some of the natural beauty of country copse and woodland can be recreated.

However, the available space may dictate some modifications, among which choice of tree is necessarily paramount.

Building a plant community
Few gardens are large enough to accommodate a full-grown oak or beech.

There are compact, slow-growing forms of nearly all our native trees, but though these are always my first option I consider it a mistake to limit planting choice to our indigenous flora.

There are many imported tree species that are equally suitable, filling all the wildlife gardener's requirements as to ultimate height and spread, usefulness in habitat terms and, above all, beauty of leaf, flower and berry.

Once planted, and whether 10 or 50ft high, a tree becomes a focal point around which to build a complete plant community.

Under natural conditions a tree growing in a hedgerow, copse or forest progresses through various stages of settlement to a climatic climax which, once attained, remains the same year after year with only minor variations.

Contrived planting plan
This process, which can take several decades in open country, may be contrived in only a few years in a garden by reversing the natural scheme of things.

First plant the tree or trees, followed by shrubs carefully selected for their usefulness in supporting a diverse wildlife community.

Then reinforce the whole with ground cover made up of herbaceous plants, flowering bulbs  and, of course , the infinitely various and valuable annuals.

What I find extraordinary is how each tree seems almost to suggest its own companion planting.

On reflection, however, this may not be quite true, since anyone who sets out to plant a wildlife garden instinctively takes a much keener interest in, and is influenced by, natural plant associations and communities.

In my own garden the twisted hazel, Corylus avellana ‘Contorta’, is underplanted with primroses, bluebells and wood anemones, for that is how I remember them growing, as they still do, along the banks of the rive Greta.

It forms a composition both nostalgically satisfying and harmoniously beautiful.

I grow so many of my plants, including trees and shrubs, from seed.

This means that any of those experiments in plant association which prove to be unsuccessful can be scrapped without too many regrets.

That they have cost me no more than my time makes such decisions much easier than if I had paid for them in gold.

My silver birch, a fine form of Betula pendula , is now the tallest tree in the garden at 25ft, yet 16 years ago it was a seed gathered from a moss-covered stump on Birk Crag.

As is my usual practice, I pruned the first year's growth back hard to produce several stems instead of just one, and I have been well rewarded for my efforts.

The ground-planting around it includes Eranthis hyemalis (winter aconite), native daffodils and cowslips.

Autumn's golden accolade
The silver birch is so elegantly beautiful, from spring's pale green bud-burst until the final golden accolade of autumn, that it plays a part in all the seasons, not least because it is especially favoured by long-tailed tits as a food source in winter.

Betula pendula ‘Youngii’, with weeping branches, is a neatly  compact form which should fit neatly into a confined space without becoming an embarrassment.

The canopy is light enough to encourage underplanting too, making Young's weeping birch a good choice for the smaller plot.

Also eminently suitable for the smaller garden is Sorbus aucuparia ‘Fastigiata’, a slow-growing form of our native rowan which will eventually reach 15ft in height.

That sorbus berries when red and ripe turn blackbirds, starlings and other fruit eaters into the most shameless gluttons merely serves to underline this tree's usefulness.

There is some confusion over the parentage of S. ‘Fastigiata’.

My only contribution to the debate is to affirm that the colony of twenty or more specimens growing along the lane above my house breeds true.

The seedlings, upright as bishops, are as free-fruiting and close-branched as you could wish for.

The common holly, Ilex aquifolium , shares an almost symbiotic relationship with rowan, providing an extra amenity as a secure nesting and roosting place, and supplying ample berries in bleak mid-winter for both fieldfares and redwings to feed on.

A well defined form
According to my dictionary, a tree can be any perennial plant having a self-supporting woody main stem.

In a small garden two excellent weeping ornamental and habitat shrubs, the Kilmarnock willow, Salix caprea pendula , and Cotoneaster ‘Hybridus Pendulus’, make ideal trees up to 10ft high.

In spring the willow, with its arching branches, embroidered with silver female catkins, is truly a thing of beauty.

The caterpillars  so far unidentified, which feed on its leaves provide an abundant source of protein for the many young birds.

Birds are bowled over
Cotoneaster ‘Hybridus Pendulus’ is, in wildlife terms, what Ian Botham is to cricket — in the allrounder class for usefulness.

I have this neatly weeping tree in my own garden, its serried mass of pink flowers in spring followed in autumn by a profusion of dark red berries, and the avian population has expressed its approval.

This year a robin has nested in the closely interlacing branches; last summer there was a wren.

There are a number of cherries which will interest the wildlife-oriented gardener.

Prunus avium makes a broad canopied tree, the clusters of white flowers in spring followed by small succulent fruit in August.

Prunus padus is well named the bird cherry, for its black fruits are high on the animal and bird menu of gastronomic delights.

It grows into a small-too-medium-sized tree which will tolerate fairly hard pruning, but can nevertheless persist in being rather unshapely.

However, it has its compensations.

Watching badgers graze on bird cherries and elderberries in Gyhll Beck wood is certainly high on my list of happier wildlife experiences.

Crab apples and wild cherry grow in company with blackthorn, hawthorn, elder, and wild rose along a verge near my own garden, forming what must be the best natural autumn bird larder for miles around.

Too big for their beaks
Crab apples are easily grown from seed, and most of the seedlings are well worth their place in the garden.

Certainly each of the six crab apples planted in my garden earn their keep in wildlife and ornamental terms.

Watching blackbirds trying to give themselves hernias by swallowing cherry-sized crab apples whole is now a firm fixture in my programme of autumn entertainments.

Wildlife profile
Rowan
Some native trees have an attractive robustness and the rowan ( Sorbus aucuparia ), particularly in the upright growing forms, is one.

Few sorbus can compare with our native rowan for ease of cultivation or the liberal manner with which it unfailingly produces an abundant crop of insect-pollinated flowers each May, followed in late August by densely packed bunches of bright orange-red fruits.

When the leaves turn colour and the berry clusters are ripe, the rowan is a princely sight.

The witches' bane
S. aucuparia forms a tree 35–45ft tall.

The compound leaves, orange scarlet in autumn, are unpaired pinnate, made up of nine to 15 leaflets.

Rowans will grow in alkaline soils, but prefer heavier acid loams.

A valley I know has rowan trees growing with oak, birch and holly.

In winter it's a wildlife haven; even in the harshest weather it affords a rarely failing food source.

Since ancient times, the rowan tree has been considered a scourge to witches.

Cattle wore collars of rowan wood to protect them from spells and curses.

In many rural areas the tree was deemed sacred and thus is widely planted in churchyards.

Topical tip
If you, your relations or friends bring children into the wildlife garden, remember that many berries are poisonous.

Keep an eye on youngsters, and teach them to recognise danger too.

Turn left at Gib!

This is a time of abundance when bird, beast and insect gather to share the cornucopia.

Hedgehogs appear as twilight deepens and robins become pugnaciously territorial.

Young martins and swallows form chattering groups on eaves and telephone wires.

No doubt they are being told by their elders, as a friend informed his grand-daughter, to turn left at Gibraltar! 
Corylus avellana ‘Contorta’, aptly known as the corkscrew hazel
This berry-laden holly bough will be a welcome winter sight to birds
Delicate blossoms of Primus avium ‘Plena’ are a delight to behold
A hungry waxwing pauses, berry in mouth, to contemplate the bounty of nature's larder
A berry-laden cotoneaster overhung by the elegant Betula pendula 
The characteristic spreading canopy of Betula pendula ‘Youngii’ allows some sunlight to filter through
Ornamental Salix caprea ‘Pendula’ makes a well-proportioned tree
Hedgehogs are the most welcome of garden pest controllers
Specialist Spotlight
Apple appeal
Growing apples is as easy as apple pie, if you are Joan Greenway of Highfield Nurseries.

Graham Rice finds out her recipe for success
While I was visiting Joan Greenway of Highfield Nurseries, the fruit specialists, she described to me her recipe for trouble-free apple growing: disease-resistant varieties, the right rootstock for your preferred size of tree, a simple summer and winter prune plus a crab apple to take care of your pollination needs.

She made it all sound temptingly and realistically easy.

The new varieties and modern techniques that she and other growers use have certainly taken the anxiety out of apple growing, a subject wreathed in mystery, according to traditional literature.

Just how small can apple trees get?

Small enough to step over, as Highfield's step-over trees testify.

The nursery has revived this old and useful idea, whereby instead of growing upwards the tree grows horizontally.

Each tree consists of just two branches, 2–3ft long, running along about a foot off the ground.

You can plant step-overs along a path or as an edging to a bed and pick 20 or 30 apples from each one.

At around the 5ft height there are two options, bushes or cordons.

A bush tree is exactly what you would expect it to be (bushy), but at the right height for picking and pruning comfortably.

A cordon is no more than a single stem which fruits all the way along.

A row of cordons must be the easiest possible way to grow apples.

Trained espaliers
Next size up are espaliers and larger bush trees.

Espaliers are trained flat against a fence or wall, or freestanding along wires.

Each has a vertical central stem and horizontal tiers of branches trained out on either side.

A three-tiered espalier stands at  about 4ft; five tiers will reach around 7ft.

After that they become too tall to manage easily, although dealing with a tall espalier growing flat on a wall is a breeze compared to pruning a bush tree of the same height.

Finally, there are large bush trees and trees of orchard size which are really too big for most gardeners to manage.

Choosing rootstocks
Apple trees are made up of two parts, the fruiting variety and the rootstock.

You'll find the join about a foot above the ground where there's a slight kink in the stem.

The rootstocks were developed at government research stations and are still known by their reference numbers.

‘The rootstock controls the vigour of the tree and how early it crops,’ explains Joan.

‘If you simply take cuttings from an apple tree they will grow vigorously but take years and years to fruit.

The important thing is to choose the right rootstock for the size of tree you eventually want.’

Joan is a firm supporter of new varieties; they are much more likely to stay in good health as they're bred with inbuilt resistance to canker and other diseases.

Some of the new apples solve other problems associated with traditional varieties.

For example , ‘Bramley’ is very difficult to keep small or grow as a cordon as it needs quite different pruning.

To make matter worse it's also a triploid, so you need an extra pollinator.

The answer is to choose the new ‘Bountiful’, similar if a touch sweeter, instead.

From the 350 different apples listed in various catalogues, Joan Greenway has some favourites and recommendations for the first-time grower.

‘Lord Lambourne’, for instance , is a very reliable early-flowering variety with green, red-flushed skin and crisp, juicy flesh.

Fleshy favourites
Flowering mid-season ‘James Grieve’ is almost guaranteed to give a good crop of very juicy fruit with fine, slightly acid flavour, lovely both for cooking and for eating.

Also flowering mid-season, ‘Bountiful’ is the first new cooker for 55 years.

With good colour, sweet flavour and generous crops, it makes an ideal replacement for the difficult to grow ‘Bramley’, and another advantage is its mildew resistance.

Another newer variety rapidly replacing the more difficult to grow ‘Cox's Orange Pippin’, ‘Fiesta’ looks similar, has the same flavour, flowers mid-season, produces larger fruits, crops  twice as heavily and even produces a fair crop with no pollinator.

Too good to be true!

‘Jupiter’ is a triploid, so you'll need an extra pollinator for its mid-season flowers.

But it's well worth it: sweet and juicy with a lovely flavour and large fruits, three or even two to a pound.

Picking a little later, in October, is ‘Elstar’, bright red in colour with juicy, very crisp flesh and a fine flavour.

Fruitful Ballerinas
A lot has been said recently about the Ballerina series of trees.

These grow naturally as a single, vertical stem and need absolutely no pruning.

They're ideal for small gardens and crop heavily.

One problem is that although they stay slim they grow very tall, up to 11ft in six years.

If you cut them back when they reach a manageable height they'll retain their shape but will sprout a forest of shoots at the top.

This looks a little strange so they're best removed every year.

The Ballerina series comprises three eating apples, all derived from ‘Golden Delicious’ which maybe accounts for their unremarkable flavour, and a very attractive crab called ‘Maypole’ which can be left to grow as tall as you like if you don't want to pick the fruits.

For a free copy of the Highfield Nurseries catalogue, write to Highfield Nurseries, Whitminster, Gloucester, GL2 7PL.

Pollination
Pollination can seem a daunting subject.

In theory, you have to ensure that you have at least two trees in flower at the same time so that they can pollinate each other , otherwise you may get no fruit at all .

Different varieties flower at different times; you will find them described as early, mid-season or late flowering in catalogues and on the labels on most garden centres.

Fortunately, the flowering of successive groups usually overlaps, and as most of the best varieties are in the mid-season group, just one from that group will pollinate most other varieties.

The small group of apple varieties know as triploids present more of a challenge.

Although triploids can be pollinated by any other variety flowering at the same time, they don't produce any pollen of their own.

So the tree that pollinates the triploid won't produce any fruit unless you plant a third variety flowering at the same time.

Simple solution
But if you simply don't have room for two or more bushes or trees, all may not be lost.

As Joan points out, bees love apple blossom and will range far and wide — up to three miles — to find it.

So if you're in an area where there are other apple trees, you should have no problem.

However, according to Joan, there is an even better, risk-free option.

Some ornamental crab apples flower for so long that they will pollinate your fruiting apples whatever their flowering season.

Plant a ‘John Downie’ or a ‘Golden Hornet’ as a garden tree, and your pollination worries will be banished forever.

Apple tree care
The secret of efficient and easy pruning is to take control when you first get your tree.

Always shorten all branches by one third when planting and never leave any tree unpruned.

Thereafter, prune when you see long growths taking the goodness out of the tree; in late summer cut back all whippy shoots to 4in, then in February or March cut back again to two buds.

Any pruning is better than no pruning.

The most essential thing is to prune once a year, and if you miss the summer, prune in winter.

Apples suffer from pests and diseases like other plants, but like many growers, Joan Greenway is no great fan of chemical sprays.

She believes in growing the trees well by mulching every September and feeding in March and July.

Dress with 4oz of sulphate of potash per cordon tree or per sq yd around bush trees.

Her solutions to the most common pest and disease problems are ICI Benlate for mildew, grease bands for the leaf-eating loopers (winter moth caterpillars), tar oil winter wash to deal with woolly aphids and pbi Malathion Greenfly Killer for other aphids.

Rootstocks
•

M27 is the most dwarfing stock; trees reach only 5–6ft at maturity.

They fruit very early but root growth is limited, so they need good soil.

Choose it for step-overs, tubs, small bush trees and cordons on rich soil.

•

M9 is slightly more vigorous; trees will reach about 8ft, and need good soil.

This also produces a very small root system, so trees need permanent staking.

Choose M9 for most cordons and dwarf bush trees.

M26 is quite similar to M9, but a little more vigorous.

It is mid-way in vigour between M9 and MM106.

•

Trees on the semi-dwarfing MM106 are much more vigorous than either M27 or M9, and achieve a height of around 15ft.

Choose for espaliers, fans, larger bushes and cordons on poor soil.

•

Trees grown on MM111 rootstock will reach a robust 18–20ft in height, but won't crop for the first six years.

It is well suited to poor soil and ideal if you want to plant a traditional orchard.

Juicy ‘Lord Lambourne’ is ideal for novice growers
Bees will scour the countryside for the scent of apple blossom
Angst-free apple growing: Joan Greenway shows Graham Rice how
A 5ft espalier is just the right height for pruning
A ‘John Downie’ crab not only looks good, it's a sure-fire pollinator
‘Bountiful’ is a sweeter, easier alternative to the traditional favourite ‘Bramley’

Cordons give trouble-free growing
Greeny-yellow ‘Greensleeves’ are delicious for dessert
Looks good, tastes good: a fan-trained apple tree enlivens a dull wall
‘Ballerina’ has been called ‘the world's most compact apple tree’

Highfield's step-over trees can each produce 20 or 30 apples
Kitchen Garden
Kitchen Garden
As summer draws to a close, some plants are still cropping, others need winter preparation and, suggests Joy Larkcom, a green manure will do your soil a power of good
Time to repay your debt to the soil
The time has come to think about putting something back into the soil.

After all, we have been reaping rewards from the vegetable garden for months: the soil can't go on and on providing if its own storehouse is not replenished.

Late summer and early autumn are good times to sow hardy green manures, which stay in the ground through the winter and rot down, or are dug in, in the spring.

A green manure is a crop grown mainly to improve soil fertility.

While not a complete substitute for manure or compost, it is of particular use to those who find bulky animal manure hard to come by.

Autumn-sown green manures improve the soil in a variety of ways, depending on the plants used.

They conserve nutrients, especially nitrogen, by taking them up in autumn and releasing them in spring.

This prevents nitrates being washed out of the soil in winter.

When the manures rot down they add organic matter to the soil, which turns into humus.

This is not only a source of plant foods, but also encourages earthworm activity.

The two together make poor, dry soil more moisture-retentive, and improve the drainage in heavy soils.

Plants with a fibrous root system, creating plenty of organic matter, do most to improve the soil structure.

In addition they help conserve the existing soil structure by protecting the surface from the destructive force of winter rain.

By blanketing the soil they also help to control weeds.

Leguminous green manures, such as clover and beans, fix atmospheric nitrogen in the soil by means of their root nodules, so making it available to plants later in the growing season.

Including the planting of a green manure into a garden plan can seem difficult.

The easiest way to start is to sow small patches when clearing crops in autumn.

Of course , if for any reason you have to leave your garden for several months, the best thing you can do is to sow a suitable green manure.

Most green manures can be sown broadcast or in rows.

They should always be turned in when they are lush and green, before they flower or become woody.

The following hardy green manures are among those most suitable for autumn sowing.

Winter field beans ( Vicia faba )

These look like broad beans, and will grow 2–3ft high.

Sow from September to November, spacing seeds about 5in apart each way, or 4in apart in rows 6in apart.

Cut the leaves back in spring, then allow them to re-grow before digging in the plants.

They  provide humus and fix nitrogen, are excellent in heavy soils but don't grow well in dry conditions.

Winter tares ( Vicia sativa , common vetch)

Fast, low-growing legumes, tares are excellent for suppressing weeds.

Sow the seeds, which look like sweet peas, at the rate of about 1/2oz-sq yd.

Tares fix nitrogen and have a good fibrous root system which helps to improve heavy clay soils, preferring these to light or very acid soils.

Fodder radish ( Raphanus sativus )

This develops into a large bulky plant 2ft high, which collapses after heavy frost, blanketing the ground and breaking down into a mass of fibre.

Sow in August or early September.

You can pick off a few young leaves for salads or cooking.

In mild winters it may be necessary to chop down the leaves and dig in the roots in spring.

Don't grow in clubroot-infected soil.

Winter grazing rye grass ( Secale cereale )

This develops a wonderful fibrous root system, but is not very dense, so doesn't suppress weeds well.

Birds love the seed, so you may need to net it.

Sow it from August to November at the rate of 1oz/sq yd.

Dig in when you can feel flower heads starting to form at the base.

Don't leave it any longer or it becomes hard to control.

Or, you can cover it with black plastic so that it rots down.

Give your sprouts sturdy supports
If your garden is at all exposed to wind you must make sure that any top-heavy brassicas, such as Brussels sprouts and purple sprouting broccoli, are supported by really stout stakes.

Put them in now, before autumn gales and winter blasts make the plants rock at their roots, and frost loosens up the soil to compound the damage.

And when I say stout supports, I mean stout.

The photo here was taken in friend Jane Allen's garden — a very practical potter and organic gardener.

That same winter my sprouts were ‘supported’ by flimsy canes.

While Janet's plants stayed strong and proud throughout the bad weather, mine were almost horizontal by spring.

Dry off the beans
One of the best varieties of old-fashioned drying beans is the khaki-coloured ‘Dutch Brown’.

This year I am also trying ‘Chinese Yellow’, claimed to be very resistant to poor weather.

These and other varieties are available from the Dutch seed firm Bakker.

To dry beans, leave the mature pods on the plants as long as possible, then pull them up by the roots and hang them in the sun to complete drying.

In wet weather hand them inside to deter mould.

Plum crazy
In September's issue of Good Food magazine you'll find lots of delicious recipes for this season's crop of plums.

The cover recipe for a German plum cake is from Glynn Christian, who is celebrating the opening of trade barriers in Europe in 1992.

Try his menus from Germany, Portugal, Ireland and an English menu which celebrates King Henry VIII's birthday.

You can see him on BBC1's Garden Party, Mondays 12pm.

And if you've been watching BBC's Masterchef series, the winning recipes are also in Good Food , on sale August 8. 
Clover and rye grass should be dug in before flowering
Clover is a traditional ley crop
Vetch shares with peas and beans the ability to ‘fix’ nitrogen
Green manures, sown in autumn, are turned in when spring comes
Sweet corn ‘Earliest of All’, ready to be harvested
It may look excessive, but this stout staking really pays off
Beans drying in the sun give the garden a rustic air
60 minute vegetable plot
Roy Lacey confronts the weeds, and ponders the lessons of his first season with the labour-saving plot
Summer holidays arrive at just the wrong time for gardeners.

Everything is growing apace, especially the weeds; there are plants to be watered and crops to be gathered.

There's too much to be done in the garden to leave it for a week or more.

But, of course , we do.

Returning from a break in Wales, we found annual nettles, chickweed and seedling thistles had made a major takeover bid for the plot; a bit of a blow, but not entirely unexpected.

Weedy horrors
Weeds are opportunists, quick to stake a claim for any vacant patch of ground they find.

Some, like chickweed and poppies, have seeds that lie dormant in the soil for long periods until the right conditions trigger them to life.

Up until the trip to Gwent, any weeds had been kept in check well within my 60 minutes a week.

But it took all of a week's ration of time to restore the plot to its pre-holiday weed-free state.

Happily, there hasn't been any problem with the pernicious perennial weeds I find elsewhere in the garden, such as the deep-rooting bindweed and ground elder.

Ground elder is said to have been brought to Britain by the Romans as a remedy for gout and has plagued us ever since.

Thorough preparation of the plot before sowing also say off those other perennial horrors, couch and horsetail, both of which can go down 6ft or more and spread in all directions.

Horsetail is the oldest species of plant still surviving.

Its wiry black roots go very deep and break readily, so it is difficult to eradicate.

So, too, is couch, or twitch, whose sharp spear-like underground stems pierce potatoes and other root crops.

Cleavers, or goosegrass, the weed whose sticky stems and seeds cling to clothing, appeared among the pea vines in June, but was quickly and easily dealt with.

So, too, was the odd dandelion seedling that germinated after an airborne invasion of seeds from a patch of wasteland a quarter of mile away.

Chickweed, fat hen, groundsel and shepher's purse are the commonest annual weeds in any garden and because of their leaf pattern are easily confused, when young, with the seedlings of cultivated plants.

As well as taking up good growing space, they compete with the other plants for light, moisture and nutrients.

My various crops have competed not only with weeds but also with each other , a major factor in the profit and loss account for the plot.

Pea problem
Readers have suggested that it might have been more profitable to give more space to fewer sorts of vegetable, but that would have  been something of a soft option.

However, another year I shall not grow even a low line of peas along the south border.

Although their rooting system didn't interfere with the other crops, the 18in-tall vines cast too heavy a shadow on the plants below.

Their place has been taken by a row of ‘Argenta’ leeks raised in the seed bed and dibbled into 6in holes spaced about a foot apart.

The single row of ‘Scarlet Emperor’ runner beans along the north border presents no such problem.

The beans have now reached the top of their 6ft canes and I'm praying that any autumn gales will be delayed until the beans are all safely harvested.

In spring and summer last year, pollination of the runner beans was generally poor.

Experts were divided on the cause, with some blaming the hordes of pollen beetles that descended from fields of oil seed rape on to garden crops, other believing the hot, dry weather caused a change in the development of the reproductive system of the plants.

But the eventual consensus was that runner beans, which of course rely on insects for pollination, simply weren't getting enough attention from them.

In anticipation that the same problem might recur this summer I tried sowing some sweet peas with the runner beans.

The result has been both attractive and functional, and there has certainly been no shortage of bees on the beans.

The plot pays off
The ‘Topper’ shallots are now in store, hung in our cool cellar in an onion get begged from the greengrocer.

When the tops became straw-coloured the clumps were eased from the ground and the bulbs were dried off until the skins were yellow and brittle.

As I said earlier this year, there will not be enough of any one crop to give self-sufficiency, but the contribution this small plot has made to the good budget has ten times repaid the outlay on seeds and materials.

And after all, what price can you put on the immense satisfaction of taking dew-fresh vegetables to the kitchen within minutes of harvesting them?

As for the time investment, planning the layout, preparing the plot by digging and manuring, sowing the seeds and watering those crops that needed extra moisture were all carried out well within the weekly ration of 60 minutes.

However, there's no doubt the blitz on the weeds on our return from holiday took a disproportionately long spell.

My inclination is to reconsider this summer holiday ritual.

It's a critical time to be abandoning the plot.

Your 60-minute action checklist
•

Thin out the parsley sown in July.

In hard winter areas it will need protection with cloches to continue cropping all through the winter.

•

Transplant the sowing of spring cabbages made in July into the patch that grew the shallots.

But don't add any fertiliser; these plants will have to stand through the winter, so it's not a good idea to encourage too much soft growth.

•

Make a final sowing of an early carrot, such as ‘Amsterdam Forcing’, ‘Early Nantes’, ‘Almoro’ or ‘Bertop’, for pulling as baby carrots at around Christmas time.

Cover with Agryl P17 before the first frosts.

•

Towards the end of the month lift carrots and beetroot and store in boxes of peat, peat substitute or sand.

•

Check the underside of the Brussels sprout plants for whitefly.

Spray with a soap-based insecticide twice weekly until clear.

Savona, Sebon, Nature's Answer and Bio Friendly's Pest Pistol are all suitable alternative controls to conventional agrochemicals.

Vegetable grow guide  Sweet Peppers
Varieties to choose
Nearly 30 capsicum varieties are listed in seed catalogues.

Colours range from green and yellow to deep red.

Some of the best are the dwarf Redskin, Gypsy, Clio, Luteus (yellow), Bellboy, Canape (red), and New Ace.

Sowing and growing
•

From March-April sow seed 1/2in deep in pots.

Place in a heated propagator.

•

When seedlings have 3 leaves prick out into 2–3in pots.

•

Keep watered and in good light and warmth.

Continue to pot on as required into larger pots.

•

Wait until first flowers have set fruit before planting out the peppers.

•

Capsicums are frost tender.

Plant outside under cloches when all fear of frost has passed (late May/mid June).

•

Harden off greenhouse raised plants before planting out, warming the soil first by covering with cloches.

•

Pinch out the tip of the main shoot when 8–12in tall to promote the formation of side shoots.

Site &soil Sweet peppers crop well in growing bags, planting 3 per bag, or can be grown singly in 9in pots of potting compost.

Alternatively, grow outside in full sun.

Soil should be rich and moisture retentive, but free-draining.

Pest problems
Greenhouse crops are susceptible to greenfly, whitefly and red spider mite which all feed on the leaves.

Inspect plants regularly and spray at the first signs of attack.

Spray with a suitable insecticide or use biological control.

Aftercare
•

Vigorous plants need staking and regular tying in.

•

Water regularly, ensuring the compost/soil never dries out.

•

Mist plants each day to prevent red spider mite attack.

•

Once fruits have set, feed weekly with a high potash liquid tomato fertiliser when watering.

•

Harvest fruits when plump and full sized.

Leave to mature and ripen on the plant for fruits to change colour as required.

Grow guide by Adam Pasco 
Weeding after a week away took the entire 60-minute ration of time
Groundsel flourishes rapidly, soon occupying good growing space
The end of September is the time to lift and store carrots and beetroot.

Pack them carefully in boxes of peat, peat substitute or sand
Common chickweed, another familiar annual nuisance
On some varieties green fruits ripen to a deep glowing red
‘Gypsy’ produces early, heavy crops, especially under glass
The Victorian kitchen garden
Jennifer Davies finds out how Victorian gardeners did battle with the bugs
A peewit in the greenhouse is a friend.

Well, that was the view of a gardener writing in February 1858 to the journal The Cottage Gardener .

His peewit, he said, would manifest its friendship by its exemplary conduct, eating insects of all shapes and sizes but never pecking or injuring the plants.

The same writer recommended giving glasshouse room to a few hedgehogs, ideal for keeping down woodlice.

Toad sentinel
When he first came to Chilton, Harry Dodson recalls that the pest controller in the glasshouses was a large old toad.

It took a bit of getting used to.

It was, Harry says, something of a shock to life a flowerpot and be confronted by the toad's baleful stare.

It also didn't help that the toad's colouring blended perfectly with the surroundings for, Harry remembers, you never knew from where it might jump.

One day a young journeyman white-washing the inside of the houses ran his brush over the toad's back.

From that time on it was easier to spot.

The ritual of the whitewashing (or limewashing, as Harry calls it) the houses was in itself a method of pest control.

The lime was mixed with flowers of sulphur so that the walls would give off sulphurous fumes when they got warm.

Limewashing began in October and all the houses had to be finished by the end of February, as many would then have the heat turned up to set their inmates into growth.

It was also during the winter months that vines were taken down from their wires and their ends tied (often to the water pipes) so that they formed a large bow shape.

This checked the sap and induced even growth.

The vines were tied back up when the new growth was 4–6in long.

Bug beaters
When the rods (stems) were first taken down they were scraped and painted with sulphur mixed with paraffin and soft soap.

The crevices where the spurs were cut back each year were particularly attractive hiding places for mealy bugs.

However, like the newly decorated glasshouse toad, the mealy bugs, being white, found it difficult to remain unseen.

Harry says that a drop of methylated spirit dotted onto their backs from a camel hair brush caused them to turn pink and expire immediately.

Years ago, before it was made illegal, pure nicotine was used for fumigating glasshouses.

A little would be sprinkled into a small metal dish placed on top of a metal cylinder.

Inside was a lighted wick; as the metal dish warmed up, the nicotine began to sizzle and give off fumes lethal to red spider mite and aphids.

Almost all garden glasshouses were treated in this way.

Harry recalls.

But it was not without its problems.

You had, he says, to be careful not to fumigate on a foggy night when the air was too heavy to let the fumes drift away.

If that happened, when the sun came out the lingering nicotine would burn yellow marks around the edges of young foliage.

Soot solution
In those days, a bag of soot purchased from the local chimney sweep was a valuable aid to bug control.

The bag was dropped into a tank of water and swilled round occasionally like a giant tea bag.

The fresher the soot, the longer it needed to percolate through the hessian, but within three or four days the water would be nicely laced.

Regular spraying with this soot solution kept leaf miners off chrysanthemums standing outside in pots.

Harry also remembers that when he was a journeyman at Stanstead Park, the liquid was used to deter red spider mite from violet cuttings planted out in cool spots in the grounds.

Compared to today's remedies it was an effective and extremely economical solution: one bag of soot lasted all summer!

Harry's hints
•

Lure wasps to sticky deaths in narrow-necked jam-jars.

Quarter fill the jars with old beer and rotten fruit and hang them out on fruit trees
•

Trap earwigs as they advance up your peach trees by tying small lengths of hollow broad bean sticks to the branches.

The offending insects can be blown out each morning into a jar of water.

•

For earwigs bend on molesting your chrysanthemums, wood-wool or hay stuffed into a small flowerpot hung upside down at the top of a cane offers a similarly unsafe and temporary lodging.

•

Poke a carrot into beds containing old meadow loam.

The carrot will attract any wireworm around, which can be lifted out as they munch on it (Harry says he finds this particularly useful for melon beds).

•

Half a grapefruit or orange scraped out and put down forms a trap for slugs attacking young lettuce or rockery plants.

The slugs obligingly congregate beneath the citrus dome and can be gathered for disposal.

Earwigs are only too ready to picnic on a peach
Chilton's baleful toad repelled pests and staff alike
Tebb's fearsome-looking ‘Universal Fumigator’

Spider mite comfy on cucumber
Gardens by design
The straight &narrow
Narrow garden design project: part one
If you take a train ride into any of our major cities you will see thousands of long narrow gardens in serried ranks on either side of the track.

In all probability you will also see how not to lay them out.

That is , with a path slap down the middle, a flanking washing line and four narrow borders around the edge.

The effect is similar to dressing a tall man in a pinstripe suit — it simply accentuates the length!

In fact, gardens that are long and narrow are among the more simple to design because they can be broken down very easily into separate garden areas or ‘rooms’, each of them having a different function or theme.

This philosophy, though on a far grander scale, can be observed in practice in such great gardens as Sissinghurst in Kent and Hidcote Manor in Gloucestershire, where similar plants and colour combinations have been placed in walled or hedged parts of the larger garden.

Long narrow plots often adjoin older properties and this can give you the opportunity of working existing trees and shrubs into the new design.

When you carry out the initial survey to check just what you have got and what you want, don't discard anything that might make a positive contribution to the garden later on.

In older gardens, particularly those that date back to Edwardian or Victorian times, you might be lucky enough to inherit paths laid in old blue paving bricks, or some of those delightful ‘rope’ edging tiles that cost a small fortune to buy today.

If you do, you must lift them very carefully and stack them ready to use again.

The garden we show is typical, measuring approximately 25ft (8m) wide and 112ft (35m) long.

It faces south-west and slopes gently away from the house.

Amply proportioned patio
As in most gardens a sitting, dining, and entertaining area is an absolute must.

This means that a patio of ample size will be needed, which could use a combination of pre-cast slabs and new brick paving, or, of you are lucky, some old bricks that may have been in the garden already.

Here, these have been laid in a bold panel close to the house and have also been used in strips and courses so that they tie the raised pool into  the overall design of the terrace.

The pool forms a real focal point from both the house and patio, while the sound of water, falling from a mask set in the wall, will be delightful on a hot summer's day.

Of course , if you have a young family and feel water might be a hazard, the feature could become a raised sandpit or planter, which naturally gives you the opportunity of converting it at a later stage.

On the other side of the terrace a raised bed provides visual balance and accommodates a specimen juniper and winter flowering heathers.

Moving away from the terrace, broad steps drop down past a rose and herb bed edged with low growing box to the first lawn level, which would make an ideal play area.

The path flanking the lawn leads first down and then across the garden to help create a feeling of greater space.

This zig-zagging technique is particularly effective in visually widening the area, since it passes between the two wings of planting that divide this second ‘room’ from the next.

A final change of level takes us under the archway into the next small grassed and planted area, an altogether quieter space.

The path leads down and around to a brick-paved seating area situated beneath a climber-covered arbour looking back towards the house.

The final garden section has been screened off neatly with espalier fruit and given over to salad crops and utility elements such as a shed, a compost area and an incinerator (essential ingredients in most compositions).

Softening the pattern
It is an interesting thought that this whole design has been built up from a series of interlocking rectangles.

People often avoid using too many straight lines in a garden as they fear that the end result will look clinical.

In fact, selective planting will help to soften the overall pattern and, if the shapes are carefully worked out and planted well, the final result will be a functional and fascinating living lesson in geometry that will serve you and your family well.

Archways and arbours need the stout timber treatment
Important parts of the overall design are the archway, halfway down the garden, and the arbour at the bottom.

Too often these features are made from flimsy, untreated timbers, too week to last long.

They look like it, too.

I would also avoid all those bent wire contraptions: they may look attractive in a well photographed catalogue but do little for the design of your garden.

Remember that any such feature is simply a vehicle for the plants to be grown over it, and in a few years the structure becomes incidental to the glory of the climber that smothers it.

It's best to use a simple design and stout timbers, well treated with a non-toxic preservative — don't use creosote, sure death to plants.

Topical tip
Using a zig-zagging technique with your garden path will create a felling of greater space and, if it is placed between the plantings, will enhance the ‘separate room’ effect. 
An arch creates a feeling of spaciousness, giving the garden an ‘extra room’

The arbour will play host to Vitis coignetiae , the crimson glory vine
Hibiscus syriacus ‘Woodbridge’ will add colour to the borders
TV Special
Cope with a slope
A sloping garden needn't be an uphill struggle, as Pippa Greenwood discovered when she lent a hand to the Lloyds on camera
When I first met Chris and Pauline Lloyd to discuss their garden and take a look at its one-in-three slope, I was filled with a mixture of admiration for them, and horror at the task ahead.

But they have proved that with a good plan, persistence and a lot of hard work even a very steep slope can be transformed into a tremendous garden.

If you're going to tackle a project like this yourself there are a few golden rules.

•

Start with a good plan.

You could do it yourself or get expert help.

We were lucky to have at our service the skilled pen of Dick Allen of the Millbrook Garden Centre in Sussex.

•

Break up the slope by creating different levels.

We created an attractive and useful patio area paved with wooden decking and surrounded by planting towards the lower end of the garden.

This provided a totally separate area to the levelled lawn in front of the house.

•

If possible increase the size of any vaguely level area already there, as we did with the lawn.

A sturdy retaining wall will hold everything in place and you can use soil taken from other areas to fill in gaps.

Remember to keep all the topsoil you remove; you're bound to find a use for it later!

•

A winding, levelled path at a gentle gradient is much easier to walk down.

Stepping stones, laid level, can give access to other areas.

•

As you build up and level out areas of the garden, keep the soil in place using retaining walls.

We used Forest palisade poles, which are pressure-treated with preservative and guaranteed to last for at least fifteen years.

Inadequately treated wood is not worth bothering with: the retaining walls are too fundamental to the design and structure to take any risks.

The poles must be set vertically (use a spirit level).

Concrete mixed dry (5 parts ballast to 1 cement) will make the job easier.

We widened the steps slightly to make them a secure and comfortable width to walk and wheel a barrow down.

•

The path's risers here are Forest sleepers, flattened top and bottom.

As they lie smoothly  on top of one another , they were also used for the principal retaining walk around the lawn.

•

Create some privacy.

One of the problems with a sloping garden is that it may be overlooked by many other houses.

We used Chelsea trellis and a pergola to shield the upper area.

When planning screens make sure that all areas will still be readily accessible, not only so you can enjoy the whole garden but also to make planting and maintenance easier.

•

There are a wide range of plants which will be perfect for planting on sloped beds.

Ground cover is particularly valuable, as it will keep the soil in situ .

I recommend Vinca major, Vinca minor, Brachyglottis (or Senecio ) greyi, Potentilla ‘Tangerine’, Spiraea ‘Goldflame’, Lamium maculatum ‘Beacon Silver’, Rosa ‘Paulii’, Rosa ‘Essex’, Stephanandra incisa ‘Crispa’, Juniperus ‘Blue Carpet’, Geranium ‘Johnson's Blue’, Pachysandra terminalis and the lowgrowing helianthemums.

•

Finally, and very importantly, make the features of the gradient work for, not against you.

You can successfully use plants in all situations, allowing them to grow down and up the slope and trail over pergolas, trellis and fences.

We constructed a multi-level pool with a cascading waterfall.

Combine this with a seat at the water's edge and you have a lovely place to sit and admire the distant views and your new-look garden.

From their first-floor sitting room the Lloyds have a new perspective on the garden, the pool and the top of their pergola!

If you would like more information on how we coped with the Lloyds' slope and how you could do the same with yours, write enclosing a stamped addressed envelope to The Horticultural Trades Association, PO Box 56, Reading, Berkshire RG7 5JJ.

Dick Allen's design
1
Paved area
2
Brick paving/path
3
Gravel path
4
Lawn
5
Brick edging
6
Low retaining wall ( Forest border timbers)

7
Steps (Forest mini-sleeper risers with gravel treads)

8
Compost bin (screened from top lawn area)

9
Chelsea trellis
10
Retaining wall (Forest minisleepers laid horizontally)

11
Seat
12
Pond (with butyl liner)

13
Pergola
14
Retaining wall (Forest palisades set vertically)

15
Stepping stones
16
Sitting area (floored in Forest checkerboard decking)

17
Leyland cypress hedge
Forest British timber products are a renewable source
Stakes set in cut-out notches hold the steps firmly
Pippa gives Chris a hand in the 1:3 sloping garden
Using wood throughout ties the design together
Planting will give the patio area at the base of the garden more privacy
Gardeners' Manual
The essential reference book
Start collecting our superb free Gardeners' Manual and month by month it will build into a reference book you will turn to time and time again.

Compiled exclusively for BBC Gardeners' World Magazine by Andi Clevely, the Gardeners' Manual provides detailed advice, explains techniques and gives practical information on choosing and using plants.

Packed with gardening know-how, its structured style and easy-to-follow, well-illustrated format will appeal to every gardener, from novice to enthusiast.

The Gardeners' Manual has been designed to pull out and collect, so you can always keep it close at hand with your other gardening reference books.

Coming next month in part 8
•

A practical guide to rock gardens and alpine plants, including sink gardens
•

Choosing and using a cold frame through the year
•

Heating your greenhouse
•

Successful outdoor ferns and non-flowering plants
•

Growing fruit under glass
•

We show you how to spot and combat diseases, with advice on various control methods
Part 7
Portrait gallery
Rays of Sunshine
Always bright and cheerful, daisies never fail to lift Roy Lancaster's spirits
If there is in flower which above all others triggers memories of childhood days it is the humble daisy.

There can be few of us who cannot make a daisy chain with our eyes closed — and who could forget the daisy-spangled downs and pastures where we loved to picnic?

Life would not have been the same without them, nor would it be now, considering the lasting impression they made in our minds.

Maybe part of the daisy's popularity lies in its shape, a yellow disk fringed with white petals (correctly ray-florets), a simple arrangement which reminds us of the sun.

Look at any toddler's drawing of the two and you will see what I mean.

Chain reaction
Happily (and daisy flowers always make me feel happy) the same arrangement and connotations may be reproduced again and again in the garden by planting a selection of daisy relatives and look-alikes.

Given the variety available there are enough to fill most of our summer and early autumn days with colour, bold foliage and, let's not forget, happy memories.

Leucanthemella serotina is what I was brought up to call Chrysanthemum ulginosum , the so-called moon daisy of Hungary, where it is often found growing in damp places.

It does not demand such a situation in  cultivation but there is no doubt that it thrives best in deep soils that do not dry out in summer.

A hardy herbaceous perennial, it develops a bold clump of erect leafy stems as much as 6ft tall, crowned in autumn with loose sprays of green-eyed, white rayed daisies 2in across.

Sun-seeking flowers
Curiously enough, these charming blooms turn to face and follow the sun as it progresses across the sky, a phenomenon you will find frustrating if you have planted it in a north-facing border, since they will invariably turn their backs on you.

Given its height and vigour, L. serotina is probably best accommodated at the back of a herbaceous border or in the wild garden if you are lucky enough to have such a place.

Do not, however, plant it in shade or flowering will be less than satisfactory.

Silphium laciniatum , from the prairies of the central and southeastern states of America, is another six-footer, sometimes more, whose large, deeply divided foliage is far more ornamental than the yellow daisies it produces in late summer.

Interestingly, the leaves, which are stiff and bristly, turn their faces to avoid the full heat of the sun.

They are poised with their edges on a north-south axis, hence its American name, the compass plant.

Just as fascinating is the related S perfoliatum , another giant in which the upper pair of leaves unite at their base to form a cup-shaped depression where, after rain, a little pool of water collects.

Both these plants are hardy and although not in the front rank of ornamentals, are worth growing in a large border or even on the bank of a stream or lake provided they are kept away from the wet margin.

Inula magnifica also grows and looks well by water, but is equally happy in the deep rich soil of a border or bed.

Its great clumps of rough, hairy stems can grow up to 6ft tall.

Its equally hairy large leaves will dominate any border or waterside planting and when the large imposing deep yellow daisies appear in late summer all traffic stops.

The daisies can be as much as 5 or 6in across and are carried in terminal branched heads, a truly remarkable sight.

A Georgian giant
In common with several other well-known giants such as the giant hogweed, I. magnifica is native to the Caucasus mountains of the Russian republic of Georgia, where it is commonly seen in damp meadows and by streams, often on the margins of woodland or in glades.

In cultivation it is quite hardy and suited  to all but dry or exposed places.

Telekia speciosa , from southeastern Europe and western Asia, is a perennial noted for its bold pile of large, long-stalked, heart-shaped leaves and its suitability for waterside planting although, like Inula magnifica , it is satisfactory in most deep rich soils.

It has another virtue too in shade tolerance, providing the soil beneath is deep and cool.

Spectacular spread
The broad branching heads of large, ragged yellow daisies appear over a long period during summer; a large patch is a magnificent spectacle.

Given its spreading tendencies, telekia is not a plant for small gardens unless steps can be taken to contain its roots.

It is excellent for naturalising in ‘wild’ gardens.

All those who grow Aster x frikartii’ ‘Mönch’ agree that it is one of the finest herbaceous perennials ever raised.

It is one of three seedlings of a hybrid raised in Switzerland around 1920 and consequently named after Swiss mountains.

Its parents are the European Aster amellus , of which many varieties are grown in gardens, and the Himalayan A. thomsonii , usually represented in British gardens by the dwarf form ‘Nanus’.

For weeks on end through late  summer and autumn the large lavender-blue, gold-eyed daisies are displayed on branching stems up to 3ft tall.

It is suitable for even the smallest gardens, and if you can only accommodate one daisy-flowered perennial it should be this.

Give it a rich soil in full sun and it will pay for its keep a thousandfold.

A delicate daisy
Senecio pulcher is a plant for the adventurous gardener.

For a start, it is not the hardiest of perennials; not surprisingly considering that it hails from Uruguay.

Added to this, it is regarded as a special treat by snails and slugs who will soon polish it off given the opportunity.

So why, you may well ask, try to grow it then?

You will understand when you see its handsome dark green leathery leaves and startling gold-eyed daisies, their cerise-magenta ray florets in branched heads 1–1/2ft above the ground.

The combination is dramatic and somehow unexpected in a senecio, especially as it takes place in autumn when most other border perennials have flowered and then faded.

A moist but well-drained fertile soil in a warm sheltered corner will give it the best chance, and even then only in the mildest areas — and do not forget the slugs!

If you're looking for another daisy-flowered perennial to form the perfect contrast with Aster x frikartii ‘Mönch’ I could recommend no better plant than Rudbeckia fulgida deamii .

Its rough, hairy, much-branched stems rise to 2ft and will reward you in late summer and early autumn with numerous vivid yellow daisies with blackish central cones, well earning this plant the name black-eyed Susan.

It is hardy and easy to cultivate in most soils, even dry ones, but thrives best in soil which retains some moisture in the summer.

Give it a sunny position and it will be your pal for life.

Echinacea purpurea , also native to the American prairies, was at one time included with the rudbeckias as R. purpurea , differing most obviously in having purplish-red ray-florets.

It is a rather stiff-stemmed perennial up to 3ft tall with dark green leathery leaves which are rough to the touch.

Backswept blooms
The few-branched stems are topped by large single daises, the petals reflexed (turned back) and the bold central boss orange-brown, rounded and prickly to the touch.

Even better is ‘Robert Bloom’ with larger, mire richly-coloured flowers.

Contrasting with these are ‘White Lustre’ ans ‘White Swan’, both with white-rayed daisies.

All forms of E. purpurea enjoy a rich, deep, well-drained soil in sun and are best propagated by root cuttings.

Their flowers appear over several weeks in summer and are at all times most striking and handsome.

Gallery guide
Aster x frikartii ‘Mönch’

Hailing from the Swiss Alps it prefers rich soil and full sun.

Large blue daisies make a wonderful display through late summer and autumn.

Echinacea purpurea
A rather stiff-stemmed perennial whose few branches are each topped by a large daisy with reflexed petals.

Prefers rich well-drained soil in the sun.

Propagate from root cuttings.

Inula magnifica
Imposing six-footer with large hairy leaves and spectacular deep yellow daisies.

Hails from the Caucasus mountains and is well suited to all but dry or exposed sites.

Leucanthemella serotina
The so-called ‘moon daisy’ of Hungary thrives in deep, moist soils.

Grows to 6ft, crowned with green-eyed white daisies two inches in diameter.

Silphium laciniatum/perfoliatum
Both good in large borders or near water, growing up to 6ft, with highly ornamental bristly foliage and less spectacular yellow daisies.

Native to the US prairies.

Telekia speciosa
Noted for its long-stalked heart-shaped leaves, shade tolerance and suitability for waterside planting.

Bears ragged yellow daisies for much of the summer.

Senecio pulcher
Delicate Uraguayan perennial beloved of slugs!

Dramatic foliage and flowers make it a worthwhile challenge for the adventurous.

Rudbeckia fulgida deamii
With yellow petals and dark cones, black-eyed Susan tolerates most conditions, but prefers moisture and sunshine.

Tune in to…

Join Roy Lancaster in the new series of Channel 4's practical ideas show Garden Club, broadcast on Fridays at 9.30pm (repeated on Mondays at 2pm).

The series begins on August 23 
Rudbeckia fulgida deamii is better known as black-eyed Susan
Leucanthamella serotina has classic sunburst blooms
Aster x frikarti ‘Mönch’, one of the finest perennial plants
Senecio pulcher needs good soil and a sunny, sheltered corner
Inula magnifica will thrive best in deep, rich soils, even in shade
Echinacea purpurea comes from the American prairies
Green Gardening
Waging war on weeds
Work with nature and you can make nature work for you, advises Geoff Hamilton from his organic garden
Earlier in the year, wherever you looked, whatever you read, gardeners were complaining of the constant battle against weeds.

Gardening columns in the Sunday newspapers were full of it, magazines and television programmes gave advice and encouragement and the garden centres made a killing on weedkiller sales.

The problem was the unusual one of a warmish (well, for the plants anyway), wet spring.

Ideal conditions, in fact, for the growth of all plants and especially the natives.

Weeds?

What weeds?

At the risk of sounding smug, my ornamental kitchen garden gave me no such problems.

Weeds?

What weeds?

The reason, of course , is that my garden is so packed with plants that the weeds simply don't stand a chance.

In the middle of the borders, where I can't reach without treading on the soil, I grow shrubs and perennials that need hardly any attention during the year.

They're planted quite closely together to deny any weeds a chance of seeing the sunshine.

The interlopers soon give up the unequal contest.

In the front of the borders where I can reach, I grow my vegetables, annuals and low-growing perennials in patches rather than in rows.

Here, of course , weeds do have more space to grow, but they're discouraged by constant cultivation.

As soon as one patch of vegetables is cleared, the soil is revitalised with compost and a handful of organic fertiliser and lightly pricked over before replanting.

When I do have to evict an intruder, I've discovered that it's far better to pull the weeds out rather than hoe them.

The reason is that physically removing a weed, especially a perennial, is quite final, while one hoed out and simply left on the surface can easily root in again, especially in wet weather.

So when I go round the garden, I carry two containers: a bucket for compostable weeds, and a plastic bag for those perennials  with tough tools that might survive.

So any docks, dandelions and creeping buttercup go straight to the tip and good riddance to them too.

Swings and roundabouts
But I have to confess that what I save on the weedless swings, I lose on the rampant roundabouts.

Because my plants are packed in so tightly I spend a great deal of time trimming and tying.

And, of course , closely packed plants compete not only with the weeds but with each other .

So in this type of garden you'll need to be doubly vigilant, first ensuring that you keep the soil well fed and watered, then keeping a constant umpiring eye open to make sure that one plant is not starting to take unfair advantage of another. 
Weeds don't stand a chance in the closely-planted beds at Barnsdale
Weeds sprouting in the path can be left or very easily dealt with
Hand-weeding prevents perennial weeds from gaining a foothold
Pooled resources bring benefits to all
For an organic garden a pool is essential.

A place for all kinds of wildlife to stop off and drink, it will attract them like a magnet.

That's good news for pest control, and even better for gardeners whose interest spreads to birds, butterflies, bees and other creatures.

I've spent hours crouching behind plants watching birds and insects, hedgehogs, often frogs and toads and on one memorable occasion a young fox.

Somehow, I'm sure that wild animals have a sixth sense that tells them they're safe, even in the presence of their arch-enemy, man.

How could it be otherwise, when I have an almost tame squirrel that happily hops about the borders when I'm feeding or digging?

He seems completely secure in the knowledge that I'm far too soppy to do him any harm.

A balanced regime
But pools need regular maintenance too.

I try to maintain a regime that keeps wildlife happy.

And that means regular work.

Tadpoles and young frogs love a pool chock-full of oxygenating weed in the spring and early summer.

It gives them plenty of cover and also somewhere to rest with their heads out of the water but their bodies submerged.

But if the pool is simply left like this, it will become choked and unattractive.

And, after all, though wildlife is important, I deserve my fun too.

I like a bit of clear water and the chance to grow attractive aquatics like lilies.

Fortunately my own fancies and those of the wildlife can be accommodated.

I leave the weed in the pool untouched until the frogs have departed.

Then I pull some of it out to clear a bit of space.

The difficulty is that every handful of weed that's pulled out is likely to contain its fair share of aquatic creatures too.

However insignificant, they still don't deserve to be thrown out with the bathwater, or rather the pond water.

So, I pull handfuls of weed and leave it near the water's edge, giving at least some of the creatures the chance to nip back into the water again.

The next day I swish the weed around in a bucket of pondwater, throw the water back in and the weed away.

It's still hard to know whether I've saved them all, but at least I know I've done my best. 
Removing weed once young frogs have departed, a compromise between man and wildlife
Frogs love to bask on the surface of dense aquatic vegetation
A pool needs tending to remain this lovely
Wonderful worm factories
There could, I have to admit, be something dramatically wrong with me.

While other chaps sing the praises of Meryl Streep, Joely Richardson or Gabriela Sabatini, I'm much more likely to be found getting worked up over worms.

Star soil performers
I don't care what you say, they really are marvellous creatures and one of the few animals in God's world that do absolutely nothing but good.

In the soil they aerate, they cultivate and they fertilise and in captivity they'll turn your rubbish into gold dust.

I bet Meryl can't manage that!

Worm casts make excellent additives to composts, not only improving the structure of the medium but adding nutrients and growth-promoting hormones too.

And you can manufacture bucketfuls of this marvellous stuff from nothing more than kitchen waste.

You'd have to be daft not to want to give it a go.

My own worm factory is made from a plastic dustbin and it works well, but I welcome the advent of a new, custom-made job at what I think is a pretty reasonable price.

It consists of a plastic bin with a lockable lid that will keep out flies, children and so on .

Inside is a plastic platform which is perforated to allow liquids to seep through to the tank in the bottom.

This keeps the material inside reasonably dry and sweet and also provides a liquid fertiliser that can be drawn off regularly via a tap at the bottom.

The kit arrives complete with worms, a pack of starter compost to get the process going, calcified seaweed to keep the compost sweet and non-acidic; there's even a ready-torn supply of strips of newspaper to go in the bottom.

All you do is put in the starter compost and the newspaper, add the worms and put some kitchen waste on top.

This is gently mixed up with the compost and the worms get to work.

At they munch their way through, you progressively add waste until the bin's full.

Then you remove the top layer, which will contain all the worms.

This is set on one side to start again after emptying out your reward, the valuable compost.

Warm worms up in winter
The bin is completely portable, so it can be brought into the warmth in winter so that the worms will continue to work.

And the lid's so well-fitting, you could even have it in your sitting room.

Oh well, perhaps not.

The wormery is available from: Original Organics Ltd, Organic House, PO Box 6, Tiverton, Devon EX16 7SL and costs £38.45 inclusive.

Flocking to amazing ‘Grace’

The decorative smoke tree Cotinus coggygria gives terrific value in the garden.

The hybrid variety ‘Grace’ is even better, with huge deep red leaves throughout the spring and summer that turn fiery red in autumn.

What I didn't discover until recently was that it provides a bonus for organic gardeners.

I've had this shrub for a few years now but it has been a bit reluctant to bloom.

But this year, it has finally decided to flower profusely, forming brownish clouds which drift hazily over the bush.

And those flowers are literally buzzing with honey-making, pollinating bees and greenfly-eating hoverflies.

Just let anyone come near it with a sprayer!

Tune in to…

BBC Gardeners' World, on Fridays at 8.30pm (repeated on Tuesday, 5.30pm) where Geoff Hamilton passes on more organic gardening advice from Barnsdale every week 
Geoff's Barnsdale buddies make short work of kitchen waste
Wildlife will grace your garden more often with this cotinus
Organic advice
From Pauline Pears and Sue Strickland of the National Centre for Organic Gardening
Save it for the birds
Don't chop off all the deadheads in your border the moment the flowers fade.

Leave some for the birds.

Their antics as they tease out the ripe seeds in autumn are a delight.

You will quickly spot which plants produce their favourite seeds.

In general , simple cottage garden type flowers are the best; highly bred double varieties and hybrids are less likely to give a good seed crop.

Yarrow, cranesbill, goldenrod, globe thistle, rose campion and Michaelmas daisies are usually in the birds' top ten of herbaceous plants.

Herbs are popular too, particularly umbellifers such as angelica, lovage and fennel.

As a special treat for finches, plant a few giant sunflowers next year.

Strawberry strategy
An early start for strawberries ensures a full crop the following season, so you should plant out your runners now.

October plantings make small plants which do not crop well until the second year.

Strawberry plants deteriorate after three years of cropping and need re-siting.

They aren't heavy eaters so do not need constant feeding, but they do prefer well-drained, humus-rich soil.

To prepare, fork compost into the top 6in of soil, a barrowful to every 4sq yd.

Add a barrow of rotted manure for every 120sq yd.

If you can't plant them out at once , pot up the runners and plant out later.

Keeping slugs off your spuds
Ever dug up a bed of apparently flourishing potatoes, only to find the tubers riddles with holes where the slugs have been at them?

The major culprit is the keeled slug, dark grey or black with a distinct ridge down its back, which lives mostly in the soil.

Slugs turn to the potato crop in late summer, when other food sources are disappearing.

Once started, there is little you can to to stop them, and the damage increases greatly in September.

A good solution is to harvest the crop early in September, storing the tubers out of harms way.

Chilling news
September is one of the best times for sowing wildflower seeds, particularly the many mixtures now available.

Some wildflower seeds need a period of cold before they will germinate.

You could put them in the fridge, but many like a fluctuating temperature which would be extremely hard to simulate!

Wild seeds needing chilling before germination include poppies, primroses and umbellifers like wild carrot and angelica.

Topical tip
To obtain a free catalogue from the National Centre for Organic Gardening, please send a large stamped (32p) addressed envelope to the HDRA, Ryton-on-Dunsmore, Coventry CV8 3LG
Know your friends
The earwig is not immediately recognisable as a gardener's friend, and has been known to damage fruit.

So we were surprised when a local entomologist advised us to put sacking around our fruit trees or straw round their bases to encourage the insect.

Earwigs are redeemed by an appetite for the eggs of moths and sawflies, including gooseberry sawfly, and winter, tortrix and codling moth. 
Flower garden
Little wonders
Bulbs bring welcome colour to the New Year, says Anne Swithinbank, and even the smallest garden can house a stunning display of miniature varieties
The main bulb planting season is upon us once again .

Shops and garden centres are fully stocked with row upon row of tempting treasures to add to our gardens.

Spring-flowering bulbs are difficult for any kind of gardener to resist since, unless they are asked to grow in appalling soil conditions, success if usually guaranteed.

As well as the more familiar tall-growing daffodils and tulips, there are many dwarf-growing bulbs to choose from.

Their diminutive size makes them suitable for even the smallest, most overcrowded garden.

Early spring colour
My favourites have definitely got to be those which flower early in January and February.

They will brighten the garden, produce leaf and die down again often before other plants have come into growth.

Early flowering crocus species and certain varieties of Crocus chrysanthus are particularly lovely and extremely reliable.

We've planted several different kinds in drifts under a beech hedge.

Planning striking displays
The first to open is ‘Zwanenburg Bronze’, whose bronze-streaked yellow flowers open up wide in the low shafts of February sunshine.

Delicate creamy-yellow ‘E P Bowles’ stays open just long enough to contrast beautifully with the pale mauve flowers and bright orange stamens of Crocus tommasinianus .

Next is ‘Prins Claus’, in purple and white.

By the time the beech hedge begins to grow and shade the border, the leaves will have refuelled their corms and died down.

There is nothing more annoying than unintentionally digging up groups of bulbs when they are dormant.

One way of avoiding this is to plant them, not in spaces towards the front of borders, but around the stems of trees and shrubs.

Hardy cyclamen and the winter aconite, Eranthis hyemalis , positively thrive in the dry soil ground around the base of mature trees.

For a striking display in March plant Scilla mischtschenkoana (formerly Scilla tubergeniana ) around Japanese quince and camellia.

The pale blue flowers stand out like jewels against dark, bare soil.

Scilla siberica alba, Puschkinia scilloides and Chionodoxa forbesii ‘Pink Giant’ look similarly marvellous.

Creating border space
Where space is at a premium, bulbs which are given a prominent position can be lifted while still in leaf, labelled and planted elsewhere in the garden.

This releases the space they formerly occupied for bedding plants and other summer flowerers.

The smaller kinds of daffodils and tulips are ideally suited to the rock garden or dry bed.

Many of the exquisite, tiny species narcissi will thrive in the well-drained soil.

A top dressing of grit, though not essential, will show them off and avoid soil splashes on their delicate petals.

At only 3in high, Narcissus asturiensis is a perfect miniature.

An alternative is N. bulbocodium , growing between 3 and 6in tall.

With its skirt-shaped cups and narrow petals, this narcissus is known as the hoop petticoat daffodil.

Small-scale options
Similar, yet perhaps even more beautiful, is delicate N. romieuzii , whose cups, the fresh colour of pale lemon sorbet, have undulating edges.

Sturdier looking and about 5in high, miniature daffodils ‘Little Beauty’ (white and yellow) and ‘Little Gem’ (yellow) are like scaled-down versions of their full-sized cousins.

Ideas for rock gardens or for more exposed borders, where taller daffodils are likely to be felled by the wind, the reliable range of cyclamineus type daffodils varies from 8 to 10in high.

‘Peeping Tom’ is well known for its cheerful yellow flowers.

‘Tête-à-Tête’ and closely related ‘Jumblie’, differing only in its backswept petals, are multi-headed varieties.

‘Jack Snipe’ has white petals which contrast handsomely with their dark lemon-yellow cups, while for sheer daintiness ‘Hawera’ is hard to beat.

A Narcissus triandrus about 8in high, it has a short creamy cup and backwards-slanting yellow petals.

Dwarf tulips are largely represented by the kaufmanniana types.

Mostly 8 to 10in high, they are distinguished by brilliantly coloured flowers.

Greigii tulips also tend to be short, in particular varieties like ‘Sweet Lady’, peach pink, and the impressive ‘Queen Ingrid’, producing rich red petals with a striking yellow edge.

In addition their mottled leaves significantly extend  the season of interest, so be quite sure to allow enough space for them to reach their full potential glory.

Out of the increasingly popular species tulips, my favourite is Tulipa tarda , originally from Central Asia.

Long-lasting flowers appear in spring, their green-tinged, white petals gradually shading th bright yellow towards the centre.

On dull days the flowers remain closed, revealing their full beauty only in the sunshine.

Yellow Iris danfordiae and varieties of reticulated iris appreciate a well-drained soil.

They will reward care over choosing their position with a gorgeous display of early flower on plants rarely more than 4in high.

My firm favourite is the lovely I. ‘Katharine Hodgkin’, blessed with flowers the unusual pale blue/green of a clear sea.

The falls of the flowers are a delicate yellowish green veined with slate blue.

Plant with care
Bulbs of any kind look best when planted informally in groups.

While most, for example narcissi and scillas, should be planted as soon as they are bought, tulips should not go in to the garden until November.

Each kind of bulb has its own particular planting depth, which should be explained on the packaging or in the catalogue.

Carry out those instructions even if they sound extreme.

Topical tip
Planted into well-scrubbed clay pots topped with gravel, miniature spring bulbs make unusual Christmas presents which can be transferred to the recipient's garden after reflowering
Container and basket planting
Many gardeners plant up colourful tubs, window boxes and baskets for the summer, but few arrange for a similarly splendid winter and spring display.

A mixture of evergreen shrubs, dwarf conifers, winter-flowering heathers and ivies with bulbs, pansies and polyanthus will enrich any garden.

Dwarf bulbs are particularly suitable.

My winter hanging basket looks stunning when Narcissus ‘Tête-à-Tête’ pops up among Ophiopogon planiscapus nigrescens and Erica ‘Springwood Pink’.

Hyacinths and grape hyacinths make colourful window-box displays. 
Delicate Crocus sieberi ‘Bowles' White’

Harbingers of spring, scillas are perfect plants for the rock garden
Scilla peruviana forms large, conican racemes of flowers if shallowly planted in a hot, sunny spot
Pale mauve Crocus tommasinianus partners crisp white snowdrops
Flowering in early to mid-spring, Narcissus cyclamineus , with its reflexed petals, makes a cheerful display
Tulipa praestans ‘Fusilier’ bears several flowers on each stem
Cyclamen hederifolium forms a bright spring carpet
The festively stiped blooms of Tulipa kaufmanniana ‘Stresa’

Springtime exuberance packed into a tub
The dwarf iris ‘Katharine Hodgkin’ is an excellent rockery plant
Grape hyacinths are natural subjects for creating drifts under trees
Houseplants
Living with houseplants
Colour co-ordinated plant arrangements and an easy way to propagate begonias are among the bright ideas suggested by Carol Kurrein this month
Six co-ordinating companions
Just as you might decide to colour co-ordinate your curtains and cushions, why not try arranging your houseplants into effective colour schemes?

Here are six plants which will give you a delightful blend of pink, purple and rich cream.

Purple passions
Setcreasea purpurea (purple heart) is an easy-to-grow trailing tradescantia, with long, elegant deep purple leaves, shown to best effect in good light.

It is also known as Tradescantia pallida .

The New Guinea impatiens is a compact, bushy plant producing richly coloured foliage which provides a superb foil to its abundant pink to rosy-red busy Lizzie blooms.

This plant much prefers to be kept out of direct sunlight.

Cordyline terminalis ‘Tricolor’, a cabbage palm, has lance-shaped leaves impressively streaked with creamy white, pink and red.

It likes bright light.

Hypoestes sanguinolenta , the polka dot plant, has neat, tightly-packed foliage covered in pink speckles on a creamy ground.

The new improved varieties have virtually no green in the leaf colour at all .

Keep in good light to maintain colour.

Candy-striped creations
Cryptanthus ‘Pink Starlight’, a widely available bromeliad, has boldly arching dark green strap-like leaves, striped deep pink and yellowy-green.

Occasional tubular white flowers appear from the central rosette in summer.

It needs free-draining compost and a slightly shaded position.

Spathiphyllum wallisii , the peace lily, is a most elegant houseplant, with glossy green lance-shaped leaves and fragrant arum lily-like flowers of the purest white, turning to cream then to the palest green with age.

Seasonal tips
As the days get shorter and light levels start to fade, September is the time to begin the process of easing your houseplants into their winter rest period.

•

Over the next six weeks or so, gradually reduce feeding to the recommended winter rate, and water less frequently, according to each plant's needs.

Remove any dust and grime so that your plants benefit from all the available light.

A spongedown with tepid water works well on smooth-leaved plants, or try one of the proprietary leaf shine wipes.

Furry-leaved houseplants can be cleaned with a soft brush.

•

Some plants may need to be moved to more suitable winter quarters.

Those on windowsills could be too cold at night, for example , while plants which spend the summer in darker corners might prefer a bright spot near to the window.

Gently wipe down shiny-leaved plants such as philodendrons
The elegant, elongated purple leaves of Setcreasea purpurea make a good display
New Guinea impatiens, a striking combination of burnished foliage and rosy blooms
The art of selective shopping
When you are out buying houseplants, it's always worth taking some time to shop around.

Although it can be very tempting to splash out on the first splendid specimen that catches your eye, you might be surprised at what you can find once you really start looking.

Dare to be different
Many garden centres offer a great deal more than the stock range of houseplants, I have seen unusual specimens like daturas laden with superbly scented flowers, anthuriums (aptly named the flamingo flower), streptocarpus, the new pot gerberas (huge flowers in fabulous colours) and the much improved New Guinea hybrid impatiens.

Some plants seem a little intimidating simply because they are unusual.

But, after all, experimentation is half of the fun.

Temperamental stars of the East
Those who relish the challenge of something different should seek out the striking Egyptian star ( Pentas lanceolata ) or its temperamental relative, flame of the woods ( Ixora coccinea ).

Both of these members of the Rubiaceae family are finding their way into good houseplant departments.

The ones I've seen have had startling cluster heads of tiny pink-red flowers, star-shaped on pentas and tubular on ixoras, amid bold, leafy foliage.

The leaves of pentas are bright green and slightly hairy, while those of ixoras are dark, rich and glossy.

Egyptian star should be positioned in bright light, ideally with some direct sun, and kept at 55°F minimum.

You should keep compost moist but allow the surface to dry out between waterings.

Allow the plant to rest with no food and little water for about six weeks after flowering has finished.

Key to good care
Provide good light for flame of the woods, but keep it out of direct sun at a temperature of 60°-70°F.

Keep compost evenly moist at all times and mist daily to maintain high humidity.

Take care not to move the plant when in flower, as the buds will drop.

Bringing up begonias
Propagating the popular trailing tuberous Begonia sutherlandi is easy.

Simply wait until autumn, when small tubers will appear along the stem, tucked into the leaf axils.

Just pinch them off and plant in seed compost, which should be kept barely moist in a bright, warm place.

Come next spring, you should have lots of new young plants — and all for free!

Topical tip
Check any impatiens and begonias that you intend to over-winter indoors.

Trim them back, dead-head regularly and bring in before the first frosts and you should have flowers for months to come 
Datura meteloides ‘Zurich’ bears an abundance of fragrant blooms
Ixora coccinea ‘Peter Rapsley’, the so-called flame of the woods
Tips and Ideas
Readers' original gardening tips
Share your gardening tips with other readers and you could win the holiday of a lifetime
Everyone has their own favourite gardening wheeze, and if yours is original enough to print on this page we'll send you a £50 cash prize.

What's more, at the end of the year we'll be choosing the best tip of all, and the gardening genius who dreamt it up will win a fantastic holiday for two — with spending money — in exotic Thailand.

Drain Brain
Offcuts of plastic drainpipe or pipes of larger diameters can be cut as shown to make plant pot hangers for the fence or trellis, or even to maximise space in the greenhouse or conservatory.

A hacksaw is all you need to cut the pipe.

Drill a small hole at the top to screw the potholder firmly into position.

Mr R Codling, Hartlepool 
Make a net profit
To make these adjustable plant supports, all you need is a piece of semi-rigid green netting and a few canes.

It takes only a minute or two to wrap a band of netting supported by three or four canes around the plant, threading one cane through generously overlapping ends to keep the band in place.

As the plant grows the band can be slid up the canes or, as the plant grows wider, both canes and band removed and repositioned.

Derek Ogden, Cambridgeshire 
Scary videos A worn-out tape makes an excellent bird scarer.

To protect the young, tender leaves of seedlings such as brassicas and lettuce, stretch the old tape between canes about 18in from the ground, where it will flutter in the breeze and glitter in the sunshine.

The tape can also be draped on the branches of apple trees, or among bush fruit such as raspberry canes.

H Cullett, Sunderland 
Auto-Waterer
Take the guesswork out of watering growbags by raising the bags off the ground and providing a reservoir beneath them.

Make simple wooden frame to support the bag.

Push two wicks of capillary matting through slits in the bottom of the bag.

Put a bowl of water under the frame.

Place the growbag on the frame, feeding the wicks into the water.

The bottom of the bag and the surface of the water should be as close as possible.

Five the bag an initial soaking, keep the bowl topped up, and the bag will water itself.

A Gill, Mid-Glamorgan 
Do-it-yourself trickle hose
When hose-pipe bans are on, an easy and efficient way to water rows of beans is to cut a length of hosepipe about 3ft longer than your row and make holes along its length, leaving the surplus length at one end hole-free.

Lead this up a stout stake at one end of the row, tying in position, and put a funnel in the open end.

Stop up the other end, and bury the hose-pipe alongside the beans.

Water poured in the funnel will go directly to the roots.

Mrs C Jenkins, Farnborough 
Win a holiday to exotic Thailand
At the end of a year our judges will choose the best tip of all, and the winner will receive a holiday for two in Thailand, plus £500 spending money.

All thanks to BBC Gardeners' World Magazine and Guinness Original.

How to enter
Just jot down your tips and ideas, including drawings if appropriate, and send them to us.

Photos would also be useful.

Then open a chilled bottle of Guinness Original and pour it slowly into a glass.

Study the rich oatmeal head and the dark velvet body.

Then enjoy its distinctive bitter taste as you slowly drink it.

What better way to reward yourself for your original gardening idea.

Send your entries (being sure to include your name and address) to Readers' Original Gardening Tips, BBC Gardeners' World Magazine , 20–26 Brunswick Place, London N1 6DJ.

All entrants will receive a 50p voucher redeemable against any future purchase of Guinness Original, so everyone can enjoy the distinctive and satisfying taste of this special beer.

Competition rules
Entrants to the competition agree to abide by the rules which appeared in our March issue and are available on request, if you enclose a stamped addressed envelope. 
Guinness Original Gardeners' World
BBC Scotland
The Beechgrove garden
Up in cooler Scottish climes it's time to start planning for winter and laying good foundations for next year's displays, says Sid Robertson
Our mountains can be very cold in late September.

Even in the first week of June, when potatoes were a foot high and oilseed rape was in glower, snow fell on high ground, and this makes a difference to what you can grow successfully.

Last September I visited a garden which was nearly a thousand feet up, and I could see that the gladioli, planted as dormant corms in early May, weren't going to flower.

What a contrast to the beautiful gladioli grown by Carole in pots.

We planted the corms on the programme on May 24.

Pot-growing and planting in good soil near sea level made all the difference.

Preparing for frost
Even on low ground, the risk of frost is certainly with us from September onwards, and preparations must be made to take in half-hardy plants.

At Beechgrove we have a well-established standard fuchsia, ‘Dollar Princess’, with cerise sepals and a deep purple corolla, but Bill has done well in training a few new standards this summer and intends to give them early protection this year.

A gentleman from Peebles called our phone-in to ask for help with whitefly on his fuchsias, and Carole was able to offer some advice.

Not only must you spray regularly, but it's a good idea to vary the brand of spray that you use; the nasty wee beasties soon develop resistance if you use the same one over and over again, and that's something worth taking the time to avoid.

Burgeoning biennials
Seeds of biennials were sown on the programme in June, and many have made fine plants to fill borders, windowboxes and containers, which will grace our first programmes come next spring.

All biennials are best placed in their final quarters by the end of the month, and firm planting is extremely important.

Your plants will need time to become really well established to give them a better chance of surviving a harsh winter.

We've very great expectations of a brand new pansy, an F1 hybrid called ‘Imperial Gold Princess’ with enormous scarlet blotches over deep yellow petals.

It flowers early but continues on through the summer.

‘Baby Franjo’ is smaller, at only 4in high.

It sports small yellow flowers en masse , sometimes showing as many as 30 at a time.

It should make a lovely display against ‘Black Beauty’, another very distinctive pansy.

Double daisies are often overlooked, but we're planning for a really fresh new look from mixed ‘Bellis habenera’.

Its flowers have needle-thin petals in differing degrees of white, rose, pink and carmine.

Wallflowers, particularly blood-red or the salmon-red of ‘Eastern Queen’, are favourites in the north.

We always tell folk to watch out for clubroot, because the wallflower is actually a member of the cabbage family.

Thinking of Christmas
Although the programme finishes at the end of the month, head gardener Carole is still thinking ahead and planning for future displays.

This month we will be installing prepared hyacinths in bowls of bulb fibre.

They must go in right away if they are to bloom for Christmas.

In the mild south, gardeners can get away with plunging them in their containers buried in peat in the garden, but up here they'll need to be kept safe from hard frost in a cold frame.

They will remain there for up to ten weeks, before being brought into a warm greenhouse so we can force them into flower.

Bulb planting, outdoors can also start in September, and continue successfully into October.

Our lawns always need attention in autumn.

As well as scarifying to clear out thatch, we aerate to let air into the turf and release surface water.

We use a proprietary autumn fertiliser to encourage strong roots and stiffer growth, which is beneficial for the winter conditions ahead.

As final mowing draws near, be sure to raise the level of the blades to leave an inch of grass showing. 
Blood-red wallflowers are a favourite of the Beechgrove team
If you have whitefly on your fuchsias or other flowers, vary the pesticides that you use
Using a hollow-tines aerator will revive and condition your lawn
Standard fuchsia ‘Dollar Princess’ is well established at Beechgrove’

Practical Project
Planting by numbers
Creating a border to see out the summer
By following our guidelines and shopping list, you can create a border like this one, ending the season with a cracking display of firework colours
This month's plan is for a wide, rectangular border which receives lots of sunshine every day.

Although it is mostly made up of perennial plants which will come up fresh in spring, there are one or two evergreen shrubs added for structure: an upright rosemary and a couple of spiky yuccas.

The border will provide plenty of interest and colour from midsummer onwards, particularly at summer's end, when many other plants have long since finished flowering.

Some of the key plants are described in more detail below.

If you have trouble in finding exactly the same varieties, you local nursery should be able to suggest some good alternatives.

The suggested list will fill an area roughly 15ft x 5ft.

Increase or reduce numbers of plants for larger or smaller areas.

Nemerocallis ‘Stafford’

Striking, dark red flowers with yellow throat, mid to late summer.

Height 2ft 6in; spread 2ft.

Sedum ‘Autumn Joy’

Attractive flat heads of flowers, pink at first , turning dark wine red as the season progresses.

Height and spread: 2ft.

Dahlia ‘Shandy’

Spiky blooms of apricot-salmon.

Height: 3ft 6in.

Alternatives to try: ‘Shirley Alliance’ or ‘Majestic Kerkade’.

Phlox paniculata
Choose mauve cultivars like ‘Excelsior’, ‘Franz Schubert’ or ‘Prospero’.

Height: 3ft.

Penstemon ‘Garnet’

Tubular flowers of deep crimson/wine from midsummer to autumn.

Height 2ft 6in; spread 2ft.

Helenium ‘Moerheim Beauty’

Deep, rusty-orange flowers with attractively reflexed petals.

An excellent autumn border plant.

Height 3ft; spread 2ft.

Aster amellus ‘Nocturne’

Reliable, lavender-flowered Michaelmas daisy for the front.

Height and spread: 20in.

‘Brilliant’ and ‘Pink Zenith’ are good pinks.

Planting and care
1
Prepare the new border by clearing away all weeds, and digging in plenty of well-rotted manure, leaf-mould or compost.

2
Set out the plants in informal drifts as shown.

Add spring bulbs for early colour.

3
Many of the plants can be put in at any time of year, except for the dahlias.

These should go in after frosts have finished in late spring/early summer, and will need to be lifted and stored before winter.

4
Treat pests if necessary, particularly if mildew attacks asters.

Look out too for earwigs, which love dahlias.

‘Prospero’ is a handsome for of Phlox paniculata with mauve-washed flowers
Spiky dahlias lend their vibrant colours to the scheme
The end-of-summer border blends a warm mixture of sunset colours
Planting plan and shopping list
1
3 x Hemerocallis ‘Stafford’

2
2x Foeniculum vulgare ‘Purpureum’ (fennel)

3
2 x Sedum ‘Autumn Joy’

4
3 x Rudbeckia ‘Goldsturm’

5
2 x Dahlis ‘Shandy’

6
1 x Dahlia ‘Apache’

7
3 x Penstemon ‘Garnet’

8
2 x Phlox paniculate ‘Prospero’

9
1 x Yucca flaccida
10
3 x Helenium ‘Moerheim Beauty’

11
2 x Dahlia ‘Judith’

12
1 x Rosemary ‘Miss Jessup’

13
2 x Dahlia ‘Shandy’

14
2 x Phlox paniculata ‘Prospero’

15
1 x Yucca flacida
16
3 x Penstemon ‘Firebird’

17
3 x Helenium ‘Moerheim Beauty’

18
2 x Sedum ‘Autumn Joy’

19
3 x Aster amellus ‘Nocturne’

20
3 x Penstemon ‘Garnet’

21
2 x Aster amellus ‘Brilliant’

Helenium ‘Moerheim Beauty’: warm russet tints for summer's end
Gardening in tomorrow's world
A glimpse of the future from Dr Phil Gates, lecturer in botany at Durham University
Confusing climates
The trend towards milder winters is beginning to concern horticulturists. many trees need lengthy cold spells if they are to open their buds at the right time in spring, and research on the Continent confirms that apple trees will be confused by the changing climate.

In mild winters apples buds began to break soon after Christmas, leaving them vulnerable to frost damage.

Although bud break is early, leaf development is delayed and very variable.

If current cultivars do not adapt, breeders may need to look for new varieties which cope better with milder winters.

Lilies like it hot
If your amaryllis has produced seed pods, you may fancy raising seedlings.

The experience of researchers in Florida should help.

The key to their success was to cover the seeds with a fine layer of compost and germinate at a constant 77°F (25°C).

As fluctuating temperatures reduced germination, a thermostatically-controlled propagator would be ideal.

Friendly fungus
Trichoderma is a microscopic fungus with a miraculous effect on plant growth.

Professor Jim Lynch at Horticultural Research International has found that lettuce yields can double when pots are inoculated with trichoderma, while petunias and marigolds develop extra-large early flowers.

Professor Lynch is uncertain how the fungal growth enhancer works; a likely possibility is that it helps combat natural toxins that develop in seed and potting composts.

Perfect peaches
Anyone who has ever tried to grow peaches outdoors will be familiar with ‘Taphrina deformans’, the fungus which causes peach leaf curl disease.

Spores overwinter in buds and on twigs then, especially in cold, damp springs, they infect leaves.

These become wrinkled and red, dropping prematurely.

Until now the only sure solution has been to grow peaches under glass, but help may be at hand.

Indian scientists have identified varieties with a modified leaf structure which confers some resistance to taphrina.

Hoe, hoe, hoe!

Regular weeding is a tiresome but essential job.

Evidence is mounting that weeds do more than just compete with crops for light and nutrients.

Several produce subtle chemical secretions which actually interfere with crop growth.

Polish scientists have discovered that compounds in the roots and foliage of creeping thistle can prevent seed germination and inhibit root growth in other plants.

Heard on the grapevine
•

Raising decorative and useful herbs in pots is becoming popular, and Danish horticulturists have been busy selecting non-flowering varieties of sage with ornamental foliage for container growing.

They report that rooted cuttings, pinched out twice during growth, make very attractive and of course functional houseplants.

•

Dutch growers have successfully experimented with growing winter crops of cauliflowers in buckets under glass.

By planting two seedlings of the variety ‘Dok Elgon’ per 5-litre bucket of peat in August, they have harvested good-quality curds in time for Christmas.

•

Research at the University of New Hampshire in the United States shows that the single most effective method of controlling apple scab is to collect and burn all fallen leaves from infected trees in autumn.

It's a tedious job, but well worth the effort for blemish-free fruits.

•

Growers in Holland have added two more popular plants to the list of species which can cause allergies in gardeners.

They report cases of contact dermatitis after handling hydrangeas and alstroemerias.

The problem seems to affect people sensitive to primulas.

Concerted effort in autumn can reduce the risk of apple scab
Help at Hand
Question Time
Puzzling pines and poorly potatoes are just a couple of the problems to be solved by our team of BBC experts this month
Colborn induces violet longings
Please can you tell me where I may purchase some dog's tooth violets.

I have been following with interest the Gardeners' World programmes where Nigel Colborn had been designing a new garden, especially when he had been using plants for the shady corner.

He mentions dog's tooth violets and despite an intensive search, I have been unable to find any.

Erythroniums are commonly known as dog's tooth violets because their bulbs are curiously shaped and pointed, rather like canine teeth.

Erythronium dens-canis , the common dog's tooth violet, has attractively blotched and marbled leaves.

Its flowers come in several forms varying in colour from white to deep pinky-purple.

Some other erythronium hybrids include ‘Pagoda’ and ‘Kondo’ (yellow) and ‘White Beauty’.

You can buy them mail order from Van Tubergen UK Ltd, Bressingham, Diss, Norfolk IP22 3AA.

Tel: 0379–888282.

Helping hand for a budding plantsman
Could you suggest some helpful books for a keen amateur gardener who would like to know more about plants?

These books are extremely useful: Encyclopaedia of Garden Plants and Flowers (Reader's Digest £24.95), RHS Gardeners' Encyclopaedia of Plants and Flowers (Dorling Kindersley £27.50), Perennial Garden Plants by Graham Stuart Thomas (Dent £19).

Ace of spades for back back sufferers
Ages ago I saw on television someone using a special space with a lever action behind it, to help people with bad backs to be able to dig the garden.

Do you know what it is, and where I can get one?

We suspect you had seen the Terrex Autospade, which is made by Wolf Tools.

It is quite a hefty spade, with bicycle-type handlebars and a sprung lever at the rear, which you step on to activate it.

Used correctly, you shouldn't have to bend your back during general digging, although it won't lift out the soil and put in a barrow if you need to move it!

If gardening tends to give you backache, remember to take plenty of rest periods during the day, and never try to lift more than you can easily cope with.

The raised bed, no-dig method of growing vegetables is also better for back sufferers.

The Terrex Autospade is available from Wolf Tools, Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire.

Tel: 0989–767600.

Looking after the tender abutilon
I have been given a beautiful abutilon plant, and I wonder if you could advise me on how to look after it.

At the moment it is in my garden, but I don't think it is hardy enough to stay there.

Many abutilons are ideal for growing in the greenhouse or conservatory, being frost-tender.

They are also frequently put outside during summer as bedding, particularly the ones with variegated foliage.

Water and feed your plant regularly over the summer and check regularly for aphid pests.

In warm and sheltered gardens Abutilon megaponticum and A. vitifolium can remain outside.

Readers' questions
We are unable to provide a personal query answering service to readers by post.

However, a selection of your questions will be answered on these pages each month.

Tune in to your BBC local radio gardening experts for advice.

Details are in our Television and Radio Guide, starting on p95, including their phone-in numbers. 
Abutilons make exotic subjects ideal for conservatory planting
A drift of the exquisite yellow dog's tooth violet, Erythronium ‘Pagoda’

The Wolf Terrex Autospade has been designed to make digging a little easier
Dovecote discovery for would-be buyer
In your July issue there was a white bird house in the David Stevens feature ‘Making Wood Work’.

Having looked unsuccessfully for such a bird house, I would like to find the name of a stockist.

We haven't been able to locate anyone who makes exactly that bird house (it may even have been especially made).

However, we know of two firms who make similar dovecotes together with other garden ornaments: Roseney Farm Designs, Lanlivery, Bodmin, Cornwall (Tel: 0208 872664) and Forsham Dovecotes, Goreside Farm, Great Chart, Ashford, Kent (Tel: 0233–820 229).

I can't do a thing with my carrots
I have a Caryopteris x clandonensis about six years old.

It has a mass of flowers in August but has got very straggly.

I have not been able to find any reference to pruning it, although I have cut out any dead wood found in the spring.

Please can you advise me?

You have been doing the right thing by cutting out the dead wood you found in spring, but these plants do get very straggly, and to get the best out of it you will need to be a bit more ruthless.

The plant flowers in late summer and early autumn on wood produced earlier in the same year.

By cutting the stems back hard, you will encourage it to produce new shoots from low down.

These will be much stronger and have better flowers than the numerous spindly bits at the ends would produce, if left unpruned.

Prune all the stems back to within about 4in of the ground in mid to late March when the sap is rising.

By leaving pruning until after the winter you allow the plant some extra frost protection.

A conifer for your conservatory
While on holiday in Portugal I saw a conifer that looked so magnificent I just had to photograph it.

The trouble is that I can't identify it and can't find it in my gardening books or in any of the books at my local library.

I would be so grateful if you could tell me the name of it, because it looks so unusual.

Your picture shows a splendid specimen of the Norfolk Island pine, Araucaria heterophylla .

It is often planted as an ornamental tree in warmer climates such as the Mediterranean, where it is valued for being very tolerant of salt-laden winds.

Over here you will sometimes see juvenile trees grown in conservatories.

Lazy daisies love to bask in the sun
I wonder if you could give me any information on osteospermums.

I was given a cutting a few years ago by my sister and have subsequently passed on cuttings but have never known the proper name of it or much about it.

Osteospermums, also known as Cape marigolds or African daisies, come from South Africa, as the popular names indicate.

They belong to the huge daisy family ( Compositae ), and are sometimes still listed under the dreadfully tongue-twisting name of Dimorphotheca .

Although they are generally regarded as being tender, many gardeners in cold northern areas have reported these plants to have survived several recent winters without harm.

However, to be on the safe side, it is better to take cuttings in August to overwinter under glass.

Put out new plants in May or June in a warm, sunny position in well-drained soil.

They also make excellent container plants for summer.

The flowers only open during bright weather.

Good varieties include ‘Buttermilk’ (pale yellow), ‘Tresco Purple’ (mauve) and ‘Silver Sparkler’ (white).

A thorny problem for our team to solve
On p57 of the June issue the picture on the right has some tall pink and white flowers at the back of the picture.

What are they called?

I saw a whole border of them in Germany, but they were the only plants without a name tag!

They have quite sharp thorns on the back of the leaves.

The plants you spotted are Cleome spinosa , the spider flower, and you're quite right, there are thorns under the leaves, as its name implies.

It is a half-hardy annual, and is available from most seed companies.

Sow the seeds in a propagator at 64°F (19°C) in Feb/March, and set out young plants in the garden in late May, or after the last likely frosts in your area. 
An attractive dovecote can make an excellent focal point
Sun-lovers from South Africa, osteospermums are gaining in popularity
The Norfolk Island pine is a familiar sight on Mediterranean holidays
The spidery blooms of Cleome spinosa are unusual and attractive
Making the most of roses
I have a lovely plant of Rosa glauca which is often admired by my friends.

Can I grow some more plants from cuttings?

Take cuttings of this and other shrub roses in September.

Choose ripe shoots from this year's growth of roughly a pencil's thickness.

Cutting should be about 9in long, cut just below a leaf joint at the bottom, and just above a leaf joint at the top.

Remove the lower leaves and thorns and place about 6in deep and 6in apart in a trench, poking them into a layer of sharp sand.

Refill with soil and firm it down.

Water well and keep watered in summer.

They should root well by the following November.

Charmed by a snake-bark
Could you tell me the name of the maple that has interesting white-striped branches and trunk, and where I might be able to purchase one?

There are several trees known as the snake-bark maples that have this effect.

One of the best is Acer pensylvanicum , which has beautifully striped stems in white and pale grey-green.

Others include Acer davidii, A. capillipes and A. grosseri .

You should be able to obtain snake-barks from Hillier nurseries (Winchester) Ltd, Ampfield House, Ampfield, Nr Romsey, Hants SO51 9PA.

Tel: 0794–68733.

On the trail of nepeta advice
Can you help me with my trailing variegated nepeta?

Despite reference to seed catalogues and gardening books, I have been unable to find any information on its propagation, either from seed or from cuttings.

Trailing variegated nepetas are often sold with the bedding plants during summer at garden centres as they make admirable subjects for hanging baskets and window boxes.

You should be able to find it in gardening books listed as Glechoma hederacea ‘Variegate’, or Nepeta hederacea ‘Variegata’.

It is a hardy herbaceous perennial, although you will often see it sold with greenhouse plants.

To propagate it, lift and divide up the plants in spring and repot them.

Alternatively, peg down the trailing stems in the soil, and they will form roots, then individual new plants you can detach from the parent.

They're making mischief in my mulch
I use forest bark and cocoa shell mulch on two flower beds to help control weeds.

However, both are constantly being disturbed by blackbirds.

How can I deter the birds from molesting my mulches?

I have tried a product called ‘Hoppit’ but to no effect.

Organic mulches increase worm and insect activity, so it's not surprising and, we fear, inevitable that blackbirds and others sometimes plunder these mulches in search of food.

Console yourself with the knowledge that the birds are also picking out many a garden pest.

Caterpillars breakfast on eggplants
I haven't been very successful with my aubergines the last couple of years, as they keep being eaten by caterpillars.

Is there any way of dealing with them without using chemicals?

Vigilant and regular inspection of your plants is the best way of avoiding such pests.

As soon as you spot caterpillars, their eggs or signs of caterpillar damage such as ragged holes in leaves and the tell-tale small faeces, search them out and squash them.

If you have a lot of plants and don't want to use any of the usual chemicals, try a biological insecticide.

Bacillus thuringiensis is sold as DiPel and comes as powder which you dilute to spray.

It is effective against all caterpillars, including those of harmless butterflies, so don't spray indiscriminately outside.

You can buy packets of it by mail order from HDRA Sales Ltd Tel: 0203–303517 
Treat caterpillars before they treat themselves to your fruit and vegetables
Rosa glauca has handsome foliage, pretty single flowers and good red hips
Striped like a python, the snakebark maple Acer pensylvanicum 
Occasionally birds disturb mulches while looking for food
Spot the mineral deficiency
The older leaves on my potato plants are distinctly yellowing, with brown spots and marking too.

Do you know what this could be?

It looks like magnesium deficiency, which is very common on sandy and light soils, where the nutrient is quickly leached away.

This happens most readily when the season has been particularly rainy.

This deficiency shouldn't affect the yield and tends to look more serious than it actually is.

When liming the soil choose magnesian limestone to correct the problem.

This will take care of any probable calcium deficiency too.

Traditional edging can be elusive
On p9 in your July edition one of the photographs shows a brown glazed edging to a path.

I have often seen this in gardens of older house.

Is it possible still to buy this kind of edging, and if so, can you please supply details of the manufacturer or stocklist?

Those old, glazed rope-twist tiles seem to be hard to find nowadays, and the ones in the picture will have been in the garden for many years.

Try your local architectural salvage merchants, who collect artefacts from old house and gardens.

Many garden centres also now sell unglazed terracotta versions of rope-twist tiles, and your local centre should be able to order some for you.

Be harsh with your mallow
Our Lavatera ‘Barnsley’, now in its second year, is about 5ft tall and ready to flower.

How should I prune it and take cuttings?

This lavatera (shrubby mallow) flowers on wood made in the same season, so cut last year's branches hard back in spring.

Take semi-hardwood cuttings in late summer, choosing material that is woody at the base, but soft at the tips.

Dip the base in hormone rooting powder and insert in very free-draining rooting compost, or equal parts peat and sand, four or five cuttings round the edge of a 5in pot.

Overwinter in a cool greenhouse, keeping the compost slightly moist to help roots form.

Flaming Katy need a drenching
I have suddenly noticed that my kalanchoe is badly attacked by greenfly.

What should I use to get rid of them?

If your kalanchoe is in the house, the most economical and easy way to deal with them is by using a proprietary spray, such as Fisons Insect Spray for Houseplants.

If aphids are a big problem outside too, buy some ICI Rapid to get rid of the lot.

Pink hydrangea is giving me the blues
Last year I was given a beautiful blue pot hydrangea which I planted in the garden when it finished flowering.

This year its flowers are different, being a mauvey-pink instead.

What went wrong?

You can buy forced hydrangeas from florists and garden centres almost any time of year these days, and sometimes in the most tempting, vibrant blues.

Although they will grow on successfully when put out into the garden in spring or summer, the flowers you get in future years may well turn pink if you are not on an acid soil.

Garden centres stock sachets of blueing powder for hydrangeas, but the most reliable way is to continue growing them in pots. 
Potatoes growing on light soils often show magnesium deficiency
Glazed rope-twist tiles make a traditional edging
Lavatera ‘Barnsley’ needs regular pruning to maintain its shape
Colonies of aphids can build up quickly on plants such as kalanchoe
Blue in the pot, the florist's hydrangea may change its colours
Gardeners' Manual
Guide to hedges
Hedges are valuable features whether your garden is exposed to wind or view.

We show you how to create a hedge that will be both effective and attractive.

Hedge selection
More than 30 prospective hedges to choose from in our comprehensive and detailed selector table.

Pest prevention and control
Prevention is better than chemical cures; natural pest control relies on recognising and understanding not only your enemies but the gardeners friends in the animal kingdom.

Using colour
Skilful use of colour compositions is the key to creating spectacular and subtle displays all year round.

Harvesting and storing
Our simple tips on handling and storage at harvest time, the most satisfying season for the kitchen gardener.

Plants for shade
Lots of clever ideas to banish gloom and turn that difficult shady spot into an elegant and eye-catching planting feature.

All you need to know about hedges, p98
Get to know your pests with our complete guide, p102
Harvesting and storing made easy on p108
Choosing colourful combinations, p106
Guide to hedges
Hedges create living walls for shelter and privacy in the garden
As a means of enclosing your garden and defining its boundaries, a hedge is a durable, less expensive and often more aesthetically satisfying alternative to fencing.

It will, however, occupy more space and, depending on the species, may take several years to establish.

It will also need clipping or pruning to shape at least once a year, especially in the case of formal hedges.

Within the garden, hedges are valuable for marking off special areas, providing shelter for delicate plants and hiding utility areas or eyesores.

Dwarf hedges are a traditional means of edging beds, especially in herb and kitchen gardens.

As a design element, hedges can lead or intervene as well as define, diverting attention from an obvious path or keeping secret areas from immediate view.

Hedges can also provide effective weather protection.

Exposure to winds is a problem in many gardens, resulting in scorched and damaged young foliage, collapsed stems, uneven growth and rapid drying of soil and leaves.

Strategically sited wind-breaks reduce the impact of strong winds and provide more vulnerable plants with essential shelter for a distance many times the height of the wind-break.

The main wind-break should protect the side of the garden most exposed to prevailing winds, with individual or grouped shrubs positioned to limit the impact of other seasonal winds and create sheltered corners for delicate plants.

Planning a hedge
The type of hedging plant you choose depends partly on the amount of annual maintenance you are prepared to undertake.

If left to reach their natural dimensions, many species will eventually take over a wide area of ground and should be avoided in small gardens.

Fortunately, most popular hedging plants tolerate frequent close clipping to control them, and a hedge made from species such as beech, hornbeam or box can be as little as 15in wide.

Identify the main functions of a hedge before deciding its composition.

Thorny plants such as hawthorn and pyracantha will develop into impenetrable barriers where security is important, while the dense foliage of yew and Lawson's cypress suppresses noise.

Evergreen species of all kinds are ideal for wind-breaks.

Choose plants that should reach the desired height without becoming bare or ragged at the base (this can be a problem with berberis).

Make sure hedging plants blend with the rest of the garden.

A deciduous or sombre evergreen hedge in a prominent position may look bleak in winter, although in summer they often enhance the brilliance of adjacent flowers.

Also consider the cost, since hedges comprise large numbers of plants.

As a rule of thumb, tall, vigorous species are spaced 18–24in apart, those of medium height (2–4ft) about 15–18in, and dwarf typed 9–15in apart.

Single lines of plants are preferable to double staggered rows for ease of weeding and hoeing.

Garden centres are not the best places to buy hedging plants in large numbers: specimens are usually larger than is ideal (large plants take longer to establish) and more expensive than small plants bought by the dozen or hundred from specialist nurseries.

Preparation and planting
The least expensive method is to root your own cuttings from one or two stock plants, inserting groups of three cuttings at each planting position through a black polythene mulch.

Aucuba, berberis, griselinia, privet, laurel, rugosa roses and many ornamentals will root and develop quickly.

Before planting, you should cultivate the site thoroughly.

Prepare a strip 3–4ft wide, extending a little beyond the ends of the hedge.

Dig to two spade-lengths if possible, adding at least a bucketful of  organic matter per square yard.

Clear out all perennial weeds.

Plant in the same way as for trees and shrubs, mulching the prepared ground with black plastic or strips of old carpet.

Stake large specimens and protect the young plants from cold winds until growing steadily.

Clipping and pruning
Hedging plants are usually cut back to half their height after planting to encourage bushiness, but some conifers are best left unpruned until they reach the desired height.

Water freely in dry weather during the first two seasons, and feed plants each year with a general fertiliser (2oz/sq yd), starting immediately after their first clipping.

This should be done annually to ensure dense sides, removing up to half the season's new growth at a time.

Once established, hedges need routine clipping according to species and the level of precision required.

Flowering, fruiting and informal hedges can be clipped once annually, but for crisp outlines more frequent trimming is needed.

Use a string as a guide to accurate shaping at the beginning of the season, thereafter working by eye.

Where possible, shape the hedge so that is narrower at the top, admitting light to growth near the base.

Clear away and burn all trimmings, and keep tools sharp and free from sap.

Many neglected hedge species respond to hard pruning at the right time of year, and will quickly produce a thicket of new growth.

Conifers other than yew usually resent harsh treatment, however, and are difficult to rejuvenate, Deciduous species are best pruned hard back in late winter, evergreens in late spring — cutting one side a year back to a foot within the intended final width to allow room for regrowth.

Always feed generously after hard pruning.

Bare patches at the hedge base are the result of excessive height, uncontrolled weed growth or a hedge profile which obstructs light from filtering down.

Reducing the height might help, but otherwise it's best to simple disguise the damage by planting decorative shrubs beside the hedge.

Dead wood should be cut out, allowing adjacent healthy growth to fill the gap.

Hedge companions
A hedge will compete with nearby plants for water and nutrients, and the roots of some species can be very invasive.

Cutting along the side of the hedge with a spade helps check lateral roots, but it's wiser to grow adjacent plants that tolerate poor, dry soil or shade.

This will suit most bulbs, and annual or late-flowering perennial climbers that use the hedge for support.

But check whether companion plants prefer the sunny or shady side. 
A hydrangea hedge, pretty and practical
An eye-catching mix of Berberis x stenophylla and Mahonia japonica 
Pruning a beech hedge the easy way
Trimming with secateurs avoids chopping up attractive leaves
Privet and yew combine in an effective two-tone design
Hedge selection
A hedge can be a dense, glossy barrier, an informal background to herbaceous plants or, with flowers and bright fruits, a colourful feature in its own right.

There's something for all tastes in our table
Name Artemisia abrotanum Common name Southernwood In leaf: deciduous Ideal height 3ft Clip in March Features Aromatic grey bushy foliage; yellow flowers
Name Aucuba japonica ‘Variegata’ Common name Spotted laurel In leaf evergreen Ideal height 6–10ft Clip in April Features Dense and glossy; gold-speckled leaves
Name Berberis x stenophylla ‘Irwinii’ Common name Barberry In leaf evergreen Ideal height 2ft Clip in June Features Spiny, arching stems; orange spring flowers
‘Castlewellan Gold’, a Leyland cypress type
Dwarf box makes traditional edging
Flowering quince will add colour
Griswlinia will tolerate salt-laden winds
Yew foliage and fruits are attractive, but poisonous
Gold speckling on variegated aucuba
Crataegus , or hawthorn, makes a dense hedge which lends itself well to severe formal trimming
Beech gives a spectacular display of changing colours in autumn
Glossy laurel is fully hardy and evergreen
Pest control
Healthy plants and a vigilant conscientious gardener are the two most valuable weapons against pests
Like every other organism in a thriving garden, pests have a role to play.

They provide food for predators whose presence reduces the likelihood of any one pest developing into epidemic proportions, and they eliminate weak and sickly plants.

Destroying one pest leaves a vacuum that will be filled by something else.

Although major types of plant pest are surprisingly few, it is easy to become over-sensitive, not to say paranoid, and assume that everything that moves is a potential threat.

Friends and foes
A garden is a balanced community of plants, creatures and micro-organisms, many of them beneficial.

Realistic gardeners encourage this diversity while remaining alert to early symptoms of disturbance.

The most practical approach is to accept a permanent low incidence of various plant pests, and prevent serious problems from arising by growing healthy plants that tolerate normal pest populations.

Any sudden increase in the number of a particular pest, however, need immediate action.

The first priority is to consult a good reference book to identify the pest and choose the most effective control.

It is important to distinguish between allies and enemies: large numbers of aphids, for example , are often accompanied by ladybird or lacewing larvae which feed voraciously on them and are liable to be killed by many insecticides.

Nuisance or threat?

Decide whether the pest is a serious threat or merely a nuisance.

Some, such as froghoppers (‘cuckoo spit’) and flea beetles, cause little more than cosmetic damage and will be tolerated by healthy plants.

On the other hand, aphids can infect raspberries with incurable virus diseases, and blackcurrant reversion is spread by big-bud mites.

As well as selecting a suitable  remedy where appropriate, you should also try to discover the cause of the problem, because this could help prevent future repetitions.

Unseasonal weather can encourage a dramatic rise in pest numbers before their natural predators have multiplied in response, but very often an outbreak is the result of poor management, leaving plants susceptible to attack.

Plants under stress from drought, disease or nutrient deficiency are the most likely to attract insect pests.

Good soil husbandry can help prevent many of the conditions favourable to pests by ensuring steady growth, hence the importance of improving poor drainage and fertility.

Too much manure or fertiliser, however, can result in soft lush growth which is equally vulnerable, and you should aim for balance between the various essential nutrients.

Test the soil with a pH kit to see if its acidity needs adjusting.

Weather watch
Guard against the harmful effects of extreme weather by watering plants before drought becomes critical, and making sure excessive rainfall can drain away freely.

Site is as important as soil, for plants that prefer full sun, shade or shelter may not thrive if planted in the wrong place, and are then more likely to succumb.

A regular walk around the garden to make sure everything is growing healthily is the simplest precaution of all, often revealing preliminary signs of trouble.

In addition to maintaining positive plant health, there are several ways to avoid the probability of serious pest attacks, or at least lessen their impact, which in turn will cut down on the need to apply pesticides.

Although no single measure is usually sufficient on its own, a combination of deterrents can be remarkably effective.

A fundamental precaution against both pest and disease problems is keeping the garden clean and tidy.

Whether you grow vegetables, summer bedding or an informal patch of wildflowers, you should compost  or destroy dead leaves, exhausted plants, vegetable stumps and thinnings, for all these are favourite haunts of many harmful insects.

Make life difficult
Frequent cultivation disturbs and exposes soil pests for birds to clear up.

Some pests live temporarily on alternative host plants — carrot fly on cow parsley and certain aphid species on chickweed, for example — and controlling these interrupts the pest's life cycle.

Growing pest-resistant varieties of fruit and vegetables is a sensible precaution.

This promising approach to pest control is in its infancy, but varieties that are less attractive to certain pests are constantly being developed and tested.

Work out a sound crop rotation for vegetables to deny pests a continuous supply of particular host plants.

Avoid monoculture: growing large areas of the same crop which then becomes an easy target.

Inter-cropping and dispersal among other unrelated plants can also reduce the effects of an attack.

In cases where vegetables can be sheltered from a common pest by physical barriers, it's worth gathering sowings together in one easily protected site.

Brassicas, for example , can then be netted against pigeons, or carrots surrounded by a low fence of plastic sheeting to repel root fly.

Provide solitary plants with individual defences, such as snail-proof rings of soot or grit, or brassica collars to foil cabbage root fly.

Floating mulches of spun fibre both encourage early crops and shield them from pests.

Most insects have fairly predictable behaviour and you can often adjust sowing dates to avoid peak periods of egg-laying or migration, and deny colonising pests a favoured habitat by, for example , pinching out the soft tips of broad beans or applying a protective insecticide.

Some pests can be trapped, then collected and destroyed.

Slugs will shelter under inverted halves of grapefruit peel, inverted pots of straw on canes will lure earwigs and hanging sticky yellow cards in a greenhouse will catch flying pests.

Many fruit pests can be trapped in winter and spring on grease bands.

Encourage your allies
Learn to recognise and welcome your allies.

Plant pests are herbivores, eating foliage or sucking the sap, while predators are carnivorous and live by feeding on plants pests, directly or by laying their eggs among colonies so that their larvae have a ready supply of food.

The commonest predators are ladybirds, hoverflies, lacewings, ground beetles, centipedes and insectivorous birds, together with frogs, toads and hedgehogs.

Attract birds to the garden by feeding them when their natural sources of food are scarce; grow plants favoured by insect predators (like limnanthes, cornflowers, eschscholzia, asters, chrysanthemums, robinia, philadelphus and spiraea), and respect the habitats of retiring predators such as beetles, frogs and bats.

Treatment
A major infestation is almost certain to occur at some time or other, and you must then decide how to control or eradicate it.

Some pests are large enough to be gathered and destroyed by hand: caterpillars can be picked off at any time, while slugs and snails around vulnerable plants are easily collected by torchlight on moist evenings.

Leaf miner grubs are usually found at the end of their meandering tunnels in leaves and can be squeezed between your thumbnails.

Crushing batches of eggs on stems or leaves is quicker and more efficient than spraying.

Small numbers of aphids and other soft-bodied insects can be quickly rubbed off plants, while a forcible spray from a hose-pipe will disperse larger colonies, few of the insects surviving to climb back up the plant.

Spraying with water is particularly effective for discouraging red spider mite, which flourishes in dry conditions.

This can also be treated biologically in a greenhouse by deliberately introducing a predator mite, Phytoseiulus persimilis , which feeds on red spider mite.

Other examples of biological control, as it is known, are the use of encarsia parasites to eradicate glasshouse whitefly, and Bacillus thuringiensis , a natural bacteria that kills cabbage caterpillars.

Both parasites and predators are affected by insecticides, however, so it is important not to combine biological control with chemical sprays.

Chemicals
If used strictly according to recommendations, chemical treatments have their place, if only as a last resort for serious threats.

Asparagus beetles, for example , can dramatically reduce crop yields and, although often controlled naturally by ground beetles, need to be sprayed if they get out of hand.

If you decide to use an insecticide, choose the most appropriate one for the affected plant and the pest concerned to avoid injuring beneficial insects.

A guide from the British Agrochemicals Association, Garden chemicals: a guide to their safe and effective use , is available for £1.50.

Write to the association, at 4 Lincoln Court, Lincoln Road, Peterborough PE1 2RP, or telephone: (0733) 349225.

Larger pests
Where birds and mammals are concerned some gardeners are squeamish about killing them.

Nevertheless, to protect your crops they must at least be deterred.

Smaller birds that prey on insect pests also raid fruit crops, which must be netted.

Either keep pigeons off brassicas with nets and various kinds of bird scarer, or intercrop brassicas where they are partly hidden by other plants.

Moles are difficult to deter.

The latest bright idea is to bury the device from one of those irritating musical greetings cards in their run, which should drive them out (or mad).

Traps should wither kill them instantly or confine them for release elsewhere.

Mice, too, are best caught in traps tucked beneath slates or inside lengths of pipe to avoid injuring birds.

Wire netting is the best defence against rabbits and squirrels, which will chew through plastic netting to plunder fruit crops.

Pesticides: handle with care
Although biological methods of pest control such as Bacillus thuringiensis (for caterpillars) are now available to committed organic gardeners, there are few of us who never need to resort to the use of chemicals.

Pesticides are either selective (affecting specific insects only) or non-selective.

Some kill on contact and are then rendered ineffective, whereas systemic (translocated) chemicals are absorbed into the plant's system and remain active for much longer, which could delay the harvest of fruit and vegetables.

Many gardeners prefer to apply systemic chemicals to ornamentals, restricting edible plants to spot treatment with contract pesticides.

Check that the chemical will in fact control the pest and can be used on the affected plant.

Use the most appropriate formulation, too.

Concentrated liquid pesticides applied as diluted sprays are perhaps the most versatile against pests of top growth, whereas soil pests are often treated with granules or dusts, the latter also used as seed dressings.

Aerosols are expensive but useful for emergencies, especially indoors.

Fumigants are generally used for non-selective treatment of confined areas such as greenhouses.

Simple solutions to small pests
Aphids
Green and blackfly (but not whitefly), root aphids and the grey-coloured mealy cabbage aphid; sap-feeding insects that multiply rapidly into dense colonies.

Their numerous wingless progeny weaken and distort young plant growth as they feed, spread virus diseases and produce sticky honeydew which disfigures leaves and encourages sooty mould.

Preventative sprays of systemic insecticides, and winter washes to kill aphid eggs, are often preferable to spraying establishing colonies which might contain predators.

Slugs and snails
Soft-bodied, voracious molluscs that often shelter by day beneath leaves and plant debris, and feed at night.

Catch on damp evenings; under grapefruit skins or large leaves; deter by ringing vulnerable plants with grit or soot.

Metaldehyde or methiocarb pellets can harm pets or wildlife; organic gardeners should poison with selective aluminium sulphate preparations.

Millipedes
Long and segmented, moving slowly and coiling up tightly when disturbed.

Two pairs of legs per segment, compared with one for centipedes, the gardener's allies.

Millipedes eat seeds, seedlings, roots and bulbs.

Disturb with frequent cultivation, and treat with a soil insecticide.

Control other soil pests, such as cutworms, leatherjackets and wireworms, in the same way.

Caterpillars
The larvae of moths, butterflies and sawflies.

Most plants are affected by one or more species, their presence betrayed by ragged leaves, buds or shoots, accumulations of dark green grass (excreta), and sometimes silky webs or rolled leaves.

Large numbers can strip a plant beyond recovery.

Crush eggs and caterpillars when seen: trap fruit species with grease bands; spray with a contact insecticide, or a systemic one if you suspect them to be feeding out of sight. 
A seven-spot ladybird bears down on a group of hapless aphids
Plant bright, open flowers to attract the beneficent hoverfly
Wed-spinning red spider mite can wreak havoc in the greenhouse
Moles, cute but catastrophic
Wood mice make short work of fruit crops
Though it may snack on a strawberry, the ground beetle is an ally
Biological warfare with Bacillus thuringiensis 
The frothy den of the froghopper, unaesthetic but harmless
No fate is too cruel for voracious snails, here devouring Iris foetida 
This leopard slug, like all slugs, loves soils rich in organic matter
Greenfly can literally suck a plant dry
Cabbage white caterpillars hatch en masse 
Using colour
Cool or warm, vivacious or romantic, a garden design depends on the colour mix
The chemistry of colour pigmentation helps gardeners to understand the behaviour and health of their plants, but garden design depends much more on visual impact and appreciation.

Colour is intimately linked with light, so it is hardly surprising that changing light alters colours, enhancing the brilliance of some while causing other to fade almost into invisibility.

Red roses that look vivid at midday seem to vanish as dusk falls, just when white flowers are at their most luminous.

Life-giving green
The way you arrange and exploit colours in your garden is ultimately a matter of personal preference.

A painful clash for one gardener may be gloriously stimulating to another.

However, a few basic guidelines are generally valid.

Green is the most essential colour in the garden, because without it other colours would be diminished.

Most dwellers in the temperate zones would agree, since centuries of conditioning by our surroundings have led us to see green as the fresh, life-giving backdrop to everything we perceive.

Cool and refreshing on its own, green is a matrix in which to set other colours like gems.

Thus a gold or purple-leaved shrub is best used not as an alternative to green foliage, but as a specimen highlight whose beauty depends on the contrast with its green neighbours.

All colours create moods and illusions.

Whereas greens and blues are cool and make flowers seem to recede, reds and yellows are warm colours that attract attention and stand forward from paler flowers.

White illuminates dark corners and en masse provides a still  breathing space among more lively shades.

Pastel colours are gentle and romantic, helping to restrain exuberant reds and yellows from overwhelming the senses.

Save intensely blue, purple and crimson flowers for dramatic flourishes within a paler context, otherwise they will lose their impact and seem too heavy or lifeless.

Set in front of a light background, these more dominating colours are not only vibrant, but suggest space and distance behind.

Harmony and contrast
Planning colour schemes involves choosing and balancing colours which will contrast or harmonise in a pleasing way.

Combine the stronger shades with care, keeping arrangements simple, except in mixed bedding where a lively tumult of colour is de rigueur .

However, while effective in small beds, such polychromatic mixtures can be uncomfortably dazzling unless framed by an outline of a single cool colour.

Or you could plant blocks of distinct colours, divided by a neutral foliage plant.

Two contrasting colours such a blue and yellow can look effective when freely mingled, each intensifying the impact of the other.

Limiting a bed or an area of a border to all the various shades of a single colour produces a sophisticated effect, although on a larger scale it may appear monotonous unless relieved by a subtle use of green or variegated foliage.

Colour all year round
From April, when spring bulbs, shrubs and herbaceous plants start flowering in earnest, until the summer bedding is dismantled in late September, there should be no problem keeping the garden filled with colour.

The majority of perennials flower during this period, along with hardy and half-hardy annuals.

A short flowering season can be extended by regular dead-heading.

However, fewer species flower out of doors between October and the end of February, and you'll need to plan carefully to devise a sequence of colour during these months, especially as weather conditions may spoil or interrupt normal flowering.

Evergreen shrubs with variegated foliage are a valuable insurance, although a great number of hardy plants usually succeed in blooming even in the severest season.

Bright ideas
The brief selection of flowering plants listed here should help brighten the darker months.

Several will remain in bloom for more than one month.

October
Anemone japonica, Arbutus unedo, asters, autumn crocus, chrysanthemums, helenium, rudbeckia, schizostylis.

November
Chimonanthus fragrans, gentians, Prunus subhirtella ‘Autumnalis’, Sternbergea lutea.

December
Colchicums, Erica carnea, Hamamelis mollis, Lonicera fragrantissima, Mahonia japonica, Viburnum x bodnantense.

January
Adonis amurensis, brodiaea, Chimonanthus praecox, crocus, Iris unguicularis, winter aconites.

February
Anemones, Cornusmas, Daphne odora, doronicum narcissi, primulas, Prunus incisa ‘Praecox’, P. mume, saxifrages, scillas.

Purple foliage sets off these clematis blooms
A bright, dramatic red instantly draws the eye
Rich yellows and reds need a green setting for maximum effect
A bold mix of sedum, aster and rudbeckia creates a lively border
Green, purple and gold in harmony
Glowing Schizostylis coccinea 
Harvesting and storing
The prudent gardener takes as much care with his produce once picked as when growing, and saves seed in order to obtain plants for free
Throughout the main growing season vegetables, fruit and flowers are gathered or cut according to need, often before they are fully ripe.

Gooseberries, for example , can be picked for cooking or processing when they are still hard and green, flowers are often cut while still in bud and many roots or salad crops are at their most palatable when young and tender.

A great deal in store
Some garden produce, however, is deliberately grown for storage, and crops can be preserved for use during the winter months must be fully ripened if they are to last without rapid deterioration.

To recognise when a crop is ripe is an acquired art.

The critical moment for harvest varies from year to year and from one plant to the next.

Many fruits change colour as they reach maturity and this can be a useful indicator, although not in every case: apples will often colour up early if occupied by a burrowing pest, some pear varieties only change colour once in store and marrows are past their best when they turn yellow.

Friendly persuasion
A more reliable test is whether a fruit comes away from the plant without much persuasion.

Root crops for storage are best left in the ground for as long as possible, provided they are dug up before severe frosts set in.

Only unblemished, healthy produce will keep for long , and it is important to handle crops gently.

Punctured skins and broken stems might admit spores and cause the fruit or vegetable to rot, often spreading to adjacent specimens.

Since a firm intact skin is essential, both to exclude infections and prevent the contents from drying out, it is usual to leave roots on the soil surface for a few hours to harden their skins.

For the same reason, fruit that ripens in a dry sunny autumn will often keep longest, whereas a wet season may shorten their storage life.

Waste not, want not
Although many crops are processed for freezing or bottling, there are wasteful methods with roots and top fruits that can be preserved intact.

Storage methods vary considerably, as do the most suitable conditions (‘Grenadier’ apples store best several degrees cooler than ‘Blenheim Orange’, or example), but as a general rule the place of storage should be dry and cool.

A cellar, well-ventilated attic or frost-free shed is ideal, whereas inhabited rooms are usually too  warm and encourage early dessication.

Never lay crops directly on the floor where it is possible they could suffer from the effects of damp and poor air circulation, and arrange produce according to its preference: the roots nearer to the cool floor, and onions and marrows close to the ceiling where it is slightly warmer.

Spud space
Once dug and left to dry, potatoes can be sorted and stored in teachests, thick paper sacks or shallow boxes covered with sacking to keep the light from turning them green.

While parsnips, maincrop carrots, turnips and swedes are often left in the ground, covered with straw or leaves and dug as needed, they are better stored in boxes under cover if the soil is heavy and wet, or if you have a high soil pest population.

Use any damaged roots immediately and leave the rest to dry.

Trim off their leaves, and then spread the roots between layers of moist sand or dry sawdust, placing the largest roots at the bottom as these keep longest.

Beetroot is always better stored in this way after its leaves have been twisted off.

You should never wash roots before storing, but always gently rub off any loose soil.

Apples should be picked carefully and graded so that the smallest and largest are used first, and medium-sized fruit is saved for storage.

Lay the fruit stem uppermost on shelves or in shallow boxes so that they do not touch each other .

Wrap the finest dessert specimens individually, in some newspaper.

Alternatively, store them in perforated polythene bags.

Leave a window or door open for a week after storing to let the fruit sweat, and then keep cool, checking them occasionally for signs of decay.

Pears are treated in much the same way, but are never wrapped.

Most continue ripening in store until ready for the table, but a few varieties must be brought into the warm for a few days before they are ready to eat.

Saving seeds
Many gardeners collect and store seeds from their garden plants, which is an economical practice, especially in the case of outstanding vegetables, flowering plants and sports or other unusual forms.

It is not really worth saving seeds from F1 hybrids or from most fruit varieties as these rarely reproduce true to type.

Variegated varieties will often produce green plants from seed, and seedlings from a flower mixture may not represent the full range of colours.

You should gather seeds from the best plants only, if possible selecting and marking them early on and removing all but one or two of the first, fattest seed-heads to conserve as much energy as possible.

A plant left to fully ripen all its seeds will probably stop flowering or cropping before its neighbours.

Off with their heads
Wait until the seed-heads are fully ripe.

Colour may be an indication of maturity, but some seeds will probably remain green and it is better to gently shake or tap seed-heads to see if the contents are dropping.

At this stage cut off the complete head and invert it in a paper bag, hanging these in an airy place for a few days until the seeds are quite dry.

Sort and clean the seeds, removing stems, casings and chaff manually, by sieving or blowing away the debris.

Seal the seeds in envelopes marked with name, date, place where gathered and other date.

Store the envelopes in an airtight container, and include a sachet of silica gel to absorb moisture (if the gel turns pink, dry gently in the oven until it turns blue again).

Keep them in a cool dry place until the appropriate sowing time. 
Choose unblemished, healthy fruit for storing
Polythene bags should be perforated if used
Store potatoes in tea-chests, paper sacks or shallow boxes
Keep carrots, parsnips, swedes and turnips in boxes under cover
Make sure the seed heads are fully ripe before you cut them away
Honesty ( Lunaria annua ) produces silvery, moon-like seed-heads
Plants for shade
With the right choice of shrubs and plants, you can brighten up the shadiest of corners
Light in some form is absolutely essential for the healthy development of green plants.

All the complex chemical changes that take place within every leaf are fuelled by the energy in light, and regulated by the intensity and duration of the light available.

But some plants actually prefer varying degrees of shade, which is fortunate for gardeners choosing plants for gloomy corners or the dappled shade beneath trees.

Gardeners occasionally regard shade as an evil to be avoided at all costs.

It can certainly cause problems with a wide range of plants, but there are many others that suffer from high intensity of sunlight.

Too much sun, for example helps trigger the premature bolting to seed of some crops in summer, which is one reason why later sowings of radishes, salads or spinach are much better situated in a cool, shady bed.

Other factors affecting growth explain why not all plants welcome unlimited light.

For plants to photosynthesise and produce sugars in their leaf cells, they need to absorb large amounts of carbon dioxide.

How much they can take in depends partially on the structure of their leaves.

Some absorb the gas quickly, whereas others circulate it slowly and cannot respond to floods of bright light.

These plants, with their slow metabolism, can be found in the wild growing happily in woodland floors where sunlight is filtered.

Plants that manufacture food slowly will respond to full sunshine by wilting as they become hotter and lose water.

Bright sunlight destroys chlorophyll which they are unable to replace fast enough, and so they suffer while other, more adaptable plants flourish.

Striving for the light
Plants that do need sunlight may survive in shade for a while, directing their energies to growing rapidly towards the light essential for their flowering and seed production.

Their elongated stems with few small leaves strive upwards until they find sufficient light, and this can be seen when sun-loving species are planted in shady parts of the garden.

Similarly, congested seedlings will become thin and drawn, with soft, weak stems that eventually collapse from being forced.

And where the source of light comes mostly from one side, as when plants are growing under a hedge, stems often bend and stretch in that direction.

The tendency to move or grow towards light is called phototropism.

For these reasons, when tackling the problem of gardening in the shade it is important to choose plants proficient at extracting energy from limited sunlight.

Mere tolerance of shade is not enough.

Some species may be receiving sufficient light to grow plenty of  healthy foliage, but will always lack that little extra needed to produce flowering shoots.

Variegated plants will start to make more chlorophyll in their leaves in response to restricted sunlight, and so tend to turn green in the shade.

Others need precise daily rations of sunlight that change with the seasons if they are to start flowering at a particular time.

Those that need a long day-length to complete their life-cycle often refuse to bloom in the shade.

Coping with shade
Understanding the preferences of particular plants will help you avoid making mistakes in shaded areas of the garden.

Watch to see how long the shade persists; if sunlight reaches the area for at least half the day, plants listed as tolerating partial shade will thrive there.

Depth of shade is also important, since a number of species, while enjoying the limited sunlight filtered through trees with an open branch system, are unable to cope with the dense shade cast by evergreens.

Many plants native to natural mixed woodland flower and produce their leaves early in the year, before deciduous trees have developed a full canopy, and welcome the shade in summer that protects them from scorching in full sun.

Feed under your trees
Favourable soil conditions affect a plant's chances of survival beneath trees.

Very often the soil is dry and hungry (deficient in nutrients), especially near evergreens and vigorously rooting hedge species such as privet.

Working quantities of organic material into the top few inches will markedly improve some plants' performance.

Massed conifers cast dense shadows and their fallen needles can upset the acid/alkaline balance of the soil.

Some thinning may be necessary to admit enough light for plants such as rhododendrons, pieris and hostas to thrive.

Unless very dense, the shady conditions produced by most garden trees can be turned to advantage by creating a miniature woodland that will suit shade-loving plants and offer a cool oasis in a hot summer.

Even branches from a neighbour's tree overhanging your garden can be exploited in this way.

With a little unobtrusive thinning, you can regulate the amount of dappled shade and filtered sunlight to suit the kind of plants you would like to grow.

The same approach can be used where the shade is cast by a wall, fence or building.

Capitalise on this change of environment: train leafy creepers (ivies, honeysuckle, small-flowered clematis) on the vertical surfaces, lay an appropriate style of path through the area and then plant with shade-loving species according to soil type and aspect.

No place for nigella
Always avoid species where flowers close up at night or when the sun goes in; variegated varieties, whose rich colours will fade and leaves gradually green over in persistent shade, and ‘long-day’ flowers such as iris, rudbeckia and nigella whose flowering depends absolutely on prolonged sunlight.

Arrange one or two suitable shrubs that grow with a relaxed, arching habit, and then fill between them with large patches or drifts of herbaceous plants en masse .

Single specimens, even if very brightly coloured, tend to disappear in the shadows, whereas they will be more conspicuous planted in a block especially if supported by masses of healthy green foliage: ferns for a splash of colour.

On dry soils, mulch annually around the plants to retain what moisture there is, and remember to water regularly if they are overhung by a tree, fence or wall and hence miss out on rainfall.

Plants for a variety of shades
Flowers for damp shade
Astilbe; cimicifuga; dicentra; Iris sibirica; mimulus; primula (candelabras); rodgersia; smilacina; trollius; viola.

Flowers for dry shade
Aquilegia; astrantia; campanula; corydalis; epimedium; geranium; helleborus; heuchera; lamium; Lunaria; Meconopsis cambrica; pulmonaria; viola.

Shrubs for light shade
Amelancher; azaleas (deciduous); cornus; corylus; hamamelis; philadelphus; rose species; Spiraea x arguta; Viburnum x bodnantense.

Shrubs for heavy shade
Camellia japonica; elaeagnus; Euonymus fortunei; Fatsia japonica; Mahonia aquifolium; Prunus laurocerasus; rhododendron hybrids; sarcococa; skimmia.

Woodland flowers &wildflowers
Allium ursinum (wild garlic)

Anemone nemorosa
Arum maculatum
Convallaria (lily-of-the-valley)

Cyclamen
Digitalis purpurea (foxglove)

Eranthis hyemalis (winter aconite)

Erythroniums
Fritillaries
Galanthus (snowdrops)

Galium odoratum (sweet woodruff)

Hyacinthoides non-scriptus (bluebells)

Lamiastrum galeobdolon
Muscari (grape hyacinths)

Myosotis sylvatica (wood forget-me-not)

Ornithogalum
Primula vulgaris (primrose)

Silene dioica (red campion)

In light shade, rogersias bring flower plumes and foliar interest
Graceful polystichums are the key to this deliciously cool tableau
Hamamelis (witch hazel) flowers in winter
Many spiraeas will be happy in partial shade, brightening it with their dense white blooms
Deciduous azaleas bring subtly contrasting colour in autumn
Create a natural woodland look with a carpet of hardy cyclamen
Candelabra primulas enjoy dappled sunlight
Snowdrops are shady favourites for the dark days of late winter
