Avoiding gliding accidents
Gliding safety depends on good training and on instructors encouraging novices to develop safety-conscious habits.
Most accidents occur because the pilot is unaware of, or chooses to ignore, possible hazards.
Safety must be everyone's concern — the majority of accidents could be avoided if every pilot is aware of the common hazards.
Reading or hearing of other pilots' experiences emphasises how easy it is for even seasoned pilots to make mistakes.
Instructors and senior pilots have a big responsibility to pass on their experience and knowledge and to look out for poor airmanship and flying techniques in others which could lead to mishaps in the future.
In section 1, I have chosen various gliding areas which involve special hazards for the unwary, and have suggested how to prevent accidents by being conscious of potentially difficult situations.
How glider accidents happen
Considering that so many gliders are flown across country on every possible soaring day, the accident rate for gliding is extremely low.
However, it must always be remembered that, like the sea, the air is an environment which is potentially dangerous to the unwary.
There are, of course, always a number of minor incidents and accidents during training.
The result of every accident, however minor, is a rise in the cost of insurance, the loss of the aircraft while it is replaced or repaired and, sometimes, injuries to the pilot and other people involved.
Most glider pilots have never experienced anything more hazardous than a bad landing, so reading and talking about other people's mistakes is almost the only way of becoming aware of the kind of situations which lead to broken gliders.
few pilots realise how much even minor damage can cost to repair.
Just slipping and dropping a wing while loading it into the trailer will cause hundreds of pounds' worth of damage, and although most gliders are insured, every accident eventually results in higher premiums and higher costs for gliding enthusiasts.
It is quite rare to have an accident directly caused by some kind of technical failure.
The main cause is almost always something to do with the pilot's flying skills or judgements.
99% of all gliding accidents happen when the aircraft hits something.
A few pilots manage to stall and spin in; some fly into the ground during their final turn; many make such bad landings that they damage their glider; and, finally, far too many run into other gliders or obstructions during take-offs and landings.
This indicates that instruction is failing to get across the vital aspects which could reduce the risk of accidents.
Are you fit to fly?
When an emergency situation arises the pilot needs all his wits about him.
A surprising number of accidents and incidents happen because pilots are in some way not 100% fit on the day in question.
Obviously, if you have a heavy cold, a headache, are suffering from lack of sleep or are jet lagged, you should not be flying.
But the decision about whether or not to fly is left to you, the pilot.
You alone have to make that judgement.
It is best to make a firm rule not to fly if you are feeling unwell or unenthusiastic.
If you have spent a long day on the airfield, it will be difficult to refuse your turn to fly, even if you are tired.
However, if you are going to fly solo, refusing is the only sensible thing to do.
Flying demands all your concentration and it is not wise to risk flying if you have business worries or some other mental stress on your mind.
Even a violent argument will leave you mentally high and quite unfit to fly.
You can also become unfit in the air through lack of food and drink.
Both these factors can cause lack of concentration and apathy.
In warm weather, dehydration is a serious problem, and sufficient liquid must be taken during the flight even if this has its disadvantages afterwards!
Keeping in practice
It is probably true to say that the first few solo flights are the safest that a student pilot ever makes.
This is because he has recently practised safety procedures for almost every conceivable emergency, and they are therefore fresh in his mind.
Also, the pilot will be in very good flying form and his instructor will have made sure that he has not been getting into bad habits.
It is important to try and keep in practice in order to reinforce all the things which have been learned during the pre-solo training.
Most gliding clubs have a system of re-checking pilots during the first few hours of solo flying, but then pilots are left very much to their own devices to improve their soaring techniques.
They may go several years without a cable break on the winch launching, and so they will scarcely give the possibility any thought.
An annual briefing on cable break procedures and other emergencies would be very valuable for everyone who flies gliders, and particularly those who stop flying for long periods over the winter months and so get badly out of practice.
Many pilots select the days on which they fly so that the weather is near ideal and not too windy.
It is easy to forget exactly how much allowance should be made for the wind and other factors on a rough day.
Pilots who have only flown in light winds will be dangerously incompetent in rough weather, particularly if they are also out of current flying practice.
If they do attempt to fly on a windy day, then a check flight should be made to ensure that they remember the hazards and how to avoid them.
When pilots from a big, flat site visit a hill site, they are at risk and often make absolute fools of themselves unless they get a very thorough briefing and listen to what local pilots and instructors have to say.
It is always wise to have a dual flight before flying solo at an unfamiliar site.
There is always something to be learned from a knowledgeable local instructor, and a flight is far more valuable than just a site briefing.
Being in practice is also important for a first flight in a new and unfamiliar type of aircraft.
Always avoid doing too many new things in one flight; i.e. do not fly a new type of aircraft on an unfamiliar airfield.
Try and get a dual flight on the airfield so that at least you know something about the airfield and its surrounds.
Wire launches
A large proportion of gliding accidents and incidents result from launch failures.
Too many pilots seem to believe that they can cope with these failures and then are proved wrong.
Most accidents happen when a cable break occurs close to the ground.
Here a failure calls for immediate action if you are to level out into normal flight and so prevent a stall.
Always ensure that the initial climbing angles on a winch or car launch will allow time for a safe recovery into  the glide if the cable breaks.
Too many pilots allow their glider to zoom up too steeply as they leave the ground.
This is always dangerous because at that moment the glider has insufficient speed to allow for safe recovery and landing.
If pilots continue to do this, sooner or later they will get hurt.
Far too often with a low cable break, the pilot goes for the airbrakes when there is a mile of field ahead and no hurry whatsoever.
The actual speed at the time is usually far too slow to allow for any use of the airbrakes, but there is plenty of room ahead for a safe landing.
If the failure occurs higher on the launch, again a snap decision can be fatal.
Lower the nose and check the actual airspeed before doing anything else.
The most common cause of serious accidents on wire launches is making a snap decision to turn off for a 360° turn without ensuring that there is enough speed.
Even though the nose has been lowered well below the horizon, a glider takes time to regain speed, and any attempt to turn off immediately results in a potential stall and spin accident.
The first question you ask yourself is ‘can I get down straight ahead?’
If the answer is no, then check the speed before starting to turn.
Reacting too slowly and taking too long to make a decision can also be hazardous.
If you obviously cannot get down ahead or if you have doubts about it, then you have no alternative but to turn off, but check your speed first!
How to avoid problems with wire launches
1
Go over the launch failure procedures after any long lay-off from flying.
2
Try and think systematically about your actions in the event of a launch failure.
3
Always assess the special considerations and conditions for the day (e.g cross winds, turbulence etc.).
4
At an unfamiliar site, talk to the locals and discuss the best course of action for launch failures.
5
Before you take off, ask yourself the following questions.
Is the glider ready?
What about the weather conditions?
Are you ready for a launch failure?
Is it safe to go now?
6
Always expect and be ready for a launch failure in the first 500 feet on every launch.
Soaring
Inexperienced pilots get into difficulties when they are soaring.
They often get lost because they have not kept the airfield in sight and within easy gliding range.
It is important for these pilots to develop the habit of checking the position of the gliding site immediately after releasing the tow and to re-check it regularly every few circles.
It is also important to be aware of the wind direction and the amount of drift, and to avoid drifting down wind whenever possible.
Beginners often continue to struggle with weak lift without realising  that they are, in fact, losing height and drifting further away.
If the variometer is fluctuating and reading up on one side of the circle and down a little on the other, the probability is that the glider is not climbing at all but is just drifting further down wind.
If the glider is down wind of the site, the decision to return must be taken before the glider gets to less than an angle of about 20° to the field in light winds, and 30–40° in windy weather.
Allowance must always be made for wind strength and the possibility of strong sink, since it can never be known beforehand whether there will be lift or sink on the way back.
A common mistake is to try to use lift on the way back instead of gliding on through it at a sensible speed.
This nearly always results in drifting further back without much gain of height and ending up in a worse situation than before.
If it begins to look doubtful that the site can be reached and the glider is down to 1,000 feet, it is time to select the best possible field within easy reach and to make a safe landing in it.
If you glide back any lower, the choice of landing area becomes very limited, until finally there is no choice at all.
Be decisive.
If you are uncertain about whether or not you can get back with a reasonable margin of safety, make a safe landing while you can; a planned approach into a poor field is better than an out-of-wind crash into a good field!
For inexperienced pilots flying in light winds, a good general rule is to allow a maximum of 3 miles' glide per 1,000 feet with nothing for the last 1,000 feet.
However, an extra allowance must be made for any head wind, and in poor visibility inexperienced pilots should make sure that they are close enough to keep the field in sight all the time.
Almost all accidents start with a simple error on the part of the pilot that leads to a chain of events, each of which makes the situation worse and an accident more and more difficult to avoid.
The art of safe piloting is to learn to avoid the initial error whenever possible.
But, if an error of judgement or a bad decision has been made, the vital thing is to recognise that, admit it and take immediate action to break the chain of events while a safe course of action is still possible.
forget the error or the cause of the problem and get on with correcting it and avoiding a worse situation.
A similar situation occurs when soaring cross-country.
Although you may get ridiculously low because of pressing on too hard, when, a few minutes later, you are back in the good conditions several thousand feet up, you must forget the wasted time and concentrate on flying normally.
Ground handling damage
Nothing is more heartbreaking than to see a beautiful glider damaged by incompetent handling on the ground.
For every incident which causes damage to a glider while it is being flown, there must be many more that happen because of careless or thoughtless ground handling.
Sometimes these accidents are caused by laziness, but more often they are the result of someone not realising the significance of doing things the right way.
All of them are avoidable and cost time and money.
Student pilots need very thorough briefing about the hazards of ground handling in a strong wind and, since most flying is restricted to light winds, this must be reinforced whenever the conditions make extra care necessary.
Towing
The danger involved when towing the glider into a strong wind cannot be stressed too much.
This is when there is the greatest risk of the glider being lifted off the ground by the first strong gust.
With no one in the cockpit and the tail on the ground, most gliders will develop enough lift to leave the ground at well under 30 knots.
To prevent this happening, the nose of the glider should be held down (or the tail held up) to reduce the wing incidence, as this in turn reduces the lift significantly.
Usually, the weight of a person on the extreme nose will prevent the glider lifting off the ground, but to be safe it is best to put a person in the cockpit.
Anyone sitting in a glider must always be properly strapped in.
If a glider was blown over with someone sitting inside it unstrapped, that person could be killed.
The airbrakes should always be opened (tying them open with a harness strap, if necessary) as this reduces the lift and increases the ‘lift-off’ speed by several knots.
A student at Lashan Gliding Centre was badly hurt once when the glider lifted off the ground and came down on top of him as he walked by the nose.
This was caused by a combination of a very strong gust and the fact that no one was keeping the nose down while the glider was being towed into wind.
The wind that day had been increasing with the approach of bad weather and the instructor, who had decided that it was time to stop, was towing the glider to the hangar.
In such situations, it is always worth considering whether it is safer to have another launch and fly the glider to the hangar.
Flying is often safer than towing into a really strong and gusty wind.
Obviously, the slower the tow is into wind, the less airflow there is over the wings, and thus the safer it is.
On a windy day, more care is usually taken, but even then a few moments' inattention, or the wrong drill, can result in the glider being blown over and written off.
When a glider is being moved around the airfield, one person should take charge of the whole operation and be responsible for the safety of the aircraft.
This is normally either the pilot or the instructor.
This person must brief the  helpers if they are inexperienced.
He should insist that the correct wing is held, and direct the car or tractor driver so that they take a safe route which is clear of any hazard from dropping winch cables.
It is his responsibility to decide whether the glider should be manned at the nose or tail, and whether someone is needed in the cockpit.
In a strong wind he must refuse to move until sufficient additional crew arrive to handle the glider safely.
Many accidents happen through impatience.
If you cannot be sure of handling the glider safely, turn it out of the wind, hold the wing down and wait for help.
Ground handling
Wing-tips
It is generally agreed that only one wing-tip should be held while the glider is being moved about.
This is because if there is a person on both wing-tips, neither may have a good grip.
Furthermore, it is all too easy for both people to decide to let go at the same moment, so that no one is left holding a wing-tip.
Traditionally, it was usual to take the upwind wing-tip and to hold it slightly below the horizontal.
This was because with the older gliders like the T21 or T31, the wings were very high and they could not be held securely except by keeping one wing low.
However, when towing in a cross wind, the glider will tend to weathercock into wind, and the person on the upwind wing will have difficulty in pushing forward enough to prevent this happening.
With a modern glider which has a lower wing and the wheel well ahead of the c.g., this weathercocking will be even more pronounced, so it is better to hold the down wind tip.
(Just as with the cross wind take-off, the down wind wing should be held so that any slight pull will not help the weathercocking into wind.)
Groundhandling an ASK13
Light winds
It is a great temptation to tow a single-seater back with only the pilot on the wing-tip.
This may be reasonably safe with a very long tow rope, but if there is only a shorter length of rope available the glider may overrun and smash into the back of the car, causing hundreds of pounds' worth of damage to the glider.
If towing is permitted with only a wing-tip man, it is vital that the pilots all recognise that this is only safe if the ground is more or less level and the wind is very light.
Strong wind conditions
In windy weather every effort should be made to avoid having to move the glider upwind; it is far safer and easier to land well into the field and then to move the glider back down wind.
It is safe to push backwards, moving down wind with the nose into wind, provided that the airbrakes are open and weight is applied down on the nose.
The effective wind-speed is reduced by the movement down wind and, as long as the tail is not held down, this is safer and easier than turning the glider right round.
(Always put a knowledgeable and reliable person at the tail, and remind them only to hold the tail down if that is necessary to move the glider easily.)
Towing forwards going down wind means that there is no possibility of being blown over, but the controls must be held or locked otherwise the control hinges may be damaged by the surfaces slamming across against the stops.
In very strong winds the critical place for ground handling is at the tail.
Always make sure that the person on the tail is briefed to hold it up until someone has their weight on the nose.
After coming to a stop with the glider facing into wind, holding the tail down is the worst possible thing, and even leaving the nose unattended for a few moments is dangerous.
It is always safer to transfer the person on the tail to the nose, where his extra weight can be more effective.
Many modern machines do not have hand holds at the tail and are very tail-heavy on the ground.
Weight on the nose or in the cockpit will be sufficient to prevent the glider lifting.
There is always a tendency for pilots to relax as the launch point is reached.
Unless the glider is going to be launched without delay, it should be turned out of wind and held with the into-wind wing down until it is needed.
Tail and wing-tip trolleys
Britain must be one of the only countries in the world where the club members manhandle the two-seater gliders all the way out to the launch point.
Most private owners discovered the use of a tail and wing-tip dolly a long time ago, making it possible to tow out with a car single-handedly on most days.
It is a harsh punishment to have to walk the glider all the way back, particularly after a cable break where the glider lands in the middle of the airfield.
I am always surprised that clubs will happily buy an expensive tractor to pull gliders back, but will not provide aids to make it all less strenuous and time-consuming.
The proper equipment makes the whole operation far easier and safer, and encourages instructors to practise those exercises which can so often result in a long walk back to the launch point.
However, it is essential to recognise that  towing aids are only really safe for use in normal flying conditions, and caution is needed if they are used in windy weather.
Parking
If the wind can be trusted to stay in much the same direction, safe parking is an easy matter.
With the lighter machines, the into-wind wing should be picketed or weighted with tyres or weights, and the tail-skid or wheel should be blocked to prevent the glider moving round into wind.
The front skid or main wheel will also need to be chocked, and an easy, effective way of doing this is to run the main wheel into a rut in the ground.
Parking with the airbrakes open is very little trouble and is helpful if the wind does swing.
The canopy should always be locked down.
Gliders are often left for short periods with tyres on the wing-tip only.
If this is done, the tyres should be right on the tip and not half on the ground, otherwise if the glider does move, the tip will slide out from under the tyre and be freed.
This can be disastrous and may easily occur if there is no wind in the early morning when the gliders are parked outside the hangar with a single tyre on the wing-tip.
Later, when the wind has picked up, the gliders weathercock round and can be free to tip over so that the into-wind wing is upwards.
Another hazard is the wind swinging and increasing during the day so that the glider ends up parked facing directly into the wind.
If the glider is facing across the wind with the into-wind wing held down, the wind will be blowing on to its top surface, producing an extra down-load.
However, in a strong wind several tyres are required to stop the into-wind wing lifting up.
The upper tip will be high in the air where the wind is stronger, while the lower wing will be close to the ground where the wind is much lighter.
The glider is not secure with only one light tyre on the wing-tip.
Blow-overs
If the glider is facing more or less directly into the wind, and there is a pilot in the cockpit, it is just as safe as it would be after a normal landing.
Some people think that holding the wing down or putting a tyre on the wing will stop the glider blowing over.
However, facing into the wind while waiting for a launch, a tyre on the wing-tip is just a convenient way of preventing the wing from lifting off the ground.
When conditions are very squally it is better to have the wings held level, with as much weight on the nose as possible.
Having one wing down may result in a light glider being blown over if the wind changes direction and gets underneath the raised wing.
Then, all the weight in the world on the wing-tip would not stop it going over.
When a blow-over does occur, you will always hear the people concerned state, quite truthfully: ‘Up to that time the wind had been quite acceptable and then there was this bad gust…
‘. Of course, had the wind been very gusty before, they would already have stopped flying, or they would have taken extra precautions to make sure that there were enough people to prevent an incident.
The moral is clear: when gustiness is getting near to the limit for safe  flying, assume that at any time it could suddenly increase.
Stop flying before it becomes too windy to move or fly the glider.
Blow-overs were a common occurrence in the early days with lighter gliders and they sometimes even happened on almost windless summer days.
Although the gliders were left facing at right angles to the wind and were weighted down with tyres in the approved manner, when the first strong thermal went off nearby the wind would become gusty and change direction completely.
This meant that the gliders were then parked the wrong way and, being light, they often blew over.
This kind of blow-over can only be avoided by manning the glider all the time or by tying it down with pickets, preferably with the wings level and all its control surfaces locked to prevent them flapping against their stops.
This is standard practice in more tropical countries where there are ‘dust devils’ or ‘willy willies’which can produce a 40-knot wind in almost any direction with little or no warning.
Even the towplanes are taxied to a nearby picketing point and tied down properly between each flight.
Now that modern gliders are so much heavier and have their wings closer to the ground, it is fairly usual for private owners to park 90° out of wind with the into-wind wing up.
Although perhaps vulnerable to strong winds in this position, in lighter winds it is stable enough to ensure that no tyres are needed.
The result is that many glider pilots are becoming complacent about parking and on a really windy day it is not unusual to see gliders at risk, just waiting for the first really big gust of wind to blow them over.
The whys and wherefores of these procedures need to be explained to students, otherwise they might conclude that proper parking is not really important and that it is alright to leave a glider with either wing down.
Line squalls and thunderstorms
The worst situation for accidents is a good soaring day with a risk of thundery showers.
This means that a large number of gliders will be rigged and brought out on the airfield.
Then, when the first big shower starts, rather than stand under the wings in the rain everyone will desert the launch point for a cup of tea, leaving the gliders apparently well parked and weighted with tyres but, in fact, vulnerable to a change in the wind direction.
Often, even after insisting that everyone goes back to the launch point, there will be barely enough people to hold all the gliders down, turn them around and re-park them if the wind changes.
This is an easy way to have a number of gliders wrecked by the wind, but luckily it does not occur very often.
The only safe solution is to get the gliders into the hangar before the squalls arrive, or to make sure that there are at least two people close to each glider all the time, ready to swing them round when necessary.
Everyone gets very wet but it is worth while getting soaked if it saves even one glider from serious damage.
Finally, remember that if a cold front is due in the summer-time, it may be preceded by some hours by a line of unpredicted severe squalls and storms.
Overnight or long-term parking
In dry and settled weather conditions it is quite safe to leave gliders out overnight.
However, permanent parking outside in all weathers has been shown to cause rapid deterioration to the finish of all non-metal gliders.
Never risk parking out overnight without checking the weather forecast for a strong wind warning or the approach of a cold front.
Provided that all the controls can be locked to prevent them getting damaged by slamming against the stops, parking the aircraft facing down wind will be safest, because then the wing is meeting the airflow at a negative angle.
In lighter winds they can be picketed out, facing into wind with the wings level.
For long-term picketing out, the main wheel can be run into a hollow or trench in the ground to reduce the wing incidence and to lower the wings still further.
Wing covers will also help to reduce the lifting qualities, but they can damage the finish if they are allowed to thrash about in the wind.
Protecting the instruments
It is always worth while covering both the pitot and static vents to prevent rain entering the systems.
However, it is unwise to seal them off completely with tape as a large change in atmospheric pressure may cause damage to some instruments.
I usually make a tape hood over the static vents to allow them to breathe without letting water droplets get into the tubes.
If this does happen, the only solution seems to be to disconnect the instruments and to pump air through the system to blow out the water and dry the tubing.
Never blow down the vents or the total energy and pitot heads because this can destroy the instruments.
The venturi-tube type of total energy system can be dried out by venting it to cockpit static to allow the venturi to suck out the water in flight.
This leaves you with a working variometer but without total energy.
Always take precautions against rain.
You never find out about the water in the instrument systems until you are airborne and it will ruin that flight, if not the entire flying for that day.
It takes at least an hour to get the system clear and dry again, and is a very frustrating problem, particularly if it occurs in a competition.
Rigging and de-rigging
With the help of good rigging aids such as trestles and a stand for the fuselage, it is often just possible to rig with two people.
However, it is always a little risky, especially if the ground is slippery or uneven.
One slip may mean that the wingtip is dropped, causing some very expensive damage to the wing or the fuselage structure and fittings.
It is rarely an impossibility to find a third person, and in gusty weather this must make sense.
Think how often you see two people struggling to rig or de-rig because they are too embarrassed or independent to ask someone to help.
In the early days of gliding, trestles were not considered essential as an aid to rigging; I remember the very first ASW17 to arrive in the UK being rigged without them.
Like most new machines, everything was a tight fit and by the  time we had the glider rigged, we had worn out several people with the sheer weight of the wings.
Trestles make it all so much easier and safer, and it is worth while having a second one so that everyone can relax for a few minutes if it is proving difficult to align both wings to get the main pins in place.
Trestles are also very useful for holding the wings level if the glider is being picketed overnight.
The routine for rigging and de-rigging is usually passed on by word of mouth, or is self-taught.
As a result it is not unusual to see people doing things which increase the risk of serious damage if things go wrong.
I have often seen pilots fitting the tailplane on before the wings.
This ensures some very expensive damage in the event of the fuselage falling over, whereas without the tailplane very little or no damage is likely.
If you put your tailplane on first, you might say, quite rightly, that this will not happen with your equipment.
However, someone seeing you may do the same thing using a crude ‘dead man’ to hold the fuselage upright.
If it falls over it will certainly be weeks before he flies again.
Make sure that the fuselage is secure and is not liable to move.
In windy weather there will be a definite tendency for the fuselage to weathercock round into wind unless the tail-wheel or skid is chocked.
Anything which makes rigging and de-rigging more difficult increases the risk of someone getting tired of holding up a wing-tip and so letting it droop or even drop.
The most common cause of damage when getting the glider out of the trailer and putting it back at the end of the day's flying is impatience, and the only answer is never to rig without an adequate number of people.
If in doubt, get help, and don't rig until enough help is available.
Hangar rash
It is often said that more damage is done inside the hangar than out!
This is often the result of inexperienced people trying to give a helping hand to get the gliders out.
Usually the problem is that no one is really taking charge and telling the others exactly what to do.
A quick but careful briefing would, in most cases, prevent incidents such as someone lifting a wing without first checking that the other wing will not come down on to another glider's canopy.
Moving through a confined space, for example if the glider is too large to go through the door, it is always wise to go nose first, swinging the glider right round and out with its nose close to one door.
(Leading edges are much stronger than trailing edges or tailplanes and rudders.)
Don't try to go out backwards unless there is ample space for the glider to go straight through.
Some hangars have doors at each end and these make a good wind tunnel if both ends are opened at the same time.
Even in light winds there can be a venturi effect sufficient to blow the gliders about.
Unless the wing-tips are weighted down with a tyre, one wing lifting off the ground means that the other will come down on to another glider with expensive results.
Always close the doors at one end before opening them at the other, unless the wind is very light, and never leave both ends open in case a wind springs up later in the day.
Trailer towing
Unfortunately, most people learn about towing trailers by trial and error, which can prove to be a very expensive way of doing things.
Every year a number of trailers are rolled over on our roads and trailer accidents account for a great deal of glider repairs.
Snaking
Glider trailers can be stable or unstable, depending on the car and the trailer combination.
If a trailer begins to ‘snake’, the swinging often develops so quickly that within seconds there is no way of stopping it and avoiding going right off the road.
Even a fairly stable trailer will start to swing if it overtakes or is overtaken by a large truck.
The pressure wave from an overtaking truck strikes the rear of the trailer first, setting up a swing.
In addition, the venturi effect between the two vehicles assists this swing and tends to suck the two vehicles together.
This is particularly common on motorways where trucks are overtaking at quite high speeds.
It is vital to have good side mirrors on the car in order to be aware of traffic which is behind or overtaking.
Judging by the number of trailer accidents on the motorways, it may be wiser to keep off them whenever possible.
Factors which influence the stability of the combination include the softness of the car and the trailer's suspension, plus the balance of the trailer.
It is a good idea to add an extra 5 or 10 p.s.i.
to the pressure in the car tyres and to keep the trailer tyres at a higher pressure than might at first seem necessary.
If you are building a trailer, fit a suspension rated for a trailer heavier than the actual weight.
The balance and dynamic stability of the trailer, loaded or unloaded, is affected by heavy items like spare wheels, which should be up front when possible.
The ideal seems to be to have a down load on the tow bar of 10–15 kg (20–301b).
Anti-snake devices have been proved to be worth while.
They work by stiffening the coupling between the trailer and car.
Many swinging and jack-knife accidents seem to start on slight downhill gradients, and particularly if the road surface changes or is uneven.
Once the swinging has started, there is very little even a skilled driver can do.
Slowing down does not help, and generally the driver is not brave enough or quick enough to try accelerating.
I learned about trailer driving the hard way during a competition retrieve, when an enthusiastic crew member took us off the road with an Eagle two-seater in the trailer.
Both the car and the trailer were badly damaged, but because the glider was securely held in by the fittings, it survived the trailer going over on to its side without damage.
As a result of this incident, I am very cautious and rarely drive above 80 k.p.h. (50 m.p.h.) with a loaded trailer.
It is a frightening experience, and I have never heard of anyone doing it a second time.
With a trailer that you have not towed before, your first priority should be to explore its stability carefully.
You can do this by driving on a quiet, wide road with no traffic about, gradually increasing your speed and moving the steering slightly to produce a very slight weave.
As the speed is increased, the damping  becomes less and you will be able to decide on a reasonable limit to keep to for the first half hour.
By then you will have become tuned in to the driving and will be better able to judge if it is safe to go a little faster.
Remember to reduce speed on downhill stretches and to watch in the mirror for traffic which may be about to overtake, and which could therefore set up a swing.
Gears must be used more frequently with the extra weight of the loaded trailer, and it is important to change down in plenty of time to prevent having to brake fiercely.
The major effects of this will be poor acceleration and a reduction in effective braking.
Allow for greater braking distances with a loaded trailer and always use the lower gears going down steep hills.
Many trailers are dangerous much above 80 k.p.h. (50 m.p.h.) and it is just not worth taking any chances going much faster.
A flat or burst tyre can mean no flying for months!
Parking the trailer
Simply parking the trailer with the stands firmly down will not prevent really strong winds from doing irreparable damage.
Trailers are usually safer if they are parked close together so that they protect each other.
However, never park your trailer near one which has poor stands and is liable to swing in a wind.
Ideally, every trailer should be anchored by the ball hitch on to a ball mounted in the ground.
Alternatively, they need tying down securely at both ends.
This should prevent incidents where trailers are blown for hundreds of yards and wrecked.
It is worth while designing trailer fittings so that the glider is held firmly in place even if the trailer rolls over.
Often, the only cause of damage to the glider is if the wings or fuselage break loose.
It is also a good idea to make covers of some kind for the trailer tyres.
These tend to rot in the sun and though the treads might be as good as new, they will have to be changed because of the cracks in the walls.
Conclusion
The main thing to realise with trailer driving is that it only takes one mistake to wreck the trailer and a nice glider, as well as possibly writing off a new car.
Clearly, it is important to consider each of the ways in which you can safeguard your equipment because it is no use avoiding all the flying hazards if you are going to write off your glider on the ground.
Repairs take time and money to carry out, and if they can be avoided gliding will be less expensive in the future.
Cockpit checks
There was a time when many gliding instructors scorned the use of a rigid drill, and taught their students instead to check everything logically by going round the cockpit from left to right.
The disadvantage of this method is easily demonstrated by asking the students as they finish if they are sure that they have not forgotten something.
They will then start all over again and go round the cockpit a second or even a third time.
This can easily be avoided if a simple, systematic check is followed.
Thus if you go through a drill of vital actions, or check-list each time, you will ensure that you do not forget any item.
You can then take off with complete confidence, knowing that you have checked all the really vital things for the flight.
However, this confidence is only justified when the check is done systematically and correctly.
For example, checking the items in the wrong order is totally unacceptable because it can so easily lead to missing something out altogether.
A re-check should never be necessary, since this only implies the acceptance of a half-hearted check in the first place.
The idea of having the person attaching the cable ask if the airbrakes are closed and locked has been introduced in some clubs to try and prevent incidents where pilots take off with their airbrakes unlocked.
However, if you are going to re-check the airbrakes, it would seem logical to check all the items in the check-list as well.
Many instructors are not careful, or thoughtful enough about either their initial teaching or their subsequent monitoring of their students as they do their own cockpit checks.
In the UK the pre-take off checks are standardised and remembered by the mnemonic CBSIFTCB.
Each letter represents a vital item to be checked, i.e.
C-Controls
F-Flaps
B-Ballast
T-Trim
S-Straps
C-Canopy
I-Instruments
B-Brakes.
Long before going solo the student should have learned the mnemonic by heart.
It is a good idea to say the key words aloud every time as you check each item so that it becomes a habit.
If you do this when you are solo, you will be less likely to skip an item or become careless about the checks when you are more experienced.
It is important for every student to understand the philosophy behind having a rigid drill and the reasons for precise actions such as checking and locking the airbrakes.
Without a convincing explanation and an insistence that the checks must be done properly, many students will become careless and slap dash when they are on their own and away from close supervision.
All aspects of flying require this combination of understanding and self-discipline, and the vital actions make a good starting point.
It is also important to differentiate here between the first flight of the day and subsequent flights.
A careless daily inspection after rigging may easily leave the glider with one aileron or the elevator disconnected.
The control check is often better done initially before the vital actions, perhaps even before getting into the cockpit, when the control surfaces can be seen more easily.
On the other hand, the check for full and free movement must be done after strapping in, because it is possible in some aircraft to jam the controls by tightening the straps round a cable or control rod.
The importance of the vital actions drill may even be undermined in the eyes of the student if the instructor insists on a complete check of each control movement for every flight (stick to the left, left aileron up, right aileron down, stick to the right, etc.), since it is clear that things like this cannot change between flights, and the majority of experienced pilots only do that check on the first flight of the day.
I think that the instructor should treat the first flight on a particular glider as if it was the first flight of the day, and on subsequent flights he should just check for full and free movement and that the surfaces are moving fully.
At the same time he should check that he can reach the full rudder and stick movements without undue stretching, and that cushions or other objects are not limiting the movements of the controls.
The canopy
An incomplete or sloppy check carried out on the canopy can be lethal, because if it comes off it is a matter of luck whether it hits or misses the tail.
In addition to checking the canopy lock for security, it is essential to push up on the perspex itself to confirm that the hinges or pins are secure.
It has been known for the hinges on a canopy to fail or for poorly designed and faulty catches to fail in flight, resulting in a lost canopy.
Most of these expensive incidents might have been avoided by this drill.
The airbrakes
The method of checking that the airbrakes are correctly locked is all-important.
Since the majority of modern machines have airbrakes which are held closed by a geometric lock, it is essential that the method of checking them must be foolproof for this kind of system.
First open the brakes or spoilers fully, checking them visually whenever this is possible.
Then close them with a firm push on the lever in order to establish the habit.
The pilot should be able to feel the geometric lock operating just after the airbrakes are flush with the wing surface.
In some cases there is a gate for the lever to go into once the brakes are correctly locked.
This operation needs to be explained and demonstrated to every student.
It must be understood that unless the geometric lock is felt, either the brakes are not locked, in which case a harder push is needed on the lever, or the locks themselves need adjusting.
If it is the latter, the aircraft is unserviceable and must not be flown until the brakes have been re-adjusted.
If the basic training is being done on a Falke, or on any other type of glider  fitted with simple spoilers or airbrakes which do not have a lock, the differences must be explained.
However, the method of checking should be just the same in order to establish the right habit.
The cause of almost every incident where the airbrakes open during the launch is that the pilot has failed to lock them correctly.
The amount of force needed to lock them will vary considerably from aircraft to aircraft and even perhaps from day to day.
Merely pushing the lever forwards as far as it will go is not enough because the lock may be very stiff.
Modern gliders usually have spring-loaded caps which are pulled down firmly to prevent air leaking into or out of the wing.
This makes the lock much stiffer to operate than on the earlier types of glider.
A geometric lock which requires no force to lock is seriously out of adjustment.
It may allow the airbrakes to open during a launch if the lever is knocked or if one side is unlocking a little before the other.
However, despite careful instruction, there will still be incidents in which the airbrakes open during a launch.
On a wire launch the best hope is for the car or winch driver to build up extra speed to get the glider as high as possible.
This gives the glider pilot more time to find out why his glider is semi-stalled and is sinking like a brick.
With an aerotow, if the towplane pilot realises that the airbrakes are open, he can signal to the glider pilot by rapid rudder-waggling.
In both cases this is a real emergency, because in the event of a cable break the pilot does not have time to realise what is wrong, and he may well stall and spin if he flies by attitude and tries to turn without checking the actual speed.
Taking your time
Pilots sometimes complain about being rushed through their cockpit drills.
Ideally, you need a few minutes to settle comfortably before setting off, but if you have to rush you can usually blame yourself for not getting in before he cable or towplane arrives.
Whatever happens, don't rush those vital actions.
They take less than 30 seconds to do and they should be left until the last moment before the cable or rope is attached.
Swinging and ground looping accidents
The pilot's responsibility
During the last few years there has been an increase in swinging and ground looping accidents and these must be analysed to see if there are new lessons to be learned.
In one instance, a young pilot started a launch with another glider standing only a few yards to the side and just ahead of the take-off point.
With a normal take-off the glider would have cleared the obstruction.
However, it should have been obvious to the pilot, and to everyone at the launch point, that with either a swing or a wing-drop there would almost certainly be a collision.
Unfortunately, the glider did start to take-off, it did drop a wing and swing, and there was a collision.
Where there is a slight risk in the event of a swing, a pilot may be said to have made a simple error of judgement or taken an unnecessary risk.
However, in the aforementioned case I think we must look further for the factors influencing the pilot.
When students are learning to glide, the instructor is not only teaching them the technique of flying a glider, but also how to make decisions and judgements in the air.
The final stages of training amount to the handing over of all the responsibility for safety to the student.
Ideally, the student should be making all the decisions and choosing actions in the interests of safety and efficiency.
By setting the student problems during the final flights before going solo, the instructor can test his ability to think logically and to deal with situations as they arise.
An experienced instructor will stop helping the student at this stage and will refuse to comment until after each flight.
In this way, the student can gain confidence by knowing that he made the decisions and that they were sensible ones.
As he reaches the first solo stage, therefore, the pupil must either achieve a standard of flying which does not leave room for criticism, or he must learn to accept the particular instructor's comments as fair and helpful.
In the air, decisions are relatively easy and concern only the student and the instructor.
On the ground, however, the situation is not so simple.
Even with ground handling someone must take charge, but it may not be the pilot.
A young and inexperienced pilot may not feel able to take command of the situation and so prevent a stupid accident or an unnecessary risk being taken.
Nevertheless, he should try and take control and tell the other handlers what to do.
Inhibiting situations
Whereas in the air pilots may make good decisions and behave responsibly, on the ground they may feel that each move is being watched and criticised by the  other members.
This will make them less decisive and may inhibit them from giving orders or taking charge of the situation.
Since it is quite unusual to need to stop a launch, a shy person would certainly hesitate about shouting out.
Many incident and accidents of this nature would be prevented by expert supervision on every flight.
However, 100% supervision, even of early solo flying, is impractical for 365 days in the year as there are bound to be moments when the instructor's attention is diverted.
The real solution is to train pilots to accept responsibility, whether they are sitting in the aircraft or are merely bystanders at the launch point.
The more timid personalities must be encouraged to take charge and to give orders.
When there is an opportunity during training for the pilot to decide whether or not a situation is safe, they must be taught to assume that the worst will happen, and then to assess whether there is a risk or not.
The rather shy students must be encouraged to shout the launching orders clearly and loudly, so that if they need to shout ‘stop’, they do not hesitate because they are reluctant to raise their voice.
Normally, the instructor is inclined to emphasise the ‘All clear above and behind’, without making the student think consciously about the area ahead.
Too often the instructor may allow a take-off when there is an object to one side.
This would certainly be hazard in a cross wind and, to an inexperienced pilot, in any wind direction.
In these cases the student probably relies on the instructor to make the decision and knows that he is there and can save the situation if things go wrong.
It is important to make the student aware of the subtle difference between being safe at all times and being safe in particular conditions.
Above all it is vital for every pilot to have the old adage ‘safety first’ indelibly imprinted on their mind.
In other words, if in doubt, don't take a chance.
The mature glider pilot would never hesitate to make a fool of himself in the interests of safety.
However, it is not just beginners who make mistakes and get caught out.
On one occasion a very experienced pilot in a Nimbus 2 was starting on a car launch when it swung off the runway into a K8 which was some distance ahead.
There was a very light cross wind from the right which caused a swing in that direction, and as the Nimbus has only a tail-skid, it swung as it started its take-off run.
The pilot released the cable but could not keep the glider straight, or stop in time to prevent the collision.
The Nimbus was undamaged but the K8 had one wing severed at about half-span as well as other serious damage.
Realising that the take-off would involve an element of risk, the Nimbus pilot had, in fact, refused to go at first, and had asked for the K8 to be moved.
After it had been moved a short distance away, the pilot was persuaded that the situation was all right and he accepted this, rather than face being unpopular for causing further delay.
The accident caused considerable consternation and it became clear, talking to the members present at the launch point, that many pilots did not really understand all the factors which caused the accident.
Obviously, the Nimbus pilot was at fault for allowing the other people at the launch point to influence his judgement.
Perhaps the most important point is that, regardless of who may be at the launch point, the pilot alone bears the responsibility for accepting or rejecting the launch in the light of the situation as he sees it from the cockpit.
If he has the slightest doubt about his ability to launch safely, bearing in mind  such hazards as swinging to one side or a cable break at any stage, then he must refuse the launch.
Moreover, if a pilot decides not to launch in a situation like this, he must never be overruled or criticised for playing it safe.
Accidents due to swinging on take-off and landing are so common that it is worth studying the causes in detail.
The behaviour of some modern gliders during take-offs and landings is very different to most of the training gliders, and it is vital to understand why they are more prone to swinging.
Cross wind effects
The two main effects of a cross wind on the ground run are well known.
The first is that the wind tends to lift the upwind wing-tip and the second is that the glider tends to weathercock into the wind.
This applies to every type of aircraft and not just to gliders.
Light cross winds, and in particular those with a slight down wind component, create by far the most treacherous conditions for both take-offs and landings.
If there is a cross wind, there will be a tendency for the glider to start to swing, while if there is a down wind component on take-off, it will take the glider longer to gain enough speed for the controls to become effective.
Prevention is always better than cure.
The person holding the wing-tip should always run the down wind wing-tip so that any pull that he may exert is against the weathercocking swing into the wind.
He should hold the down wind wing-tip a little above the horizontal and be prepared to run with it, not just balance it and let go.
Once again it is up to the pilot to insist that this wing is held and not to accept someone on the upwind wing-tip.
The pilot himself can help anticipate the swing into wind by applying full out-of-wind rudder before he starts to roll.
As the controls become effective, the amount of rudder will have to be reduced long before full flying speed is reached.
A bad swing can easily lead to a serious ground loop or even to cart-wheeling and a broken glider.
This can only be avoided by releasing the tow promptly before the situation develops.
Always keep your left hand close to the release toggle until you are sure that the glider is stabilised, i.e. in a modern machine until the tail has come up.
Strong cross winds
Unless the wind is more than about 45° to the direction of take-off, a strong cross wind seldom creates problems.
This is because good control is reached at a much lower ground speed.
Provided that there is normal acceleration on take-off, the pilot should have good aileron control and be able to stop any swing into the wind by means of the rudder.
Of course, there is a definite limit to the strength of cross wind that can be accepted by some machines, particularly those fitted with tail-skids rather than tail-wheels.
The main precaution is always to leave plenty of room on both sides of the take-off path to allow for a possible swing.
Room must be left on the upwind side in case there is a cable break or premature release, and on the down wind side in case the wing touches and causes a swing that way.
If the  wing-tip touches long grass or rough ground, there will certainly be a bad swing and the launch will have to be abandoned.
The most serious swings and cart-wheels usually occur when the wind gets under the wing-tip so that the down wind tip scrapes along the ground.
A few seconds later, as the glider gains speed, the full aileron suddenly takes effect.
If this happens at the same time as the inevitable swing into wind, it can result in a very rapid rolling over on to the into-wind wing-tip.
By then the glider may be airborne and a cart-wheel will be unavoidable.
This situation can be prevented by being prepared to release immediately if things start to go wrong, or by being ready to stop the wing coming up suddenly.
Tow-rope loads
On a car or winch launch, the pull of the rope or launching cable exerts very little stabilising effect, but the rapid acceleration usually ensures that enough speed is gained to have good control.
A nose hook provides more stability for aerotowing, and it is a slight advantage to start the take-off a little on the upwind side of the towplane.
This ensures that there is a sideways pull on the nose, helping to prevent both the glider and the towplane from weathercocking into wind.
The poor acceleration of an aerotow makes a swing or a wing-drop more likely.
Directional stability
In flight
In flight, the directional or weathercock stability is maintained by the fin and rudder, which provide extra side area behind the c.g.
Thus with the aileron and rudder held in a central position, a glider will always weathercock into line with the relative airflow, just as the wind vane on a church steeple will always swing into the wind.
When rudder is applied, the nose of the glider yaws to the side until the force produced by the rudder is balanced by the tendency for the aircraft to swing back into line with the airflow.
(In the air this is nothing to do with the actual wind.
The aircraft is flying in a mass of air which may be stationary or moving.)
If an aircraft is very directionally stable because of a large fin, then the rudder will be less able to produce a large angle of yaw before this balance of forces occurs.
With a smaller fin, the directional stability will be weaker, the rudder will be more effective and the angle of yaw will be far greater.
On the ground
This particular accident, like so many others, would never have happened if just one of the dozen or so people at the launch point had recognised the danger and shouted ‘stop’.
To say that it was not their business to stop the launch is not good enough.
Safety is everybody's business.
When a glider is on the ground it does not pivot around its c.g. as it does in  flight.
Instead it pivots around the main wheel.
If the main wheel is further forward, the glider will have a stronger tendency to weathercock than in the air, and the rudder will be even less effective at preventing this.
Conversely, if the main wheel is behind the c.g., the directional stability will be less and the rudder more effective.
Most modern gliders have their main wheel well ahead of the c.g. and sit with their tail-skid or tail-wheel firmly on the ground.
This wheel position affects the behaviour of the glider once a swing has started.
Any swing will be increased by the inertia of the glider because the mass is behind the wheel, trying to move on in a steady direction.
In light winds, when the ground speed is much higher, this inertia effect is stronger, and therefore control is relatively poor, making ground looping more likely.
This is why the worst risk of swinging and ground looping is always in calm or light wind conditions.
In a strong cross wind, the glider will tend to swing into wind, but will then be directionally stable and stop swinging.
In lighter winds it will be far easier for the glider to continue the swing, accentuated by the inertia effects.
Swings often start by touching down with drift in a cross wind and it is worth remembering that, from the point of view of avoiding a bad swing into wind, it is better to overdo the drift correction.
This tends to induce a slight swing out of wind on touchdown, which is useful.
Tail-wheels and tail-skids
Glider designers sometimes choose to fit a tail-skid rather than a wheel for simplicity and cheapness, saying quite rightly that they offer a little less drag.
In addition, they can be made to break off under a large side load and in so doing, perhaps prevent further damage being done to the fuselage.
However, a tail-wheel is more convenient for ground handling, particularly as with these types of glider the tail is extremely heavy and awkward to lift when the glider needs turning around on the ground.
A swing can only occur if the tail is sliding sideways over the ground.
A tail-wheel with a rubber tyre will resist skidding sideways over tarmac, but it will not grip quite so well when it is bouncing over rough grass.
On the other hand, a tail-skid will not grip at all on tarmac, but is better on the grass or earth, particularly if it is soft.
Any extra load on the tail will help to increase its resistance to moving sideways and so help prevent a serious swing.
Some people think that it is useful to hold the stick back during the early part of the ground run, until sufficient speed has been reached to ensure good rudder control.
However, it is doubtful whether this really has much effect, because in the tail-down position at such low speeds, the tail cannot develop much, if any, down-load.
It may be better just to concentrate on keeping straight, holding the wings level and getting the tail up as soon as possible, to reduce the wing's angle of attack and so improve the aileron power.
(See use of flap on take-off on pages 93 and 94.)
After landing, the stick should be moved slowly right back to increase the tail load, unless there is good reason to deliberately steer the glider to one side.
This helps to prevent the glider from bouncing on any rough ground.
With strong winds, the tendency to swing into the wind is far more  pronounced, and after landing the swing cannot always be controlled by full rudder.
In very high winds it is usually better to deliberately let the glider swing into wind so that it comes to a stop facing directly into wind.
Otherwise, if the wind is squally it may end up with the wrong wing down in a fierce cross wind.
Steering on the ground
It is vital for every pilot to learn to steer on the ground because it is a completely different technique to turning in the air.
Students should be given experience of steering the glider off to one side so that they learn how to use the controls independently instead of co-ordinating them.
Otherwise, they will try to stop a swing with the stick and rudder together thus putting the wing-tip onto the ground.
Sooner or later students will need to swing, or stop a swing, to avoid a collision on the ground.
However, as a matter of principle and good airmanship, at least one full wing-span of clearance should always be left to allow for inadvertent drifting or swinging during landings.
This is the absolute minimum, and whenever possible much more room should be left, or an alternative landing area should be chosen.
Winch and car launching
With winch or car launches, it is essential to consider whether a cable break could result in a part of the cable falling on or near to a glider or anything else in mid-field.
Whereas a glider on the upwind side of the launch line may be out of danger, it is not safe to launch until any glider on the down wind side of the cable run has been moved.
If such a risk is accepted, sooner or later the cable will break at the wrong moment and an accident will occur.
The pilot who takes a chance is always to blame if he creates an unnecessary hazard.
Use of the wheel brake
Many violent swings and ground loops occur because of heavy braking after landing.
If the wheel brake is powerful, the effect of any rapid deceleration increases the inertia effect of the mass being behind the main wheel, and so accentuates any swinging tendency.
It also reduces the load on the tail-skid or wheel and makes it slip sideways more easily.
Thus hard braking should be avoided,particularly if the glider has started to swing.
If the glider is running straight, the wheel brake can be applied safely.
However, it is best to avoid continuous harsh braking which may just result in locking the wheel and skidding.
Intermittent braking is often more effective because it allows the wheel to re-grip between skids.
As the glider slows down the braking should be reduced to avoid lifting the tail.
Inexperienced pilots sometimes find it difficult to remember, or to work out quickly, the control movements needed to keep straight.
But once the wind direction is known, it is easy.
The into-wind wing must always be kept down by moving the stick across a little into wind, and it is always necessary to rudder  out of the wind.
This applies during any cross wind take-off.
It also applies during the landing itself and the ground run, whether the wing-down or crabbing method is being used.
As with all flying, anticipation prevents difficulties arising.
At the start of the cross wind take-off apply full rudder in anticipation of the swing into wind, and then reduce it as soon as it becomes effective.
Get the wing-tip holder to keep the down wind wing-tip high and apply a little aileron to prevent it falling during the first part of the take-off run.
Always leave ample room on both sides for swinging or ground looping.
Do not land behind or close to another glider or obstruction.
If the glider is tipped by a gust it may be difficult, or even impossible, to stop it drifting to one side.
Make sure that you correct the drift before touch down and then be prepared to prevent the swing into wind.
Remember that if the glider is drifting towards an obstruction this can only be stopped by banking away from it and not by just applying the rudder.
Inspections
It is almost impossible to judge what loads have gone into the structure during a bad landing, swing or ground loop.
Never assume that the glider is undamaged.
Get an expert to inspect the whole glider carefully, paying particular attention to the wing-root and fuselage fittings, and the tail and rear fuselage.
It is wise to remove the wings and tailplane to inspect the attachment points carefully, and to pay particular attention to the rear fuselage and base of the fin.
In a ground loop there are very high inertia forces on the fin and it takes expert knowledge to detect quite serious damage in these areas, particularly with T-tailed types.
Winch and car launches
Provided that the pilot keeps to the correct procedures, winch and car launches can be very safe.
However, they mean that the pilot has to be prepared for a possible launch failure or cable break on every flight.
Launch failures account for a very high proportion of gliding accidents, making cable break practice a very important aspect of glider training.
Most students have very little difficulty in learning how to make satisfactory launches.
However, the critical few moments at the start of the launch are not always fully understood, and often there is an element of luck in getting it right.
Instructors can be mistaken about their students' ability to control the initial part properly if one or two launches go well.
The critical phase is from the time the glider leaves the ground until it reaches a height of about 400 feet.
If there is a problem up to that height, failing to lower the nose and abandon the launch promptly can leave the aircraft in a critical position, semi-stalled and with very little time or height to make a full recovery and a safe landing.
Above that height an abbreviated circuit should always be possible, although it may not be necessary or desirable in very windy and turbulent conditions.
Pilots will tend to try to blame the winch or car driver, or the state of the cable if they have an accident following a cable break.
This is quite unreasonable as the pilot should always be in a position to recover and make a normal landing.
Cable breaks are a nuisance because they almost always result in having to retrieve the glider from mid-field.
However they should not be a worry for a pilot who is well trained, and who keeps in practice and thinks about the conditions before each flight.
Cables and wires
Single-strand, steel piano wire is often used for car and winch launching.
Multi-strand, flexible, steel cable is particularly suited to winching because it does not kink so easily.
It is normal practice to use a drogue or parachute to keep the cable under tension after it has been released from the glider.
One problem with normal car launching in light winds is that any poor steering on the part of the pilot results in the parachute dropping outside the normal dropping zone.
This is largely eliminated with reverse-pulley car launching and winching, where the parachute is pulled in as it drops.
Although ropes and ‘parafil’(a sheathed form of nylon line) can be used for car launching, they are not generally suitable for winching.
The advantage of rope and parafil for car launching is that a drogue or parachute are not absolutely necessary.
Whereas the parachute keeps the cable under tension as it drops, if there is a cross wind it tends to drift much more than a rope with no chute.
The disadvantage of rope or parafil is that it cannot be retrieved at high speed without the friction overheating and burning the material.
Piano wire is less expensive than cable but requires careful handling.
If a  break does occur the wire tends to coil up, and it is easy to make the mistake of just tying the broken ends together and towing it straight back to the launch point for the next launch.
If a loop in the cable is overlooked, it becomes a small kink and it will fail on the very next launch.
Moreover, the strength of the kink is so low that it will often fail when the glider is only just off the ground.
With the low acceleration of a car launch, unless the pilot recognises that the cable has broken and lowers the nose very quickly, the glider will stall and land heavily.
Special care must always be taken during the climb away if single-strand wire is being used, because there is no sudden jerk or noise if a kink breaks early on the launch.
(Stranded cable is expensive and wears quickly when dragged over runways or any other abrasive surface, making it uneconomical to use for car launching.)
Weak links
Cable which has a large reserve of strength is mostly used so that a weak-link device of some kind safeguards the structure on a fast launch in gusty conditions.
It is now common practice to use a series of different strength weak links, and to select one suited to the strength and weight of the glider.
For many years all British clubs used 1,000 lb weak links which failed on any two-seater launch where the pilot tried to get the maximum height.
Breaking the weak link proved a bigger hazard than actual cable breaks or power failures.
With the weak-link strength recommended by the glider manufacturer, breaking the weak link is now comparatively rare and the risks of error have been reduced.
However, with fewer breaks pilots tend to take it for granted that they will not get a cable break, and this makes them more vulnerable when one does occur.
Launching speeds
To prevent overstressing the glider during a launch, the weak link should break if the climb is made too steeply at speeds above the maximum shown on the placard.
Below that speed it is impossible to generate sufficient lift to overload the weak link.
Nevertheless, above the placard speed a severe gust can raise the loads on the wings and cause damage before the weak link has had time to break and relieve the situation.
This means that in rough air it is only safe to pull up hard if the speed is below the maximum launch speed.
At other times the exact speed is not critical and the pilot can always reduce the load on the glider by relaxing the backward pressure on the stick.
The loads on the structure are lower during the first half of the launch and it is not unusual to exceed the placard speed for a few seconds during the initial steepening of the climb.
This is not critical because at this point the winch driver is adjusting the power.
Failure to get up into the full climb is the usual cause of serious overspeeding during the first third of the launch.
The ‘too fast’ signal should not be given until the glider is well up into the climb and putting a load onto the cable.
Of course, there is a small increase in speed as the climb gets steeper, both because the glider is starting to ascend the  arc of a circle and also because of the effects of the wind gradient.
This can be allowed for by the winch or car driver reducing the power slightly.
However, this increase in speed must not be relied on if the launch is too slow and the pilot wants more speed, because the cause of a slow launch may be the beginning of a power failure, in which case steepening up in the hope of creating more speed would be dangerous.
During a winch launch the potential load on the glider is at a maximum near the top of the launch, when the pull of the cable adds directly to the weight of the glider.
Excessive speed at this time can be dangerous in rough air if the pilot is pulling back hard.
The take-off
If the glider leaves the ground in a very tail-low attitude, with the tail-skid or wheel on the ground, it has the minimum of flying speed.
Worse still, if the stick is being held back the aircraft may bounce off the ground into an even more nose-high attitude and at an even lower speed.
A loss of power or cable break in these situations leaves the pilot helpless, and a very heavy, stalled landing will be inevitable.
In spite of this very real hazard, however, it is not uncommon to see quite experienced pilots leaving the ground with the elevator up, which results in the glider zooming up into a dangerously steep initial climb.
To avoid these situations it is important for pilots to be taught the right technique for the take-off run.
This involves getting the aircraft into an attitude with the tail-wheel or skid just off the ground.
In this position it will not leave the ground until a little more speed is gained.
The control movements needed to achieve this vary according to the configuration of the undercarriage.
Thus the pilots who are flying several different types of glider, or a glider which is unfamiliar to them, must ask themselves before each flight, ‘Do I need the stick forward to lift the tail, or back a little to lift the nose?’
With gliders which have a front wheel or main skid, a main wheel just behind the c.g. and a tail-wheel or skid like the K13, Grob 103, ASK21, Puchazc, Schweitzer 233 and most of the older single seaters, it may be necessary to ease back a little during the take-off run to raise the front wheel or skid.
A few seconds later as the aircraft gains more speed, it will need more forward movement to prevent it from unsticking with the tail-wheel or skid touching the ground, and climbing away too steeply.
When the main wheel is ahead of the c.g. so that the glider is sitting tail-down, a forward movement is needed to raise the tail a little for take-off.
The exact movements required will vary depending on the amount of acceleration.
A rapid winch launch will tend to pitch the glider back on to the tail, making a larger forward movement necessary to get the tail off the ground and so ensure a margin of speed when the aircraft takes off.
With all types of glider, it is wise to hold the stick right forward for the initial part of the ground run, so that there is no possibility of the glider zooming off the ground and into a steep climb if the winch driver applies full power too quickly.
However, as soon as it begins to accelerate smoothly, that movement is no longer necessary, and the control should be moved to get the glider balanced nicely on to the main wheel.
Care must be taken not to keep the stick  forward for too long, as too much forward movement during the take-off run will prevent the glider from leaving the ground until a much higher speed is reached.
It is also undesirable because, if the glider is bounced off by bumpy ground, it will fly back into the ground heavily a few moments later.
In very light cross winds there is always the possibility of dropping a wing on to the ground and swinging badly.
In these conditions it is vital for the pilot to have a hand close to the release, ready to pull it if the need arises.
If the grass is long, touching a wing-tip may result in a serious ground loop.
But worse still, if the pilot is able to pick up the dropped wing after the initial swing, because of the acceleration the controls suddenly become effective, and this often results in the other wing touching just as the aircraft becomes airborne.
This can cause a cart-wheel and major damage or even injury.
Always be ready to release during the take-off run and if in doubt, abandon the take-off.
Many gliding clubs use multi-drum winches so that several cables are pulled out at the same time.
Unless the cables are well spaced, or the truck driver keeps absolutely straight, there is a risk of two or more cables becoming tangled.
Thus when the glider is launched it takes a second cable and parachute up with it.
This may cause an abnormally slow launch and the winch driver, seeing the other parachute, may cut the power.
However, this should not lead to any particular problem, and it can be dealt with as a normal cable break.
Another possibility is the glider swinging and catching the tail-skid under another cable.
This is particularly dangerous because the weight and drag of the second cable may make it difficult to get the nose down.
Therefore prevention is better than cure.
Cables are dangerous, and where there is more than one cable it is important to keep the glider straight and well clear of any other cable.
Always be particularly careful to avoid swinging across another cable in a strong cross wind.
Initial climb
The ideal is to leave the ground balanced on the main wheel, and to hold a constant attitude for the first few feet of the launch while the aircraft gains height and speed.
The glider should not be steepened up or levelled out immediately after leaving the ground.
After a few seconds the attitude should be allowed to steepen up gradually and smoothly until the full climbing angle is reached.
The rate at which the angle is changed must depend on the speed at the time, and this has to be judged because there is insufficient time to check the ASI.
If the acceleration is healthy, the change into the climb can be made normally; if the acceleration is slower than normal, then of course the climb must be restricted.
At all times the angle of climb and the combination of speed and height must be such that a safe recovery can be made if the launch fails.
When the change in angle is made smoothly, the glider will be climbing at a safe angle and will be able to recover if there is a launch failure at any point.
Students used to be told that it was dangerous to steepen the climb below 100 feet.
This made them hold the glider down and often caused overspeeding or even overrunning of the cable or parachute.
Pulling up suddenly at that height puts a sudden, uncontrolled load on the cable and often results in a cable    break.
Obviously, it does not suddenly become safe to steepen the climb at a certain height, and it is now recognised that the angle should be progressively steepened.
ASK13 on a winch launch
With a low-powered winch or tow car, the acceleration is far slower and there is plenty of time to get the glider nicely balanced on the wheel so that it leaves the ground with a safe margin of speed.
Again, if the acceleration is poor the climb must not be steepened quickly or it will be impossible to recover in time if the launch fails.
The climbing angles for winch or car tow can be similar once the initial climb is over.
Controlling the speed
There are two completely different systems of speed control on wire launches.
Most operations depend entirely on the winch or car driver judging the speeds from the bow in the cable and the way in which the glider is gaining height.
Unless the winch or car is very under-powered, pulling up steeper on a fast launch has little or no effect on launching speed.
All the pilot can do is to signal if the launch is too fast or abandon the launch if it is to slow.
The other system requires a device to measure the load in the cable or to control the maximum pull that the vehicle will provide.
In this system the speed is largely controlled by the glider pilot.
If the launch is too fast the pilot simply pulls up into a steeper climb.
When the driver sees that the load is getting too high, he reduces the power slightly.
If the speed is too low, the pilot reduces the climbing angle and the driver, seeing the reduction in load, applies more power.
Similarly with the power-limiting device the pilot can control the speed once the optimum power for the type of glider has been set.
Obviously, the pilot has to understand which system is being used.
Also, there may be confusion if winches and cars fitted with the power-limiting device become common, and launch heights will suffer until both pilots and drivers are familiar with the new system.
Healing with a launch failure
A failure very close to the ground frequently results in damage.
The cause is always one of the following: failing to recognise the loss of power in time; over-reacting and flying into the ground; opening the airbrakes instead of landing ahead with no airbrake.
If a cable break occurs just after the glider has left the ground, care must be taken not to overdo the lowering of the nose and fly into the ground.
Instead, you should simply level out and land ahead.
On no account use the airbrakes unless there is time and height to check the actual speed: usually, you will be flying very slowly, and a heavy landing will occur if the airbrakes are used.
With no airbrake the glider will float some distance even at low speed, and it must still be held off for a proper touchdown.
Opening the airbrakes at that moment will prevent the glider leaving the ground again.
With a cable break close to the ground there is always plenty of room ahead for the landing.
If it is a slow launch, any wind gradient will make the situation even more  critical.
The speed will then be dangerously low by the time that the nose has been lowered, and even more speed will be lost during the descent through the wind gradient.
As a pilot becomes more experienced, there is a real danger of the control movements becoming ‘programmed’.
If this happens he will change the angle of climb automatically as the glider starts to gain height, and he will continue to pull it higher for a few seconds even if a power failure has occurred.
The pilot should always be prepared for an unexpected power failure during this critical stage of the launch.
The normal reaction to a launch failure or cable break is to lower the nose and regain speed, and then to pull the release twice, hard, to get rid of any remaining cable.
Higher on the launch
Higher up on the launch the drill should be: lower the nose into the approach attitude; release the cable; assess if a landing ahead is practical.
If the latter is the case the speed should be checked by the ASI and, provided that it is adequate, the airbrakes can be used for a normal approach and landing.
Unless the failure has occurred below 50 feet or so, once the speed has been regained it is always best to apply full airbrake first to use up any excess height quickly.
The airbrake can then be reduced if necessary for the round-out and landing, provided that there is still plenty of room to do so.
This is far better than opening a little airbrake, then some more, and then finally having to use full airbrake for the landing in order to avoid overshooting into the far boundary.
It is important to realise that if the glider stops just within the boundary, another few feet of height could have meant a serious overshoot and perhaps a damaged aircraft.
Insufficient room to go straight ahead
After the initial reaction of lowering the nose and checking the speed, a quick assessment of the situation is necessary.
If it is obvious that there is plenty of room to land ahead, that is always the first and best choice.
In light winds the situation is far more critical than in windy weather, when it may be possible to land ahead from 500 feet or more, even on a relatively small site.
Students and instructors often fail to realise that it is not the amount of height that matters but how much room there is ahead.
If there is not enough room to get down straight ahead, obviously a turn has to be made regardless of the height; there is no point in flying on into wind and losing valuable height and space ahead.
However, it is vital to check that the speed is adequate before making this turn.
A snap decision to turn has been the cause of many serious stalling and spinning accidents, often when, in fact, there was ample room for a landing ahead.
During the turn-off, there is time for a reassessment of the height remaining relative to trees and buildings, and a decision has to be made either to continue turning to make a low circuit, or to turn back into wind after using up a little more height (this is known as an S-turn).
If, by then, it is  obvious that there is plenty of room to turn back into wind and land, this is the sensible thing to do.
If the decision is made to continue with a circuit, use a well-banked turn and monitor the airspeed every few seconds.
If there is plenty of height, it may be wise to straighten up and fly down wind a little to allow more room for the landing.
Do not try to get all the way back to the launch point unless you have ample height.
Remember, if the height is marginal it may be safer to land across the field a little out of wind, rather than try and complete the turn with insufficient height.
The direction of the turn
On a small site it is important to think about the conditions and to consider what is the best way of turning to make use of a longer run on the airfield, or to avoid having to dodge obstructions.
In a cross wind it almost always pays to turn off to the down wind side first.
However, if you are correcting for drift with one wing well down, and then the cable breaks, you may find that you have already turned quite a long way, and that it is easier to keep that turn going if you cannot get down ahead.
It is seldom possible to land down wind or in the opposite direction to the take-off.
This would normally result in overshooting and flying out of the field altogether.
Slow launches
The optimum speed for a launch depends on both the type of glider and the wind strength.
A minimum safe speed for most gliders is the minimum cruising speed, but this is only safe at height, where there is time for recovery if a stall occurs.
In windy conditions, the glider will climb higher if the launching speeds are on the slow side, whereas on a calm day the best speed is closer to the limit shown on the placard.
Special care is needed if the wings are wet when extra speed is necessary, because the stalling speed is raised.
Often, on a small field the most critical situation will be a ‘stop-go’ launch.
This is a slow launch which picks up speed and fades several times, and it is usually caused by a shortage of fuel or mechanical trouble on the winch or car.
It is tempting to hang on to the launch, thinking that it will pick up speed, but if you do you may arrive almost over the end of the field with very little height or speed — an awkward situation.
It is best to abandon any really slow launch while there is still plenty of room for a landing ahead.
If the glider stalls on the launch it will probably drop a wing and may spin.
If the launch seems slow, check the speed every few seconds.
Reducing the climbing angle slightly will help the driver to recognise the need for more speed.
However, levelling out too much will cause a large amount of slack in the cable and a further loss of speed, often leaving the aircraft in a dangerously nose-high attitude with no pull from the cable to maintain the speed.
With a slow launch the pilot must decide if the speed is sufficient to continue climbing.
If it is, he should hold the present attitude and stand by to lower the  nose if the speed drops any further.
If the launch is much too slow, the nose must be lowered and the launch abandoned immediately.
Whereas it is obvious that the launch must be abandoned anywhere near the ground, halfway up the launch it is reasonable to hold on for a few seconds to see if the speed picks up again.
A further complication may be that any sideslipping to correct for drift may cause the ASI to under-read so that the speed may have to be judged.
If the ASI is reading 20 knots there is an obvious slip error, because that is well below the stalling speed of the glider.
Any symptoms of the beginning of a stall, such as buffeting or poor control response, must be dealt with by immediately releasing and lowering the nose.
Fast launches
Most modern machines have maximum launching speeds of 70 knots or so, making it relatively difficult and unusual for the launch to overspeed.
The ‘too fast’ signal is made by yawing from side to side.
If the glider is in a very steep climb this should be reduced slightly before yawing.
A common fault is to level out too much, which results in a completely slack cable and makes the winch driver's job of judging the correction quite impossible.
In turbulent air the launch should be abandoned if the launching speed becomes really excessive.
(Usually this is the pilot's fault for holding the glider down too much during the initial climb, or failing to get right up into the normal angle of climb.)
If a decision is made to abandon the launch at height, it is safer to release first and then to lower the nose, as this prevents the risk of the cable parachute opening and flying up over the aircraft.
Should the latter ever happen, it is best to land ahead regardless rather than attempt a circuit.
The drag of the cable over one wing can make the aircraft uncontrollable in a turn, making a serious crash almost inevitable.
Hang-ups
Situations where the cable or tow rope cannot be released are now very rare.
They are most likely to occur because of a jerk in the cable causing an overrun, with the rope becoming tangled in the main wheel of the glider.
The launch should always be stopped if an overrun occurs, and if the launch continues in spite of pulling the release the pilot should make every effort to prevent the glider from leaving the ground by keeping the stick right forward.
Because of the automatic override system used on all the winch tow release hooks, this is now an extremely rare cause of accidents.
Suggestions on how to deal with a hang-up are covered in my other book Derek Piggott on Gliding (A &C Black).
Pilots are most vulnerable to all of these problems when they are out of practice or when they become blasé and do not think about the procedures regularly.
If pilots are apprehensive about cable breaks it probably means that they are uncertain about what they should do in all situations, and whether they can manage.
This is a sure sign that they need more practice.
Many pilots quite unwittingly take off with the stick right back, not realising  that if the launch fails when they have just left the ground, an accident will be inevitable.
Good supervision can prevent pilots developing careless habits, and students can learn by watching and listening to the instructor's comments about good and bad launches.
Gliders lining up for a competition launch
Stall and spin-related accidents
Although the majority of gliders have extremely docile stalling characteristics and are very reluctant to enter a full spin, most of the more serious accidents in the sport are caused initially by stalling.
If the stall occurs above about 500 feet, the accident can be put down to lack of awareness and poor stall and spin recovery training.
Where it occurs much lower down a recovery is unlikely, and the accident should be put down either to the failure to maintain a safe airspeed at low altitudes, or to bad planning leading to a situation from which a crash is almost unavoidable.
Stalling at low altitudes
If the glider is very low and there is not a clear area immediately ahead and below, a stalling type of crash will be inevitable.
Even if the pilot is fully aware of being close to the stall, he will instinctively hold off until the glider stalls down the last few feet rather than fly into obstructions at speed.
It is easy to realise that in gusty conditions, if the glider is being flown slowly, the stall may occur high enough for a wing to drop and for an incipient spin to develop with even more serious results.
Obviously it is very important to train every pilot to recognise when his planning is leading to a disastrous situation, and to take action in time to avoid it.
Usually these situations arise from running out of height on the circuit, but they can also arise from arriving back far too high and by badly planned manoeuvring in an attempt to correct that kind of position.
Student pilots need plenty of practice at dealing with both these kinds of situation during their basic training if they are to learn to be able to spot them developing.
If they can do this, a change of plan at an early stage can usually prevent the situation from developing and leading to an accident.
Very often during training, a student will be rather short of height but will just have sufficient for a normal approach.
The instructor may have been wondering if the height was going to be sufficient for a normal approach even though the student had already cut out the base leg to make a 180° turn on to finals.
The question in this situation is, would the pilot have recognised that this would not have been possible if the aircraft had been 50 feet lower?
Would he, in fact, have turned in earlier, or would it have been another near miss or accident in the making?
In many training organisations all over the world, student pilots get no training at all with this kind of problem.
It is therefore not surprising that incidents and accidents happen when this kind of situation occurs, especially if it is during an early off-field landing when the pilot is under pressure.
Undershoots
Most undershoot accidents occur because the pilot has not recognised that the glider is critically short of height until it is desperately low.
In very open country, the judgement of heights, even down below 200 or 300 feet, is surprisingly difficult.
Where there are trees or buildings nearby a direct comparison can be made, and this is a good way of eliminating serious misjudgements.
This is an important lesson for every student.
Most pilots do not instinctively look across and compare their height with the trees unless they have been taught to do so, and more often than not a pilot will try to judge by angles and positioning alone.
Often, the pilot does not even consider what he will do if the glider hits some sink and loses some extra height.
This possibility should always be in the mind of the pilot and some reserve of height must be carried all the time.
However, too much height often leads to situations where even full airbrake cannot prevent a drastic overshoot.
When the glider is desperately low the pilot's handling often goes to pieces, and he may over-rudder in an effort to get round a final turn without touching a wing-tip or turning any steeper.
Over-ruddering causes extra drag and an extra loss of height or speed, and it often leads to stalling in the turn.
Anticipation
The solution to these problems is anticipation, that is preventing them from developing by thinking ahead and taking action early.
Many situations where the glider is very low and flying slowly are insoluble quite a time before the accident actually happens.
More stalling and spin training will not help to stop this type of accident.
Such incidents can only be avoided if the pilot has a more open mind about where he is going to land.
For example, if the glider is too low to land conventionally in the normal landing area directly into the wind, it may well be possible to land across wind and behind the normal launching point, so that the low turn can be completed safely.
All too often the pilot has a plan in his mind and sticks to it even when it should have become obvious that the situation has changed and his plan is no longer feasible.
It is sometimes quite hard for a person to do the unconventional, but that may be the only safe option.
However, if the pilot is thinking ahead, that option could have already been considered and he could have had the plan ready for use if more height was lost.
Trying to do the normal thing can be the cause of accidents with cable breaks and winch failures on smaller gliding sites.
Sometimes the only safe thing to do is to land out of the site altogether in a nearby field.
By not considering this as a possibility, the pilot gives himself little or no hope of a safe landing, especially if the alternative is a very low 360° turn and he is already flying rather slowly.
Stalling on the actual approach is usually caused by failing to monitor the airspeed regularly, or by failing to react to its indications.
There is no point in reading the ASI and knowing that you are too slow unless you lower the nose to correct it.
Stalling can also be due to trying to stretch the glide instead of closing the airbrakes, or stretching the glide after getting into a desperate undershoot position.
This is more easily done when landing in an unfamiliar place, particularly if it is in a hilly area and means landing on an uphill slope.
If a bad undershoot seems inevitable, again prompt action is needed rather than waiting to see what happens and how far you get.
If there is a possible area for a safe landing, use the brakes and get down into it.
Remember that it is far better to get down and then to run into obstruction than to stall on to it at flying speed.
In a case like this it is often a matter of assessing quickly ‘Am I sure that I can reach the field, or if I get more sink will I fail to get there?’
If there is any doubt about getting there in the worst circumstances, it is better to get down short in any open space ahead and risk rolling into the hedge.
On a windy day with a strong wind gradient, you are quite likely to lose some extra height and speed and low approaches are always very risky.
Unintentional stalls at height
It is obviously very important for the student pilot to learn to recognise all the symptoms of the stall and to become familiar with them.
If they are recognised, there is almost always plenty of time to prevent a stall occurring.
However, many inexperienced pilots get so thoroughly engrossed in the thermalling or what is going on elsewhere that they are temporarily ‘switched off’ to how they are flying.
Perhaps the work-load is high at the time, looking at the map and the ground for possible clues as to where they are, looking for signs of possible lift to climb in, together with all the other little worries involved in a field landing.
It is often at these times that the glider becomes stalled without the pilot noticing, and then his instincts are bound to be automatic as the nose and wing drops.
If you stall accidentally it is almost always because you are not aware of the low speed, etc. and therefore all the training in the world will not prevent you from responding instinctively because you are not at that moment aware that you are stalled.
(If you were aware, you would have prevented the stall!)
In this situation you are bound to pull back and apply the aileron and rudder to stop the nose and wing from dropping.
Hopefully, a few seconds later you will have recognised the situation, taken heed of your training and moved forwards on the stick.
Occasionally the stall is recognised by the pilot so that a preventative movement can be made before any serious wing-drop has had time to develop.
Accidental stalls seldom happen when the glider is being flown straight, and most result in one wing stalling before the other, causing a wing-drop.
Incipient spins
Any time that a wing begins to drop at a stall it is the beginning of a possible spin, but the spin can only develop if the wing is kept stalled and the glider is allowed to continue to yaw.
In the UK there has been much discussion about teaching stall recoveries with a view to making it all easier for the beginner to understand and  remember.
It has been suggested that ‘incipient’ is an unfamiliar word, that associating the stall with a spin might get the student worried, and that to simplify things we should only talk about stalls and spins.
Although it is obviously accurate to call an incipient spin a stall with a wing-drop, I think that this is trying to avoid the issue, which is that it is really the beginning of a spin and at least a potential spin.
Recommended recovery
The recovery action now being recommended for any stall is to move forwards on the stick to unstall the wings by reducing the angle of attack.
A few seconds later the glider is unstalled and can be brought level and back to normal flight with the normal use of the controls.
This has the advantage that it does not require the pilot to remember any special movement of the controls other than the movement forward to unstall.
Perhaps in an effort to justify this simplification, some instructors have been warning against the use of the rudder to stop the yaw if a wing drops at the stall.
They have been inferring that applying the opposite rudder has been the cause of reversing the spin, whereas the real cause of this happening must be the failure to unstall the wings.
Use of the rudder
Additional yawing caused by the excess use of the rudder in a turn will make the wing-drop much sharper.
At the instant of applying the excess rudder, it speeds up the outer wing-tip, creating more lift there, and gives the inner wing ‘sweep back’ in relation to the airflow, thus increasing the tendency to tip stall on that wing while reducing it on the other.
Additional yaw will also occur if the ailerons are used to try to stop the dropping wing because of the extra aileron drag.
However, the aileron may well still be effective, and in most gliders applying the aileron to stop the wing dropping at the stall, while not recommended, does not have any noticeable tendency to cause further stalling at the tip.
How far the glider rolls over into the beginning of the spin depends to a large extent on the amount of yaw present.
Applying the opposite rudder will tend to reduce the yaw and so help even out the stalling of the wings.
In fact, the rudder power of most gliders is very poor in relation to the huge inertia of the heavy, long-span wings, and there may not be any visible effect when opposite rudder is applied in an incipient spin.
However, it is not true to say that it is dangerous to apply the opposite rudder in an incipient spin.
Applying the opposite rudder cannot possibly cause the spin to reverse as is sometimes stated, unless the pilot is keeping the stick right back.
The only reason for an incipient or full spin changing direction is if the stick is held right back so that the glider is either kept stalled, or is re-stalled as the rotation stops.
If the incipient spin has progressed for more than about half a turn because the pilot has kept the stick back, applying the full opposite rudder must be a good thing because it helps to stop the rotation and to even up the stalling of the  wings.
Probably the most effective way of dealing with an incipient spin in practice is to move forwards on the stick, apply the opposite rudder to check the yaw and then to use all the controls normally to bring the aircraft level.
This method has been taught for many years and I do not think that pilots who have learned to do it this way need bother to change.
New pilots will be taught just to unstall the wings and then to get the wings level using the normal coordination.
Of course, unless the pilot is aware that the glider is stalled, he is bound to respond instinctively at first , applying full aileron and rudder to try to stop the rapid wing-drop and pulling right back to try to stop the nose dropping.
If the pilot is aware that the glider is stalled, applying the opposite rudder at the same time as moving forwards on the stick should result in some reduction in the yawing movement towards the dropping wing, and therefore must be a good thing.
In my experience, the only occasions when I have stalled unexpectedly and known what was happening at the time, have been in very fierce stubble fires and dust devils.
In these violent thermals it is possible to be flying with a good margin of speed at one moment and to be falling with virtually no speed the next.
In such cases it is easy to make a correct recovery because it is so obvious that the glider is stalled.
Unexpected stalls
Most unintentional stalls occur, by definition, unexpectedly and usually the first obvious sign of what has happened is that the pilot is banging the stick on the rear stop with the nose still dropping — a frightening feeling.
However, provided that a movement forwards is made to unstall, the possibility of a full spin will have been avoided.
The order of movements is relatively unimportant compared to the necessity of making an immediate forward movement to reduce the angle of attack of the wing so that it unstalls.
If you imagine suddenly and unexpectedly finding yourself in an almost vertical dive facing the ground, it is easy to understand why so many pilots fail to make a movement forward on the stick to help the glider unstall itself.
Below a certain height it may be a hopeless situation, but even where there is enough height for a recovery, you can imagine how hard it is to make that movement forward unless you have practised stalls and incipient spins until the movements are well drilled.
Most types of glider are reluctant to enter a full spin unless they are being flown with the c.g. on or very close to the aft limit, that is by light pilots.
However, whether it is a full spin or just an incipient one is academic if the glider stalls a few hundred feet up.
Problems arise because many pilots do not understand much about spinning.
They are often told that gross over-ruddering is needed to spin, but this is not the case.
It is possible to spin with the rudder centralised if the glider is one which will spin fully.
For example in a 232, Puchacz, or the older Bocian and Eagle, it is usual to be able to get a full spin of several turns without using any rudder.
In this case the necessary yawing movement is caused by the high drag of the badly stalled wing.
Usually after one or two turns these gliders will unstall themselves and build up speed rapidly in a spiralling dive.
Recovery is  simply a matter of relaxing the backward pressure on the stick and using the controls quite normally to bring the wings level and to ease out of the dive.
With any recovery from a steep dive, ‘ease’ is the operative word.
If the glider is trimmed for a normal cruising speed, because of the longitudinal stability it will require a forward movement and pressure on the stick to keep it diving at a higher speed.
This means that in most cases it is more likely to be a matter of relaxing the forward pressure to allow the aircraft to level out rather than pulling it out with a positive backward pressure on the stick.
The stick position
The position of the stick in steady flight is a very clear indication of the angle of attack, and having the stick back near the rearmost stop should warn the pilot that he is close to the stalling angle for the wing.
If the nose is dropping in spite of pulling back and hitting the back stop, this is a clear indication that the glider is stalled, and a forward movement is needed for a few seconds to let the wing unstall.
In most unintentional stalls, the stick position on the back stop will be the first symptom to be recognised.
However, although the stick position and the total lack of response to the elevator are by far the most important symptoms of the actual stall, many instructors hardly mention it.
By this stage of a stall, very often the noise of the airflow will have increased because of the yawing movement, and most of the other symptoms will either be absent or will go unnoticed in the moments of panic.
The fact that the glider is not responding normally must cause alarm to any pilot until the cause is identified.
If the glider is stalled and enters a spin at height, the inability to recover must be due a lack of spin recovery training.
With insufficient experience, the pilot is likely to be slow to recognise the spin and slow to react.
Moreover, because it occurs unexpectedly it may well cause a temporary panic.
Clearly while we do have gliders that spin, it is vital to give pilots enough experience to recognise what is happening and to make the right moves instead of panicking and doing nothing.
The effects of rain on the stall
Many pilots are unaware of the significance of dirty wing surfaces and of rain or drizzle on both the performance and the stalling characteristics of gliders.
Tests show that on most high performance machines, a spread of splattered flies on the leading edges can account for up to a quarter of the glider's performance, reducing a glide ratio of 40:1 to less than 35:1 and making a mockery of glide calculations.
This is so serious that for world championship flying, many gliders are now fitted with a means of cleaning off the leading edges of the wings in flight.
In light rain I have measured an increase of about 8 knots in the speed for the pre-stall buffet and stall of a K13, although the stall itself did not seem to have changed in character.
However, some gliders do have a definite change in both speed and characteristics.
For example, with wet wings the Falke motor  gliders, the Bergfalke and the Spatz all become viscous at the stall and will flick over if they are stalled during turns.
A pilot taking off in rain on a winch or car launch is at risk with any type of glider unless the launch is faster than normal.
It is not unknown for gliders to stall and drop a wing badly on a slow launch, and the behaviour of most gliders in the rain may be far worse than in normal flight.
The combination of the poor visibility, together with the misting up of the canopy and the effects of the rain on the stall, make launching in rain foolhardy and almost always pointless from the point of view of achieving a soaring flight.
However, it is not unusual to see pilots take off towards a heavy rain shower on a good soaring day instead of waiting until it has passed.
Usually this is because they got ready before the rain started falling and are unable to see that they are not going to stay up unless they wait until the shower has passed.
Inevitably they come straight down in a few minutes looking rather sheepish!
It is as though they are unable to change their minds and this is a very dangerous trait in a glider pilot.
Really heavy rain can be disastrous.
Even in a car the wipers do not clear the windscreen in torrential rain.
Snow looks less innocuous but is even worse than rain because it blots out visibility more.
Flying in even light snow is like being in a fog, and unless you are up high and can manage to fly clear on instruments, you are liable to have real trouble.
More about spin recovery
The standard method of recovery must be taught because it has been proven to be effective during testing.
It involves applying full opposite rudder and then, with the ailerons central, moving the stick steadily or progressively forwards until the spin stops.
Finally, the pilot centralises the rudder and eases out of the dive.
(To reduce the risk of over-speeding with modern machines, the airbrakes can be opened fully at any time during the spin or the recovery.)
If every type of glider required a different recovery there would be the risk of a pilot using the wrong method for the type of aircraft.
All gliders and light aircraft have to recover satisfactorily with the standard method.
This is not to say that other methods would not work, but it is unwise to use non-standard methods for recovery from a fully developed spin, even if they appear to work better.
In the standard recovery, the full opposite rudder is always applied first, and if it does slow down the rotation, the nose of the glider will automatically drop, helping to unstall the wings.
In this way the rudder is a very powerful influence on the spin recovery because it helps the pitching movement and also slows the rotation.
(The full opposite rudder must never be taken off if the aircraft is reluctant to recover, because any additional yaw would further flatten the spin.)
Blanketing
Before the days of T-tails, there was a possibility of the downward movement  of the elevator causing some blanketing of the rudder and reducing its effectiveness.
This is another reason for standardising the rudder movement first, but it is not relevant to gliders with T-tails where no rudder blanketing can occur.
Modes of spinning
A more important reason not to experiment is to avoid the possibility of getting the glider into an untested mode of spin from which it might be difficult or impossible to recover.
It is possible for an aircraft to have several different modes of spinning, and all of them may not have been discovered during the testing.
Using the ailerons during the recovery, for example, may be the means of entering one of these other modes of spin.
It is not always realised how little spinning is carried out during the test flying of a new type of glider.
Entries are made with every different kind of control input: full in-spin aileron, full out-spin aileron, airbrakes in and out, c.g. forward and c.g. aft, etc., using the standard method of recovery to stop the spin.
Finally, to check the recovery from the stabilised spin, the glider is held in the spin for a full five turns if that is possible.
The authorities do not require other methods of recovery to be tested, and it is therefore not always possible to be sure whether using the aileron, for instance, will flatten the spin and make it more difficult to stop.
In the past there have been a number of problems with spin recoveries with light aircraft.
Some have been due to the aircraft getting into a new mode of spin, but others have been due to poor recovery techniques.
Often the instructor or pilot knows the correct recovery and thinks that he is using it, but because of the unusual forces on the controls, he is failing to apply the full recovery action.
This used to happen on both the Chipmunk and the Tomahawk where the elevator control loads become much heavier during the spin and where a half-hearted movement forward on the stick may be insufficient to stop the spin.
The position of the c.g.
With any type of aircraft the characteristics of a spin vary according to the loading, so that the spin becomes flatter as the c.g. is moved back.
This will also affect how far the stick has to be moved forwards to effect a recovery.
This depends mainly on how deeply the wing is stalled.
It is therefore important to teach and always to think of the stick movement as being a progressive forward movement made until the spin stops.
The effect of the rudder
In many gliders the spin may stop as soon as the full opposite rudder is applied.
In others the stick will have to move quite a long way forwards before the wing unstalls and the spin stops.
Where this is the case, the full opposite rudder may  not even appear to change the spin, and the spin will continue until the movement forward is sufficient.
Because each spin may be slightly different, it is important not to try to guess how far to move forwards.
Always make a progressive, steady movement forwards until the spin stops.
If the spin is unexpected, it may even be difficult to tell in which direction it is going.
If you have spun out of cloud, the turn needle always shows the direction of the spin.
Usually, but not always, the ball of the slip indicator is out the other way.
Control loads
In most gliders the rudder will have overbalanced and moved hard over in the direction of the spin.
So if you are in doubt about the direction of the spin, push against the overbalancing load and reverse the rudder.
One very deceptive thing about the control loads is the effect of the airflow at very large angles of attack and with the yawing and rolling movements during a spin.
The rudder will certainly be overbalanced and it will require far more force to apply the full opposite rudder than at any other time in flight.
The airflow over the ailerons often tends to move the stick towards the direction of the spin and they should be centralised for the recovery.
In addition, the elevator may overbalance so that the force needed to move forwards on the stick is abnormally high.
Do not mistake stick pressures for stick movement.
The stick must be moved forwards to make the recovery.
Training problems
In many training gliders it is difficult to demonstrate spinning and the spin may stop when the full opposite rudder is applied.
If this happens, it is important to move the stick forwards sufficiently to ensure that the glider does not re-stall.
When a glider recovers so easily, a rapid movement forward on the stick often results in a very steep recovery and a high speed dive.
After doing this several times in a two-seater during training, the student may find both that applying full opposite rudder will stop the spin and that the glider does not in fact re-stall again even if the stick is kept back.
(Sometimes a little of the pre-stall buffet can be felt but the glider levels out all right.)
If this is allowed to go unnoticed because the glider stops spinning each time, it will encourage the habit of keeping the stick back.
This will, in turn, guarantee a delayed recovery, or no recovery at all, on a glider which requires a more positive recovery action.
If the spin stops when the full opposite rudder is applied, the stick must be moved forwards to allow normal flight.
Failure to do this is the only reason for a reversal of the spin from one direction to another.
Incidentally, if an aircraft is very difficult to get into a spin, it also may be very difficult to recover.
It is not unknown for so-called ‘unspinnable’ aircraft to come to grief by getting into a stable spin.
Light stick forces
It is very important to watch for any tendency to use a jerky forward movement on the stick during the full recovery.
This is often a sign of nervousness and usually means that more spin training is needed.
The following incident with an experienced pilot on a K6E drew attention to the importance of making smooth stick movements.
This particular pilot was an instructor who was in good practice in a K13 two-seater but out of practice in his K6E.
The E-model, unlike the K6CR, has an all-moving stabiliser with no tabs to provide feel.
Without the spring trimming there would be no pressure required to change speeds or to pull out of dives, and the controls would be very light indeed.
Since the force exerted by the spring is the same at both low and high speeds, this makes it feel rather twitchy, and it is not difficult to overstress the aircraft at high speeds.
In this case the spin itself was quite normal, and after a few turns the pilot initiated the recovery by applying the full opposite rudder and then moving the stick forwards.
However, with the negligible stick forces of the K6E, he must have rather overdone forward movement.
He stopped the spin but pitched the nose down rather violently.
At this point, his head hit the canopy and dislodged his glasses.
What occurred next is somewhat uncertain.
He was unaware of any high ‘g’ or, indeed, of anything at all, until he found himself regaining consciousness in a near vertical climb, about to tail slide.
After landing, the aircraft was found to have split fabric and extensive minor damage to the wings, which could only be attributed to overstressing at high speed.
He was lucky not to lose the wings altogether!
Avoid abrupt movements
Subsequent checks with this K6E pilot showed that during spin recoveries in the K13 his elevator movements were rather abrupt and uncontrolled.
In fact he found it very difficult not to jerk the stick forwards for recoveries.
Since most of these control movements are semi-automatic and largely preprogrammed, it is almost certain that this was the initial cause of his reaching such a high speed.
Instructors should therefore insist that the movements of the stick must be a controlled, progressive movement rather than a rapid, uncontrolled push or jerk.
They should also use the term ‘ease’ the glider out of the dive rather than‘pull’it out.
There have been several cases of two-seaters being overstressed by pilots pulling back hard to recover from steep dives after spin recoveries.
Piecing together the evidence from the incident with the K6E pilot, it seems almost certain that the pilot blacked out during the recovery.
Susceptibility to high ‘g’ is greatly affected by the duration of the loading, and whereas most people can cope with 3 to 4 g for a few seconds, a sustained loading of that amount may cause loss of vision.
In this case the pilot had possibly pulled about 5 g for 4 or 5 seconds.
Much also depends on the seating positions and whether the pilot is expecting the extra ‘g’ and prepares for it by tensing himself up.
For example, when sitting relaxed in a T21b, I have been nearly blacked out by a student during a tight loop.
The details are unimportant but the lessons are clear.
Extreme care is always  needed when flying at high speeds with gliders fitted with an all-moving stabiliser and spring trimming, particularly when recovering from extreme attitudes.
The elevator loads remain almost constant at all speeds and are so low that any jerky movement may result in very high ‘g’ loadings.
Fortunately, glider designers seem to have given up all-moving stabilisers in favour of a fixed tailplane and normal elevator.
As a result, most of the new breed of gliders are more pleasant and safer to fly.
Interesting demonstrations to try
The following are several interesting demonstrations and experiments to try out on your own gliders, or to show to students.
The effects of slight slip or skid on stalls in turns
If a student has a habit of over-ruddering in turns, it is often worth showing him the effect on the stall of using even a slight amount of extra rudder in a gentle turn.
Most pilots have been shown the effect of gross over-ruddering during their basic training.
The following demonstration compares a stall with a little too much rudder to a stall in a slightly slipping turn, and shows how even slightly too much rudder has a significant effect at the stall.
Start to circle in a normal turn with about 20° of bank, keeping the yaw string exactly in the middle while you reduce speed very gradually.
(On most types of training glider it will be possible to get down to the pre-stall buffet and continue with either a slight rocking of the wings or a very gentle inner wingdrop.)
Keep the rudder where it is and allow the speed to increase a few knots so that both you and the student can observe the exact position of the rudder pedals.
Most types of glider should be showing a very small amount of rudder being held on into the turn.
Next, watching the rudder pedals, increase the amount of rudder by a movement of about one inch forward on the rudder pedal and try again to reduce the speed.
Note how this time the glider has a very pronounced inner wing-drop at the stall and tries to spin.
After getting back into the accurate turn as before, apply a very small amount of opposite rudder to create a slightly slipping turn and try the stall again.
This time the glider will be totally innocuous.
This demonstration shows how even very small amounts of extra rudder in a turn cause a bad wing drop, whereas using too little is a safer fault because it inhibits the stalling characteristics.
The ideal, of course, is the accurate turn with the yaw string central or, as some pilots say, showing a very slight slipping movement (because the cockpit is ahead of the c.g.).
To emphasise the stick forward movement
This demonstration is intended to counteract the tendency for pilots trained on very docile gliders to remember the full opposite rudder but to forget the stick movement.
In this case the instructor brings the aircraft to a stall and applies full rudder  as if he is going to spin.
As the wing drops and the spin starts, he move forwards on the stick, leaving the rudder applied.
The wing unstalls immediately and prevents the spin from developing.
(After a few seconds the rudder must be recentralised to avoid getting to high speeds with full rudder applied.)
This shows conclusively that any movement forward will prevent a spin developing even if the rudder is forgotten altogether.
The stall is approached once again but this time in a very slight turn and, if necessary, with a very small amount of extra rudder — just enough to make the wing drop.
Keeping the rudder still and pulling right back on the stick sharply as the stall occurs, should make the wing drop.
This time the stick is held firmly back with the aileron central, and the wing will (usually) continue dropping so that the glider spins for a turn or so.
A normal recovery is then made.
If height permits, I then like to make a series of stalls using large amounts of rudder and handing over control for a quick recovery, moving the stick forward and using normal stick and rudder together to bring the wings level.
The point about these last two demonstrations is that they emphasise that spinning depends on stalling and keeping the aircraft stalled.
Any forward movement will prevent a spin from developing, whereas failure to move forwards can result either in the spin continuing or, if the opposite rudder has been applied, in the direction of the spin suddenly reversing.
These demonstrations serve to emphasise the importance of moving forwards every time the glider is stalled.
But although they work well in the older types of glider, they are not practical with the modern machines which have a very docile stall and which will not drop a wing at the stall without gross over-ruddering.
Most of the other simulations of accidental stalling involve almost unrealistic handling of the aircraft, and are therefore not very convincing, although they may result in a rather more violent wing-drop.
Conclusion
There is no doubt that many of the serious stall/spin accidents are caused by poor planning which leads to situations involving difficult manoeuvring near the ground, putting the pilots under stress so that they make mistakes or fly badly enough to stall and spin in.
Careful instruction and constant practice is needed if the stall and spin accidents are to be prevented altogether.
It is important to be able to recognise all the symptoms of the approach of a stall in order to be able to prevent it.
It must be emphasised that to prevent or to stop a spin the wings must be unstalled by means of a forward movement.
Unstalling the wings takes away the cause of the autorotation and then the wings can be brought level using the stick and rudder normally.
In most cases with either incipient or full spins, any movement forward, or even just relaxing the backward movement of the stick, would prevent or stop the spin immediately.
The most important thing to emphasise is that, regardless of the attitude of the glider, if it is not responding to moving back on the stick or if the stick is hitting the back stop, a forward movement must be made to allow the glider to unstall.
Advice on making field landings
Flying cross-country
With all the airspace restrictions in operation it is most important to keep track of your location so that the glider does not inadvertently stray into controlled airspace or other restricted areas.
This is particularly true for early attempts at flying cross-country, where it is vital to use a priority system for concentrating on the important aspects of the flying.
Flying above 1,500 or 2,000 feet on a reasonable day, you should concentrate mainly on climbing efficiently, selecting the next good clouds, and checking and confirming your position and progress on the map between thermals .
Below 1,500 feet, the maps should be ignored and priority should be given to checking for suitable fields below while also searching for lift, re-checking on the local wind direction and moving towards a better area of fields if necessary.
At about 1,000 feet you should put away the maps, select a good field and check it for slopes and surface etc.
Use any area of lift but do not drift away from the chosen field.
Keep re-checking the field and reselect if a better one becomes apparent.
Move away to avoid flying directly over the field, but keep it within easy reach all the time.
At about 800 feet AGL, re-check your position to the side of the field, recheck for obstructions, choose the ‘turn in’ position and prepare for landing.
Consider the effects of the wind.
Will there be bad turbulence from obstructions upwind of the field?
Is it an uphill slope and how much extra speed is necessary?
At this point it is a good idea to say out loud to yourself, ‘Now I am going to land’, and from then on not to change your mind.
Many field landing accidents occur because the initial decision to choose a field is left far too late.
Often the pilot is lost and has been worrying for the past half an hour about where he is.
Then he gets low and is already in a state of anxiety which tends to make him make poor judgements.
If you are getting low, you should forget all your other problems and concentrate on selecting a good field first.
Then try to use any lift nearby, keeping within easy reach of the field and in a position from which it is easy to drop on to the circuit.
The lower the choice of field is made, the fewer fields are within reach and the less time there is to decide which one is best.
By the time that the glider is down to 500 feet or so, an inexperienced pilot often will have forgotten the wind direction, and if he realises this it will increase his anxiety.
Finally, below a few hundred feet, if no definite field has been chosen there can be little or no choice, and an accident is almost certain to happen.
Often the pilot is in such a state of panic that the flying becomes dangerously inaccurate.
This kind of accident is relatively common with inexperienced pilots, especially when they are flying in competitions.
The final glide back to the base airfield at the end of the day is a particularly stressful time.
Usually it is at the end of a long day's racing, with a number of stressful periods all adding to the   pilot's fatigue.
Perhaps the glider is theoretically just within range for a straight glide home, but has very little extra height in hand and not much prospect of getting another climb.
At 1,000 feet the pilot may be some distance from his base when some extra height is lost because of strong sink.
He badly wants to complete the task and continues hoping to pick up more lift on the way.
More sink puts him well below the intended glide path, but instead of making the decision to choose a field and look around near it for more lift, he glides on.
Eventually he finds himself at 500 feet, unable to see a good field ahead, unable to remember the wind direction, and trying to select a field with very little choice.
Bergfalke 11 landing at Ein Shemer, Israel
Even worse off is the pilot who still believes he will make it and takes no action until he arrives on the ground or in a hedge.
When you are tired out and upset with yourself for not having taken that extra piece of lift some miles back, there can be a tendency to become apathetic and not even try to prevent an accident.
It is as though you are drugged and have ceased to care.
This is one of the effects of lack of oxygen, but also of dehydration at the end of a long day's excitement.
It can be overcome if you recognise that you are tired and getting complacent, but the onset is very gradual and often you do not recognise that anything is wrong.
If you give yourself a shake, change your seating position slightly, open the clear vision panel for some fresh air, change hands on the stick for a few moments and have a sweet or drink, you can snap out of it and start to work normally again.
Think about the problems
A surprising number of inexperienced pilots haven't really thought about how they would tackle having to land in a field.
Since they don't have problems landing on their gliding site, they don't see why there should be any particular problem landing elsewhere.
They can be the quiet, but unthinking types who are simply unaware of their lack of knowledge.
They probably have never even considered that they could have an accident and damage the glider.
So, the idea that they need some training to do it safely just doesn't occur to them.
With many aspects of flying, we need to have reached a certain stage or standard to be able to appreciate the problems, or to understand and take in the facts.
There is often a tendency for pilots to think that, because they are solo and have managed a few soaring flights and their Bronze C, they should be allowed to go cross-country.
What is seldom realised, until a first cross-country, is the vast increase in mental workload involved when soaring, map reading, field landings and flying have to be thought of, instead of just how to stay up.
Many incidents and accidents are caused by lack of experience and the pilot unwittingly putting himself into situations beyond his capabilities.
For example, it is important for an inexperienced solo pilot to avoid a field landing until he has had some training in how to tackle one.
Hundreds of landings on one particular airfield or gliding site do not provide good training for landing in fields.
Unfortunately, being familiar with an approach takes away much of the need for real judgement.
Pilots, and even instructors, often believe that they have good judgement and can land accurately anywhere because they can manage on their own site.
However, even if it is a small field, all they have really learned is to position themselves by habit, using the local landmarks to help.
The really valuable experience comes from landing in many different, unfamiliar places, whether they are fields or large aerodromes.
Unintentional out landings
Throughout the training, landing out is usually treated as such a serious misdemeanour that the inexperienced pilot is often influenced into trying desperately hard to get back if he either inadvertently drifts away from the site or gets lost during a local soaring flight.
On an early solo some pilots do get rather far from the field, which causes their instructors to become apprehensive for their safety.
The inexperienced pilots often try to soar in unusable lift, and they concentrate so hard that they don't recognise that they are drifting away and are not going to get back to the field.
Then they may fail to make any choice of field or plan of action until it is too late.
If the fields below happen to be large, they may get down safely, but a safe landing is often due to luck rather than to good judgement.
After the pilot's personal safety, the safety of the aircraft must be the next most important consideration; it is always safer to land out than to risk trying to get back with marginal height.
Forget about embarrassment: a landing out  has to be made if there is any doubt about getting back.
If an inexperienced pilot finds himself in a situation where a field landing seems necessary, he should make the decision to choose a field and plan the landing properly, while there is height and time to spare.
This is not the time to be thinking about what the chief instructor is going to think or say.
Worrying about people's comments instead of keeping calm and concentrating on the flying and on getting down safely is often the root cause of a bad landing.
There is really very little excuse for the student wandering out of reach of the field if he has been taught well in the first place.
However, during training, decisions such as when to leave the lift and start to get back to the field are too often taken by the instructor.
If this happens, the student may not form the habit of checking the situation after every turn and of making his own decision about when to turn back.
Hints on choosing fields
Obviously if you are flying over a bad area, with very few good sized fields, it is necessary to divert towards the best area within range and to start looking seriously for a field at several thousand feet.
Where the countryside is more hospitable, this can be left to a thousand feet or so.
Of course, turning downwind will increase the range and the choice of the fields, and it also makes joining a regular circuit very much easier.
Choosing a field some distance upwind on the other hand, is not such a good idea.
By the time that you have battled against the wind to get there, you may find that it has some hazard that you could not see from a distance, and then there may be no other good field within reach.
Do not waste valuable height trying to fathom out how to get down in an unsuitable field.
Discard it if it has awkward wires or some other hazard on the approach, and choose another field.
Time spent puzzling how to avoid these problems is time wasted which you could use for looking around more.
If you cannot see a suitable field, don't be afraid to make a well banked circle to look right round the whole area.
Looking further out you will probably be able to see dozens of fields and also the lie of the land and the main slopes.
Disregard any fields which would entail landing on a downhill slope.
Landing down wind is a silly thing to do.
Unless you do it every day at your particular gliding site, you are certain to misjudge such a landing, besides having the hazards of the higher touchdown speeds and loss of control during the ground run to contend with.
Don't look at the fields immediately below, because the slopes cannot be seen from directly above.
You can only see three of four fields and if they all look bad your morale will suffer.
Positioning
Once you have selected a possible field, move towards it, checking its size, slope and colour, and look out for possible wires on the approach.
Don't fly over it unless you have more than enough height to allow you to reposition yourself well to the side again.
Being directly overhead, the field is one of the  worst positions from which to extricate yourself because you have to fly blind, away from the field, for quite a long time to get out to the side for a reasonable base leg.
Try putting yourself at five or six hundred feet directly over the landing area of your gliding site and see for yourself how difficult it is to plan and make a spot landing.
Be careful that you do not continue to reject fields at the same time as getting lower and lower until it is too late either to have any selection or to achieve a good approach.
If there really are no suitable fields within range, then you have left the choice far too late and you must choose the best you can.
It will be a matter of making a good landing directly into wind, if that is possible, and of hoping for a minimum of damage to the glider.
Formal circuits
You do not need a complete conventional circuit with a long downwind leg, although this will obviously give you more time in which to have a better look at the field.
But whatever happens, you must get into a good position for the start of the base leg.
Unless you have a great deal of spare height, do not try to fly right round the field.
Experience shows that people often run themselves short of height on the way right round.
Instead, they could have stayed on the side they were flying and made a right, instead of a left circuit, with height to spare.
The positioning is made easier by imagining your field to be the normal landing area on your home site and by using the same angle for the positioning.
Since it is usual in training to make circuit patterns from 800 feet or so, inexperienced pilots are often seriously put out if they find themselves unable to do this on a field landing.
Instead of accepting that their normal circuit is not possible and organising an alternative, they may try to make their formal pattern and so run themselves into an even more difficult situation.
Alternatively, they may continue to worry about their initial error of judgement instead of making a revised plan of action to get into a good position for the base leg and approach.
Positioning the final turn
It is surprisingly easy to make the circuit and base leg far too close to the field, particularly if the surrounding countryside is rough and unlandable.
After you have selected the field, it is a good policy to choose the approximate position to complete the final turn and to start the approach.
With average British fields, this needs to be at least one field length back from the boundary.
This is slightly more than the distance that most pilots would like for a spot landing at the gliding site because you need a little more time for the approach in a strange place.
Obviously, if the fields are small, two lengths might be needed.
Then, provided you are not running short of height, the final turn must not be any closer than your chosen point.
This system helps to prevent you from getting too close for a normal approach.
Only come closer if you are anxious, because the base leg is going to be rather low.
The base leg
The secret is to have sufficient height and to get the angle to the field about right before turning onto the base leg.
If the angle is too steep, and you arrive too close, it will mean having a very short base leg and no time for adjustments by moving in or out and using the airbrakes.
By the time that you turn onto the base leg you need your chosen speed and the airbrakes unlocked ready for use.
Unless you are in the habit of using the airbrakes on the base leg, you will tend to hesitate about using them and will end up too high.
With every approach, try to get into the habit of thinking ahead about the height of he final turn and to become familiar with the idea of using the airbrakes to bring you down so that the final turn is not too high.
Experience shows that even after doing this, pilots tend to overshoot through being rather too high.
This is because it is much more difficult to recognise being too high than being a little on the low side.
For this reason I always emphasise that if, as you complete the final turn, you are happy that you have got the field ‘made’, you should always open full airbrake for a few moments to check that you would undershoot with that setting.
The airbrakes can then be reduced once it is clear that the glider will not overshoot with full airbrake.
If full airbrakes are needed for more than a few seconds, and it looks as though they should be kept on, sideslipping should be used to get rid of the excess height so that for the last part of the approach less than full airbrake approach is required.
A full airbrake approach is a potential overshoot if the glider flies through any lift.
S-turns
If it becomes obvious during the base leg or final turn that you are far too high to be able to get down in the chosen field, it is often possible to make an S-turn to use up some of the height.
However, effective S-turns are not easy to do, and they need to be practised if they are not to end up in dangerously steep turns or in bringing the final turn too close to the field.
Often they cannot be practised on the home site because they are not acceptable on a busy airfield.
However, they can be demonstrated and tried at height to get the idea and to see the problems which can arise if they are not neatly executed.
They are a sign of poor planning and of not thinking sufficiently far ahead, but they can be useful as an option, just as sideslipping is an extra skill which can prevent a serious overshoot and a broken glider.
Beware of ‘suckers’ gaps
Be very cautious about approaching through a gap in a row of trees.
If trees are alongside a road they are likely to conceal telephone or power wires, making it dangerous to go between them.
Look carefully for single wires leading off the main lines and running across the fields to individual cottages.
Unless you can spot all the poles, single wires will be very difficult to see.
In Australia single wires are called SWER (Single Wire, Earth Return) lines.
They comprise a single wire strung across from the main power wires to the farms or homesteads.
They are often hung between trees or old posts a long way apart, and they are extremely difficult to see.
The only real clue to spotting them is that every homestead has electricity and if you see the buildings, you must find the wires going to them before making an approach.
I was amazed to discover that pilots sometimes forget the large wing-span of their glider and risk touching a wing-tip on one side when flying through a gap.
It seems as though the pilot is only worrying about his cockpit getting through and forgets the wings.
Experience in many hundreds of practise field selections and approaches in a motor glider show the most common faults to be: leaving the choice of field far too late, and poor planning and judgement of the circuit and approach.
Practising in a motor glider with a knowledgeable and competent cross-country pilot is the best way to gain experience quickly at both selecting and field landing procedures.
There is no substitute for this kind of training.
Summary
The following are some of the most common errors, together with suggestions on how a pilot can avoid them and what an instructor can do to help.
Failure to accept that a field landing is necessary
Be realistic about the chances of finding lift low down.
Ask yourself, ‘How often can I ‘’ get away'’from below 800 feet when the soaring conditions have already deteriorated'.
Always say to yourself, ‘I will select a field just in case I don't find lift.’
Failure to keep wind direction in mind and to orientate
This is largely a matter of forming the habit of noting the wind from smoke or some other indication and of orientating yourself relative to the sun or an obvious feature such as a coast line, i.e. remember something along the lines of ‘Into wind is into sun’, or say to yourself, ‘I must land with the sun over my left shoulder’, etc.
If you are scratching in weak lift, you may be able to see which way you have drifted after a few circles.
Near the coast, watch for large wind changes due to sea breezes.
Flying through the sea breeze front without realising it is a common cause of inadvertently landing downwind and ending up in a hedge.
Late choice of field
Don't keep putting off the choice.
Few fields are perfect and all you need is a good sized field with a level or uphill gradient and a good surface.
You know that it is extremely risky to leave the choice late and that, at the very latest, you must be organised in time to have a good look at the proposed field and to get into a good position for a proper base leg.
Poor selection
Practice is the only solution.
During local soaring, select good-looking fields, and then go and have a look at them after the flight to see what they are really  like.
Travelling by road or train, try to make a quick choice and evaluation of the nearby fields.
In the air, look right round as you make a quick circle.
This way, you will view a large number of fields.
Don't look immediately below because you won't be able to see the slopes.
If all four of the fields below are poor, it is very demoralising.
Discard difficult fields straight away.
Think systematically for size, slope, surface, colour and obstructions.
Failure to recognise slopes until committed to landing
Make a point of looking for the lay of the surrounding countryside.
River valleys and railway lines are usually fairly level, with the ground sloping down to the rivers.
Usually one side of the river will present all uphill into-wind slopes, while the other side can be dismissed as being unsuitable except when landing parallel to the river.
Keep well away so that you can see slopes properly and, when possible, view the field from at least two sides.
By choosing an uphill slope, at least you know that it will not be a downhill one!
Slopes which are visible from a thousand feet looking straight down from above are far too steep for an easy or safe landing.
Flat fields need to be larger as they may turn out to have slight downhill slopes.
Bad planning; failure to plan at all 
This is one of the most dangerous faults and requires extra training to combat it.
More experience is needed at problem circuits and joining from different unconventional positions, such as starting directly overhead, or just downwind of the site.
Keeping far too close to the field
Re-learn to judge the 20-to-30° angles for circuit planning.
Never get within 45° of the field unless you are running out of height.
Choose a ground mark for the position of the final turn about an average field length back.
Failure to fly accurately when under pressure
More flying experience, together with more situations training, is needed.
Lack of flying experience leads to overloading and panic when under extra pressure.
This can result in dangerously inaccurate flying.
Failure to try to recognise if the height is excessive at the start of the base leg
This is caused by poor basic training and not thinking ahead.
Many inexperienced pilots do not even consider what the situation is going to be and only think about what is happening at that moment.
Think ahead!
Do more circuit planning flights with the last five hundred feet of the altimeter covered and try to guess ahead of time what the height and position will be (not in feet, but in terms of very high, about right, or rather low).
Failure to use airbrakes or to move back further when necessary during the base leg
Many pilots consider, quite wrongly, that it shows lack or judgement to use  airbrakes on the base leg.
If you have been thinking this way, practise having height in hand and using the airbrakes on the base leg.
The instructor should encourage the pilot to talk through his thoughts aloud to find out whether not using the airbrakes is caused by failing to realise the glider is too high or by not being quick enough to decide and act.
Serious misjudgement of heights during the circuit
Blank off the last 500 feet on the altimeter and practise guessing heights below 600 feet.
Height judgement above that height is not essential and is largely guesswork.
Instructors should encourage the use of comparison for judging low heights so that the pilot is more confident about recognising when he is low.
Lack of confidence often results in the pilot playing it safe with extra height, instead of making an effort to rely on his own judgement.
Failure to recognise when too high after the final turn
Introduce opening full airbrakes after the final turn to check the situation (unless obviously low).
Pilots should be encouraged to make an assessment during the final turn of how much airbrake they will need as they start to straighten up for the final approach, instead of waiting until the turn is completed at which point it is already too late.
The use of the airbrakes during the final turn should be discussed and pilots should be encouraged to try it if they are too high.
It should be emphasised that there is no reason to discourage any but the most inexperienced solo pilots from opening the airbrakes in the final turn, provided the glider is not already low (or slow).
Inability to sideslip effectively with full airbrake on the final approach
Sideslipping takes skill and practice.
Plenty of dual instruction is needed to be safe, and then it requires constant practice on high approaches to be able to sideslip effectively.
Failure to recognise undershooting and to close airbrakes in time to prevent an undershoot
Instructors should demonstrate correct procedure again and pilots should practise aiming point technique.
Flying dual, practise landings just beyond an obvious mark on the ground by manipulating airbrakes.
Self-criticism is needed if any landing is even a yard short of the chosen spot.
Failure to allow sufficient speed for uphill slope
Ideally, have dual landing practice on uphill slopes.
Otherwise, re-brief or think over all the aspects of misjudgements on slopes and the reasons for needing extra speed.
Failure to make a good hold off and landing because of eagerness to get down
Although often not practical, try to get dual experience at sorting out the landing after low final turns or upset approaches.
It is important to be able to recover composure after stress, to forget the low turn, and to get on with making a good landing.
Practise opening more airbrake during the hold off as a  means of getting the glider down fully held off, but without such a long float.
Being able to land safely in fields should be one of the ultimate aims in glider pilot training and it should not be left to the pilot to decide for himself when he is competent to fly across country.
Some thoughts on aerotowing accidents
Aerotow problems usually arise because the pilot ignores the possibility of something going wrong and is caught by surprise.
Crossing the boundary, I always check the airspeed because I know that above 60 knots, if necessary, I can make a well banked turn of up to 180°, with virtually no loss of height and return for a downwind landing.
This possibility is worth suggesting to more experienced pilots, but, of course, is not suitable for a beginner.
At lower speeds, unless there is plenty of height, a landing must be made somewhere ahead.
Certainly during the first five hundred feet or so the pilot should be aware of possible fields ahead.
After a launch failure of any kind above two or three hundred feet, once the speed has been checked, it is best to turn off 90° or so in order to avoid going further from the field.
In this position, the glider is on a base leg for any available field upwind and it is easy to look back and decide whether returning to the field is practical.
On a normal tow, except for very low performance machines, the climbing angle of the towplane and glider is much steeper than the glider's gliding angle when flying downwind.
So, in theory, the glider should be within easy reach of the gliding site.
However, in turbulent and windy conditions it is always better to play safe and land into wind in another field, rather than to make a downwind landing.
Downwind landings
Every glider pilot should make at least one downwind landing during training in order to realise that there is no particular problem in making a safe landing as long as the wind is not very strong.
In some circumstances it may be the best thing to do.
I once witnessed an incident that could so easily have been avoided if the pilot had considered a downwind landing as a possible option.
He had never done one and always thought it a dangerous manoeuvre to execute.
On this day he was gliding home to our airfield and only just made it back with less than a hundred feet as he arrived flying downwind over the boundary .
Instead of carrying on and making the downwind landing without incident, he flew on to give himself room to land and then tried to turn around into wind for the landing.
He was so low that a wing-tip touched the ground, causing a ground loop.
He could so easily have hurt himself or irreparably damaged the glider but, in fact, he was very lucky and did surprisingly little damage.
It is important to realise that there is no particular danger in downwind landings on an airfield, apart from the possibility of floating too far and overshooting into the far boundary.
This makes it important to use the airbrakes to ensure that you cross the upwind boundary very low as though you were attempting to land in the first part of the field.
The other essential is to  land well clear of any obstructions, because a wing can so easily go down and cause a bad swing as you slow down after landing.
The main point to remember on the tow is to hold position accurately.
This means concentrating on the tow and only taking your eyes off the towplane for a brief moment.
Rope breaks usually occur through inattention and getting badly out of position.
They are probably almost as rare as engine failures, but there is one important difference.
With a rope break, the climb out is at the normal towing speed when the rope breaks, whereas when engine problems occur the tow is usually slow and the climb is far worse than normal.
If the rope breaks, the take off field should be within easy reach for a downwind landing, whereas a problem with the towplane's engine usually means a field landing is almost inevitable.
Towplane upsets
Over the years there have been a number of fatal towplane accidents caused by gliders getting too high and jerking the towplane into a steep dive.
Although considerable effort has been made to develop an automatic release for the towplane, the problems are not as simple as they might at first seem and so far no really satisfactory technical answer has been found.
Unfortunately, these accidents still occur from time to time.
Low tow position
The risk can be reduced by flying in the low tow position below the wake, but it still has some disadvantages and towing in this position has not been generally adopted in Europe or elsewhere.
However, it is frequently used for long distance tows, because there is less of a tendency to get a slack rope during level flight in the low tow position.
In Australia, all launching is done this way, and for a time it was common in the U.S.A. The disadvantages, however, of the low tow position are as follows.
The glider must be flown through the wake in the turbulent air near the ground.
(Some people think that this might be dangerous for inexperienced students, but it does not seem to cause any particular problems in Australia.)
It is impossible to watch the towplane and the ground ahead during the climb out so that in the event of a launch failure the glider pilot has to look for a field, whereas in the normal tow position he has a good view of the fields ahead all the time.
There is also the additional hazard that if the rope breaks at the towplane end, it may fall over the glider, causing damage.
Normal low position
Of course, there are also disadvantages in using the normal, high tow position and it is a matter of opinion which is best or easiest.
Losing sight of the tow plane for even a second can be lethal and the glider pilot must always release immediately if this happens.
In one accident I witnessed, the take off was being made towards the glare of the sun.
The glider pilot was dazzled for a moment and lost sight of the tug.
He  failed to release in time to prevent the towplane from being tipped over into the ground.
There are various contributory factors which can lead to a towplane ‘upset’ when towing in the normal (high) tow position.
Many modern machines are not fitted with a nose release hook for aerotowing, but with one designed to be suitable for both wire and aerotow launches.
With these, any jerk or sudden gust tends to result in a nose-up pitching movement, similar to the start of a winch launch.
Unless this is quickly controlled, in a few seconds the glider can be far too high above the towplane.
The effect is accentuated if the c.g. is near the aft limit and, in some cases, it is doubtful whether there is sufficient elevator authority to stop the pitching once it has gone beyond the early stages.
The only safeguard is to maintain the correct position carefully and to release at once if the glider is beginning to get too high in relation to the towplane.
A number of accidents and incidents have occurred with gliders such as the Olympia 463, K6 and K18, flown by relatively inexperienced pilots.
These machines have lower stick forces than most training two-seaters and are not generally fitted with a nose hook for aerotowing.
They have a marked tendency to zoom up into a steep climbing attitude if they are allowed to do so.
Moreover, they are often flown by early solo pilots who do not have much experience of flying them or of solo aerotowing.
In an effort to prevent this kind of accident (which is almost always fatal for the tow pilot), the emphasis has been for pilots to keep their glider very low just after leaving the ground.
It is possible that this has contributed to the risk of the glider zooming too high just after take off.
In windy weather, the effects of the wind gradient near the ground accentuate any movement up or down of the towplane and glider.
If the towplane gains speed by flying close to the ground, when it noses up to start climbing, the effect of the wind gradient accentuates the climb so that the glider may easily be left flying close to the ground, in or near the wake and below the tug.
Then, when the glider pilot recognises he is far too low, any quick movement to regain position takes the glider up through the same wind gradient, causing a sudden surge of speed and producing an unexpected and possibly uncontrollable gain of height.
At the same time, the extra load in the tow rope accentuates the nose-up pitching movement on the glider (as in a winch launch).
This slows down the towplane, leaving it at low speed below the glider and having its tail pulled up out of control.
Although it is vital not to get too high, there is no advantage trying to fly very close to the ground, except perhaps when taking off from a very short field.
It is much safer to fly at five or even ten feet until the towplane leaves the ground.
This makes it much easier to avoid pitching oscillations.
It also makes it possible to watch the towplane instead of the ground and, as on a landing, looking well ahead reduces the tendency to over-control.
It is the speed with which the situation develops that causes the problem.
Usually the tow pilot receives no warning of the danger.
One moment the tow is quite normal and the next, his aircraft is diving vertically into the ground.
So he has little or no time to release the glider, or to recover from the dive unless the upset occurs above about 500 feet, and then only if the rope breaks or the glider releases.
How can we help to prevent this kind of accident?
For a start, novice pilots should have some experience of aerotowing in single-seaters before converting to types which are not fitted with a nose hook, and gliders intended for inexperienced pilots should always be manufactured with a nose hook for aerotowing.
It is wise for inexperienced pilots to carry additional ballast to bring the c.g. well forward, making the glider more stable and increasing the stick forces.
The nose heaviness will also provide additional down elevator power to help control any nose-up pitching tendencies.
The pilot must be vigilant on every aerotow and must realise the importance of being prepared to release at any point on the climb out should his glider get badly out of position.
The pilot's left hand should certainly be near the release toggle all the time until the glider is at least 500 or 600 feet up.
Pilots should also be briefed about the dangers of raising the undercarriage, closing the canopy window or fiddling with anything in the cockpit in case they are momentarily distracted or jerk the stick unintentionally during the initial climb out.
From the start, the need to release immediately if for any reason they lose sight of the towplane must be impressed on the students.
The tow pilot can help by allowing his aircraft to climb away, gaining speed rather than holding it down close to the ground.
Gradual changes of attitude make it easier for the glider pilot to follow in position behind the tow plane.
But it is the glider pilot who literally has the life of the tow pilot in his hands.
Remember, do not hold the glider down too close to the ground, 5 to 10 feet is safer.
Be ready to ease up to stay in position as the tug starts to climb.
If you get out of position and if you find yourself too low, move up slowly in small steps, checking the movement every few feet.
Don't try to move to the correct position too quickly.
It is only rapid movements up that become uncontrollable.
Release immediately if the towplane goes out of sight, or you become very badly out of position.
just concentrate on flying the tow smoothly and accurately and don't let yourself be distracted for a moment.
Low ‘g’ sensitivity
Everyone is aware of the sensation experienced in a lift as it starts to descend, and in a car when it goes over a humped-back bridge.
On the ground the feeling only lasts a fraction of a second, but it can be more severe and prolonged during flight.
Since we live at 1g for virtually all of our lives, the feeling of even slightly reduced ‘g’ is unusual and, for many people, alarming (it can be associated with nightmare dreams of falling).
These are the sensations of reduced gravity or low ‘g’.
Acclimatisation
The majority of students become acclimatised to these sensations after a few flights, but every instructor is aware that some students are particularly sensitive to these feelings and can develop a total abhorrence of stalling and pitching manoeuvres.
Many give up flying altogether because of this.
Others persuade their instructors to do the very minimum necessary and state categorically that they hate stalls.
I often wonder whether these pilots would react safely and effectively if they suddenly got their aircraft into a stalling situation.
Most experienced pilots and instructors don't remember their own early flights and don't realise that sensations which cause discomfort on a first flight will not even be noticed by the hardened pilot or instructor.
At first, almost everyone dislikes the sensation of reduced ‘g’.
It is normal for this sensitivity to remain for a few flights and then gradually to disappear.
After a little more flying experience, beginners' eyes interpret what is happening to the aircraft and the alarm signal is no longer sent on to the brain.
For example, as the stick is moved forwards a little , the eyes see the nose of the glider moving down, and the brain expects the sensation and understands what is happening.
As there is no cause for alarm, the brain suppresses the sensation at source.
This is another reason to start off any flying training by emphasising visual references instead of the instruments.
If the reduced ‘g’ occurs because the air is turbulent, there is no visual sign of what is causing the sensation.
This makes it more alarming for the beginner who gets no warning, just a horrible sinking feeling.
After more flying the beginner will learn to recognise and accept that he need not worry about the effects of these bumps.
It is obviously helpful to make the first flights in smooth weather, with a clear horizon.
Because of the connection between vision and sensations, the latter are greatly amplified when visibility is poor, or when the pilot is looking in the cockpit, has no visual reference and is unaware of the exact movements of the aircraft.
This is very noticeable with experienced pilots flying into cloud without the help of the instruments.
After a very short time their sensations are heightened and they become worried.
For this reason, in gliders it is important to avoid watching the instruments during nose-down pitching manoeuvres  such as stall recoveries and when recovering into normal flight following a cable break during a steep winch launch.
Instinctive reactions to low ‘g'
Some pilots are completely incapacitated by even gentle nose-down pitching movements.
Less affected people will move their head back and push forwards on the stick.
This response of putting the hands out and throwing the head back is certainly not a reaction learned during flying training.
It is a very natural and fundamental protective instinct; babies respond in this manner if they are allowed to fall.
In the same way, if an adult slips and is going to fall, his hands go out to stop himself hitting his face.
I have noticed the same response with sensitive people on their very first flight when they are trying out the elevator.
As they move the stick forwards a small amount, causing only the slightest reduction in ‘g’, their response to the resulting sensation is almost always to move even further forwards, making the sensation worse.
This is, of course, totally irrational.
If doing one thing with a control gives you an unpleasant feeling, the normal reaction would be to stop doing it, or to move the control back in the other direction.
One possible theory about why some people are much more affected than others is that they may have had traumatic experiences of falling as a baby or a young child, and that this has further re-inforced their instinctive behaviour.
Why are the effects of these responses so much less noticeable in powered machines?
Probably because of the very much greater stick forces and lower rates of pitch occurring in most light aircraft.
These make it far less likely that they will dive vertically for hundreds of feet if the pilot pushes forwards on the stick.
Gliders have very low stick forces and the lower flying speeds give them a very high rate of pitch.
Associating low ‘g’ with stalling
My experience with glider pilots has made me aware of many aspects of low ‘g’ sensitivity.
Some survivors from ‘dive-in’ accidents have confirmed that they knew it was useless to try to pull out of the dive while they could ‘feel’the glider was still stalled.
This led me to think that some students may equate the feeling of low ‘g’ with the glider being stalled.
If this happens, a pilot may mistake pitching or sinking rapidly in turbulence as an indication that the aircraft has stalled.
In executing what would be a normal stall recovery, any movement forwards will, or course, increase the pitching, thereby making the sensation more vivid and encouraging the pilot to think that the aircraft is not recovering.
This is a sure recipe for panic and will be fatal unless there is plenty of height.
I was once with a student who responded with a stall recovery when the glider hit some turbulence on the final approach.
The glider dived almost vertically and I was just in time to pull back on the stick so that we hit the ground in a level attitude without any damage.
At least one double fatality has been caused in this way.
It is obviously crucial that all instructors are aware of any student who has this problem, since  it is so easy to be caught out, like I was.
Since then, my instruction on stalls and recoveries has been modified to emphasise from the start that there is no sensation, only symptoms, of stalling.
Immediately after the first introduction to gentle straight stalls I demonstrate that in normal flight even a small movement forward results in the same sensation, the feeling of reduced ‘g’.
I take good care to emphasise that the sensation as we stall and recover is not a symptom and that it can occur in normal flight and in some cases when the aircraft flies through turbulence.
Hypersensitivity
Perhaps most interesting, but most dangerous, are the very small minority of students who are really chronically affected by this sensation.
(At Lasham I estimated about 1 in 400 people making their first glider flights were very sensitive to low ‘g’.)
Fortunately, most of them try one flight and dislike it so much that they avoid flying again.
To a few, overcoming their fears of flying becomes a challenge .
I have flown with a number of people who, with the slightest lowering of the nose or the gentlest stall, look as though they are having an epileptic fit.
They become quite unconscious of what they are doing for a few seconds, and yet insist that they want to carry on and learn to fly.
With very gradual familiarisation training spread over many months of flying, some of these students have been completely cured.
But if they are not spotted early in their training, they can be a real menace to themselves and to their instructors.
These are the students who really do freeze on the controls and, with the stick held firmly forward, the instructor has to be quick and strong to prevent an accident.
The ‘cure’ is largely a matter of acclimatisation and a simple but thorough explanation of why the aircraft stalls and what causes the sensation.
From then on the stall training must be continued, with a little done on every flight.
The student must understand that nobody likes the reduced ‘g’ sensation at first, but that individuals differ in their reactions to it.
Some are scarcely affected, whereas others need longer training to overcome their natural reactions.
Young and old people may be affected and there seems to be no way of knowing who will have this kind of problem.
Experience has shown, however, that often it is the young and able students who are most likely to go undetected and have a low ‘g’ accident.
I believe that this is because they do everything so well that they do not get excessive pitching movements in their training stall recoveries.
As a result, they seldom experience much, if any, reduction in ‘g’.
Because they appear reasonably proficient, the instructors tend to give less practice to them than to the other students.
It may be some months or even years later when, for the first time they over-correct from a practice stall, they experience a substantial reduction in ‘g’ loading.
Then, if they have learned to associate the feeling with stalling, they will move forwards on the stick, making what they remember to be a normal stall recovery.
This makes the sensation much worse and, believing the aircraft is still stalled in spite of their recovery action, they are liable to panic and become unable to think or act in time to avoid diving into the ground.
‘g'-related landing accidents
There are other situations involving reduced ‘g’ which can be incapacitating.
Reports about light aircraft landing accidents often say that the aircraft bounced or ballooned, pitched nose-down and then flew into the runway in a series of worsening crashes, smashing the nose gear and engine.
Certainly, a low ‘g’ sensitive person is liable to become completely incapable of further thought once the aircraft pitches nose-down the first time.
These pilots invariably demonstrate the basic response of pushing forwards on the stick and keeping it there.
The same kind of accident used to be common with gliders, and the pilots could never remember anything after the first bounce.
They have become less common since the fully held-off landings have been taught.
It is now likely that a student will experience ballooning a number of times while learning and will have learned to avoid moving forwards on the stick automatically.
In the past, many students were so petrified about stalling that they could not be persuaded to hold off properly for the landing.
They would try to avoid a stalled situation near the ground by pushing forwards if the aircraft bounced.
A person who is scared of ballooning will nearly always fly the aircraft onto the ground instead of making well held-off landings.
This problem is accentuated by pilots being very tense and mis-timing the stick movements.
It is not unknown for quite experienced power pilots to be very sensitive to low ‘g’.
I remember an American pilot with about 200 hours, a twin-engine Commercial and full Instrument Rating who visited us some years ago.
On his site check our instructor found he was severely affected by reduced ‘g’, although he had about 60 hours' solo gliding.
When he was asked to do a stall, he became panic-stricken as the glider stalled, and it was obviously unsafe to allow him to go solo.
He stayed the week and was given lots of extra training, but he was still unsafe when he returned to the USA.
Although it may not have been related, within a month he had crashed on a bad weather approach, killing himself and his friend.
Certainly, just a little low ‘g’ on the approach would have made things very difficult for him and I often wonder exactly what happened.
Surprisingly, there is usually less reduction in ‘g’ during an incipient spin or full spin than in a straight stall and, apart from the initial apprehension, these manoeuvres affect sensitive people less than normal stall recoveries.
Pilots who are frightened or apprehensive about stalling have not been properly trained and could be a risk to themselves and their passengers if they obtain their licence without overcoming their problem.
So, every instructor has a special responsibility towards such people.
Pilots learning to fly the very docile 3-axis control microlight aircraft are also at risk.
These all fly at similar speeds and have rather light stick forces like a glider.
On the weight shift types it is difficult to give the student experience at low ‘g’ manoeuvres and the pilots may be badly affected without it becoming obvious.
Fortunately, with weight shift, moving forwards causes a nose-up rather than a nose-down effect so that at least it does not accentuate the pitching movement and make the sensation worse.
I find it a little horrifying to think that some Commercial pilots flying large numbers of passengers may have had very little exposure to reduced ‘g’.
Few  have gone through aerobatic training, and the modern tendency is to be happy with a few hours of stall avoidance training and little, if any, spinning.
It is even possible that some might be low ‘g’ sensitive and be at risk if a low ‘g’situation suddenly occurs.
What could happen if, for example, another pilot raised the leading edge flaps of a large aircraft by mistake?
This would result in a sudden high rate of sink, with no obvious visual cause.
A sensitive pilot could then be so confused that he would be unable to respond logically to the situation, particularly if it happened at night or in cloud.
Pre-solo testing
Most gliding instructors are aware of these problems and watch out for them in their students.
Instructors should test every student before allowing them to go solo to make quite sure that they are not seriously affected by reduced ‘g’.
This does not mean pitching violently to get weightlessness or negative ‘g’.
The student can be asked to pitch nose-down gently from level flight and from diving and climbing attitudes.
Most pilots who are sensitive find themselves incapable of doing this exercise and their reactions are obvious.
In such instances they would need more training until an unexpected sensation does not cause a bad reaction.
Perhaps this test should be used for all pilots, regardless of what aircraft they are learning on?
This is not the whole story about accidents associated with low ‘g’ sensations.
Because I became aware of the problems when I first came into gliding, I wrote a booklet on the subject, called Sub-Gravity Sensations and Gliding Accidents (available from the BGA in the UK and SSA in the USA).
Surprising though it may seem, although it is now well established that this is a serious problem with gliding, it is almost unknown in power flying circles or in the Air Force and it is taking many years to convince authorities.
It is still probably one of the main causes of fatal gliding accidents all over the world.
Cloud flying
Fools rush in where Angels fear to tread
It is alarming to hear how many relatively inexperienced pilots seem completely unaware of the risks they take when pitting their skills against the forces of nature.
They often think that if their flying is good enough, it is safe for them to press on in any weather conditions.
The performance of modern gliders makes it much easier and more likely for a pilot to fly himself into a potential death trap unless he uses his imagination or has already learned to have a healthy respect for the elements.
The result has been a noticeable increase in the number of pilots who suddenly find themselves faced with a situation far beyond their control, usually a situation that they had not even considered at the start of the flight.
In most respects, using wave lift is far safer than cloud flying for attempts at Gold and Diamond heights.
However, wave flying has its own problems which a pilot must understand and recognise if such flights are to be made safely.
Similarly, if you are going to fly in a cloud, it is important to understand the possible hazards in order to avoid them.
Cloud flying, particularly in shower clouds, can be quite a dangerous pastime and on many days it would be totally irresponsible to risk losing a club glider by attempting to climb a large cloud.
Competence
The first essentials for any cloud flying in large cumulus are that the glider must be properly equipped for serious flying, and the pilot must be competent and experienced enough at instrument flying to be able to regain control from any attitude without having to use the airbrakes.
Because of the risk of a failure of the battery-operated Artificial Horizons, I always insist that pilots are competent to fly on the Turn and Slip Indicator before even trying a Horizon.
Many pilots find that they manage safely on their first few short cloud climbs but that they soon get tired and lose their concentration.
It is after they have lost control for the second or third time that the real difficulties appear.
One or two short climbs in cloud do not prove the ability of a pilot to cope with the required longer periods of concentration and more varied conditions in larger clouds.
However, there are a number of risks to be considered by even the most competent pilot, and these are outside the pilot's control once the cloud climb has been started.
Getting lost
It is impossible for any glider pilot to make a high cloud climb and to be sure of his position.
For this reason it is not acceptable to make climbs where the glider could possibly drift into Controlled Airspace.
Unless frequent pin points can be obtained during the descent, errors in position of 20 miles or more can easily occur, and this factor alone limits cloud flying to days on which large clouds are isolated so that there are clear areas between them.
Icing
If the glider gets wet before taking off for a high climb, the airbrakes may freeze up and become unusable.
This makes it vital for the pilot to be able to manage any loss of control due to stalling or spiralling without using them.
Severe icing seems rare, but even slight jamming of the controls should be treated as a serious warning to leave the cloud immediately before all control is lost.
Modern machines are blessed with a minimum of tail area and even a small coating on the leading edge of the tailplane may cause uncontrollable stability problems.
Probably for this reason most of the glass fibre gliders are not cleared by the manufacturers for cloud flying.
Hail
Flying into hail or very heavy rain deliberately in search of lift is also an unjustifiable risk.
Even in England, half-inch diameter hail stones are not unknown, and these will smash canopies and ruin the surfaces, causing very expensive damage and making it a matter of luck to get out of the area and down safely.
Lightning
In the past it was thought that the chance of having a glider struck by lightning in cloud was negligible.
However, there is now ample evidence to show that this was an over-optimistic view.
With gliders which climbed above 15,000 feet in cloud in the early 1960s, there was approximately one serious strike or electrical damage for every ten flights.
In those days quite a number of Diamond heights were attempted in large shower clouds and cumulo nimbus, whereas very few are flown today because of the unacceptable risks involved.
After an accident in which a pilot was killed by a strike, the remains of the aircraft showed the true potential power of nature.
The main spars were burnt where the control cables had been melted away.
It was obvious from this that in going into storms we were quite literally playing with fire.
The effects of electrical discharges on glass fibre and carbon fibre structures are uncertain, but it is clear that any moisture in the material would be turned to steam by a flash and would certainly cause delamination and very expensive damage.
Clearly, therefore, we should take heed of these warnings and never enter clouds which are actively electric.
Hypoxia
The only safe policy is to have oxygen equipment available and to insist on its use for any attempts at Gold or Diamond Heights.
At 15,000 feet, no enthusiastic pilot who is already suffering from the effects of lack of oxygen will be able to make the sensible decision to leave strong lift.
Furthermore, people vary in their tolerance from day to day, and it is not safe to assume that because you have been to 15,000 feet or so without oxygen before, you will be able to do it again.
The doctors tell us that elderly pilots and pilots who smoke should be aware that their tolerance to a shortage of oxygen is lower than younger people's or that of non-smokers.
So, to be safe it would be wise to use it at any time flying above 10,000 feet.
There is a very real risk that even at 15,000 feet the pilot may become unconscious, or at least incapable, from the combination of cold and lack of oxygen.
If the flight gets really ‘exciting’, there is also the possibility the pilot will become so frightened that he will begin to hyperventilate, and this can bring on hypoxia and unconsciousness very quickly.
Landing
In ideal weather conditions a field landing should present no difficulties and even in poor visibility, with a known wind direction, the risks are acceptable.
But landing safely in torrential rain, with a squally and unpredictable wind, can only be a matter of luck for the most skilled pilot.
If the cloud base is low, there is bound to be a risk of coming out under the cloud and being unable to reach an area where it is not raining.
For a good chance of a safe landing, the ground must be seen from at least a thousand feet so that there is time to select a field and assess the wind.
In sinking air even this would not be enough to allow for much choice and, of course, it assumes that the descent will be made over open countryside and not amongst hills or moorland.
When the weather is showery, there is always a grave risk of the cloud base lowering to only a few hundred feet, and this can happen within minutes of the rain starting to fall.
Beware of snow showers, because they can reduce visibility to a few yards, making a safe landing impossible.
Common sense rules for cloud flying
1
Pilots should have experience at flying on the Turn and Slip indicator before using an Artificial Horizon, so that they can manage if the Horizon topples or becomes unusable.
2
These instruments should be switched on and checked before reaching cloud base.
3
Never enter cloud unless you are sure of your present position and are certain that there is no risk of drifting into Controlled Airspace.
4
The pilot's left hand should be on the airbrake lever during any climb in  cloud, ready to pull and open the airbrakes if the speed increases by more than 15 knots or so above normal.
5
Inexperienced pilots should only try cloud flying on days when there is no risk of large clouds developing, i.e. when there is an inversion preventing large vertical development.
Attempts at Gold Height (3000 metres gain of height)
1
The clouds must be sufficiently isolated to ensure that clear air can be found by flying out of the lift.
2
Check the forecast for risk of storms and do not enter large clouds if the freezing level is below 10,000 feet.
A high freezing level greatly reduces the risk of shower developing.
3
The main cloud base should be at least 2000 feet above the highest ground in the region, the freezing level must be high and the visibility should be good.
4
If you are trying to go high, get on to oxygen and check it is flowing correctly before you need it.
5
If the glider does not have oxygen equipment, make a move to leave the cloud well below oxygen height.
Moving on to other types of glider
One of the greatest hazards to a pilot can be his lack of current flying practice.
In this section are described ways of getting back into practice and of improving flying skills by making better use of the time in the air.
Flying a new type of glider is always fun, but it worries many inexperienced pilots: there is always an extra element of risk if an unexpected situation occurs on the first flight in an unfamiliar machine.
I have included help for those pilots trying out different gliders, and have suggested how to explore the handling of a new machine and how to minimise risks.
Flaps are described in detail for the many pilots who do not fully understand how to make the best use of them, and who may be nervous about their first flights in a flapped machine.
Another common cause of accidents is the inexperienced pilot who buys a glider which is not suited to his skill and experience.
There are notes for pilots considering becoming private owners and on the types of glass fibre gliders which are suitable for early solo pilots.
Polishing your flying
During training, your instructor makes you practise and insists that you try to fly more accurately and efficiently all the time.
But when you are a solo pilot, it is surprisingly easy to fly without any particular aim in mind, apart from trying to stay up!
You need to make a point of setting yourself tasks to do in order to keep on top line and to improve your flying.
Here are some suggestions on things to practise and to try out whenever you have some height and time to spare, rather than just flying up, round and down as so many pilots usually do.
Getting back into practice
Whereas the inexperienced glider pilot needs to fly at least once a month to be safe, more experienced pilots can go much longer without always becoming badly out of practice.
However, there is no doubt that we all fly better if we fly regularly and it is a good policy to fly whenever you have the opportunity.
In some countries if you miss a chance to fly it may be weeks before the weather allows you another opportunity.
Every year at the start of the soaring weather we have what is sometimes known as the ‘silly season’.
This is when the pilots who have been hibernating during the winter months get their gliders out and start flying again.
The gliding is often spectacular: poor landings, low final turns and generally sloppy flying.
At many clubs it is compulsory for everyone to have at least one dual flight at the beginning of the season before flying solo again.
Certainly, an emergency on the first flight after a long lay off provides the potential for an incident.
If you are out of practice, why not take a ride or two with an instructor and ask him to criticise your flying?
This is a very quick way to get your hand in and learn what you need to practise.
Landings
You get a practice landing on every flight, but do you learn anything from it?
If it is the first flight of the day for you, then it should always be the aim to make it an accurate spot landing.
The first flight you make on any day is really the only one where your judgement is put to the test.
On the following flights you position the final turn and approach relative to where you made the last one, i.e. if you kept too close and landed rather far into the field on the first landing, you will move back more on the next, remembering the positioning of the previous flight.
Of course, with field landings, every landing is a ‘first time’ and needs to be exactly right.
You always hope that you will be able to select a large, easy field, but that may not be possible.
Your very first field landing could even turn out to be the most difficult field of your whole gliding career.
Much depends on the wind strength as to how accurately it is possible to land.
But even in the least conducive conditions, with no wind, you should be able make a properly held-off touch down within about two fuselage lengths of your chosen spot.
After the first landing, the things to practise are more variations in the approaches and landings, trying some steep and some shallow, but attempting to touch down accurately on the chosen spot.
Always analyse how you could have improved your approach and landing and why you did not manage to touch down nearer to the spot.
With students and inexperienced pilots, it is usual to discourage them from making adjustments on the airbrakes during the hold off, apart from reducing the amount of airbrake if it is necessary to float to land further up the field.
This helps stress the need to get the whole approach right if the landings are to be reasonably accurate.
However, as pilots become more confident about their landings, it is very important for them to develop the skills needed to co-ordinate the stick and airbrake during the final hold off, so that an even more accurate touch down can be made.
Many pilots undershoot or overshoot their chosen spot by large margins.
Often they will comment that they did it deliberately, for some poor reason or other, or say that they could, of course, have touched down earlier if they had really tried.
Usually they really believe this and do not accept that they have made a mistake.
This is a dangerous way of thinking.
You need to know how consistently and how accurately you can land; be honest with yourself and accept your limitations.
Whereas there is a definite minimum speed for rounding out with full airbrake, once the glider is in level flight close to the ground, with the right technique the airbrakes can be opened fully at much lower speeds.
When the airbrakes are opened, some lift is lost so that the glider sinks a few feet very rapidly.
In addition, the drag of the airbrakes causes a more rapid deceleration.
To prevent a heavy landing as the airbrakes are opened, a backward movement is needed on the stick to increase the wing's angle of attack to maintain the same amount of lift as before.
When this is done, the combination of the lift loss and the extra drag result in the glider sinking gently and touching down almost immediately.
This makes landing accurately on the spot just a matter of timing the opening of the airbrakes and co-ordinating the elevator movement.
To land on a spot consistently by this method, the round out and early part of the float must be made without too much excess speed and with less than full airbrake.
Additional airbrake should be available to make the glider stop floating at the right moment.
It is undesirable to finish the approach with very little airbrake, although even this situation, from the point of view of an accurate touch down, is better than full airbrake and too much speed causing the glider to overshoot the point.
Unless the wind is very strong, if it is obvious that you can reach the field, it is useful to open full airbrake for a few seconds immediately after the final turn to check that you can undershoot.
It is surprisingly difficult to recognise an  overshooting situation until often it is too late to get down without sideslipping and using full airbrake.
Obviously if you have any worries about undershooting you should not do this.
But you must get the final stages of every approach within the range of the airbrakes so that you have some control to prevent either under or overshooting.
In a field landing it often happens that on the final approach or even during the hold off you realise that the first part of the field is not as smooth as it is further along.
Here you will need to reduce the airbrake to continue the float and then, as you get to the better ground, to re-open them to make the landing.
It is not satisfactory or acceptable, especially in a modern glider, to fly onto the ground by easing forwards on the stick.
This will cause a bad bounce and balloon if the ground is rough and, combined with the much higher touch down speed, may result in a broken glider.
Every landing should be made fully held off to ensure a low touch down speed.
I always think that it is criminal to undershoot the spot with some airbrake still on.
It is equivalent to landing on the hedge because you did not close the airbrake, even though you knew that you were likely to hit it.
It is important to practise adjusting the airbrakes during the float and to ‘kick’ yourself hard if you ever land short of your point with brake still applied.
It simply means that you have ‘frozen’ on the airbrake lever and have undershot when you could have saved the situation.
This is the same as ‘throttle arm paralysis’ on a powered aircraft when the pilot undershoots and crashes his aircraft.
He could have pushed the throttle forwards and avoided the accident by using the engine.
It is also worthwhile attempting the occasional no airbrake touch down to get a better idea of how far your glider will float.
Be ready to open the airbrakes fully as it touches down to stop any bouncing or a gust lifting the glider into the air again.
Whenever possible, and especially if you are out of practice, choose a completely clear area on the landing ground and remember to prevent the glider weathercocking into wind at the end of the landing run.
Landing with obstructions on the upwind side is particularly dangerous and is just the sort of error people tend to make when they haven't flown for a while.
If you are in good practice, it is fun to discover just how accurate you can be with a crosswind landing.
Choose a line feature along the landing area, with a mark or line across for the touch down point.
With a runway it is often possible to use the centre line and a selected spot.
See how close to the spot you can get for a fully held off, no drift landing.
Honing your skills like this is very enjoyable and will give you confidence if you ever have to land along a very narrow line such as a pathway.
I used to do this with my more experienced pilots using the Falke motor glider on the runway at Lasham.
We took it in turns to see how close we could get.
Most of the pilots were unconcerned if they were five feet or more to the side on their first attempts.
Then, when I really insisted that they keep right on the centre line, they found they could do it if they tried hard.
To achieve crosswind landing exactly on the spot without using the engine and in a strange machine offers a strong challenge even to the most experienced pilot.
Practise side-slipping
Every cross-country pilot should be competent at side-slipping.
It is often the only sensible way of getting rid of extra height quickly if you are still tending to overshoot with full airbrake.
In fact, it is unlikely that you would ever need to side-slip without full airbrake unless the airbrakes became frozen or jammed.
It is an important skill because even experienced pilots do occasionally make approaches which are far too high and which can be redeemed if they can side-slip quickly and accurately.
Being able to side-slip, therefore, is a useful safety valve and has prevented many a nasty accident.
However, it cannot be denied that incompetent side-slipping and sideslipping close to the ground can cause accidents.
It is a skilled exercise which needs careful instruction and supervision before attempting it on the approach with full airbrake.
Most beginners will find it difficult to apply the opposite rudder, because of their ingrained habit of using the stick and the rudder in co-ordination.
It is also surprisingly difficult to hold accurate heading during a full airbrake sideslipping approach.
You need to be familiar with the type of glider you are flying because each needs slightly different angles of bank and behaves differently when side-slipping.
Many types have a ‘pot’ pitot in the nose and the ASI indicates a false reading during side-slip.
On some, the rudder overbalances badly and there is a bad trim change.
Most only need a small angle of bank, as the rudders on gliders are not very powerful.
Normally you will want to use full side-slip for a few seconds rather than a small amount of slip for a much longer time.
Provided that the need of slipping is spotted straight away, it should never be necessary to side-slip close to the ground.
The slip is used just to get rid of the excess height so that less than full airbrake is required for the rest of the approach.
With most gliders, the easiest way to enter a side-slip and to hold the heading is to freeze the rudder central while applying the bank.
Provided the approach path was correct beforehand, the adverse yaw as the aileron is applied swings the nose off to just about the right point to keep the glider on the correct path.
The opposite rudder is then applied to hold that nose direction and to prevent the glider from turning.
Most beginners apply the opposite rudder too harshly and this makes it difficult to hold the bank constant.
It is easiest at first to limit the rudder movement to half or three quarters of the full deflection and to start by applying the banking movement just before applying the rudder.
By all means practise side-slipping at height, but don't assume that because you can do it at height you will be able to do it accurately on an approach.
In most cases when it really matters, the glider will already be on the final approach with full airbrake when it becomes apparent that an overshoot is likely.
So, this is the situation you must practise and be able to cope with.
It is much harder than going into the side-slip from the final turn where it is easy to apply the opposite rudder and straighten up correctly.
Practise by coming round the circuit several hundred feet higher than normal, making the final turn well back but very high.
When you are quite certain you will overshoot, even with full airbrake, apply full airbrake and start  the final approach, keeping straight.
Then, and only then, begin the side-slip and use up sufficient height to be sure that full airbrake will be more than adequate to get down for a spot landing.
With most gliders the attitude for the nose during the slip needs to be no higher than required to maintain the chosen approach speed.
You may require a small backward movement in many machines to stop the nose from dropping.
The critical moment is just after the recovery from the side-slip.
Most gliders are very reluctant to stall in the slip (try it some time), but if the recovery is made at a low speed, or the pilot forgets to ease forwards to prevent the nose rising during the recovery, there is a very real danger of stalling or of flying rather slowly as the glider encounters the wind gradient.
It is vital to check the actual flying speed the instant the side-slip is over and the ASI is back in normal operation.
Usually, if the speed is low, you only have a few seconds either to lower the nose or to reduce the amount of airbrake to avoid a bad landing.
In a field landing, or whenever you are trying for a spot landing (which, of course, should be on every landing), the moment you find that you are having to keep full airbrake on continuously, you should start to side-slip and use up the excess height.
Otherwise, any puff of lift on the approach will result in an unredeemable overshoot.
On every local flight that I make in a single-seater glider, I do some sideslipping on the approach to keep in practice.
Usually it will be only for a few seconds, but it is the ability to do it instantly on demand that is so important.
You need to know about side-slipping in the aircraft that you fly.
It is fun to do and needs to be practised regularly.
However, do ask an instructor or a pilot experienced on your type of glider for advice or any adverse behaviour to look out for.
Cross winds
If you are out of practice, make a particular point of watching for cross wind effects on take-off and landing.
Always be alert for a bad swing or a wing-tip touching the ground on take off and have your hand near the release, ready.
Make a point of trying to keep absolutely straight rather than just correcting a swing when it happens.
In this way you will improve your skills and prevent trouble on take off.
Explore the handling in steep turns
Time is always well spent when practising steep turns: not the classroom type where you pick up more speed and then go into the turn, but the sort you might use for thermalling.
If you are going to fly your glider efficiently while turning steeply in thermals with other gliders, you need to know how it will behave at the stall.
You will never get the best out of it if you are worrying all the time about stalling.
You need to be able to get into the turn quickly and accurately, and to be  flying within a few knots of the pre-stall buffet.
On most gliders that will mean less than 50 knots, which you may think rather slow for a steep turn.
However, don't look at the speed; try to go by feel and tighten the turn until you feel or hear the airflow start to break away around the wing-root.
Try pulling back harder until you reach the back stop on the stick and see what happens.
Does the glider stall or just wallow about buffeting?
Attempt this in a gentle turn as well, and in a gentle turn with a little too much rudder.
This time it will almost certainly drop a wing, but just easing forwards a little will make a recovery.
Try some very steep turns and then some with about 40° of bank; try reversing the turn quickly, and making little centring moves.
Of course, if there are thermals about, do all this in the lift, provided there are no other gliders sharing your thermal!
You should be able to go into turns and make centring movements without having to refer to the slip ball, yaw string, or ASI.
Different types of glider behave slightly differently, so explore all the gliders you fly and adapt your flying accordingly.
Aerobatics
Aerobatics are an excellent way of improving your co-ordination and confidence, particularly if you aim to make them accurate and smooth-flowing.
Practising aerobatics and spinning will help to overcome any misgivings you may have about flying in steep turns at low speeds.
It is all a matter of acclimatisation... and practice.
It is fun to practise pulling up into a climb and trying to establish an accurate, low-speed, steep turn.
This can be put to good use in soaring conditions as a means of getting into the lift when cruising at a high speed.
Thermalling
Rapid progress across country is largely a matter of finding and using effectively only the very strongest of thermals.
You must develop the ability to find the centre of an area of lift quickly instead of losing it, and you cannot have too much practice and experience.
To do well, you need to become sensitive both to surges of lift and to the feeling of flying out of it into the sink.
Detecting the sink is particularly useful, because it enables quicker centring to be made.
Why this is so and hints on how to centre quickly are given in the newest edition of Gliding (A &C Black).
The aim should be to out-climb every other glider nearby and not to be satisfied with just staying up, unless the conditions are very poor.
This is a matter of constantly exploring out a few yards on almost every circle to try to find the best possible area of lift.
Frequently this involves turning steeply at low speed to keep the radius of turn to a minimum and to make use of the narrow cores of lift.
Remember, thermal soaring is more about staying in the strongest area of lift than flying at an ‘efficient’ angle of bank; it usually pays to turn  steeply, as the small turning circle enables you to keep in the narrow cores of strong lift.
If flying across country is not practical and you are local soaring, it is better to practise moving from cloud to cloud or thermal to thermal without taking the climbs to any great height.
For example, on a day with a 3000 foot cloud base, climb to 2500 feet on the first climb, then fly off leaving that thermal, using the airbrakes if necessary to come down to try to find another one at 2000 feet.
If you are aiming to go back for a landing, only stay long enough in that thermal to get properly centred before moving off again down to 1500 feet and starting to look for the next bit of lift.
Bring each search a little lower.
In this way you will spend more time on the important part, i.e. finding the lift and getting centred quickly.
Remember, too, that the thermals are smaller nearer to the ground, reinforcing the need for minimum speed, well-banked turns.
Even this only becomes valuable when you are below 1000 feet, by which time, of course, you will have moved closer to the gliding site or nearer to a suitable field if you are flying across country.
At this height, if you do not make efficient use of any lift you find, you will be down.
Many pilots give up at 1000 feet when there is still a fair chance of finding something and getting away safely.
At low altitudes, it is necessary not only to use the height most effectively to search, but also to retreat gradually to your position, off to one side of the landing area for a good base leg and an easy landing.
This is all valuable experience.
If you do run into lift, you must assess the situation on each turn, being ready to break off for a normal base leg and approach.
Of course, this is impractical on a site with a lot of power traffic or where a rigid circuit procedure is in force.
But where it is possible, it is valuable to learn brinkmanship, because you also learn to reduce your feelings of stress under pressure and to make better use of thermals lower down where they are often smaller and more difficult to centre.
At these heights, the first turn or so generally dictates whether you go up and get a climb, or go down for a landing.
It is in these situations that centring skills are most useful.
When giving instruction in thermal soaring, I try to insist that students go on attempting to find lift until about 5–600 feet, and I very often explain my own thoughts and precautions as they do the flying.
All the time during each turn it is essential to have a plan for the worst contingency and to know exactly what you would do if you suddenly lost 200 feet.
In this way it is possible to use the lift low down with safety, provided that the thermals are not too turbulent.
Then it is necessary to give up much higher.
Checking the compass
As you gain experience and begin to think about a first cross-country, local soaring provides a golden opportunity to check the compass for large errors and to get some practice at turning on to definite headings.
You will find that the normal aircraft compass is quite useless unless you are flying straight and at a steady speed.
Experiment with the various compass errors.
Heading north or south, try a little banking movement to see what happens to the reading.
Then do the same  on an easterly or westerly heading.
Also try changing speeds.
You will discover large errors flying near north or south with even small amounts of bank, and large errors on east and west if you vary the speed.
Compass errors are an awful nuisance and it is well worth finding out a little about them.
You also need to become accustomed to thinking and using degrees, and deciding whether you need to turn left or right to change the heading.
The easy way to remember it is that for a ‘lesser’ number of degrees, you turn ‘left’, e.g. turning from 350° to 320° is turning to a lesser number and therefore you turn left.
Turning point photography
If you are aspiring to fly competitions or to get your Gold and Diamond Badges, it is essential to take good turning point photographs.
Like most things in gliding this takes practice and experience if you are going to avoid losing a thousand feet or more trying to take the picture of your turning point.
First perhaps, try taking the photograph with a hand-held camera.
You will soon realise the difficulties and will not need much persuading to make yourself a fixed camera mount.
A simple mount is invaluable, and it is best to set it up to get the wing-tip in the top corner of the frame.
Then it is only a matter of banking the glider over until the feature is just below the wing-tip, steadying the glider and pressing the shutter.
But you must be in the correct quadrant.
Until you are consistently getting the photos you want from inside the photographic sector, you will need to fly some distance beyond the turning point so that you do not have to be in a very steep turn or exactly positioned.
This is an ideal exercise to practise, using the camera without film.
Select a local landmark on a 250,000 scale map and draw in the correct quadrant.
It takes quite a bit of practice to orientate and get the right position for the shot, and this is something worthwhile perfecting during the winter or when you are just flying locally.
Many badge flights are invalidated by poor photography or by good photographs being taken outside the correct photographic zone.
The majority of rejected photographic claims are due to impatience — the photograph is taken before entering the zone.
So, take your time!
First flights in new types of glider
One of the most critical times in any inexperienced pilot's flying career is the first flight in a new type of single-seater glider.
If you get a poor launch or something unexpected happens, you are at a great disadvantage and are likely to have a problem.
Therefore, make sure that you are in current flying practice and that you choose a straightforward day without a high wind, severe turbulence or a cross-wind component.
Wait for another day if you are not feeling absolutely on top line.
You need to be ‘with it’, because you can never guarantee that you won't have a launch failure or end up in a field instead of back where you started.
You might need to draw on all your skills to manage safely in a strange machine.
Normally, you will have an opportunity to look over the machine and to sit in the cockpit beforehand to think about all the knobs and levers.
The ‘Maker's Handbook’, although sometimes written in somewhat basic English, will give you an idea of the flying characteristics and flight limitations.
It is also useful to watch how other pilots handle the glider.
If possible, get someone else to fly it before you to make quite sure that the ASI is working correctly.
Obtain the approximate stalling speed, the normal thermalling speed and a sensible approach speed for the glider type from the   pilot.
Also try to receive a thorough briefing from an experienced instructor or pilot who has flown the type in question.
Cockpit layout of a Grob Acro 111
Make a particular note of anything which is different from the aircraft you normally fly.
The modern tendency to put the airbrake lever, flap lever, trim and undercarriage all on the left side of the cockpit can easily result in you pulling the wrong lever.
A surprising number of gliders have been wrecked by pilots pulling the undercarriage lever or even the release knob instead of the airbrakes on the approach, usually on their first flight on type.
Even on the ground you can do expensive damage by moving the undercarriage lever in mistake for the flaps or airbrakes.
If you do this during a landing, there will not be time to realise your error.
If the glider has an unfamiliar type of airbrake or flap, it is vital to check their operation and to understand the system involved in locking them.
Over the years there have been innumerable accidents and incidents caused by the airbrakes opening in flight.
Although many gliders have a spring or bungee in the circuit to reduce the snatching loads at higher speeds on the approach, this is seldom powerful enough to prevent them sucking open if they are unlocked.
Most of the Glass ships have spring-loaded airbrake caps.
These contrive to make the locking very stiff.
The main point to realise is that if you cannot feel a positive lock, you are either not pushing hard enough or the lock is completely out of adjustment and too light to be effective.
Don't be deluded into thinking that they are locked because they are flush with the wing surface.
All airbrakes close fully before they lock.
Another potential disaster area is the canopy locking and jettison arrangements.
These can be quite complicated and it is important that you understand both systems.
It is possible that someone may have half pulled the jettison knob.
So, with an unfamiliar type make quite sure that the locks are positive and always double check by trying to push the canopy up after locking it.
Some emergency systems require operation of both the normal canopy catch and the jettison lever, and even then need a strong push up to get rid of the canopy.
Check the operation of the wheel brake.
Even your first flight could end up with a field landing and, if the wheel brake lever is not in the usual position for you, your habits will catch you out as you claw for the non-existent lever in panic.
Also, if the wheel brake is of the type that is applied automatically with full airbrake, remember that you should avoid touching down with full airbrake.
Unfortunately, a great deal of our flying is done by habit and this can lead to serious problems if anything goes wrong on the first flight in a strange machine.
If you are in current practice with aerotowing, a high launch is worthwhile for the first flight.
Carry extra ballast in the cockpit unless you are well above the minimum cockpit load, as this increases the stability and makes the elevator less ‘twitchy’.
Think carefully before take-off.
Does the glider have the main wheel well ahead of the c.g.?
If so, remember it will require a forward movement on the stick to get the tail off the ground, unlike most of the two-seaters.
Also, it will need to be kept straight on take-off (see Swings and Roundabouts).
Certainly, for your first few flights, your left hand should be close to the release knob, so that you can release immediately if you get into a bad swing or a wing-tip goes onto the ground.
One of the biggest hazards is overcontrolling just after you have left the ground.
Remember, don't try to fly too close to the ground: 5 to 10 feet is quite all right and will make it much easier to smooth out any pitching which occurs before you have had time to get used to the light controls.
Once clear of the ground, most gliders are very similar to each other and you should have no problems.
After releasing, slow right down, retrim the glider, and then raise the main wheel.
If they are fitted, set the flaps for cruising.
Try circling at low speed and reversing the turn to get the feel of the ailerons.
Then check it is clear below and attempt a straight stall, followed by a few stalls in very gentle turns.
This will tell you if the glider has an obvious stall buffet and if it is likely to drop a wing during a stall when thermalling.
Before you go down into the circuit area, increase the speed to 60–70 knots and try the airbrakes to see how badly they snatch and how effective they are.
Also try side-slipping at the approach speed to see if the rudder overbalances badly or the side-slipping is unusual in any way.
This could be serious if you had to make a side-slip to get down into field on an early flight.
Rejoin the circuit with plenty of height, remembering to lower the main wheel if it is retractable.
Look down and check that you are handling the right lever before moving it to the DOWN position.
(Some undercarriage levers are forward for up, and others are forward for DOWN!)
Finally, check the airspeed carefully and approach with an adequate amount of height and speed.
Try to avoid an approach which ends up with a very small amount of airbrake.
It is always easier to land with at least half airbrake provided that the speed is not too low.
Don't try to judge the landing attitude; just make sure that you are close to the ground and keep holding off until the glider lands itself.
Make quite sure that you hold off fully.
Gliders only bounce if they are allowed to touch down prematurely with excess speed.
If you do inadvertently end up with very little airbrake, or with excess speed, don't be afraid to hold off slightly higher than normal while you get rid of some of the speed.
Try to get a small amount of airbrake on and keep the glider off the ground as long as you can, even if it floats a long way into the airfield.
Be ready to open the airbrakes fully the moment the wheel touches the ground and then keep it straight and keep the wings level.
Modern gliders are more prone to swinging than older aircraft and it is a little more difficult to keep the wings level, so don't relax until the glider has come to rest.
Ideally, take another flight straight away so that you can master any difficulties you may have experienced on the first flight.
It will also help you to become more familiar with the glider.
Remember: modern gliders are more difficult than older gliders to operate in no-wind conditions.
For your first flight, choose a day with some wind to make it easier to keep the wings level and to keep the glider straight.
In the air, you will find all the modern machines very easy to fly but most are lighter on the controls.
