Cycling FOR HEALTH
Produced in association with The Great British Bike Ride ©
Along with jogging and swimming, cycling is one of the best all-round forms of exercise.
It can help to build up your strength, boost your body's suppleness and flexibility and, most important of all, give you staying power by boosting your stamina.
AEROBICS ON A SADDLE
Having stamina, the ability to keep the body going, means having efficient muscles, good circulation and a strong heart.
Exercises which are good for building stamina involve moving your arms or legs rhythmically.
This creates a demand for oxygen, so the heart works a little harder, and the lungs are fully used.
They pump oxygen into the bloodstream, so that it passes through the heart and reaches the working muscles.
Sometimes this is called aerobic exercise, and cycling is an excellent form of aerobics.
THE WEIGHT OFF YOUR FEET
Stamina-building is not the only advantage of cycling.
Because you're not carrying the weight of your body on your feet, it's a good form of exercise for people with painful feet, bad backs, or arthritis.
And, of course, cycling can save money and provide pleasure.
More and more people are taking to their bikes as an alternative to driving or using public transport.
Whether you're shopping, going to work or travelling for pleasure, it's a lot cheaper and much healthier!
You don't have to pay for parking or petrol and it's much quicker than walking.
Cycling is something that all the family can enjoy.
GETTING STARTED
With all forms of exercise, it's important to start slowly and build up gently.
Doing too much too quickly can be a strain on muscles and joints that aren't used to work.
If you have any doubts on health grounds about taking up cycling, talk to your doctor and ask his advice.
Choosing the right bike for you depends on what you want to use it for.
But having gears does help to make life easier on the hills.
If your bike is second-hand, or hasn't been used for a while, then it's important to check that it's safe to ride.
SAFETY FIRST
•
Always make sure you can be seen easily at night.
Keep your front and rear lights in good working order and don't forget to switch them on.
Wear light-coloured clothing or, better still, a reflective jacket.
•
Beware of careless traffic, especially in towns.
Drivers tend to have a nasty habit of cutting corners without a thought for the cyclist on the inside.
•
Don't change lanes unexpectedly or weave in and out of slow-moving traffic.
Take great care turning right.
•
Always give clear hand signals.
Learn the Highway Code before you start.
TAKING THE ROAD
Once all your preparations are complete, try starting off by doing a number of short rides, say between three and six miles.
Ideally, you should be cycling at least two or three times a week.
For the exercise to be doing you good, you should get a little out of breath.
If you find it too much, or your are in pain, stop and take a rest.
As you get fitter, you'll find that you can manage longer journeys in surprisingly short times.
Family outings on bikes are a good way to make the best of summer days.
If you get really keen, you might like to join your local cycling club.
These clubs often run tours and other events to take part in.
This leaflet is produced by the Health Education Council in conjunction with the organisers of The Great British Bike Ride, an annual sponsored bike ride from Land's End to John o' Groats organised by Bike Events and sponsored this year, once again, for Friends of the Earth.
There are 200 places open to people of all ages and abilities who can achieve a unique ambition by participating in this unusual event.
The riders are supported by a complete package of services provided by Bike Events.
Friends of the Earth
Britain's leading environmental pressure group promoting policies to protect the environment, with campaigns on cycling, transport, wildlife and countryside, safe energy and pollution.
Bike Events
The country's leading organisers of mass cycling extravaganzas and cycling holidays including The Great British Bike Ride, and The London to Brighton Ride.
Other useful organisations:
INTRAUTERINE DEVICES
the coil:
FACTS ABOUT THE IUD
What is an intrauterine device?
An intrauterine device also known as an IUD, IUCD, loop or coil is a small, flexible object between two and four centimetres in length, made of plastic or plastic wound with copper.
It can be inserted into a woman's womb quite easily by a doctor, in order to prevent pregnancy.
Intrauterine means inside the uterus or womb.
The IUD works partly by preventing the egg from settling in the womb.
It is a very reliable reversible type of non-hormonal contraceptive.
Of 100 women using an IUD between two and four will become pregnant each year.
What types of IUD are there?
Various kinds of IUD are used in Britain.
Most are wound with copper: eg the Copper-7, Copper-T, Novagard, Nova-T and Multi-load Copper 250; one is simply plastic; eg the Lippes Loop.
It is sensible to know which type you have.
The devices wound with copper are usually replaced every two-to-five years, depending on which type you have.
The Lippes Loop can be left in place longer.
When are IUDs fitted?
Some doctors prefer to fit an IUD during a period.
If not during a period, then adequate contraceptive measures must have been taken since the last period, such as the pill, or sheath, or cap with spermicide, used on every occasion.
How soon can an IUD be fitted after childbirth?
Some doctors like to fit an IUD soon after delivery; others prefer to wait until six or eight weeks after the baby has been born.
In the meantime it is essential not to risk a further pregnancy and other contraceptive measures must be taken see above.
Breastfeeding does not always prevent pregnancy.
How soon do they make sexual intercourse safe?
Straight away.
Moreover the IUD does not interfere in any way.
Do they suit all women?
IUDs are especially useful for women who have had children.
For women who have had no children at all, they are not a first-choice method of contraception, but can be used.
Discuss this with your doctor.
For a few women — particularly those who have rather heavy periods or any history of pelvic infection — IUDs are not satisfactory.
Can I use internal tampons?
Yes.
What side-effects are there?
After an IUD has been fitted you may feel the sort of cramp-like pain that sometimes comes with a period.
Usually this is mild and won't last long.
You may find that pain-relieving tablets help.
The regularity of your periods should not be affected, but some bleeding may occur after the fitting or between periods, especially at first.
Often the periods are heavier than usual.
If you miss a period you must consult your doctor as soon as possible.
Sometimes the IUD comes out this is called expulsion.
Occasionally the woman may not realise that this has happened, and so may become pregnant.
Expulsion is most likely to happen soon after insertion.
Some women learn to feel the threads tails of the IUD in the vagina.
If you cannot feel them, take other precautions, eg the sheath, and see your doctor as soon as possible.
You should attend for routine follow-up visits as instructed, probably at least once a year.
Supposing I get pregnant?
There is a greater chance of miscarriage than in a normal pregnancy, and most doctors advise that the IUD should be removed.
So go and see your doctor at once if your period is over 14 days late.
A pregnancy with an IUD in place could be ectopic outside the womb.
This is an uncommon but dangerous situation, that can also occur in women who do not have IUDs.
So any abdominal pain occurring after a delayed, light or missed period must be reported to a doctor at once.
Are there likely to be other complications?
Pelvic infection It is particularly important to tell your doctor about any pelvic infections, ‘salpingitis’ or sexually transmitted disease you have had in the past, as this may affect the choice of contraceptive method for you.
You should report any vaginal discharge, pain after intercourse or abdominal pain, especially if accompanied by fever, as these symptoms may be due to pelvic infection which requires prompt treatment.
The chances of getting infection are greater, the younger you are, and if you have more than one sexual partner.
Pelvic infection is more likely to occur in women using an IUD than in those using other contraceptive methods.
In Britain the risk in IUD users is approximately twice that of pill users.
For this reason women who have no children may prefer to use another method of contraception.
Perforation of the womb is very rare.
It may cause pain but often there are no symptoms.
The problem is usually discovered only when the threads of the device cannot be detected in the vagina.
The device may have to be removed by a small operation.
Suppose I want a baby or want my IUD removed?
If you want a baby, ask your doctor to remove the IUD you must never try to remove it yourself.
If you do not want a baby, but want your IUD removed, this is best done during a period, and you should immediately start using another method of contraception.
If your IUD is removed between periods, you could get pregnant.
To avoid this, start your new method of contraception at least a week before the IUD is removed.
HOW TO GET ADVICE
Where can I get the device fitted?
IUDs are usually fitted at hospitals or family planning clinics, by doctors with special training.
Some general practitioners will also fit IUDs.
Your own doctor or nearest family planning clinic will be able to give you up-to-date information on this.
Do I have to pay?
All family planning services and supplies on prescription are provided free on the National Health Service if you are ordinarily resident in the UK.
The services are available from hospitals, clinics and family doctors who have agreed to provide family planning advice.
If for any reason you prefer not to discuss birth control with your own GP, you are entitled to go to another GP for this service.
Some clinics have special youth advisory sessions.
How do I find my local clinic?
There are NHS family planning clinics all over the country.
You can get the address and times of your nearest clinic from your
•
Health Centre
•
Midwife
•
Hospital
•
Health Visitor
•
Telephone directory or Yellow Pages under ‘family planning’
There are a few fee-paying clinics too.
If you wish you can 'phone or write for details of NHS or fee-paying clinics to the Family Planning Information Service .
Or contact Family Planning Association offices in Bedford, Belfast, Birmingham, Brighton, Cardiff, Exeter, Glasgow, Liverpool, London, Norwich or Sheffield .
A final word
The information provided in this leaflet is not intended to be exhaustive, but tells you the basic facts about the IUD on the basis of evidence available at the time of publication.
DON'T FORGET — ring or visit the clinic or your doctor if you are worried or unsure about anything.
Artist's diagram showing a Lippes Loop in the womb
Insertion of an IUD.
The device in this case a Copper-7 is gently inserted into the womb through a narrow tube or ‘introducer’.
The introducer is then removed and the IUD opens to its correct shape in the womb.
WAKE UP.
GET A SMOKE ALARM.
CHOOSING SMOKE ALARM PROTECTION
Always look for smoke alarms which conform to the British Standard, whatever make or type you choose.
It should meet BS 5446 Part 1 or it should have the Kitemark on it.
If possible read the manufacturer's information and instructions before you buy a smoke alarm.
There are two basic types of smoke alarm.
Some use ionization detectors, which tend to react a little faster to flaming fires.
Others use optical detectors, which seem to respond more quickly to smoke from smouldering fires such as those involving upholstered furniture.
But there is little to choose between the two in terms of overall performance.
LOOKING AFTER SMOKE ALARMS
Smoke alarms need very little maintenance, but they do need to be tested regularly to make sure they are in good working order.
Most smoke alarms have a test button which sets off the alarm when pressed.
So when you fit them, make sure they can be reached easily.
The batteries should be changed once a year.
Some alarms warn you when the batteries need changing by giving a special signal.
700 DIE IN FIRES AT HOME EACH YEAR
A lot of these deaths might have been prevented if people had been able to get out in time.
But well over half of those killed were young children or elderly people who were quickly overcome by smoke and fumes while they slept at night.
Remember, even a small fire can fill your home with dense and poisonous smoke in a couple of minutes.
WHAT ARE SMOKE ALARMS?
Smoke alarms are small plastic devices which can be fitted by most people in their homes.
They cost around £10–£15 each for the battery-operated models.
Smoke alarms can detect smoke from fires in their earliest stages and sound a loud warning alarm.
Of course, you will need to go on taking basic fire safety precautions even when smoke alarms are fitted in your home.
But if, in spite of your precautions, a fire breaks out, a smoke alarm can give those precious few minutes of warning which increase the chances of you and your family getting out safely.
FITTING SMOKE ALARM PROTECTION
•
You should fix the smoke alarm on the ceiling in the centre if possible, but at least 30cm 12 inches from any wall or light fitting.
•
Smoke alarms need to be close to where a fire is most likely to break out, but also in a position where an alarm can be heard throughout your home especially when you're asleep.
•
Don't fit smoke alarms:
—
in bathrooms or kitchens, where steam or cooking fumes could set them off.
—
above heaters, air-conditioning ducts or heating vents, or in very hot or cold rooms, such as a boiler room, or an unheated outhouse.
—
in a garage, where exhaust fumes could set off the alarm.
•
If you live in a bungalow or in a mobile home, you should fix an alarm in a corridor between the living and sleeping areas.
•
If you live in a conventional two-storey house, the best place for a single alarm is above the bottom of the staircase.
HOW MANY SMOKE ALARMS DO YOU NEED?
One smoke alarm may be enough if you live in a mobile home or a small bungalow.
If you live in a house, one alarm fitted above the bottom of the staircase will give you some protection, but you can be better protected by fixing another alarm on the upstairs landing.
You and your family will be best protected by fixing extra smoke alarms in rooms where a fire is most likely to break out, eg the living room, bedrooms where there are electric fires, electric blankets, or where the occupant is a smoker.
Smoking a cigarette will not normally set off a smoke alarm.
Some smoke alarms can be linked together so that if one of them senses smoke, all of them will sound an alarm.
This can give you the earliest possible warning, especially important if you live in a big house.
IF THE ALARM GOES OFF…
•
get everyone out quickly by the safest route.
If you have to go through a smoke-filled area, crawl with your head low
•
if it's safe, shut doors to delay the spread of fire and smoke
•
feel each door before opening it.
If it's warm or it smoke is coming through, don't open it, the fire is on the other side
•
call the fire brigade as soon as possible by dialling 999 from a neighbour's house or a phone box.
Don't go back inside your house to use the phone.
Give the full address of the fire
•
stay out of your home until the fire brigade tells you it's safe.
Possessions are replaceable — your family isn't.
Get out.
Get the Fire Brigade out.
Stay out.
More information is available from your local fire brigade.
Fire kills.
Think about it.
ENTER THE FLU protected ZONE
YOU SHOULD CONSIDER A VACCINATION
What is flu?
Flu is a viral infection which can make even the fittest person feel quite ill.
The symptoms of flu may last several days, usually starting with a high temperature often with a headache.
Your limbs can ache and your muscles can feel weak.
You may also have a dry irritating cough, a sore throat and a runny, itchy nose.
Who can catch flu?
Flu can spread very rapidly, so it is easy to catch and to pass on to others.
Flu is most likely to affect you in the autumn and winter, e.g. from October to March.
In other words, anyone!
However some people are more at risk than others.
If you are elderly, have a heart, lung or kidney disorder or have diabetes, you should take particular care not to catch flu.
How can I protect myself and my family against flu?
If you are one of those patients who are at greater risk from flu, you should try to avoid catching it.
A flu vaccination can help to protect you from flu.
One simple injection, normally given in the autumn, can help to protect you right through the cold months when flu is most prevalent.
Who can give me a flu vaccination?
Your doctor will normally be able to vaccinate you with a flu vaccine.
Only one quick injection is necessary to help give you the protection you may need from flu.
Who can help if I do get flu?
It may be advisable to speak to your local pharmacist who is professionally qualified to offer advice on how to cope with the symptoms of flu.
The pharmacist can also suggest medicines to help reduce your symptoms.
If your symptoms persist for more than a few days, then contact your doctor for advice.
ONE SIMPLE VACCINATION CAN HELP PREVENT YOU CATCHING INFLUENZA
ASK YOUR DOCTOR OR NURSE FOR ADVICE.
What to do if you have flu
1
Go to bed.
2
Drink plenty of liquids to avoid fluid loss caused by sweating.
3
Ask your local pharmacist for advice on medications to help relieve symptoms.
4
Use a hot water bottle if you feel shivery.
5
Call your doctor for advice if symptoms persist for more than a few days.
6
A dose of flu means you could be off work for at least a week.
You will need a self certification note for your employer available from your doctor's surgery.
Why risk catching flu?
If you are a person at greater risk from flu, consider having a flu vaccine this autumn.
Servier VACCINATION PRODUCTS
Supplied as a service by Servier Laboratories Ltd.
So you want to be a childminder…
What is a childminder?
A childminder is anybody who looks after children under 5 in her own home, usually while their parents are at work.
Do I have to register with the authorities?
If you receive payment for looking after one or more children who are not related to you, for 2 hours or more per day, then you should, by law, register with your local Social Services Department.
What does registration involve?
Social Services Departments vary in the way they register childminders, but you will probably be visited in your home and be given some forms to complete.
What will they want to know about my home?
They will want to know that you have a safe, warm place for children to play, and that your kitchen and toilet facilities are adequate.
What will they want to know about me?
They will want to be sure that you are prepared to give your time to care for the children, that you will provide for all their needs and take them out regularly, and that you really do like small children!
What will they want to know about my health?
You will probably be asked some questions about your health, and you will need to have a routine chest X-ray if you haven't had one lately.
Is there anything else I will have to do?
You and also anyone else aged over 16 in your house will be asked to sign a statement about previous child care.
How many children will be I allowed to mind?
Again, local authorities vary, but probably not more than 3 or 4, including any under-5's of your own.
What help will I get from my Social Services Department?
You will probably be visited from time to time, and in some areas you will get practical help such as toy kits, toy libraries, first aid kits and safety equipment on loan.
You may also have the opportunity to attend a course.
Ask the person who comes to see you.
How can I find children who need looking after?
You may find that Social Services will put your name on their vacancy list, and once you are registered you can advertise.
What should I charge for minding children?
This is a private arrangement between you and the parents, though you may find that childminders in your area have agreed a uniform rate.
The N.C.M.A. thinks that a minimum of £17 a week per child for full-time care is reasonable, but you could charge more depending on the parents' earnings and the number of meals provided etc.
What does ‘full-time’ mean?
This will depend on the parents' working hours, but it can be a long day, possibly 8.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.mm., or even longer.
What do I need to discuss with the parents when taking on a child?
You should make sure you know where the parents can be contacted, and that they have given you all the information you are likely to need about the child.
Settle things like hours, holidays, pay day etc. right at the beginning if possible.
The N.C.M.A. has a contract form which is helpful for this.
Will I have to look after children if they are ill?
No, a childminder cannot normally take care of a sick child — it's not fair on the other children in her care.
Will I have to take children to the Clinic?
Discuss this with the parents, but you will find the Health Visitors helpful and pleased to see you.
Is there anything else I will have to do?
You should keep a register of when the child comes to you together with basic information like his date of birth, doctor's name and phone number.
The N.C.M.A. has another useful form for this.
Will I be able to meet other childminders?
Some Social Services Departments arrange group meetings for childminders, and in some areas there are self-help groups and associations run by the childminders.
You can join the N.C.M.A. as an individual member if you like.
Are there any benefits of being registered?
How much support and practical help you will get from your local Social Services Department varies from area to area, but everyone is at least entitled to one third of a pint of free milk each day for each child you mind.
What is childminding like as a job?
Looking after other people's children can be very rewarding indeed, but it is also hard work and a big responsibility and is not quite the same as bringing up your own children.
It's important for you and the child's parents to work together as much as possible.
You will certainly play a very important part in the life of the young child and provide a valuable service for his family.
There are 8 methods of birth control
This isn't a method of birth control!
METHOD
THE COMBINED PILL
Oral contraceptive
Triphasic and biphasic pills
Everyday/ED pill
Almost 100% effective
HOW IT WORKS
Contains two hormones — oestrogen and progestogen.
Taken regularly it stops ovulation the release of a woman's egg each month.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
Easy and convenient to use.
Gives regular monthly cycle, often with reduced amount of bleeding, period pain and premenstrual tension.
Does not interfere with lovemaking.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
Some women have minor side-effects which normally pass in a few months.
Not suitable for women over 45 and smokers over 35.
Unsuitable for those with a personal of family history of strokes, heart attacks or raised blood pressure, and some diabetics.
Serious side-effects are rare.
COMMENTS
Does not work if taken over 12 hours late, or if there is sickness or diarrhoea, when extra precautions must be used.
some drugs may stop the pill working — a doctor will advise.
The pill is prescribed by a doctor.
Pill users should try not to smoke.
METHOD
MINI-PILL
Progestogen-only pill
98% effective
HOW IT WORKS
The hormone progestogen taken regularly every day at the same time causes changes making it difficult for sperm to enter the womb or for the womb to accept a fertilised egg.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
Useful for older women, as there is less risk of blood pressure and blood clotting problems.
Easy and convenient to use.
Suitable for use while breastfeeding.
Does not interfere with lovemaking.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
Monthly cycle may be irregular, with breakthrough bleeding or ‘spotting’.
Minor side-effects usually last for only two to three months.
Sometimes periods are missed.
COMMENTS
Must be taken at the same time daily or no more than three hours late.
Sickness, diarrhoea and some drugs may stop it working, and extra precautions must be used.
The pill is prescribed by a doctor.
Pill users should try not to smoke.
METHOD
INJECTABLE CONTRACEPTIVE
Depo-Provera
The jab
Almost 100% effective
HOW IT WORKS
Acts in a similar way to the mini-pill and also stops ovulation.
A hormone, progestogen, is injected into a muscle, and is released very slowly into the body.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
One injection gives protection against pregnancy for three months.
Does not interfere with lovemaking.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
Periods usually become irregular.
Return of regular periods and fertility may be delayed for eight to ten months.
COMMENTS
Should only be offered to women for whom other methods are unsuitable.
Opinion differs about its value.
Prescribed by a doctor.
METHOD
INTRAUTERINE DEVICE
IUD, IUCD
Coil
96–98% effective
HOW IT WORKS
A small device — usually plastic with copper — which is inserted into the womb by a doctor.
It works partly by preventing an egg from settling in the womb.
effective for two to five years copper IUDs, depending on type, or longer plastic IUDs.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
Is effective immediately after fitting.
Particularly suitable for a woman who is spacing her pregnancies or who has completed her family, and for older women.
Does not interfere with lovemaking.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
Periods may be heavier at first.
Sometimes the IUD may come out.
Some women develop a pelvic infection — more likely in younger women who have several sexual partners.
There are other extremely rare complications.
Not ideal for a woman who has never been pregnant.
COMMENTS
Inserted by a specially-trained doctor.
Copper devices should be replaced every two to five years, depending on type.
Women can check the device is in place by feeling for the IUD threads high in the vagina.
Tampons may be used.
METHOD
DIAPHRAGM OR CAP + SPERMICIDE
97% effective, with careful use
HOW IT WORKS
A soft rubber device, put into the vagina before intercourse, to cover the cervix entrance to the womb, and form a barrier which prevents sperm from meeting the egg.
Must be used with a spermicide and left in place for six hours after intercourse.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
The diaphragm and spermicide can be put in at any convenient time up to three hours before making love so it needn't interfere at all with intercourse.
It may protect against cancer of the cervix.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
Need to plan ahead so that diaphragm/spermicide are in place before intercourse.
Must check every six months that cap is the right size, also after childbirth, or weight gain or loss of more than three kilograms seven lbs as size of the vagina may change.
COMMENTS
A spermicidal cream, jelly, pessary or foam must be used with the diaphragm.
Caps — cervical, vault or vimule — which are smaller devices that only cover the cervix, are also available.
METHOD
SPERMICIDES for use with diaphragm and cap
HOW IT WORKS
Spermicides inactivate sperm.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
Must be used with caps.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
Not an effective method on its own.
COMMENTS
Essential for use with diaphragm or cap.
METHOD
CONDOM
Sheath
Protective Rubber
Johnny
97% effective, with careful use
HOW IT WORKS
Made of thin rubber and worn over the erect penis, a condom prevents sperm from entering the woman.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
Easy to obtain and use.
Man can take the responsibility for birth control.
Can protect both partners against some sexually transmitted diseases and may protect the woman against cancer of the cervix.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
May slip off.
Men may find some sensitivity loss during intercourse.
Can interrupt lovemaking, although putting condom on could be enjoyed as part of loveplay.
Needs care to ensure that no sperm are spilt after ejaculation coming.
COMMENTS
Must be put on using a anew one each time before the penis touches any part of the woman's vaginal area, and must be held in place when the penis is withdrawn.
Approved condoms carry a British Standards Institution ‘Kitemark’.
METHOD
NATURAL METHODS
’ Safe period’
Rhythm method
HOW IT WORKS
Aims to predict ovulation — when a woman is most fertile.
Intercourse is avoided at this time.
The sympto-thermal method involves daily recording of body temperature, noting changes in vaginal mucus and other signs of ovulation.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
No serious physical side-effects.
Couples share responsibility for family planning and may become more aware of how their bodies work.
Some couples feel they enjoy intercourse more after abstaining during the fertile time.
No mechanical devices or hormones are used.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
Much care and restraint necessary from both partners to ensure intercourse does not take place around ovulation.
Careful record keeping needed.
More difficult to practice for women with irregular cycles, after childbirth and at the change of life.
COMMENTS
Method must be learnt from a specially-trained teacher.
Suitable for couples with religious objections to other methods.
The sympto-thermal double check method is the most reliable ‘safe period’ method.
Opinion differs widely on value of these methods.
METHOD
FEMALE STERILISATION
Occasional failures occur
HOW IT WORKS
A permanent method of birth control in which the fallopian tubes are closed so that the egg cannot travel down them to meet the sperm.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
Is effective immediately after the operation.
A once-and-for-all method for couples who are absolutely sure they have completed their family.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
Very occasionally, the tubes rejoin and fertility returns.
A few women notice heavier periods.
COMMENTS
This is a permanent method.
It should never be undertaken if in any doubt.
Counselling is important.
New surgical techniques mean a hospital stay of less than 48 hours.
Day-care operation if possible.
METHOD
MALE STERILISATION
Vasectomy
Occasional failures occur
HOW IT WORKS
A permanent method of birth control.
The tubes through which sperm travel from the testes to the penis are cut or blocked so that sperm can no longer enter the semen that is ejaculated when the man ‘comes’.
MAIN ADVANTAGES
A once-and-for-all method for couples who are absolutely sure they have completed their family.
MAIN DISADVANTAGES
It can take many ejaculations to clear sperm already in tube.
Another method of birth control must be used for a few months until two consecutive tests show there are no sperm left.
Very occasionally, the tubes rejoin and fertility returns.
COMMENTS
Can be carried out under local anaesthetic at a clinic or surgery.
Operation only takes 10–15 minutes.
NB: Withdrawal (‘being careful’) is NOT a reliable method of birth control.
These are the birth control methods to choose from:
•
combined pill/mini-pill
•
injectable
•
intrauterine device IUD
•
diaphragm or cap + spermicide
•
condom
•
natural methods
•
female sterilisation
•
male sterilisation vasectomy
You can fine some information a bout each of these methods on pages 2–6 of this leaflet.
More detailed information is available free on request.
WHY USE BIRTH CONTROL?
The attraction between a man and a woman can be one of the most powerful emotions known.
Not all people who make love want to have a baby.
However unless birth control methods are used, sooner or later the woman is likely to get pregnant.
Today's methods of birth control make it possible for a couple to choose whether or not to have a child.
Advice and supplies are free.
It's worth knowing about!
There are several birth control methods to choose from.
By making sure that you or your partner are using an effective method of contraception, you will be able to relax and enjoy sex much more.
And if you do decide to plan a family, you will know that the baby will be wanted and loved.
THE BASIC FACTS
A woman can become pregnant if, after making love, a sperm released when the man ‘comes’, joins with her egg and the egg then settles in her womb.
A man and woman who do not want to have a baby can still enjoy lovemaking if they make sure the egg and sperm never meet, or if the egg is prevented from settling in the womb.
There are several ways of doing this, but any method chosen must be used properly .
No birth control method will work unless it is used regularly — the one time you take a chance could be the time pregnancy occurs!
Different contraceptive methods suit different people at different times, so ask the advice of your family doctor or your family planning clinic.
If necessary, try out one or more methods until you find the one that suits you and your partner best.
You are far more likely to use a method regularly and properly if you feel it is the right one for you.
This leaflet outlines the methods that are available to choose from see pages 2–6: pills and injectable  IUDs  barrier methods  natural methods and  sterilisation.
If you don't want a child — don't trust to luck.
Use a reliable method of contraception.
LET'S GET IT STRAIGHT
You sill hear a lot of foolish tales about contraception which are simply not true.
So whatever you've heard,these are the true facts :
•
Breastfeeding does not prevent pregnancy.
•
Pregnancy can occur even if the woman does not ‘come’ have an orgasm.
•
Intercourse in any position can result in pregnancy.
•
Pregnancy can follow first intercourse, and can even occur without male penetration.
•
Pregnancy sometimes occurs when intercourse takes place during a period.
•
Douching, however soon after intercourse,will never prevent pregnancy.
•
Withdrawal, ‘being careful’,can result in pregnancy.
‘MORNING AFTER’ CONTRACEPTION
If you are unlucky and your contraceptive lets you d own, some doctors and clinics provide ‘morning-after’ or post-coital advice.
This may mean taking a special dose of the combined pill or insertion of an IUD.
It is a method only to be used in a real emergency under medical supervision.
So don't risk pregnancy — use a reliable method of birth control every time you make love.
It should be available from GPs and family planning clinics.
CONTRACEPTION FOR THE OLDER WOMAN
As a woman gets older, she may notice changes in the pattern of her periods.
When periods finally stop, she has reached the change of life menopause.
Contraceptive precautions should be continued until a woman has a period or any bleeding for two years if ages 45–50, and for one year if over 50.
A family doctor or family planning clinic will be able to advise on suitable birth control until then.
FREE INFORMATION SERVICE
For more details on the contraceptive methods mentioned in this leaflet, write in or 'phone for further information and a leaflet order form to the Family Planning Information Service FPIS,.
See page 10 for address and telephone number of your local information centre.
Ask for copies of the following free leaflets in print or braille:
•
The pill
•
Intrauterine devices
•
Barrier methods of birth control
•
Male and female sterilisation
•
Family planning using the ‘safe period’
As well as leaflets on family planning, information is also available on women's health care, sexually transmitted diseases and sex education.
The Family Planning Association and the Health Education Council provide a free Family Planning Information Service FPIS to help people to know about and use the free National Health Service facilities.
HOW TO GET ADVICE
You can find out more about contraception by visiting your family doctor or your nearest family planning clinic.
Anyone, married or single, male or female, young or not-so-young can go to a family planning clinic.
Your partner is also welcome, so why not go along together to discuss the different methods of birth control?
The service is free.
All family planning services and supplies on prescription are provided free on the National Health Service if you are ordinarily resident in the UK.
The services are available from hospitals, clinics and most family doctors.
GPs cannot prescribe condoms.
If for any reason you prefer not to discuss birth control with your own family doctor, you are entitled to go to another family doctor for this service.
Some clinics have special youth advisory sessions.
How to find your local clinic.
There are NHS family planning clinics all over the country.
You can get the address and times of your nearest clinic from your:
Health Centre  Hospital  Midwife  Health Visitor  Telephone directory or Yellow Pages under ‘family planning’
There are a few fee-paying clinics too.
If you wish you can 'phone or write for details of NHS or fee-paying clinics to the Family Planning Information Service .
Or contact Family Planning Association offices in Bedford , Belfast, Birmingham, Brighton, Cardiff, Exeter, Glasgow, Liverpool, London, Norwich or Sheffield.
This information leaflet replaces those previously issued and those under the title Modern methods of birth control.
WHERE THE METHODS WORK Female 
Mini-pill effect mainly on womb
IUD works in womb
Combined pill no egg produced
Injectable effect mainly on womb
Natural methods find ‘safest’ days to avoid pregnancy
Sterilisation stops egg reaching womb
Diaphragm or cap + spermicide sperm can't reach egg
Spermicide used with diaphragm and cap inactivates sperm
Turn to pages 2–6 to see how these methods work.
A note about effectiveness rates: where we say, for example, that a method is 98% effective — this means that each year, out of every 100 women using the method, 2 will become pregnant.
WHERE THE METHODS WORK Male 
Condom holds back sperm
Vasectomy stops sperm release
ARE YOU DYING TO GET A SUNTAN?
Soaking up the sun is great — but too much, too quickly and you're risking skin cancer.
Protecting yourself and your family is easy…
HEALTH EDUCATION AUTHORITY  In support of Europe Against Cancer Year
WHAT YOU CAN DO
USE A SUNCREAM OR LOTION WITH THE CORRECT SUN PROTECTION FACTOR SPF.
These preparations absorb or block out the sun's harmful ultra-violet rays.
You need to find the right one for your skin type.
Most have a Sun Protection Factor number, according to the level of protection they give.
Unfortunately, different products use different systems of numbering.
As a rule, the higher the number, the greater the protection.
•
If your skin is sensitive and burns easily, or has a tendency to burn — use a Sun Protection Factor greater than 10
•
If your skin tans easily, but sometimes burns — use a Sun Protection Factor greater than 8
•
If your skin tans easily — use a Sun Protection Factor greater than 6.
You can use a lower factor sun product when you've developed a tan, say, after 2 to 4 days.
ASK YOUR PHARMACIST IF YOU NEED MORE ADVICE.
REMEMBER:
•
Put lots on and reapply at least every two hours, as sweat, water, wind and towel friction will wear it away.
•
Use a sunscreen that protects against both UVA and UVB look on the tube or bottle.
•
Watch out for sensitive areas like lips, eyelids, nose, cheeks, upper chest, shoulders, nipples, and the soles of your feet.
•
Don't forget to use a sunscreen on overcast days — clouds or a breeze can fool you into thinking the sun is weaker than it really is.
You can burn just as easily on a cloudy day as on a bright one.
If you develop an allergic reaction to your sunscreen, change it.
YOUR PHARMACIST WILL BE ABLE TO ADVISE YOU.
BABIES AND YOUNG CHILDREN.
Keep small babies out of the sun.
Use a sunscreen with a SPF greater than 10 from 6 months onwards, and then only let them stay in the sun for short periods.
COVER UP
Wear loose fitting clothing to protect your shoulders, arms and legs when you're walking around in the sun.
A wide-brimmed hat will shade your face and help protect your nose, ears and lips.
Get the best sunglasses that you can afford.
TAN GRADUALLY
Don't rush it.
It usually takes three or four days for the pigment which gives you your tan to develop.
Build up the time you spend in the sun slowly — start with 10 minutes and increase gradually.
Never stay in the sun until your skin goes red — the damage has already been done.
Don't sunbathe for long periods in the same position.
AVOID MIDDAY SUNBATHING
Build up exposure in early mornings and late afternoons, when the sun is weaker.
WATER AND SAND
The sun's rays are reflected off water and sand.
So even if you are under an umbrella, for example, you could still get sunburnt.
TRY TO AVOID EVEN A SINGLE DOSE OF BAD SUNBURN
Remember, sun bathe , not sun bake .
You don't have to go red to go brown.
THE RISKS
The sun is the main cause of skin cancer, the second most common cancer in the UK.
Most skin cancers are completely curable, but some can be fatal.
One type of skin cancer is malignant melanoma.
It can be caused when skin that isn't used to the sun is exposed to short bursts of strong sunlight.
Just what happens when you're on holiday!
Other types of skin cancer are associated with continued exposure to the sun over a long period.
People who work outdoors all the time are more at risk here.
ARE YOU AT RISK?
EVERYONE should take care in the sun, but you should be especially careful if you have:
•
fair or freckled skin that doesn't tan or burns before it tans
•
red or fair hair and light complexioned eyes
Even if you've got a darker complexion, or tan easily, you still need to be careful in the sun.
YOUNG CHILDREN are extremely vulnerable.
The sun can easily damage a child's delicate skin.
FOR MORE INFORMATION
Most skin cancers are completely curable, especially if detected in the early stages.
Malignant melanoma can show itself by a change in the look of a skin mole.
A leaflet has been produced by the Cancer Research Campaign which gives information about these changes.
Write to them at 2 Carlton House Terrace, London SW1Y 5AR.
PROTECT YOURSELF AGAINST SKIN CANCER.
MAKING A NEW START.
A simple guide to keeping your heart young and enjoying it.
A NEW START TODAY, A NEW YOU TOMORROW.
A fatal heart attack happens in Britain every three minutes.
Heart disease is now our biggest killer.
And sadly, many of the people it kills are in their middle years.
So much for the bad news.
The good news is that you can take steps to prevent heart attacks happening to you and your family.
That's what making a new start is all about.
It doesn't mean turning your whole way of life upside down.
It simply means thinking a little about your diet and daily routine, and improving it a bit at a time.
In the long term, your heart will stay healthier.
But you'll start feeling better quite soon; a more balanced diet, a little more activity, and a positive attitude are all things that give you a sense of well being and vitality.
CUTTING DOWN ON FAT IS EASY.
Too much fat in the diet increases the risk of heart disease.
Yet it's easy to cut down on fat without changing your diet completely or giving up all your favourite foods.
Here are three key points to remember:
1.
Cut the visible fat off meat before you cook it.
Take the skin off chicken before cooking.
2.
Grill rather than fry.
3.
Join the move to skimmed or semi-skimmed milk, and low-fat products.
This table shows you just how effective simple measures can be.
HOW TO SPOT HIDDEN FATS.
It's easy to see the fat on a lamb chop — and easy to cut it off.
It's impossible to see the fat that's in a crisp, or biscuit, or chocolate bar.
But it is usually there, in surprisingly high quantities.
This is what nutritionists call ‘hidden fat’.
So next time you buy snacks like these, check the labels carefully to see if they're loaded with fat.
If they are, choose something different.
Why not fresh fruit, or a sandwich?
TEN TASTY THINGS YOU CAN EAT MORE OF
Jacket potatoes  Beans on toast  Chicken  Pasta  Fish or fish fingers  Vegetables  Fruit  Rice  Bread  Liver
YOU DON'T HAVE TO GIVE UP YOUR TIPPLE
Perhaps you don't drink alcohol.
That's fine.
Perhaps you do.
That's fine too, as long as you bear in mind that moderation is the key to staying healthy.
Think of a pint of beer, or two glasses of wine, as the maximum for one day, rather than the minimum.
Drink more than this and you run the risk of developing high blood pressure, which in turn can lead to heart attack or stroke.
It's a good idea to ask your doctor to check your blood pressure each visit.
WALK AWAY FROM HEART DISEASE.
A little exercise helps keep the heart strong.
But it doesn't have to be exercise with a capital E. Think of it more as activity.
Don't fancy jogging?
Embarrassed to go swimming?
Many people are.
Never mind, walking is good exercise too.
A brisk walk, say 20 minutes or half an hour, 3 times a week will do wonders for your circulation.
And if you walk in pleasant surroundings, you'll find it a good way to let go of stress, too.
NOW FOR THE HARDER PART.
Smoking is a cause of 1 in every 5 fatal heart attacks.
The only sensible advice here is to stop.
No one pretends that giving up smoking is easy.
On the other hand, you'll never know if you can do it till you try.
To date, 10 million smokers have succeeded in kicking the habit.
For most, the first few days were the worst.
After that, the compensations make it all worth while; you can taste food again, you have more vitality, you smell better, you feel like a winner which is what you are.
If that's not a new start to a better life, what is?
FOR MORE INFORMATION:
For free booklets on smoking, eating, drinking and exercise, write to:
If you want to know more about being healthy, join a local Look after yourself! class.
To find out the address of your local office, contact: Look after yourself!
Project centre  
AT LAST 
Look after your HEART!
SAY WHEN WHEN!
I CAN'T FIND MY CAR KEYS  'COS YOU CAN'T SEE OVER YOUR PAUNCH
A campaign to promote healthier lifestyles, supported by the Health Education Authority and the Department of Health.
AIDS…
Talking with your Children
WHY?
AIDS is an everyday topic in the papers and on television; there is every chance that your children have become interested, even at a young age, but they may have misunderstood things and have some strange ideas.
It is important for you to talk with them about AIDS, to explain the important facts and to answer any questions they may have.
HOW?
How you discuss AIDS will depend a good deal on the way you operate in your family.
Some families talk easily about anything — others are much more private.
If you are someone who finds talking about sex or AIDS difficult or embarrassing, you may find yourself concentrating on the facts, rather than on feelings.
But take courage, and try and encourage your children to talk about their feelings too.
WHAT?
Teaching children should always be taken at the child's pace, answering questions as truthfully and accurately as possible, rather than trying to tell the whole story.
Release information in limited quantities so that it can be absorbed and understood.
If you don't know the answer, don't be afraid to say so.
There is no shame in saying, ‘I don't know but I'll try to find out’, provided that you do ‘try and find out’ and report back.
WHEN?
Inevitably there are times and places when it is not possible to have a proper discussion on AIDS.
Be calm and firm — promise to talk another time — and do it soon!
THE FACTS
AIDS is a life-threatening medical condition caused by a virus known as HIV.
There is no way of telling if someone is infected by looking at them, but a special blood test declares a person negative or positive.
To be HIV+ does not mean that a person has AIDS.
AIDS may develop, or may not, but the person is still capable of passing the virus on to others.
The HIV virus is present in the blood and sexual fluids.
It is very fragile and dies quickly outside the body.
The chief risks of infection are:
•
Penetrative sexual intercourse, both vaginal and anal, with an infected person.
•
Blood to blood contact, e.g. from infected blood in needles shared for drugs use.
•
From a mother, who has HIV, to her child during pregnancy.
WHAT ABOUT SCHOOL?
If there is a child at school with HIV or AIDS, perhaps born with it or caused from infected blood transfusions, your child is not at risk from everyday contact.
Colds and measles may be passed on easily at school, but NOT HIV.
You can assure your child that kissing and hugging are not dangerous.
Nor are sharing cutlery, sitting at the next desk, going swimming or communal toilets.
IT'S MORE THAN AIDS…
Education about AIDS can be useful to reinforce good general health education.
We can use such discussions to remind our children of the importance of personal hygiene — washing hands after using the lavatory, before meals, especially after handling animals.
Remember, HIV is not a risk in these situations, but there are other nasty germs around.
HOW CAN I TALK ABOUT SEX?
Words like ‘condom’ are now used freely in conversation.
Try talking about them when you talk to your child about growing up, relationships and sex.
There are several good straightforward books available to help you see book list.
Your child's school will value your support in teaching your child about how to make good relationships.
We must realise that other children's values may be different, and that our children are affected by the pressure of their peers and others with whom they come in contact.
Sex is often a central and vital element of a committed relationship, founded on love, caring respect, honesty and faithfulness.
We can remind our children that faithfulness, chastity and married love are not just old-fashioned negative values that inhibit freedom; they are positive life-enhancing virtues.
Our children need to be aware that the more sexual partners a person has, the more likely they are to have sex with someone who is HIV+, although the risks of infection are greatly reduced if they practise Safer Sex.
You can reassure your children that there are ways to make love which are safe, and there are many ways of showing love other than sex.
They also need to be aware of the prevalence and dangers of injecting drugs, and how to reduce the risks.
It is naive and dangerous to imagine that our children or their schools couldn't possibly be involved.
OUR CHILDREN'S FUTURE
Sadly, many more people are going to develop AIDS, some from recent infection, some from infection with the virus years before the risks were known.
We can remind ourselves of, and help our children to realise, the need at all times for compassion.
It is not for us to judge.
People with AIDS have enough to bear.
What they — and their loved ones — need is our understanding, love, prayers and support.
What our children need from us is reassurance, so that they can live safely, knowing the real risks and knowing where they can go if they are worried.
WHAT EVERY PARENT SHOULD KNOW ABOUT DRUGS
Basic facts for all families with children
WHAT ARE DRUGS?
Drugs include a whole range of things.
Some we all use occasionally, like medicine prescribed by a doctor or bought from a chemist.
Others we don't usually think of as drugs at all, like alcohol and cigarettes.
But here the word means drugs which are used illegally, such as heroin, cocaine, LSD, amphetamines, barbiturates or cannabis.
The effect of any drug depends on the drug itself, how it is used and the person using it.
But any of them can cause problems when misused.
And all parents need to know something about them in order to help protect their children from danger, now or in the future.
Why does anyone take drugs?
There is no single reason.
Most youngsters probably start simply from curiosity, or because their friends are doing it.
Others like taking risks, particularly if they know their parents or other adults would disapprove.
Some may take drugs because they are bored.
Some because they don't get along with their parents.
Others because they are depressed, worried or resentful about family, school or work problems.
Or as a ‘cry for help’ to attract attention.
Depending on how they feel the first time, they may carry on if they enjoy it or if it seems to block out other worries and problems.
And if they have enough pocket money or other cash — say £5 — to buy whatever is available locally.
But it's important to remember that most young people do not take drugs.
And of those that do, few will try them more than once or twice.
Even fewer will become addicts.
What are the signs of drug-taking?
It's difficult to tell when someone is using drugs only occasionally — unless they are caught in the act, or when intoxicated like being drunk.
But here are some of the things you may notice:
—
Sudden changes of mood from cheerful and alert to sullen and moody
—
Unexpected irritability or aggression
—
Lost appetite
—
Losing interest in hobbies, sport, schoolwork or friends
—
Bouts of drowsiness or sleepiness
—
Telling lies or acting furtively
—
Money or belongings disappearing
—
Unusual smells, stains or marks on the body or clothes, or around the house
—
Unusual powders, tablets, capsules, scorched tinfoil or more rarely nowadays needles or syringes.
Of course, many of these are just signs of normal growing pains — particularly those higher up the list.
So don't jump to conclusions.
What if drugs are taken?
—
Don't over-react and take it out on your son or daughter before you know all the facts — or you could make a small problem bigger
—
First, take time to talk to your husband or wife, or perhaps your family doctor, other parents or teachers
—
Try to find out if your youngster has any other worries or problems.
Above all, show them that you care and will give them all the support and help you can — even if they are in trouble with the law
—
If you want help, or need more information, look at the back page of this leaflet.
What are the dangers?
The main dangers are:
—
Having an accident while intoxicated
—
Accidental overdose, leading to unconsciousness or even death
—
Dependence or addiction, particularly if drugs are used regularly.
In addition, all drugs can have nasty side effects.
For example:
—
Confusion and frightening hallucinations
—
Unbalanced emotions or more serious mental disorders
—
First-time heroin users may be sick.
Regular users can become constipated and girls can miss their periods.
More serious mental and physical deterioration may follow
—
Injecting can cause infection leading to sores, abscesses, jaundice and blood poisoning.
In an emergency
If your youngster overdoses and you find them drowsy or unconscious, here's what to do:
—
Make sure they get fresh air
—
Turn them on their side and try not to leave them unattended in case they inhale vomit
—
Ring for a doctor straightaway, or dial 999 and ask for an ambulance
—
Collect any powders, tablets or anything you think may have been used to take the drug.
Take them to the hospital with you for the doctor to examine.
Afterwards, give your child the chance to talk it over with you.
Now may be the time they are willing to tell you what has been going on.
Try to encourage them to accept help.
Dos and don'ts
Prevention is better than cure, so here are some guidelines for avoiding future problems:
Do work out your own attitude to all drugs.
Remember, it's more likely that youngsters may turn to drugs if they come from a home where the adults appear to be dependent on legal drugs like tobacco or alcohol.
Do remember the same is true for legally prescribed drugs like sedatives and tranquillisers.
If you are using these, keep them where they can't be tampered with.
Tell your children why they are necessary and explain how the dose is carefully worked out.
Do be prepared.
Talk with your husband or wife about how you would react if you found one of your children was using drugs.
Discuss it with other parents or schoolteachers if there seems to be a problem locally.
Do, above all, make time to talk to your son or daughter — particularly if they want to sound you out on the subject.
Get to know their hopes and fears.
Give them the confidence that comes from knowing that you care, and will help if they have problems of any sort.
All this is important, because young people who have good relationships with their parents are less likely to feel the need to try drugs.
Do decide whether it's a good idea to bring up the subject of drugs yourself.
This depends entirely on you and your children and there is no simple answer.
You must avoid making drug-taking seem acceptable without making the subject a ‘no-go’ area.
Don't dwell only on the horrors and dreadful effects of drugs.
However convinced you are, you will not convince someone who has tried drugs and enjoyed them, or knows someone who has.
In fact, it will make anything else you say less believable.
Don't be over-suspicious of your children.
This could be quite unfair.
And it could push them into drug-taking, instead of away from it.
If you want to know more…
About drugs
Two other leaflets are available from Dept.
DM, DHSS Leaflets Unit, PO Box 21, Stanmore, Middlesex HA7 1AY:
—
Drugs: What parents can do DM.2 16 pages of guidance for parents worried that their teenage children are — or may be — using drugs.
—
Drug misuse: A basic briefing DM.3 A more detailed guide for anyone who needs to know more about drugs from alcohol and tobacco to solvents and opiates.
About glue sniffing
This leaflet is available from your local Health Education Unit see in telephone book under Health Authority or in cases of difficulty from:
What to do about glue-sniffing 6 pages of advice for parents on the misuse of glue and other solvents.
How to get help locally
Ask your family doctor or talk to a teacher, social worker, probation officer or Citizens Advice Bureau.
They may be able to put you in touch with a drug counselling agency or other local help.
If not, contact SCODA Standing Conference on Drug Abuse at  They have a full list of local services throughout the country.
About getting in touch with other parents
A chain of self-help groups has already been set up throughout the country by concerned parents.
To find out whether there is one in your area contact Families Anonymous at  
Shingles
will it happen to me?
Are you likely to get shingles?
•
You only get shingles if you have had chickenpox.
•
The older you are the greater the chance of you having shingles.
•
1 in 2 people will have had shingles by the age of eighty-five.
•
Shingles occurs when your body feels ‘run-down’ due to stress, illness, shock or sometimes medical treatment.
How long does shingles last?
Shingles usually lasts for 2–3 weeks.
However, some patients may experience pain at the site of the rash for six months or even longer.
What are the signs and symptoms of shingles?
Shingles is a rash of blisters on the skin accompanied by a severe stinging pain.
•
To start with you may feel slightly feverish and your skin may feel painful and ‘prickly’ over the area where the rash will appear.
•
After 2 or 3 days blisters will appear and form a narrow band on one side of the body or face.
•
For about a week new blisters will appear.
The blisters will itch and then start to dry up forming crusts or scabs which will then disappear.
•
It's possible to have shingles anywhere on the body.
The rash most commonly appears on the chest, stomach and back.
Are there any complications with shingles?
•
Most cases of shingles will clear-up within one month.
In some cases however, complications may arise.
•
The most common complication is a prolonged and often uncomfortable pain which can last for weeks or even months.
The chances of getting this pain are greater the older you are.
•
In those patients with shingles on the face, there is a chance of the infection spreading to the eye.
•
Less common complications with shingles may include muscle weakness, or infection of the brain encephalitis.
What causes shingles?
•
Shingles is caused by the virus that causes chickenpox: the varicella zoster virus.
•
Following the initial chickenpox infection, usually during childhood, the chickenpox virus remains inactive in the body.
•
Shingles arises when some ‘trigger factor’ reactivates the virus.
•
Most people only have shingles once in a lifetime but it is possible to have it several times.
If I think I have shingles what can I do?
•
If you suspect that you have shingles see a doctor immediately.
•
It is important not to touch the rash.
It could become infected and take longer to heal.
•
The blisters in shingles may contain active virus.
To stop the spread of the virus avoid close contact with other people.
•
Wear loose fitting clothes to ease pressure or rubbing on the rash.
•
Resting ice cubes in a flannel against the rash or bathing in cool water may help.
A soothing lotion like calamine can also bring relief.
•
It is important to slow down, rest properly and to eat sensibly.
Pregnancy.
What you need to know.
The way you look after yourself when you are pregnant is very important, both for you and your baby.
This booklet tells you what you need to know and do for a healthy pregnancy, and the delivery of a healthy baby.
first things first.
As soon as you think you may be pregnant, and certainly by the time you've missed two periods, go to your doctor for confirmation.
He may arrange for you to have a pregnancy test.
He'll tell you how to collect the sample of urine that is needed for the test.
The doctor will work out the date when your baby is due.
This is easier if you've kept a note of the date of the first day of your last period.
The doctor will also give you a thorough health check, and talk to you about where to have your baby, and how to look after yourself until the birth.
Where to have your baby.
Most doctors will tell you it's best to have your baby in hospital, especially if it's your first child.
Every facility can be provided in hospital, and this is particularly important if special care should be needed.
Antenatal care.
Your doctor and the hospital will arrange for you to make regular visits for antenatal care.
You will either go to an antenatal clinic at the hospital, or to your doctor's surgery or health centre, or you may attend at both places under a ‘Shared Care’ scheme.
It is important for you and your baby's health that you are regularly examined throughout your pregnancy, so make the effort to keep your appointments.
Let the clinic or your doctor know if you cannot keep an appointment and be sure to arrange for another.
During your pregnancy you will get to know the doctors, midwives and also the health visitor.
They will be as concerned as you that you are healthy and happy during pregnancy, and that you should get the best out of the services they offer.
So don't hesitate to ask them about anything that may be worrying or puzzling you.
Take advantage of the preparation for parenthood classes run in your area.
The midwife or health visitor will be able to tell you about these.
You will learn about what happens at the birth, and how to look after your baby.
And you can meet other mothers-to-be.
Looking after yourself…what to eat.
A good diet is essential for everyone but it's extra important when you are pregnant.
A healthy diet includes:
•
meat, fish, eggs, cheese, peas, beans or lentils — for protein
•
fresh fruit and vegetables — for vitamins and minerals
•
wholemeal bread or high-fibre cereal such as breakfast cereal containing bran — for roughage, to help avoid constipation
•
about a pint of milk a day
Your doctor may also prescribe extra vitamins or iron tablets for you.
If he does, make sure you take them as instructed.
You don't have to ‘eat for two’; nor should you eat less than normal when you're pregnant.
Just eat in quantities that satisfy you, and avoid putting on unnecessary weight by cutting down on sweet things like cakes, biscuits and sweet drinks.
Later in your pregnancy you may feel more comfortable eating smaller meals more often instead of large, heavy ones.
But still try to keep meal times reasonably regular.
The clinic will check your weight gain regularly.
It is usually about 9 to 11 kg 20 to 25 lbs by the time your baby is due.
If you are seriously over or underweight when you first visit your doctor, he will advise you about your diet.
Or you may be referred to a dietitian.
Looking after yourself…exercise and rest.
To keep yourself in good health through your pregnancy you need exercise, rest and plenty of sound sleep.
How much you take of each depends on you, for no two people are the same.
But guard against getting overtired on the one hand, and on the other against become sluggish from too little exercise.
You can usually carry on with a sport you enjoy so long as you feel comfortable.
But ask your doctor or midwife if you are unsure.
Looking after yourself…visiting the dentist.
A visit to the dentist in the early months of pregnancy is a good idea.
It is part of making sure your whole body is fit.
Besides, dental treatment is free during your pregnancy and until your baby is one year old, so take advantage of this!
No smoking
Smoking is dangerous, for you and your baby.
Babies of mothers who smoke in pregnancy are often small, weaker and slower to develop than other babies.
So if you are a smoker, it's very important you give up, at least while you are pregnant, and preferably for good.
…and not too much alcohol.
Try to keep drinking to a minimum when you are pregnant, for the sake of your own health and your baby's.
Remember, alcohol is a drug.
Just as food reaches your baby, so does alcohol.
Pills and medicines.
Do not accept pills or medicines from anyone but your own doctor or the doctor at the clinic.
He knows you well and has your records to consult.
Don't listen to the well-meaning friend who says ‘two of these will get rid of that headache’ or ‘a dose of this will cure your constipation’.
Taking unprescribed pills or medicines, especially during the first three months of pregnancy, could harm your baby.
Problems such as constipation, headaches and indigestion are fairly common in pregnancy.
If you are worried about them, talk to your doctor, midwife or health visitor.
They can advise you on how to cope with any difficulties.
Pregnancy and work.
If you've got a job outside the home, it's a good ideas to talk to your doctor and to your employer about the best time for you to stop work.
The date you choose can be important if you want to go back to your job after your baby's born.
For more information, pick up leaflet Number 4, ‘Employment rights for the expectant mother’, at your local unemployment benefit office.
If you've worked for one employer for two years or more before leaving to have your baby, you may be entitled to maternity pay.
Talk to your employer about this, or look at the leaflet ‘Employment rights’ mentioned above.
Preparing for breast feeding.
Breast feeding will be best for your baby.
It gives a balanced diet, and protects against infections.
It also helps your baby feel loved and secure.
Early in your pregnancy, talk to your doctor, midwife or health visitor about how to prepare for breast feeding.
They can also advise you about bottle feeding your baby if this is what you prefer.
The father's place.
Often so much fuss is made of the mother-to-be that the father-to-be feels left out.
Yet it's important that he shares your pregnancy in every way he can.
Visiting the doctor, attending parentcraft classes, asking questions, reading books and leaflets from the clinic are all things you can do together.
Giving up smoking together too is much more likely to be successful than if you have to struggle alone.
If you both want the father to be present at the birth, ask about arrangements for this at the hospital as early as you can.
Sex in pregnancy.
Usually it's fine to go on making love during your pregnancy.
You may find that some positions for intercourse become uncomfortable.
If so, try to find a different position to suit you both.
For a few women, such as those who have had repeated miscarriages, intercourse may have to be limited.
Your doctor will tell you if this is necessary.
Planning ahead.
After the birth, intercourse can begin again as soon as you feel ready and so long as you don't feel any discomfort.
Although your chances of becoming pregnant again may be lessened if you are breast feeding your baby, this is not a reliable method of birth control.
So talk to your doctor, midwife or health visitor, or your family planning clinic, about contraception.
Remember, family planning is free under the National Health Service and you can choose whether to go to a family planning clinic or a GP.
Further information on family planning is available free of charge from The Family Planning Information Service 
Benefits.
•
While you are pregnant, and for a year after your baby is born, you can get free prescriptions for your medicines.
•
You can get free dental treatment for the same length of time.
•
You may be able to get free milk and vitamins if your income is low.
If you want to know more about these benefits and how to claim them, pick up leaflet MV.11 at your social security office or most post offices.
•
You may also be able to get a cash maternity allowance or grant.
Pick up leaflet N1.17A, and claim form BM.4, at your social security office.
•
You can claim child benefit for your baby regardless of your income.
Pick up leaflet CH.1 at your social security office.
•
If you are going to be bringing up your baby on your own, you may be able to get more money every week on top of your child benefit.
Pick up leaflet CH.11 at your social security office.
There will be someone on the staff at your antenatal clinic who can explain what benefits you can claim.
All these leaflets are available free of charge from the Health Education Service of your local Health Authority, or from the Supplies Department of the Health Education Council.
Drinking and Pregnancy
A guide for pregnant women
British Medical Association Professional Division
Should you drink if you're pregnant?
The best advice if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy is that you should stop drinking alcohol until after your baby is born.
Tobacco, pills and medicines, and alcohol can all harm your baby before it is born.
So while you are pregnant, give up smoking, only take pills and medicines with your doctor's advice and stop drinking alcohol.
This is especially important during the first few weeks of pregnancy when you might not even know you are pregnant.
During this time the baby develops very quickly, so if you are planning to have a baby you should start thinking about your health a couple of months before hand.
Look after yourself by eating a balanced and varied diet of protein, dairy products and fresh fruit and vegetables, getting enough rest and cutting out the things that can harm your baby.
That way it will have the best possible start in life.
The effects of alcohol on an unborn baby
When a pregnant woman drinks, the alcohol that enters her bloodstream passes into her baby's bloodstream as well.
This happens however much she drinks.
For a long time it has been known that heavy drinking during pregnancy can badly affect a baby's development so that when it is born, its face and head are deformed and it is mentally backward.
How much alcohol is needed to damage your baby?
A woman who takes five or more alcoholic drinks a day two or three times a week while she is pregnant is at a very high risk of harming her baby.
A woman who drinks smaller amounts is at less risk, but is still more likely to have a miscarriage than a non-drinker.
It is very important not to drink early in the pregnancy, but even if you give up drinking later it will give your baby a better chance.
How to avoid harming your baby
If you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, stop drinking alcohol until after your baby is born.
If you find it difficult to stop drinking altogether, try to cut down as much as possible.
Cutting down on your drinking, even during the last few months of your pregnancy, will help your baby to be healthy at birth.
But the best advice is to stay off alcohol altogether until after your baby is born.
What to do about Head Lice
The Health Education Council
What are head lice?
Head lice are tiny insects which live in the hair and feed by biting the scalp and sucking blood.
They are sometimes greyish in colour, sometimes a dull red or brown.
The female head louse lays shiny yellow eggs and glues them one by one to individual hairs, close to the scalp.
These eggs, or nits, hatch out, start feeding and soon begin to lay more eggs.
As the hair grows, the eggs are carried further away from the scalp and become white or grey in colour, because they have hatched out.
Can anyone catch head lice?
Yes, although children pick them up much more often than adults do.
They catch them just by coming into close contact with someone who is infected.
When heads touch, the lice simply walk from one head to the other.
How do I know if my child has head lice?
The way head lice feed causes itching and irritation.
So scratching the scalp is usually the first sign that a child has head lice.
By this time, though, the lice have probably been in the hair for several weeks.
So don't wait for the scratching to start.
Check your child's hair regularly.
Look carefully for the eggs, or nits, particularly behind the ears, at the back of the head, on the neck, crown and under fringes.
You can't mistake nits for dandruff.
Dandruff irritates too, but it is dull, flaky, and loose enough to fall out.
The nits are shiny and firmly attached to the hair.
That's why it's so difficult to get rid of them.
How can I get rid of head lice?
It's very important to get treatment for lice and nits as soon as you find them.
People who have head lice for some time begin to feel unwell — in fact, they feel ‘lousy’.
And head lice can cause other, more serious infections if they are left untreated.
So the moment you think one of the family is infected, ask your health visitor, school nurse, local health clinic, doctor or chemist for a suitable treatment.
Follow their advice and instructions carefully.
Check that no-one else is infected, not just in the family but other possible contacts too, such as your children's friends.
What's the treatment for head lice?
Treatment is usually a lotion which kills the lice and nits in a few easy applications.
It is rubbed into the hair and scalp and then left to dry naturally, because using a hair dryer can destroy its effectiveness.
Then, after waiting for a specified length of time, the hair can be shampooed in the usual way.
What can I do to avoid catching head lice?
Unfortunately, it's always possible to catch head lice, however clean your hair.
But there are two important things you should do:
•
Comb hair regularly.
Combing can help to keep lice away.
•
Check hair carefully and regularly — every time the hair is washed, for .
If you find lice, get treatment straight away.
If you need more advice, ask your health visitor, school nurse or doctor.
WHAT TO DO ABOUT GLUE-SNIFFING
Advice for parents about glue-sniffing and the abuse of other solvents
What is glue-sniffing?
Glue-sniffing means breathing in the vapours given off by certain types of glue in order to get intoxicated or ‘high’, rather like getting drunk on alcohol.
The ingredient that causes this effect is the solvent contained in many brands of glue as well as many other household and industrial products.
Why do young people sniff glue?
The reasons young people sniff glue vary with each individual.
Usually it's out of curiosity.
Some do it because they want to belong to a group where sniffing happens to be part of the group's activities.
Sniffing is also a cheap and easy substitute for alcohol and can be a pleasurable experience.
So young people, who may be unhappy for a number of reasons, might try sniffing to seek attention or to escape from their problems.
For most young people it is a passing phase which they will grow out of, but for some it can become a habit.
Glue-sniffing and the law
It isn't an offence in itself to sniff glue, but the effect on young people can result in possible conviction for public order offences such as threatening behaviour or breach of the peace.
It is an offence for a shopkeeper to sell solvent based products to anyone under the age of 18, if they know, or have reasonable cause to believe, that the products are to be abused, and not used for their normal purpose.
What are the dangers?
By inhaling poisonous vapours, young people put themselves at risk of:
•
Accidents, which can happen more easily when intoxicated.
•
Suffocation or unconsciousness.
•
Hallucinations.
Some young people have died as a direct or indirect result of sniffing glue or other solvents.
What are the signs?
The most obvious signs that someone might be sniffing are:
•
A chemical smell on the breath or unexplained traces of glue or other solvents found either on the body or on clothes.
•
Empty containers, such as aerosols or tins.
A combination of these signs and the following could also be an indication of sniffing:
•
Unusual soreness or redness around the mouth, nose or eyes.
•
Persistent, irritable cough.
•
Loss of weight/not eating.
•
Slurred speech.
The following can be normal signs of growing up, but if combined with the above may mean there's a problem:
•
Sudden irritable or moody behaviour combined perhaps with secrecy about movements.
•
A sudden and uncharacteristic decline in school performance possibly combined with the start of truancy.
What you can do
Young people are often curious and like to experiment with the latest craze.
If you feel that your child may be mixing with youngsters who sniff glue, you could talk to your child and warn him or her of the possible risks and dangers involved.
Your interest and support are important to your child.
Encourage them to talk to you about any worries or problems they may have.
Sometimes young people take to glue-sniffing out of boredom.
Encourage your child to get involved in activities at school or in the area.
If you think your child may be abusing solvents, think carefully about how you are going to handle the situation.
Talk to someone you know.
If you react angrily or aggressively, your child may do the same.
Don't be over suspicious and try not to over react — this could be unfair on your child.
Teach your child to use household products only for their proper purposes.
Teach them to follow any labelling instructions about safety.
There are, on average, 30 ‘abusable’ solvent based products in every house.
Keep them in a specific place and discard ones you don't use.
In an emergency
Don't panic.
It's important that you remain calm.
Remove any glue or solvents and make sure that your child gets plenty of fresh air.
If your child is drowsy or unconscious, lie the child on his or her side.
Make sure someone stays near so that if your child is sick, he or she can be prevented from inhaling vomit.
When your child wakes up, be reassuring; he or she is likely to be upset.
If your child is unconscious dial 999 and ask for an ambulance.
After the emergency, give your child the opportunity to talk about the incident and about any other worries he or she may have.
If you need further help or information you can contact your doctor, health visitor or child's school.
There are organisations in most parts of the country that can help.
To find out how to contact an organisation in your area contact your local health education unit in the phone book under the name of your local health authority.
The National Campaign Against Solvent Abuse provides leaflets for parents, abusers and professionals.
For information write to:
AN IMPORTANT MESSAGE for women of childbearing age
GERMAN MEASLES is not so harmless as you think
This leaflet is about German Measles or, as the doctors call it, Rubella.
It explains why it is important that you are protected against it.
German Measles is a very infectious disease, but usually very mild.
You may not even know you have had it.
The usual symptoms are a faint pink rash with a slight fever, perhaps swollen glands or aching joints and a general feeling of being off-colour.
It sounds harmless enough, doesn't it?
But German Measles can damage your unborn child.
If a woman catches German Measles when she is pregnant, it can seriously harm her baby.
It can damage the baby's brain, sight, hearing or heart.
Some babies affected like this die in the first year of their life, those who do not die can face a lifetime of handicap.
This need not happen.
Vaccination can protect you against German Measles.
What to do?
Even if you have no intention of becoming pregnant, don't take a chance.
If you have not been vaccinated already, see your doctor now and ask him to check whether you are immune to German Measles.
This is done by a quick and simple blood test.
If you are already immune, the test will make it clear.
Ask for a blood test even if you think you have had German Measles.
It can be such a mild disease, and so like other childhood illnesses, you can never be absolutely sure you have had it.
So don't rely on your memory.
Have the test done.
Some family planning clinics will also arrange for you to be given a blood test.
Ask at your next appointment.
One simple injection gives protection.
If the blood test shows you are not immune, one injection will give you the protection you need.
It's free and easily arranged.
Ask your doctor or at the family planning clinic.
Side effects.
Side effects from the injection are uncommon.
You may perhaps have some mild symptoms of the disease itself.
But you won't be infectious and most people are able to carry on just as normal.
People especially at risk.
Remember, if you are often in contact with young children, either at home or in your job, you run a higher risk of catching German Measles.
So it is particularly important for you to be protected against it.
Precautions
Vaccination should be delayed if:
•
you are unwell with a fever
•
you are or think you may be pregnant
•
you have had certain other vaccinations within the last three weeks — you can check these with your doctor.
You should not have the vaccine if:
•
you suffer from cancer or an immunity disease
•
you are on steroids, or on any other drug or medical treatment affecting immunity.
You must tell your doctor if you're allergic to certain antibiotics not penicillin, or to rabbits.
If you are already pregnant you must not be given German Measles vaccine.
But you can ask the staff at the antenatal clinic for the results of your Rubella blood test.
If they tell you that you're not immune, you should be vaccinated soon after your baby is born.
After the birth, make sure you get your German Measles vaccination so you can be certain you're protected for the future.
It is very important that you don't become pregnant for at least three months after you have had the vaccination.
If you would like advice on contraception, talk to your doctor or local family planning clinic.
REMEMBER.
When you protect yourself against German Measles, you're protecting your unborn children.
YOUR HEALTH
A Guide to Services for Women
In general, women are healthier and live longer than ever before, indeed on average they can expect to live 5 years longer than men.
But although anyone can catch a cold or break their leg only women have babies or get cancer of the cervix, and, and some health problems, like osteoporosis and cystitis,mostly affect women.
In recent years, a lot of work has gone into improving the quality of care that patients receive from the health service.
Particular emphasis has been placed on women's health.
Many women have a special, influential role in family health, such as in making decisions about the family's diet and in educating children by their example.
This booklet, however, concentrates on women as individuals and outlines the help and services available.
It is not a comprehensive guide to symptoms and services, but it should point you in the right direction and show you where to go for help.
AT YOUR SERVICE
Good health is not just about providing efficient, high quality medical services.
In many ways it is also a partnership.
There is much that each of us can do to help ourselves — by not smoking, by eating sensibly, by taking regular exercise, and by not drinking too much.
There is also a wealth of support and expertise throughout the health service to turn to when you need help.
Your Doctor
It is likely that your first point of contact for most medical services will be your Family Doctor or General Practitioner.
The GP and the health team which may include a practice nurse will know about the health resources in your area and can arrange specialist help when you need it.
Your GP will also keep your details for the systematic screening programmes for breast and cervical cancer.
It is essential you are registered with a GP, who needs to have your latest address.
GPs are not simply there to give help to people when they are ill.
They promote health and help prevent illness in the first place.
All will offer general health checks, write prescriptions and immunise against disease.
Other services which they and their health team may provide include:
•
Well Woman Clinics
•
Family Planning
•
Health Promotion Clinics which cover aspects of health such as diet, alcohol control, giving up smoking and coping with stress.
Different doctors offer different services.
All provide a leaflet telling you about the range of services on offer.
Before choosing a GP, think about your needs and the  services that a particular surgery offers.
The sort of questions you might like to ask the receptionist are:
•
Is a health visitor or nurse attached to the practice?
•
Is a woman doctor available?
•
Are there family planning services?
•
Are there arrangements for surgeries or clinics out of working hours?
•
Does the practice work with or employ a midwife?
•
Are there facilities for young children e.g. play area?
•
Are there accessible toilet facilities?
•
Is there a disabled access?
If a service or facility you would like is not available, ask about it.
The practice might not know that a need exists and may be able to help.
Making the most of your doctor
Your GP is an expert in health care — but only you will know exactly what and how you feel.
The more openly you and your doctor can talk together, the better the service he or she will be able to give you.
Questions you might ask about any problem could be:
•
what caused it?
•
how is it treated?
•
what can I do about it?
•
are there any long term effects?
•
how can I prevent it happening again?
To make sure everything is covered you could write your questions down before you go.
It might also help to make a note of your doctor's answers as a reminder of what is said, for example about any medicines you should take.
Sometimes it's not easy to talk about intimate things like sex or your body.
Remember it's likely your problem will be common to many other women who attend the same surgery.
You might find it helps to bring a friend or relative with you.
Service and Choice
Everyone has a right to first-rate care and everyone has the right to complain if they're not satisfied.
If you aren't happy with the service you're getting from your GP, dentist or optician, then discuss it with them first.
They are there to help you and will want to clear away any misunderstanding.
If you are still unhappy you can change to another practice.
A full list of GPs in your area is obtainable from the library or from your local Family Health Services Authority FHSA address in your local telephone book and you don't have to tell your doctor your reasons for changing.
You just ask the doctor of your choice whether you can be taken onto their list.
ETHNIC MINORITIES
To take account of differences in language and culture a number of services are available for women from ethnic minority communities.
Link workers
Some health authorities and general practitioners employ link workers.
They work in many clinics, health centres and surgeries where there are large ethnic minority communities.
The link worker can help overcome language and cultural barriers between the doctor or nurse and the patient.
If you wish they can stay with you during a consultation.
If you think a link worker might be helpful ask the doctor or nurse if one is available.
Advice
There are booklets, videos and audio tapes available in ethnic minority languages to advise you on particular health issues.
You can ask the Health Promotion Unit of your local health authority address in phone book what material is available and how you can get it.
Enquiries
Your doctor or the local Family Health Services Authority can tell you about the services available.
COMMON HEALTH CONCERNS
There are several complaints that may affect women at some time in their lives from period pains and pre-menstrual tension to thrush and cystitis.
Often these problems are merely irritating, but for some women the problem can be so severe that the way they live their life can be affected.
There is a range of information available on how to cope.
Cystitis
This usually takes the form of a burning pain when you pass water and the feeling you want to go to the toilet more often than usual.
It is very common — more than half the women in this country suffer from cystitis at some point in their lives.
Drinking several pints of water should help to relieve the symptoms in the short term, but, if they persist, you should see your GP as soon as possible.
This condition generally responds rapidly to simple treatment.
For more information:…
Cystitis &What To Do About It 
Available from:…
The Health Education Authority 
Continence
Many women suffer from incontinence.
If you have a problem, do mention it to your doctor, health visitor or midwife.
They will be able to advise you and may recommend exercises to strengthen your pelvic floor muscles or other treatment.
Thrush
Thrush is caused by a yeast infection.
Common symptoms include an intense itching in the vagina and possibly a whitish discharge.
If it is recurrent your sexual partner may also need treatment.
To soothe the discomfort, if the thrush is severe, your doctor might give you pessaries — pills you put directly in the vagina — or cream.
For more information:…
A Self-help Guide to Thrush 
Available from:…
The Health Education Authority
Pre-menstrual tension
Pre-menstrual tension covers a range of emotional or physical problems that many women suffer before a period.
These can include swelling and breast discomfort as well as tension, depression or irritability.
If you suffer badly from these symptoms, go and see your doctor who should be able to help.
Period Pains
Period pains can be severe and disruptive.
Sometimes, a mild painkiller is enough to ease the pain but, if it's more of a problem, your doctor will be able to prescribe medicines or give you other advice.
For more information:…
Premenstrual Syndrome &Period Pains 
Available from:…
Women's Health Concern  
Depression &Stress
Events in a woman's life like childbirth see page 23, a break-up in a marriage or partnership, or bereavement, can lead to depression.
In some cases this can be painful, distressing and can affect your family and work.
If you are depressed, see your doctor, who will be able to discuss your difficulties with you and offer advice.
This may involve putting you in contact with specialist help or one of the voluntary organisations that are expert in this field.
For help with problems in a relationship see ‘Relationships’ on page 32.
For additional support contact:
Sometimes depression is caused by circumstances.
In this sort of situation the local Social Services Department may be able to help you with many practical problems, such as caring for a dependent relative.
VIOLENCE
Physical and sexual assaults against women occur both inside and outside the family.
Violence in the home is as much a crime as violence from a stranger, so do not put up with it.
You are entitled to legal protection and reporting assaults to the police makes it less likely that they will recur.
You can get help from your GP or from your local Social Services Department and you could contact a local rape crisis centre or women's refuge.
If you are experiencing domestic violence you can ring the Women's Aid National Helpline on 0272 633542.
BREAST AND CERVICAL SCREENING
Each year, more than 15,000 women in Britain die from breast cancer and about 2,000 from cancer of the cervix.
Many of these deaths could have been prevented if the disease had been discovered earlier.
To reduce these figures, two major national screening programmes have been introduced — the first of their kind in the European Community.
Women in the age groups described below are now entitled to free and regular screening.
If you are on your GP's books, then you'll be picked up by the schemes.
Make sure you take advantage of the service.
Cervical Cancer
The cervix is the neck of the womb.
In certain cases its cells undergo changes, which in time can lead to cancer.
But these changes in the cells mean that cervical cancer can be prevented before it starts.
By carrying out a smear test, doctors can detect the abnormal cells that might become cancerous in time and then treat them easily and simply.
The national screening programme will enable all women between the ages of 20 and 64 to be tested at least every five years you should have received your invitation for screening by 1993.
The smear test takes less than five minutes and normally only causes slight discomfort.
The great majority of women won't have any abnormalities.
If your smear isn't normal it doesn't always mean you need treatment.
Sometimes all that is needed is for the  smear to be repeated in 6 months or a year.
If treatment is needed the success rate is very high.
Major surgery is rarely necessary.
You generally won't have to stay overnight in hospital.
The early treatment of abnormal cells will not affect your drive or fertility.
For more information:…
The Cervical Smear Test — Why You Need It 
Breast Cancer
Breast cancer kills more women than any other form of cancer.
It is more common in older women but, if the small changes are discovered early, there is a better chance of a successful recovery — and less likelihood of serious surgery.
The national breast screening programme is free and offers mammography breast X-rays every three years to all women between the ages of 50 and 64.
Older women can also be screened every three years on request.
The service is provided by nearly 80 special screening centres throughout England — at hospitals, clinics or mobile units.
If you are in the relevant age-group, and have registered your address with your GP, then you should automatically get an invitation by the end of 1993.
Women below 50 will not be invited routinely.
Mammography is less accurate at detecting cancers in younger women.
This can lead to unnecessary investigations.
Also it is not advisable to have X-rays more often than is really needed.
For more information:…
NHS Breast Screening — The Facts 
Although routine screening is available for certain groups of women it is still important for your to maintain an awareness of your own health.
You should know what is normal for you and consult your GP if any changes occur which concern you.
All women should register with a GP and ensure that they notify the practice of any change of address.
This will ensure that you are invited for screening as appropriate.
Some may find it inconvenient to take the time off work to be screened.
Your GP may be able to offer out-of-work-hours cervical screening and you should ask your employer about workplace screening or getting the necessary time off to have it done.
Help and counselling about breast and cervical cancer are available from:
FAMILY PLANNING
Free family planning advice and services are available under the NHS from most family doctors and family planning clinics.
In some areas there may be special clinics for particular groups such as young people, or services provided by voluntary organisations to complement NHS facilities.
Women are free to choose where they want to go for advice and treatment.
Forms of contraception
There are many different types of contraception available.
You can discuss with your doctor or family planning clinic which is most suitable for you.
They include:
•
the oral contraceptive pill
•
the intra-uterine device IUD or coil
•
the diaphragm or cap
•
the condom
•
the sponge
•
injectable contraceptives
•
sterilisation for you or your partner.
This is a permanent method of contraception and is only recommended for those who are absolutely sure that they do not want any more children.
Most forms of contraception are available from family planning clinics but GPs are not able to prescribe condoms on the NHS, although some may have agreements with local Health Authorities to supply them to their patients.
You can, however, buy some forms of contraceptives like the condom or sponge from chemists or other retailers.
GPs and family planning clinics can also provide advice to those who wish to use natural methods of seeking to avoid pregnancy.
Contact your local Family Health Services Authority or District Health Authority for information on the availability of local services the address will be in the phone book.
Information can also be obtained from:
In case of emergency
Emergency contraception sometimes called ‘the morning after pill’ may protect you against pregnancy if you have had sexual intercourse without contraception or if you think that the method you have used may not have worked — but it should never be used as a regular method of family planning.
There are two methods of emergency contraception — a pill that can be used up to 72 hours after intercourse and an IUD method that may be fitted within five days.
GPs or local family planning clinics will be able to advise you on these.
Safer Sex
Sex is a natural way of expressing human feelings but sometimes there are risks, including the possibility of catching a sexually transmitted disease — for example gonorrhoea, syphilis or chlamydia.
Most sexually transmitted diseases are curable.
Now there is the risk of infection with HIV, the Human Immuno Deficiency Virus which causes AIDS.
There is as yet no vaccine against HIV infection and no cure for AIDS.
You can get confidential help from your GP or local Genito-Urinary Medicine clinic.
Remember that, although in this country the impact of HIV and AIDS has up until now been mainly confined to homosexual men and injecting drug users, the infection can also be transmitted between men and women by unprotected sexual intercourse.
This is the most common cause of transmission worldwide.
Also, remember that many people with HIV infection may remain perfectly well for some years, and it is not possible to tell who is infected just by looking at them.
So if you have any doubts at all…use a condom.
Used properly they act as a contraceptive and can protect you from HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.
Contraceptives, such as the pill, do not provide protection against these.
For free, confidential advice and help you can ring the National AIDS Helpline on 0800 567123, any time, any day.
the Helpline will also give you details of the telephone advice services available in various ethnic minority languages.
For more information:…
Women and AIDS  Your Guide to Safer Sex and the Condom 
PREPARING FOR PREGNANCY
It helps to plan for your pregnancy before you become pregnant and above all to concentrate on your health.
The healthier you are when pregnant, the healthier your baby is likely to be.
Get immunised
For adults, catching German Measles Rubella won't do you much harm.
But if you do catch it when you are pregnant, your unborn child could be seriously affected and born deaf, blind or brain damaged.
Your GP will be able to immunise you free of charge if you need it.
After immunisation you must wait at least 1 month before becoming pregnant.
Eat properly
Eating well before and during pregnancy is very important.
It keeps you fit and helps you to have a healthy baby.
You don't need a special diet and ‘eating for two’ could mean you put on too much weight.
Enjoying a variety of foods gives you all the nourishment you need.
There are certain precautions women should take during pregnancy, for instance, avoiding certain foods and being careful about contact with animals.
Your doctor, midwife or health visitor will tell you about these.
For general advice on diet, see page 27–28.
Stop smoking
If you smoke when you're pregnant, it is not just your own health you are damaging.
Smoking can affect the developing baby by holding back its growth.
There is a higher risk that your baby will be underweight at birth and you run a greater risk of complications when your baby is born.
For further information and ‘Smoker's Quit Line’ number see page 29.
For more information:…
So You Want to Stop Smoking 
Cut down on alcohol
It is probably best to cut out alcohol altogether when pregnant.
Never drink heavily during pregnancy.
See page 29–30 for more information and contact addresses.
Medicines
Some medicines, whether prescribed or bought from the chemist, can damage your baby very early in a pregnancy.
If you take any form of medicine or tablet, check with your doctor first.
Drugs Misuse
Misusing drugs in pregnancy can seriously harm your baby and even lead to the birth of a baby dependent on drugs.
If you are involved in any form of drug misuse consult your doctor.
Infertility Services
It takes different people different lengths of time to conceive.
Indeed, one in ten couples find it takes them over a year, while for others it is much quicker.
But if you're worried, go to your doctor for advice.
Some cases of infertility are easy to treat, although others require complex treatment which may, in any case, not be successful.
For further help contact:
Maternity Services
There's a wide range of services offered by the NHS to help you through every stage of your pregnancy, including regular antenatal classes, designed to keep you well and to prepare you and your partner for the birth and for looking after your child.
All services are free.
Make sure you go to see your doctor as soon as you suspect you are pregnant.
Free Prescriptions and special help
If you're pregnant, you can get free prescriptions and free dental treatment.
And if you're on income support, you'll be entitled to 7 pints of milk a week and free vitamins.
Just show your social security office the certificate of pregnancy which you can get from your doctor or midwife.
Screening
When you are pregnant, it is possible your GP will suggest a number of tests — an ultrasound scan for example— to check that both you and your baby are in good health.
Such tests are normally safe.
Make sure you understand what you are being offered and why, and also the possible effects they may have.
For further information:
Abortion
Sometimes, because of the circumstances, termination of a pregnancy may need to be considered.
A GP is generally in the best position to advise, but advice can also be obtained from a pregnancy advice bureau registered by the Department of Health or one or more of the voluntary bodies which may include religious organisations which offer help to pregnant women.
Details of these can be found in your local telephone directory: look under ‘pregnancy test services ’ in the Yellow Pages.
The loss of a baby
Unfortunately, some pregnancies result in miscarriage or stillbirth; or a baby does not survive beyond the early stages of life.
Professional staff, including your GP, hospital consultant or midwife, will be able to provide you and your partner with immediate support and advice.
The following organisations can also provide help.
BIRTH AND BEYOND
Your midwife or GP will be able to tell you about the types of care available which may include: a hospital maternity unit, a GP maternity unit, or a home birth.
Soon after the birth, you and your baby will be visited by a health visitor who will tell you about health checks for the baby either from your GP or from your local child health clinic.
Breastfeeding
There is no doubt that breastfeeding is best for your baby and you.
It's natural, promotes your child's growth and helps to protect against allergy and infection.
It's also convenient and free.
For mothers who choose not to breastfeed, bottlefeeding provides a safe alternative.
Depression
It's not unusual for many women to feel depressed a few days after giving birth.
For most it's a temporary phase, caused by a variety of factors — not least tiredness.
But if the feeling persists then see your doctor or health visitor and let them know just what you're feeling and for how long you've felt it.
Immunisation
You should get your child immunised as soon as possible against Diphtheria, Tetanus, Whooping Cough, Polio, Measles, Mumps and Rubella.
Your GP or health visitor will make the necessary arrangements at the correct time.
GROWING OLDER
As you get older, the pressures of work, home and family can make it very easy to forget your own health.
Events like bereavement or retirement can increase the pressure.
The Menopause
The menopause is a natural event in every woman's life.
It marks the end of her periods and her capacity to bear children.
At the same time, for many women it can also mark a new beginning.
The average age for the menopause to occur is 50 — in some women it can start as early as 35 and in others as late as 60.
But just as adolescence brings about major changes in your body, most women experience some physical and emotional change during the menopause.
Sometimes this can be very unsettling.
Common symptoms include hot flushes and dryness of the skin and vagina.
Some women also go through varying emotions, including depression and irritability.
If your everyday life is affected by menopausal symptoms see your doctor.
If it is suitable for you, your doctor might suggest Hormone Replacement Therapy HRT to relieve the symptoms.
If further bleeding occurs a year or more after your periods have stopped, you should always consult your doctor.
Osteoporosis Brittle Bones
Osteoporosis is a condition that mainly affects women after the menopause.
Their bones may become fragile and break more easily leading to fractures of wrists, hips and bones in the spine.
There may be back pain and loss of height.
A healthy lifestyle, including taking exercise and avoiding smoking and heavy drinking see page 27–30 will reduce the possibility of developing osteoporosis.
Your doctor will advise you whether any other action is necessary.
If you have already developed osteoporosis, they may be able to treat it or refer you to a specialist.
For help and information:
Elderly People
Getting older does not necessarily mean losing independence.
Though people expect illness to become more frequent in old age, you should not assume that nothing can be done, but should consult your doctor if you think you have a health problem.
You should continue to lead a healthy life, such as eating a balanced diet, taking  exercise and keeping warm.
GPs must offer an annual health check to all their patients aged 75 and over.
You do not have to accept this offer, but it makes sense to do so.
It is free of charge and can help to detect early signs of health problems and prevent them developing.
When necessary, the health and social services can offer help to people to keep their independence with a range of special services including domestic help, delivery of cooked meals, sitters-in and night attendants.
For more information:
LOOKING AFTER YOURSELF
Being healthy is more than a question of not being ill.
Although the health services outlined in this book can give you vital help and treatment, you need to help yourself as well, by taking care of what you do and eat.
Exercise
Taking regular exercise is one of the healthiest things that women can do.
Not only can it help control your weight and prevent heart disease, it will make you look and feel better.
And exercise is not just a matter of jogging or sport — it can mean other enjoyable activities like dancing, swimming and walking.
If you can exercise just two or three times a week, for about half an hour at a time, you will keep your body in shape.
For more information…
Exercise.
Why Bother?
Healthy Eating
Eating regular nourishing meals is important to keep yourself fit and well.
Make sure you eat a wide variety of the foods you enjoy.
Go easy on fatty foods and avoid adding extra sugar but include plenty of fruit, vegetables and cereal foods in your diet.
You also need to be aware of certain precautions that should be taken in the handling, preparing and storing of food.
For your health's sake, it is important not to let yourself get overweight.
See where you are on this chart.
Smoking
There is not doubt at all that smoking can seriously damage your health.
Not only are you much more likely to die from lung cancer or heart disease, but other illnesses highlighted in this booklet, including cervical cancer, are associated with smoking.
You should not smoke if you are pregnant see page 19.
Giving up is not easy, but many women manage it.
You could too.
For further information, help and advice contact:
Alcohol
Alcohol in moderation is fine — but if you over-indulge, then you can do yourself serious harm.
In the long term, too much drink can cause high blood pressure and stomach disorders.
It can cause severe problems at home or at work for you, your family and others.
Alcohol affects women and men differently because of the way their bodies are made, so remember that for women the sensible drinking limits are lower.
See page 19 for alcohol and pregnancy.0  
For advice, information and access to over 40 local centres around the country contact:
If you've got family or friends with a problem:
Drugs Misuse
It is dangerous to misuse drugs in any way.
You can get treatment for drug dependence, mostly as an outpatient.
The voluntary sector also provides advice, counselling and rehabilitation services.
Tranquilliser Dependence
Many local drug treatment centres provide services to meet the particular needs of people dependent on drugs such as tranquillisers.
Your GP can also advise you.
OTHER HELP AVAILABLE
Social Services for Women and Their Families
A wide range of services is available from your local Social Services Department address and telephone number under the local authority or council in your phone book.
These services are not just for women, but you may find them useful.
They include services for: families with children; elderly people; mentally ill people; physically handicapped people including those with poor sight or hearing; and people with learning difficulties.
Help may also be available for those who care for others, for example if you are looking after a disabled person or an elderly relation.
Ask your local Social Services Department for advice and for detailed information about the services they provide.
They will also be able to give information about local voluntary agencies which may be able to offer you advice or support, and also about local services for people with special difficulties such as problems with alcohol, drugs or gambling.
Relationships
Every area will have a Relate office for advice on marriage and partnerships.
Counsellors are available to talk to and advise individuals and couples about marital or partnership problems, preparing for marriage and parenthood.
For information contact your local Relate office address and telephone number in your local phone book.
Other Difficulties
Many problems can cause stress or personal difficulty, which in turn can affect your health.
You can get advice on a wide variety of subjects including money or debt, legal difficulties and housing from the Citizens Advice Bureaux.
See the local telephone book for the address and telephone of the nearest branch.
The services provided by the NHS are there to be used.
You are not wasting your doctor's time by asking about something which worries you.
Your doctor wants to help you.
If you are concerned about the provision of any part of the health services in your area you can contact your local Community Health Council.
The address can be found in the library, post office or the GP's surgery.
This booklet covers some of the many services available and more importantly how to make use of them.
The leaflets and organisations mentioned are just some of the sources of information and advice.
Your local library, Citizens Advice Bureau, or the Social Services Department of your local authority will be able to give details of help available in your area or tell you where detailed advice can be sought.
The Health Education Authority gives people the information they need to look after themselves.
For more information on looking after your own health, or the health of family and friends, contact:
There is a wealth of useful information about pregnancy and birth, available from organisations like the Health Education Authority.
The Pregnancy Book is given free through the NHS to all first-time expectant mothers.
Your height in feet and inches 1 foot = approx 0.3 metres
Your weight in stones 1 pound = approx 0.45 kilograms
Underweight.
Maybe you need to eat a bit more.
If you are very underweight, see your doctor.
O.K. This is the desirable weight range for your health.
Overweight.
Your health could suffer — don't get any fatter!
Fat.
It's important for you to lose weight.
Very fat.
This is severe and treatment is urgently required.
One unit of alcohol equals 1 single measure of spirits = 1 small glass of sherry = 1 single measure of aperitifs = 1 small glass of wine = ½ pint of ordinary strength beer lager or cider
Estimate your weekly total
Adapting Your Home
OXFORDSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL Social Services  CARING COUNTYWIDE 
Contents
Preface 
Introduction
Financial Help with Adaptations
Plans, Building Regulations and Building Approvals
Flow Chart
Installing a Stairlift
Through Floor Lifts
What Other Grants are available?
Specialist Equipment
Accessibility for the people of Ealing
Further Information
Useful Addresses
The Motability Scheme
PREFACE
Being able to stay in your own home or setting up a home of your own is something that most people value greatly.
It is an important feature of being independent and a vital ingredient of providing care in the community to people with all kinds of disabilities.
This booklet has been prepared to give general information about adapting your homes and about other options that may help you establish and maintain independence.
I hope that you will find it useful.
In order that as many people as possible may benefit from the information please take a copy if you know of someone else who would find the booklet helpful.
Jon Winter  Director of Social Services 
INTRODUCTION
At first, making adaptations to your home may seem a very complicated process, because of the information you need to gather together, and the number of people who have to be involved.
There are several people who will probably need to help you with various parts of the work from the very beginning to completion; Environmental Health Officers, Builders, Architects or Surveyors, Building Control Officers and Occupational Therapists.
For most people one of the first questions to answer is ‘How am I going to pay for it?’
What financial help is available?
Since July 1st 1990 the major source of financial help is through the Environmental Health Department Borough or City Council.
Disabled Facilities Grants are available to people who are disabled, for works which improve their access to essential facilities and which are supported by Social Services Department as being ‘necessary and appropriate’.
The address of your local EHO Department is at the end of this book.
What will the grant fund?
The adaptation work should help to overcome or remove any obstacles that prevent you from enjoying the use of your present facilities.
Such as:
1.
getting into the house of flat…you may have steps that need ramping, or doors that need widening,
2.
being able to get into a living room, or main family room,
3.
being able to get into a room that can be used as a bedroom, either upstairs or downstairs,
4.
being able to get to a room where there is a bath/shower, toilet and wash basin and be able to use them,
5.
being able to prepare a meal or snack, if this is suitable for yourself,
6.
being able to control heating, lighting and power.
Other works may be eligible, but grants for these will be offered at the discretion of the Environmental Health Department.
Your house should also be in reasonable repair to obtain a grant, but if it isn't, help may be available through Renovation Grants — seek advice from your local council.
Is there a limit to the grant and will I have to pay anything?
There is no limit to the amount of grant available, but it will be offered for ‘reasonable’ costs only.
If additional work, or special items such as gold taps are requested by you, then you will be expected to pay for these.
It is important to agree on, and understand the limit of the works that are being done before work starts.
The Environmental Health Officer will however carry out a Financial Test of resources to determine how much, if anything, you are expected to pay towards the ‘reasonable’ costs.
He/she will tell you how much this is at the beginning so you know at the start how much you have to pay.
You will then need to gather together the necessary things to make an application.
How do I raise the money I am to pay?
The amount that you are assessed to pay is based on what you should be able to afford to take out as a loan.
It may be that you choose to obtain a mortgage, second mortgage or a loan from a bank.
If you feel that you will be unable to take out a loan in this way or that it will cause you financial hardship, you can apply to the Social Services Department for help.
They will ask you further information about your finances and/or your situation and may then in certain circumstances by able to offer you a loan.
You should tell your Social Services Occupational Therapist that you wish to apply to Social Services for financial help as soon as you know to prevent delay.
Remember if you are on an income related benefit it is likely that you will receive a grant for all the ‘reasonable’ costs.
Starting to plan what I need — who helps with this?
The Social Services Occupational Therapist will visit you to discuss the type of adaptation that Social Services would be prepared to support.
He/she will work with you and your family to plan what is needed, using knowledge about what is available, what works well and your own experience.
It is important that you a shared involvement in this process.
The Occupational Therapist is there to try and help you find a solution to your problem.
Once you have some ideas of what would suit you, you will need help to take these ideas forward.
You can contact your Social Services Occupational Therapist at your local Social Services Office — Address at the end of the Book.
Help with plans.
Who do I ask?
It will be necessary for you to seek help and advice from someone who knows about building and plans.
You may already know someone.
You should seek advice from an Architect, Building Surveyor or Builder.
These people will help you prepare plans, obtain building regulation approval, planning permission if needed find and supervise a builder.
Fees for this can be included as part of the ‘reasonable’ cost of the work and grant given.
Preliminary plans will show what the adaptation will look like — make sure that these are explained to you.
The Environmental Health Officer and Occupational Therapist will also want to comment on these plans, to give advice on whether the planned work is suitable and acceptable.
Some Environmental Health Departments may have agencies who can deal with this part for you — Ask them — Social Services also may have help available — Ask your Occupational Therapist.
Site Visits
Sometimes it is necessary for all the people involved in your adaptation to meet together with you at your home.
This is to enable everyone to advise you on the possibilities you may choose to explore.
Often during a site visit measurements will be taken and checks made on supply of gas, electricity and position of drains.
SEE FLOW CHART PAGE 27
If it is only a small job, will I need Building Regulation Approval or Planning Permission?
Most new work needs approval from building control, to ensure that the work meets necessary standards.
Planning Permission depends on the size of the work and whether it affects other priorities.
Both applications are dealt with by your District Borough or City Council Planning and Building Control Section.
If you have an architect, surveyor or agent working for you they will do this for you.
Once I have plans and all the building approvals, what happens next?
If a builder has already worked with you to obtain the above, he will also give you an estimate for the work.
If not you will need to choose a builder an agent, architect or surveyor will help you with this, to give you an estimate.
It is important to obtain detailed estimates.
The Environmental Health Officer will advise you of how many estimates you need to send with your application.
Choose a builder carefully — your Environmental Health Department may have a list to help you.
How do I make the application?
Have I got all the things I need to do this?
To make the formal application you will need to complete the forms given to you by your Environmental Health Officer.
He/she will help you to complete these if you have any problems.
You will also need to supply documentation about the ownership of your home.
Your Occupational Therapist will have written to the Environmental Health Officer to support your application and you will have had an initial test of resources.
The application forms should be submitted together with copies of the plans, building and planning approval and copies of the estimate.
You should also by now know how you are going to find your part of the cost.
When can work start?
When you receive the Grant Approval Notice from the District Borough or City Council, you can contact your builder to arrange a starting date or your advisor, architect, surveyor will do this for you.
DO NOT START ANY WORK UNTIL YOU HAVE RECEIVED THIS APPROVAL.
If you have applied to the Social Services to help with funding you must be sure that you have their written approval too before work starts.
What happens when the work starts?
You will be asked to let the Environmental Health Officer and the Occupational Therapist know when the work starts.
They may wish to visit during the building stages.
You must also let them know when the work is complete.
If the builder encounters some unforeseen work don't panic, but you must advise the Environmental Health Officer immediately; they should be able to assist with additional finance if they are giving you a grant.
When will the money be paid?
When the work is finished the Environmental Health Officer and the Occupational Therapist will inspect the work.
When you and they are satisfied with the work, the grant will be released to you and you can then pay the builder.
It may be possible to have money paid stage by stage during the building process.
Ask your Environmental Health Officer.
Applications for people who live in council property
For some types of work your District Council may expect you to apply for a grant as a tenant.
If they support the work they may provide financial help towards the cost.
The District Council may offer to rehouse you if this is more suitable for you, and it is an option that you might want to consider.
If you are living in council property you must discuss adapting your house with the housing department.
The Social Services Occupational Therapist will help you with this.
Applications for people living in privately rented property
You may apply as a tenant for a grant, or your landlord may apply on your behalf.
You must have the approval of your landlord if you are making the application.
Applications for people living in Housing Association Property
You may apply as a tenant for a grant, or the Housing Association may apply on your behalf.
In some cases the Housing Association will fund the work.
You will need the support of the Social Services Occupational Therapist for the work.
The Flow Chart may help to clarify the procedure.
’ Making adaptations to your home may seem a very complicated process…‘
’ There is no limit to the grant available…but.’
’ Seek help from someone who knows something about building and plans.’
’ Do not start any work until you have received written approval.’
’ If the builder encounters some unforeseen work…
DON'T PANIC!’
INSTALLING A STAIRLIFT
In some instances a lift will be the solution to your problem of access.
If so you will want to know…
What types of lift are available?
There are two main types of lifts — Stairlifts and Through Floor Lifts.
Stairlifts
These lifts fit on the staircase.
There are several sorts to suit various needs.
They can have a seat on which you can travel facing sideways, or facing to the front; a platform on which you can stand, or a platform on which a wheelchair will travel.
Stairlifts normally have a weight limit of 20 stone.
What if I have a curved staircase or a platform landing?
Some companies make lifts that fit on to curved stairways or have automatic platforms that bridge the difference between the two steps at a platform landing.
Ask the advice of the Occupational Therapist; Social Services will also arrange for someone to give further advice.
Will a stairlift obstruct the stairs?
It will take up room on the stairs, so remember that the space left for other people using the stairs will be less.
It is not suitable to put a lift on a very narrow stairway.
Normally 33″ is the minimum required.
Will I need room at the top and bottom of the stairs?
The answer to this is Yes.
The chair has to come to rest at the bottom of the stairs and you need room to get on and off at both ends.
Some lifts have rails that can fold up at the bottom if space is tight or if a doorway is going to obstructed.
Some have swivel seats to make getting on and off easier.
Are they safe?
All lifts are fitted with Key Switches that can turn them off to prevent children playing with them.
Lifts also should have a micro sensitive pad at the bottom which means the lift will cut out and stop the moment it touches or lands on anything.
The British Standards Institute have issued standards to cover lifts.
Make sure the lift you are having installed meets with these standards.
B.S. 5776 — Powered Stairlifts
B.S. 5900 — Powered Homelifts.
Are grants available for stairlifts?
You may apply for a Disabled Facilities Grant towards the installation of a lift.
Remember the work will need to be supported by the Social Services Occupational Therapist and you will have a test of resources.
The lift must not be installed before you have grant approval.
The Social Services Department may be able to help with a maintenance scheme — contact the Social Services Occupational Therapist for further information.
If you are putting the lift in and paying for it yourself it is wise to take out a maintenance agreement and add the lift to your Home Contents Insurance.
Through Floor Lifts
These lifts go up through the ceiling into the room above.
There are several types…some suitable for use by a wheelchair user and others simply for people to stand or use a seat.
The lift needs space available in the ground floor and upstairs room for manoeuvring in and out.
How is the lift fixed?
The tracks are usually fixed to the wall with special types of fixings.
The wall should be a load-bearing wall preferably an outside wall.
There are various ways to fix models in different sites.
The manufacturer and your architect or surveyor will be able to advise you.
How is the lift installed?
The manufacturer will be able to provide you with a plan, an estimate and details of building and electrical work required.
A builder will need to give an estimate for the building work.
The building work and electrical work will need to be completed ready for the installation, and some making good is needed afterwards.
Can I get a grant for this work?
You can apply for a grant for the building and electrical work under the normal grant conditions — Ask your Environmental Health Officer.
’ THROUGH FLOOR LIFTS…
There are several types…!’
WHAT OTHER GRANTS ARE AVAILABLE?
If you are elderly and need minor works done to assist you to stay in your home, or to live with a relative, the Environmental Health Department have grants for Assistance with Minor Works to Dwellings.
The two main adaptation ones are:
Staying Put
For repairs, improvements or adaptations to properties owned or tenanted by an elderly person over 60.
Elderly Resident Adaptation
For adaptations to a property to enable an elderly person over 60) who is not the owner or tenant, but who intends to live in the property to be cared for by a friend or relative.
The householder makes the application and he/she must also be elderly.
There is no financial test of resources for these grants, but the person applying, or their spouse or person they live with, must be in receipt of one of the following benefits: Housing Benefit, Community Charge Benefit, Income Support or Family Credit.
Any one application must not exceed £1,000 and a maximum of three applications in three years can be made.
These grants however are discretionary — that means they do not have to be given so there will be variations from one district to another.
ASK YOUR LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT FOR DETAILS.
Grants may also be available for thermal insulation, or repairs to properties in clearance areas.
ASK YOUR LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
I would like a home of my own but I have special requirements.
Can I apply for a house/flat?
Adaptations can usually be done to a property to suit it to your needs.
Both local housing authorities and housing associations will try to be helpful in finding somewhere suitable to adapt for you.
It may take them a little while, but it is important that you contact them to make a housing application and let them know of your needs.
Putting your name on their housing list also enables them to plan new buildings suitable for disabled people.
SPECIALIST EQUIPMENT
Before starting adaptations to your home, there may be some problems that can be solved by using various pieces of equipment available on the market at the moment.
It is advisable to look at some of the types available and try them first.
Quite a common problem is not being able to get in and out of the bath.
There are many aids that can be tried.
The equipment can be very simple, but very effective.
Both boards and bath seats assist many people in being able to continue using their baths.
Some people may find they need more complicated items such as hoists or units that fit into the bath to raise and lower the bather using air or water pressure.
Many types of small aids are available and can help overcome a wide range of problems relating to eating, drinking, toileting, dressing, mobility and others.
These may be available through local outlets.
Several of the larger equipment companies have a mail order service, which is useful if you are unable to get out to the shops.
The Mail Order service offers a range of most widely used items that are not too expensive.
The correct equipment is equally important when you are adapting your property, make sure that the bath or shaver, and w.c. that you install are suitable for you to use.
This is particularly relevant if you have limited movement in your hips, shoulders or problems with your hands.
A simple grab rail placed in the correct place can make a considerable difference to how you cope, especially with the bath or toilet.
Remember rails in bathrooms could be plastic coated or bonded to prevent conduction.
If you are replacing existing fitments to redecorate or improve your bathroom it is advisable to consider  what equipment suits you best, particularly if you are less mobile, have a disability or are elderly.
Can you really use it?
If not don't buy it.
The same applies to changing your chairs or perhaps your kitchen fitments.
If you are considering purchasing a piece of equipment remember many aids can be tried out first at Disabled Living Centres and at ‘Dialability’ in Oxford.
Here you may be able to try things, and get advice on several makes, try many makes and styles in one place.
CONTACT DIALABILITY FOR FURTHER INFORMATION.
Many companies allow you to try equipment and will demonstrate equipment to you in your own home.
It is advisable to ask if this service is available and to TRY FIRST whenever you can.
The Social Services department has a variety of equipment which can be on free loan to you if you are assessed to need it.
CONTACT YOUR LOCAL OCCUPATIONAL THERAPIST.
ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE PEOPLE OF EALING
Internally 3 lifts suitable for wheelchair uses were installed, each double ended so that all levels and half levels are served by a lift.
All steps in corridors were replaced by ramps so that now wheelchair users can  gain access to any part of the Town Hall.
This is proving useful to them as well as to mothers with push-chairs, who are perhaps more frequent users.
In 1987 Maguire and Murray were appointed by the London Borough of Ealing to design the major refurbishment of the Ealing Town Hall.
This Victorian Stone building, initially constructed in 1886 and extended extensively in 1913 and 1934 had floors on  no less than 17 different levels and half levels.
One of the main priorities therefore was to make the whole building accessible to disabled people.
The steps at the front entrance were demolished and a ramp was constructed together with new steps.
This used existing stone pillars, together with new replicas so that the whole design is very much in keeping with the original architecture.
Giving the Town hall back to the people of Ealing was achieved by re-locating administrative staff in an adjacent building, and using the space thus created for lettable function rooms.
One such room was especially adapted for partially sighted people and the hard of hearing, so that special interest groups with immobility or other disabilities could make use of the function room.
This room was equipped with an induction loop to transmit sound to people with suitably receptive hearing aids.
Also, in association with the Partially Sighted Society, special adaptations were made.
These were to install illuminations up to 1000 Lux, but all indirectly to avoid sparkle and glare in the abnormally thick spectacles of partially sighted people.
A deep black dado below the white walls surrounds the room in order to provide an enhanced sense of perspective to those who see only a blur and have to find their way using very little visual data.
Doors are outlined in a black architrave for the same reason.
The effect of a black and white room in stunningly attractive.
It is surprising what can be achieved in an old and complex building to provide for disabled people and also how much the internal and external architecture can benefit from the refurbishment that the opportunities of converting a building for disabled access can provide.
Jeremy Bell, Maguire &Co 
Maguire &Co was started as the successor firm to Maguire &Murray in 1988.
The firm has two offices, at Richmond, Surrey and Thame, Oxon.
A disabled ramp serves wheel chair users and mothers with pushchairs.
It can enhance a building if done sensitively.
A modern lift can be elegantly installed in an old building.
A black and white room and indirect lighting helps the visual perspective for the partially sighted.
FURTHER INFORMATION AVAILABLE
Further information on services is available throughout Oxfordshire on OXCIS a visual display scheme.
There are screens in many libraries and other sites.
The Oxford Disability Information Network.
The Oxford Disability Information Network is a group of information providers both statutory and voluntary together with the users of services, who come together to discuss ways of improving information provision across the country.
Oxfordshire Council of Disabled People.
The above Council within Oxfordshire exists to promote the views, needs, interests and image of disabled people.
It is supported by Oxfordshire Social Services, and makes representation to several departments within the County Council.
If you would like to know more about O.C.D.P. they have a development co-ordinator who would be pleased for you to make contact.
John Hodgeon available at Rivermead.
Oxford 792226.
Other Publications
The Department of the Environment have a new booklet titled ‘House Renovation Grants’.
It includes information on Disabled Facilities Grants and the Test of Resources.
A copy can be obtained from your local Environmental Health Department.
THE MOTABILITY SCHEME
Motability was set up with government backing in 1977 with the aim of helping disabled people to use their mobility allowances to achieve greater value for money.
Motability has arranged special schemes with motor manufacturers, wheelchair manufacturers, insurance brokers, and other so that today a variety of schemes can be offered which not only help disabled people become mobile but also give them a chance to be truly independent.
Under Mobility's hire scheme, it is possible to choose from a wide range of vehicles from most major manufacturers.
It is usual to hire a new vehicle on a fully maintained basis for a period of about three years.
In these cases, there are no servicing costs, and often insurance is also included.
In certain circumstances, the vehicle will also be exempt from Vehicle Excise Duty Road Tax.
Models in all price ranges are available under the scheme.
For the more expensive models, a downpayment is required at the start of the scheme, but it is still possible to obtain a car with little or no downpayment with the hire charges being met entirely by the mobility allowance.
The scheme operates very simply with Motability arranging for the DSS to use part or all of the Mobility Allowance to pay the necessary instalments or rentals.
For those who wish to buy their cars, Motability offers a finance scheme under which both new or used cars can be purchased in exchange for part of the mobility allowance.
Motability has also negotiated good discounts on new cars on behalf of purchasers.
Cars supplied for hire or purchase can be adapted to suit the needs of the individual, but the types of adaptation that can be made to hire cars is more restricted because they have to be returned to the general market at the end of the hire period.
Motability can provide the names of professional organisations who can assess the needs of the disabled person and advise them whether or not they are capable of driving and what sort of car and adaptations they might need.
Providing the disabled person is entitled to receive mobility allowance, it need not necessarily be the disabled person who has to be the driver of the vehicle.
Often vehicles are provided for the use of children or other non-drivers.
In addition to providing help for the hiring and buying of cars, Motability also has a wheelchair hire scheme covering both manual and powered models.
Motability is a registered charity and if a person cannot meet the full cost of putting a car on the road, including any adaptations, Motability may be able to provide some financial help from special funds.
If you would like further details of the scheme, contact your local Motability motor dealer.
They will have all the facts and will be able to explain what the costs would be in your particular case.
