Participant Observation of Police Practice 
AN ARM OF EXECUTIVE POWER
For over a century the control of certain aspects of British social life has rested in the hands of the police forces of England and Wales.
However, these increasingly centralized and expensive units only enforce control over a very narrow range of public or ‘street visible’ acts of social disorder.
This system of power and control has primarily been directed towards the protection of property and to prevent assaults on the individual, but only in very specific situations.
These aims have gained a high symbolic place in the public imagination and the institution has set out to prevent and detect acts which are usually subsumed under a generic (but simplistic) classification of ‘crime’.
To a less immediately visible extent the institution of policing is also set up to control those who would publicly demonstrate against the state and its executive powers.
It is in relation to this area of activity that recent moves towards systematic amalgamation, centralization, and mutual aid seem to have been made.
Cohen (1973) describes how, at specific times, certain public crimes generate ‘moral panics’ directed at ‘folk devils’or scapegoat groups.
Pearson (1983) further showed that the identification of these groups as ‘the dangerous classes’ manifests itself as a continuous historical phenomenon.
Tracing this back to the seventeenth century, he points out that in such times, it is ‘always those crimes that are associated with the materially disadvantaged underclass which have provided the continuing thread within this history of respectable fears…
’. Prior to the establishment of the modern police system, the control of this underclass was the responsibility of the army working for the monarch or government.
Foucault (1980) details the move away from the army, to control  by the civil police; describing how the judicial control and surveillance systems emerged.
He suggests the army could no longer be used to drain off the unemployable proletariat by conscription, nor could the newly independent colonies be used to dump the troublesome of society (see also Hughes 1987).
In consequence, the burgeoning nineteenth-century penal and criminal justice system was aimed at these socially ‘dangerous classes’ simply because of their potential for contesting the power of the state and those in control.
Foucault (1980: 17) suggests:
the bourgeoisie erected an ideological barrier around those who went to prison…[an ideology]about crime, criminals, theft, the mob, degenerates, ‘animals’…which was in part linked with racialism…
The Army can't play the same role as it used to.
As a result we have a reinforcement of the police and an overloading of the penal system…
He goes on to argue that the bourgeoisie have always used sections from within the ‘dangerous classes’ to control those who are overtly troublesome, perhaps following the maxim that ‘it takes a thief to catch a thief’, when he argues: ‘for one and a half centuries the bourgeoisie offered the following choices: you can go to prison or join the Army; you can go to prison or go to the colonies; you can go to prison or you can join the police’(ibid. 23).
This somewhat idiosyncratic interpretation is no doubt coloured by the specificities of French history, yet there is little doubt that the British police system is also a political construction of the nineteenth century, created to contain the potential in the newly urbanized working classes for mob disorder, which the excesses of the military had seemed likely to exacerbate rather than disperse.
Furthermore, a fear of revolution on the lines of that which had occurred in France still loomed large in the minds of the new English bourgeoisie, underpinning the demand for an organized police system geared to the protection of the life and property of the ruling classes (Reiner 1985).
This fear of the mob has continued to haunt the executive, who saw that control could best be determined by the installation of a professional police organization formulated on strict hierarchic, semi-militaristic lines, and possessed of discipline, obedience, and loyalty.
Today, police forces pursue the control of the ‘dangerous classes’ by employing a crucially important range of ritual metaphors of negation.
The police world is one of preventing, detaining; arresting, stopping, containing, denying, and rebutting; it is a world of diffused and hidden versions of reality where deflection is a prominent tool of the trade.
Moreover, it has a culture which is built on a history of defensive skirmishes and has generated a metaphorical language of warfare which looms large in all of its structures of significance.
In addition, it often seems that police culture possesses a dramaturgical or melodramatic inflexion, as the increasingly autocratic operational style is brought to bear in contests with new generations of dissenting workers, political radicals, and the largely dispossessed criminal underclass.
Police methodologies of controlling the dangerous classes may well reflect that we are in a period which Foucault (1980) has described as the ‘end of an historical epoch’.
This, he suggests, is a time when we have witnessed the ending of the construct of what he calls, ‘the homogeneity of man’ which was a product of a special political climate that has now passed.
Leach (1982: 57) has suggested that if Foucault's assertion is correct, then this demise will undoubtedly enhance the separation of man by man into categories of ‘inhuman’, ‘subhuman’, and ‘animal’.
Such classificatory techniques and use of social binaries seem all too obvious in police practice and undoubtedly enhance ideological barriers and present further opportunities for the powerful to encourage their agents in the police to pursue bigotry and authoritarian measures in their contests with the dispossessed.
If the philosophical discontinuity Foucault describes is truly occurring, then an inside or reflexive exploration of police practice should reveal the strength of these divisive classificatory techniques, for any binary separation of man by his contemporaries into the non-human categories suggested by Leach (1982) is the very stuff of anthropology.
And if such a classificatory system is a major feature of the way the police control their fellow citizens, then it seems essential it should be identified, assessed, and described.
Foucault (1980), like Thompson (1980), asserts that the criminal justice system is increasingly becoming an arm of the state apparatus, with the institution of policing beginning to wield expanding socio-political power.
In a liberal democracy this needs to be scrutinized constantly, and herein lies the first problem for the researcher.
For how can one really study a system of state control without acknowledging that such an activity itself is antithetical to  the direction of power?
Indeed it reverses the direction, as we shall see.
If the British system of policing is a social construction geared to the maintenance of élitist power and is primarily concerned to keep control over a materially disadvantaged underclass, then these same ‘dangerous classes’ seem to have willingly entered into this game of power-relations with their masters; and by doing so they have deflected attention away from their own lack of privilege and power.
Never having shown the same propensity as the French for violent revolution, the dispossessed have entered into a complex ritual of action within the processes of the criminal justice system, and in doing so have encouraged those tasked with their containment to consider them as being less than human and therefore needing further control and discipline.
As Wilson (1981), Reiner (1985), and others have clearly identified, policing is basically a socio-political tool of the state and government.
It is sustained by an intimate knowledge of its ‘enemy’— the underclass of society — and exemplary use is made of this knowledge to produce the technological and structural means for the continuity of this system of power.
As we shall see, there is now a specifically created police culture of the dramatic, which incorporates illusion, praxis, and imagery as part of a well-directed social production.
It rejoices in an enhanced belief in Manichaean and mythological archetypes of good and evil which are made manifest in exaggerated games of ‘cops’ and ‘robbers’.
Series of interlinking metaphors of chaos and inhumanity are generated to maintain this dramatic mode and ensure that the agenda for control remains firmly with the system, and already I have used such metaphorical terms as ‘animals’ and ‘enemies’to indicate some of the ways in which those in power make use of the rich imagination contained in everyday language.
As Lakoff and Johnson (1980: 157) remind us: ‘whether in national politics or in everyday interaction, people in power get to impose their metaphors’.
So when the police declare (as they do) that they are non-political institution, this can only be a partial truth.
For a co-ordinated system of mutual police aid is now one  of the primary tools for repressing expressions of political discontent, as the miners discovered during their disputes with government policy in the mid-1980s; and the chief constables of the forty-three forces in England and Wales now form a powerful cabal for co-ordinated action against any political or moral dissent.
In the main, however, policing continues to be publicly concerned to prevent and detect individual attempts to steal the property of the citizen and it suits the police's purpose for their community role to be well broadcast, for on those rare occasions when they have expanded their controls to include the activities of the middle classes, they have found themselves on less certain ground.
These groups, like all élites, have no previous perception of themselves as belonging to the troublesome classes, and it does not do for the police to remind them that the application of control can be redirected depending on who is defining the ‘illegalities’.
If the police are to continue to exercise control over an increasingly pluralist society, which is better educated and less willing simply to accept any version of events handed out by the powerful, then it seems essential they should avoid scrutiny yet suggest they are totally accountable to the democratic ideal.
In order to achieve this they seem certain to continue to deny close analysis of their practices, for exposure could well generate the potential to contest the system by releasing knowledge to those the system was set up to control.
It is really one of the foundations of any executive power group that it maintains secrecy about its activities and avoids the possibility for its antagonists to subsume that power.
As Arendt (1958) indicated, the more public a group, the less power it is likely to have.
Real power, she clearly demonstrates, begins where secrecy exists.
It should come as no surprise, therefore, to find that detailed ethnography of police social practice is antithetical to the philosophies of control by which they operate.
Yet in a liberal democracy, such a declaration cannot easily be made; indeed the opposite must be proclaimed.
To carry out participant observation into the minutiae of police practice might be theoretically approved in any statement made for general consumption, but in the cold light of institutional reality it will most likely be thwarted or subverted even as it is being agreed.
In the remainder of this chapter I will explore some of the ambiguities and problems which face those who set out to  research the police and assess some of the fears of the academic incursion into police society.
They illustrate some of the problems the policeman/anthropologist faces when he sets out to describe and interpret police culture, for he must — if the ethnography is to count — reveal hidden aspects of the relationships of power which are an integral aspect of this institution of state.
THE POLICE OFFICER AS ETHNOGRAPHER: ANTHROPOLOGY AT HOME
Traditionally in anthropology, the ethnographer has studied a social system or culture through a period of intensive participant observation in the field.
This has generated considerable concern about the ethnographic experience itself, and specifically about the subjective nature of the process.
Unlike the natural sciences, where discussion often starts with the results and ignores the methodology of the research, the social sciences — and increasingly anthropology — have developed an elaborate argument about the practices of doing research.
The interpretation of culture and even the ability to understand what is happening in the society under scrutiny as well as the need to grapple with political or ethical questions are all endless and fundamental problems of the moment (Phillips 1973: 78).
Mere observation and reporting is inadequate, given the limited scope of things which can be truly observed (Holy 1984: 25).
Rather an alternative and extra dimension to the observation is required if the deep structures and meaning inherent in any arbitrarily constructed social world are to be understood.
Analysis of any construction of meaning from which social practice is derived has to be part of the participant ethnographer's cognitive processes, replacing the notion of simple observation as the main data-yielding technique.
This role as observing participant reverses the emphasis of traditional fieldwork, so that the researcher is required to participate actively in the social life studied and thus consciously eliminate the distinction between the observer and the observed phenomena (ibid. 29).
This can create something of a dilemma for the anthropologist  and for the discipline itself, for one of the tenets of social research is that it requires detachment.
However, even at the same time as this controversy continues the discipline has not only come to recognize the influence of the self, but has urged that we use it as a scientific construction (Okely 1975a).
Analytic detachment is an elusive construct of the intellect.
As Cohen (1984: 227) points out: ‘by detachment I do not mean we have to distance ourselves emotionally; that I think would be perverse.
But we do have to attempt to maintain some intellectual detachment’.
In consequence it is becoming increasingly accepted that not only does the anthropologist have his own social history and subjective stance, but more importantly, that those accounts which ignore this seem to lose something in the telling.
For my contemporaries in the postgraduate school at Durham in the early 1980s, the inclusion of the scientism of the self (to use Okely's phrase) became part of ‘doing the business’(to move to the jargon of my contemporaries in the detective departments).
The ethnography we pursued and the seminar papers we created all tended to include the subjective ‘I’ as part of the discourse, and we were encouraged to explore the effects of our history, our social, political, sexual, and economic influences and include our vision of what we had experienced during the fieldwork situation.
For as Crick (1982: 16) has suggested, doing anthropology is inherently autobiographical.
It is by making use of this complexity of an extended observing participation I believe anthropology can edge beyond its contemporaries in the other social sciences, so that the ‘thick description’ which Geertz (1975) urged us to use, takes on the ‘finer grain and detail’necessary for an anthropology at home (MacDonald 1987: 120) where access to the social group or community studied is readily available to any demand for analytic reassessment.
Furthermore, the political implication of becoming an observing participant in an institution such as the police is immense, both for the group studied and for the ethnographer.
To a unit of executive power, any analysis of how that power is maintained  and used must be uncomfortable; while the ‘insider’ had no means of retreating across some geographic boundary or vanishing like the traditional anthropologist, back into academia.
The researcher who is really at home as one of the natives must seek inside himself to create his ‘remote areas’(E. Ardener 1987).
He must, as Ardener demonstrates, seek to sow ‘semantic grain and grow theoretical crystals’ which he may well appreciate no one is asking for.
His ethnographic boundaries cannot be described as being geographically to the north of anywhere, for they are around him and within.
The insider who studies his own society is really the ‘anthropologist at home’ and he cannot move away.
Much of the recent writings on anthropology at home remain largely concerned with temporary visits by the academic to what is still the ‘exotic’ world of ‘out there’.
Usually the field trip is still an episodic visit to somewhere else, geographically to another culture from which the analyst can take leave or bring visitors too.
Returning to academia he can recall the spatial remove as being ‘out there in the field’; so that much of the current anthropology at home may still only be practising in its own backyard, pursuing an exploration of ‘exotic cultures at home’ rather than looking into its own front room (Cheater 1987: 166).
Sarsby,(1984: 130–1) echoing Cheater, points out that ‘anthropologists have tended to study people whose values and life-styles are different, even in their own society…[seeking]the unfamiliar at home as well as abroad’.
An assumption remains inherent in the literature that anthropology is academically based, funded by some research organization, presented in seminar, taught to students, and then written up and published.
It exists largely as a product of the institutions of higher education (Sarsby 1984: 132) and has only recently begun to surface in policy and practice.
As Okely (1987: 67) observes, the urge to create publications is not always as crucial to others as it is to the academic.
Indeed for those insiders living in Cheater's metaphorical front room — such as in the police — the need to obscure and seek a degree of anonymity from the analytic gaze can be described as a major principle in the preservation of power, ranking highly in the structures of significance.
Yet there are those of us who, although firmly based inside such an institution, have undertaken anthropological training and have  subsequently developed the academic wish to be discursive.
Our interpretation of the field situation therefore becomes a specific and unusual type of ‘anthropology at home’, for it is not out there in the exotic or even in the backyard.
It is neither here nor there, but is everywhere.
It is all around, all of the time, and not even an interpretation of another but similar society, ‘at home’ in what Hastrup (1987) has called a ‘parallel culture’.
This research at home is primarily about the society of the self and the self in that society.
It encompasses an internal exploration of a personal history within a culture and inevitably differs in scale from much of the ‘anthropology at home’ which has become one of the genres of the 1980s.
Inevitably it has qualitative differences and is not easily written or smoothly integrated into the ‘isms’ or historical categories of the discipline.
Material obtained in such circumstances inevitably contains the seeds of a special inside knowledge, avoiding problems described by Liebow (1967: 232–56), who was still separated by cognitive barriers while pursuing research in what was ostensibly his own society, and who found an insider's language, education, and ‘social membership’ all helped to retain boundaries he was unable to penetrate.
The semantic ability of the insider to translate the hidden and the unspoken aspects of the cultural agenda which occur in any society should be especially productive in any analysis of the police, where a massive visibility at one level is matched by a secretive, hidden side to institutional practice.
Furthermore the ethnography must contain a recognition that the anthropologist within is stepping outside himself to describe how and why he performs within his own culture.
This requires a detached intellectual process to illuminate how the culture is constructed and how modes of thought are translated into organized beliefs and action.
He must understand how these are taught to the neophyte and inculcated into the consciousness to be transmitted across time.
It requires a conscious act of experiencing a reflection of yourself and of how you have become what you are!
It can be quite painful, for the insider is studying his own social navel, with the potential always present that he will recognize this to be only one of a number of arbitrary possibilities and perhaps also find that many practices are built on the flimsiest of moral precepts.
Such special knowledge holds further difficulties, for it highlights the specifically political nature of any ethnographic account  of such an institution, bringing to the forefront those expectations of loyalty which the executive demands of any individual who has hold of the account.
Ethical problems will surface, for no power-based organization likes to have its idiosyncrasies made public, and the anthropologist who is a member of the family and not merely a temporary visitor to the ‘backyard’ exotica can find that writing anything at all becomes crucially problematic.
Expectations of confidentiality and silence prevent many accounts from reaching fruition, for as the revelations of Spycatcher (Wright and Greenglass 1986) revealed, it is not necessarily what is written which causes the pain; rather it is the breach of the convention which requires members in various arms of the executive to say nothing about their practices.
This returns us to Arendt's observation that secrecy is a prerequisite of totalitarianism, for those involved in the executive use of power know that to reveal is antagonistic to its maintenance.
The insider/anthropologist is therefore somewhat schizophrenic, something of a Jekyll and Hyde, for he knows that publication and explication might be career-suicidal but are necessary intellectual tasks.
One result of this constant paradox is that while the police make statements welcoming research and applaud intellectual debate, they strive to impose rigid control over a system of preferred rules and regulations to negate open enquiry, so that systems are quietly but firmly deployed to deny the critical approach — as we shall see.
The observing participant insider is consequently torn between self and scientism, for he knows the strengths of an inculcated approval for quality of restraint which sustains the police mind.
It should come as no surprise, therefore, to find that most insider participant observation of policing is almost always confined to discussion on management techniques and to the implementation of new systems.
Philosophical reflexivity is not high on the agenda and in an organization which makes much of the concept of loyalty but really means subservience, the insider can find it hard to bite the hand that feeds and reveal any unhealthy aspect in the agenda.
When the research is carried out by academics from outside, critical analysis creates enormous tensions.
Barrie Irving, director of the Police Foundation, indicated this antipathy in his title to a paper given to the British Psychological Society, ‘Research into Policy won't go’(1983).
He told his audience that ‘C.I.D.
officers use deception, trickery and psychologically oriented persuasive tactics amounting to threats and inducements, in order to obtain confessions; and this process is potentiated by the custodial environment’.
Of course, insiders are well aware of the drama which surrounds interrogation and do not need to be reminded or really welcome such information being made public, for as a detective colleague pointed out after reading Irving's paper, ‘if we don't use fear, force, fraud or the promise, how do they think we are going to clear up the crime and get the coughs the system needs to survive?’
Irving had studied the 1984 Police and Criminal Evidence Act proposals to legislate for interrogation and prisoner control.
He concluded the bill was a legislator's attempt to ‘assume institutions work on the kind of rational and ordered basis which they outwardly pretend’.
In this he recognizes the same problem which faces the insider/ethnographer, for he clearly understands that pretence, deception, and bizarre social drama play a large part in police culture and accepts this will be difficult to research.
However, he is optimistic (as any professional researcher must remain!), for he cites Sir Kenneth Newman's efforts as the new commissioner of the Metropolitan Police to ‘make police ethics a major issue, so that performance assessment, promotion criteria etc., will take integrity and professional conduct more and more into account’.
With hindsight it seems that the prevailing structures of police practice will remain as powerful as ever, for at a conference on policing at Bristol University (1988), the newly retired Sir Kenneth admitted that police culture had defeated many of his attempts to bring a new ethic to the managerial style during his reign as commissioner of the metropolis.
ANTHROPOLOGY FOR THE POLICE
It seems relevant that anthropology be used at this time to contribute to the debate on policing, for since the 1964 Police Act and the preceding Royal Commission which was generated through concern over police practice, the organization has held an increasingly central place in the public imagination.
Policing issues are never long out of the headlines (Chibnall 1977), and this media obsession has been transmitted into a  wealth of analyses of policing — which have mostly been carried out by outside observers.
Indeed insider accounts have largely consisted of bland reminiscences in the style of ‘my greatest arrests and cases’ and it has been left to investigative journalism to redress some unacceptable police activity, by calling attention to the limits and abuses of police authority, power, and accountability.
Concern also continues to be expressed in some quarters over the increasingly authoritarian attitudes and methodology which surrounds some police practices and there is a commensurate fear about the growth in policing and the exercise of their extensive powers, which look set to become increasingly centralized and wieldy.
Thompson (1980) has warned of the potential danger of a strong police autocracy, conscious, no doubt, of the slim line which exists between the democratic use of power and its subversion by a more centralized totalitarianism.
And the forty-three forces in England and Wales now contain some formidable units, amalgamated out of the small borough, city, and county forces of the pre-1960s, many of which were prone to the whims of corrupt local politicians (Simey 1988).
Some of the forty-three police units now have visibly autocratic chief officers who consistently spell out their public accountability yet pursue very personal perceptions of what they consider to be disorderly and what needs to be controlled, and such constructions of reality generate systems which enforce power differently from force to force.
For example, James Anderton, the chief  constable of Greater Manchester, pursued a drive against pornography in the early 1980s which was not imitated by other chief officers.
Pornography — like homosexuality, which he has similarly crusaded against — is an ambiguous activity and creates very marginal offences in any standard police hierarchy of crimes.
Thus, the use of anthropological ideas of social marginality and the construction of gender and masculinity are of primary use in the analysis of such actions, revealing the depth of concern with bodily form which structures considerable areas of police thinking.
For a fear of pollution and impurity in the body physical is constantly and easily transposed to create controls in the body social.
Disquiet over deaths in police cells, to take one further example, is another area in which anthropology seems well placed to make some comment.
Statistically these deaths largely occur as a result of the inhalation of vomit and alcoholic poisoning, and it therefore seems somewhat bizarre for the police to be in charge of those suffering in such a way.
More often than not the victims have serious medical problems, show a long history of social inadequacy, or are clearly suffering from mental illness.
At the 1987 annual ACPO conference, chief officers complained they were still having to deal with this illness and asked why do people still need to die in cells from inhalation of vomit?
In Chapter 3 I will describe in detail the culture created to deal with these ‘street-visible’ offenders in a cell-block situation, but suggest the inertia surrounding the whole problem is more easily understood when we consider the social history of such illness (Foucault 1967), and see how the executive has always allocated the control of such ‘drunken dossers’to the police.
As ‘social dirt’ they become an affront to purity and possess the danger of the contagious and impure (Douglas 1966), requiring their removal from the public vision.
As yet there is no other body to undertake this task, and even tentative moves to remove the problem from the cell block and into the detoxification centre foundered in the entrepreneurial 1980s; for there is little immediate profit to be made from reclamation of this kind of scrap material (although the long-term value of a humanitarian return might be thought to be well worth pursuing in a civilized society!).
The argument is therefore not about police control or a utopia without controls, but to explore why some cultural behaviour has  a history of police action and to discover where that behaviour fits into police ideology.
Its status or (as importantly) its lack of value creates complex systems of meaning which are rarely articulated; for the police world has similar strictures to that which Benedict (1967) described in her attempts to understand the rigidities of Japanese culture:
men who have accepted a system of values by which to live, cannot without courting in-efficiency and chaos keep for long a fenced-off portion of their lives where they think and behave according to a contrary set of values.
Anthropological modes of enquiry are therefore programmed to steer us through the assumptions of police society, so that contradictions no longer remain incomprehensible.
The cultural baggage which any social group, tribe, or institution such as the police acquires over time can thus be translated to reveal just what sustains it, and furthermore reveal what the society itself may not even have understood.
Where there does exist a genuine public expression of concern about the way the police operate this cannot just be dismissed as a matter of misunderstanding or be written off as the foolish ramblings of that police ‘folk devil’ the ‘loony left’, who would dismantle the system for their own political ends.
Such a mood of concern has existed now for more than a decade and seems to mirror uncertainties of role occurring elsewhere in society.
For example, it can be argued the expansion into amalgamated police units has enlarged the organization to a point where it is no longer accessible to the man in the street; alternatively, it may be that the use of a centralized computer and complex technical aids has alienated the public even at the same time they are increasingly fed a diet of violent news snippets which reinforce a fear of crime and generate another ‘folk devil’ of criminal menace, which demands the impossible: a policeman on every corner.
In nightly theatrical TV rituals of social order and chaos, a stream of hero-policemen stand at the symbolic crossroads between peace and mayhem, and the detective and the chief officer now operate at the point where once the church and its priests declaimed on categories of good and evil and the resulting binary codes they produce.
Inevitably, as a secular interpretation of morality has superseded that of established religion, so the  activities of the social controller have become increasingly important in the drama.
It can be no accident that the opinion of the police officer is now sought on matters which once would have remained the province of the archbishop and his clergy.
The immediate result is that alongside a few major clerics such as Runcie and Jenkins, we find that Stalker, Sampson, Anderton, Alderson, Newman, Imbert, Dear, Oxford, and Hermon are national personalities, while a second division of chief officers regularly proclaim on a range of subjects which at other times would lie outside the province of the police.
Yet Robert Reiner (1989), writing on the collective culture of chief constables, is the first to explore their extraordinary place in modern society, simply because as an élite among the powerful in society they have had little need to reveal how they operate, link together, or reveal what structures of significance guide their actions.
Across the history of policing their need has always been for the light of research to illuminate the activities of the underprivileged and the powerless, rather than focus upon the élite themselves!
Analysis of police culture is therefore particularly suited to the anthropological method, for it requires an extended field study to reveal much about the unspoken agenda which determines many aspects of police practice.
These are governed by an often unwritten series of transformations, creating homologies which reaffirm operational practice and which are determined by a definitive, but rarely acknowledged rationale.
For, as Benedict (1967: 12) implied, reflexivity in any dogmatic culture always presents the possibility that the whole scheme of things will simply fall to pieces.
In consequence, there is always a careful code of practice, elaborated in Force Orders to suit the legalistic need to define.
In addition the system also has a range of unwritten rules about such aspects as loyalty and the way activities should be handled in practice.
These are taught to the initiate to show him the accepted response to the vagaries of order, disorder, ambiguity, and ambivalence which lies in the complexities of social behaviour.
As Crick (1976: 123) has argued, ‘criminology (like anthropology), is largely concerned with systems of classification’.
In consequence, police modes of thought build up into classifiable systems of praxis which are the product of dealing with the extremes of social experience.
These in turn become massively  overdetermined, regenerative and self-justifying, creating an institutional mind which, although allegedly acting on behalf of society and the majority population, comes to regard that same group as outsiders and potential antagonists who are never to be accorded easy access to the processes of the organization.
Such a world view is the product of a perception conceptualized to contend dramatically with the instant experience of dealing with highly emotive, personal conflicts at street level, or the tensions of ritual ‘battles with criminals’.
Inevitably in such circumstances, the detail of practice suffers a reduction to enable these charged and emotional situations to be handled more easily and to allow the complexities of social events to be reduced to the simplicities of narrative necessary for the file of evidence.
In such a situation, action becomes more easily defined if it runs along well-known lines, following precepts which have status and acceptability.
Such compression into a carefully managed logic allows policemen to deal quickly with what are intensely charged and often dangerous situations, best resolved with the minimum of introspection or self-analysis.
Not unnaturally one consequence of this reductionism is that action and pragmatism take on an extra dimension in the police mind, holding a special place in the institutional imagination.
While any analytic appraisal or reflexivity on this rationale is never given much credibility in the structures of significance.
Anthropological analysis of these beliefs, I believe, should add a crucial semantic dimension to compliment the many non-qualitative enquiries into policing now in progress.
For example, the Police Foundation is only one of the bodies publishing indices of current research on the police.
Their 1986/7 register of police research (Bird 1987) contains over 200 pages of police-related projects, yet only one item in the index specifically relates to police culture.
This is being conducted by Simon Holdaway, an ex-police officer turned academic, with whom I discussed the anthropological potential for police studies at a 1988 conference we both attended.
He agreed there was little in an anthropological vein and deplored the current lack of funding available for cultural or qualitative research into the semantics of policing.
Much of the work which is being undertaken is dependent on government funding and, of necessity, is required to provide material which fits current political philosophy.
As a result, the bulk  of research listed in the Police Foundation Register, or outlined in a Home Office Research and Planning Unit 1987/8 ‘Research Programme’ document, is concerned with managerial effectiveness, workload assessments, resource deployment measurements; evaluation of neighbourhood watch or victim support schemes, or the analysis of the effectiveness of enforcement programmes.
All are described pragmatically (ibid. 21) as measures ‘to aid decisions as to how police manpower can most usefully be deployed’.
In their own research departments the police continuously attempt to measure aspects of their activity, largely to demonstrate cost effectiveness in line with criteria imposed by the limits on public spending (HO Circular 114/83) and the prevalent socio-economic world view of society.
This has meant that many studies tend to concentrate on the objective assessment of a fiscally quantifiable reality.
For example, the Audit Commission (an arm of the treasury) spent some time in 1987/8 with myself and others in a police research department assessing an OSU (Operational Support Unit) administrative system which they claimed had ‘revolutionized police decision making’ and released manpower for patrol equal to £6.358 million.
However, a colleague looking at these OSUs in relation to their cultural impact, saw there were many aspects of a qualitative nature which could not easily be expressed in fiscal terms (Adams 1988: 11):
direct submission of reports to the 0.
S.U. was to be encouraged, eliminating chains of assessment and decision making which had lain within the purview of the superintendent.
A central decision making process involving Inspectors and civilian decision makers was established and developed….
Its early implementation met with a degree of resistance,[for]the new system fundamentally dislocates the well established and cultural preferences of the service.
Inspectors can no longer‘hide behind a paper managing a desk’(quote from a Chief Superintendent).
Then again for reasons of established cultural preference we had to go back to the Audit Commission and ask them to translate £6.358 million into ‘real men’, for we had difficulty in trying to sell such an alien concept to the police mind.
In effect their fiscal mandate meant their version of reality failed to synchronize with the police world view.
Constantly the symbolic or qualitative nature of police culture  slips through the grasp of the researcher or the audit analysis, simply because of its ephemeral potential for statistical assessment.
At a 1988 Police Foundation Conference ‘Coming to Terms with Policing’(ed.
Morgan and Smith 1989), where I had had the discussion with Simon Holdaway mentioned above, the symbolic nature of police culture consistently surfaced to confound the economic assessment of good practice which the Home Secretary had set in his opening address to the participants.
All too often the outside researcher pursues lines of enquiry which the prevailing culture manages to encompass and nullify.
For example, Christine Horton (1989) told the conference she regretted that many aspects of policing had a symbolic role which were not conducive to quantitative measures and were difficult to present with absolute objectivity.
Others described problems in dealing with the influences of culture and the ingrained systems of status attributed to ‘real police work’.
Shapland and Hobbs (1989) consider many low status activities are effectively invisible, while Chatterton and Rogers (1989) acknowledge many cultural inhibitors, ranging from a lack of trust between the ranks to a ‘number of deeply rooted myths about the existing police systems which protected it from criticism and disguised its deficiencies’.
Chatterton told the conference: ‘regretfully there is a considerable amount of material which is unrecorded and unavailable to the researcher locked away in the constable's heads’.
This troublesome invisibility in the material record is often inversely related to its semantic value, and activity which may well have a central place in the police model of reality can well remain beyond the grasp of the outsider.
Often a priority given to some activity in this police hierarchy of meaning has been laid down from a constable's first days as a probationer and now lies beneath the immediate consciousness, so that any calls for a change in direction of police response may well be defeated by an unspoken semantic value which the institution gives to that activity.
For example the considerable criticism of the police response to domestic disputes ‘mainly related to their failure to take effective action by arresting men who assault their wives and girl friends’(Shapland and Hobbs 1989) is largely determined by wider social factors pertaining to the historical role and place of women in society.
Systems will simply not change as easily as Shapland and Hobbs seem to hope; for police society is extremely conservative and  masculine in outlook, and has long reflected the low esteem women are given in wider society, as I will describe in more detail in Chapter 4.
In consequence the wealth of research contained in the bibliographies I have mentioned often fails to follow through the deep structures of police culture or establish the ways in which the culture is self-sustaining even in the face of calls for social change.
As long ago now as 1974, Michael Maguire argued a need for a semantic ethnography of police systems and the criminals they pursue; and there has been a subsequent trickle of attempts to carry out participant observation inside the world of ‘cops and robbers’.
Ditton (1979) was said to have carried out ‘a unique situational ethnography in a bakery’, when he set out to assess fiddling; while Holdaway (1979, 1982, 1983) has pursued aspects of police culture, using his previous insider's knowledge to peel away some of the layers of obfuscation.
Dick Hobbs (1988) lived with thieves and detectives as they set out to ‘do the business’, and perhaps one of the most effective pieces of participant observation in recent times has been the four-volume Policy Studies Institute work on the police in London (1983).
Robert Lustig (1983), writing in the Observer (20 November 1983) called it:
the most detailed examination of the relationships between police and public ever conducted.
Every statement is based on observation; every conclusion is supported by evidence; every judgement is carefully weighed.
Two of the institute's researchers spent the best part of two years observing.
Its analysis of police culture was certainly incisive and accurate, as can be judged by its wholesale condemnation.
Sir Kenneth Newman, to whom the report was presented, candidly admitted he would not have commissioned it in the first place (it was commissioned by his predecessor, Sir David McNee), while the official Police Federation magazine (Police , December 1983) concluded in an editorial:
the report is certainly not a definitive and unchallengeable portrait of the Metropolitan police.
In later, calmer moments, those conclusions which are not based on published research material need to be contested.
There is a world of difference between research findings based on safe academic principles and methodology, and those produced with graphic literary phrases, but based upon anecdotal heresay, recorded by listeners blessed with total recall.
This attack was repeated again in 1987 in the Federation magazine, for the report had obviously hit a very raw nerve.
Its frenzied rejection was very different to that of the many projects listed in the Police Foundation or Home Office Registers of Research mentioned above, most of which are simply ignored and never ever receive any review.
I believe the denial of the PSI report and the furore it caused occurred precisely because it managed to get beneath the surface of police culture to explore the deep structures of belief and to comment adversely about their influence on police activities.
The invisibility in the written record, which Shapland and Hobbs (1989) observed, and the unrecorded information which Chatterton told the conference remained hidden in the heads of the constables are the result of cultural values, which are then brought to bear to deny validity to these agendas.
It is worth noting the language in the Federation rebuttal of the PSI report, for it illustrates how the culture is programmed to sneer at the ‘graphic literary phrase’ and dismiss the use of ‘anecdotal material’as unscientific: while participant observation is considered to be a world away from‘research based on safe academic principles’(my emphasis).
Police culture is omnipotent is structuring such views of critical research.
Historically it has homed in on sociology as the generic symbol of reformatory zealousness, regarding its practitioners almost as ‘folk devils’ or bogeymen.
Such a view of ‘sociology’ sets up another binary derived from the police preference for a Manichaean world created on homologies of ‘good — evil’, and further reflects the ferocious resistance to and fear of change which permeates the organization (see for example Weatheritt 1986, Butler 1984, and Adams 1988).
Certainly the social sciences are seen to be the arbiters of revolutionary change which might somehow dismantle the police institution and its processes, and this has led it to negate the reforming social scientists, keeping them as outsiders beyond the system.
A further example from the Police Foundation Oxford Conference gives some indication of the different perspectives which exist for the analytic researcher and the practical policeman:
Barrie Irving, the Police Foundation director has presented a paper today outlining research into the Police and Criminal Evidence Act (PACE).
Having some 1979 data on custody practices and prisoner interviews he sought to replicate the study in 1986/7 to assess the influence of the legislation on police practice.
Claiming significant differences in post-PACE activities he suggested these showed the need for legal measures to impact upon police practice and influence change.
His observational sample of prisoner interviews, although small, had found the PACE codes of practice were followed to the letter and he argued this showed that it required the sanction of the law to effect changes in interview and interrogation techniques.
A detective inspector shrugged this off, arguing from ‘practical mastery’ and ‘insider's’knowledge, that the practices of ‘doing the business’remained undisturbed outside of the PACE interview.
He accepted there was no question that the PACE interviews Irving had witnessed would have been carried out with exactitude, but was certain that the negotiation of justice could easily continue outside of the world of the written custody record or file of evidence.
The fact that a sociologist was witnessing the interviews make it all the more certain they would be conducted with scrupulous care, but there was no way he would be given access to the extra-legal deals which may well have gone on outside the interview room or later during a prison visit for ‘write-offs’.
As the detective cryptically pointed out:
I could make up the detections that his presence lost me in a matter of days, and if he thinks he is going to see any wheeling and dealing when he is sitting in, well he's naive!
As a working detective, it would take six months of living with a mate to trust him and know that when it came to the Crown Court appearance he would know exactly what to say.
(From fieldnotes.)
This distrust of the social scientist is so deeply ingrained that when I was reading anthropology as an undergraduate and I was asked by my colleagues what subject I was reading, I knew that I would have to prevaricate or face problems.
Usually I was challenged as to why I was not reading law, which was always quoted as the ‘proper’ subject for a police officer.
I eventually described the discipline of anthropology to certain colleagues as ‘the study of old bones, prehistory, and human evolution you know; David Attenborough and all that’.
I had taken two classes in physical anthropology and felt less guilty because of this and they were satisfied; although they would have preferred I had chosen to read law.
But as one said, ‘so long as you're not reading that bloody sociology’.
In 1987 I worked with a chief inspector who had just returned from university having read for a Bramshill scholarship in what he called ‘black letter law’.
He described the  study of precedent and case law as being ‘real academic activity’ for police officers, thus supporting my contention that research into the philosophy of control is ‘unreal’or polluting.
He spoke revealingly about the problems he had had with jurisprudence, bemoaning the fact that it was ambivalent and undefined, concerned primarily with the ambiguity which sustains the anthropologist by revealing the centralities of a system: ‘it was all grey areas; no black and white certainties or decisions; no precedent or case law giving the definitive interpretation’.
At the Police Staff College shortly before I was offered the scholarship to university, I had listened as lists of degrees obtained by previous scholars were read out.
The majority were for law and were greeted by applause in an assembly of the staff and students.
Later on, however, the names of those who had graduated in the social sciences and especially sociology were greeted with hissing disparagement and barely concealed denigration.
Greenhill (1981), then a lecturer at the college, discussed this history of police/sociology antagonism in detail, arguing a tendency in each side to discredit the other; resulting in a situation where ‘the number of published British texts and research studies on the sociology of the police may be numbered on the fingers of both hands’.
I suspect Greenhill was referring specifically to a dearth in the cultural analysis of policing, while his use of the duality of ‘sides’ reveals another parallel binary to that of ‘cops and robbers’, with the police and sociology arraigned against each other in yet another of the wars which the police wage against those who defile the sanctity of their definition of the concept of order.
Constant separations between the two categories are promoted, producing a dichotomized vision of left-wing, radical reformists, antagonistic to the ‘right-minded’‘boys in blue’ and includes a wealth of negative imagery of sociology which is lodged deep in the collective consciousness of the police mind.
The sociologist, as I shall illustrate, is the despised, hairy, intellectual subversive, who is set against the ‘clean and ordered British bobby’.
To reinforce a belief in their own omnipotence and popularity, the police have made increasing use of market research to show they are well liked; especially by that important category ‘the silent majority’.
The findings have tended to support the view that the police are held in relatively high esteem, although those  polled have invariably had little or no contact with the police in any capacity.
Although such findings are not in dispute, and of course are rarely undertaken in areas where public antagonism to the institution is known to run high, there is continual pressure to replicate them and repeat the consoling message.
For such results show the police to be ‘on the side of righteousness’, arraigned with the numerically superior forces of goodness and order in their fight against darkness and the void.
This tendency to dichotomize policemen against the social reformer even led the ex-police liberal John Alderson uncharacteristically to describe the historian E. P. Thompson as being ‘an unfair critic of the police’(Public Office , Granada TV, 20 June 1980); and this at a time when Thompson (1980) had just pointed out that most policemen are ‘ordinary blokes, and no society could do without them in dealing with many of its sordid realities’.
And sordid behaviour does exist, for even without the labelling techniques beloved of deviance theorists and favoured by the police, there remains the grim fact that such activities would not cease to occur (Maguire 1974).
Thompson (1980) has further suggested that many of these analyses are designed to present some utopian vision of a police-free world, but often include ‘the soppy notion that all crime is some kind of displaced revolutionary activity’.
This perspective, he contends, is a particularly sociological construct, implying criminal activity is some kind of pure or moralistic behaviour.
If Thompson is correct, then such presentations are as simplistic as many of the police images which imply that society is consistently under attack from rampaging and ubiquitous criminal enemies, and which (it follows) only they can fight off and defeat.
In the light of these partial versions of reality, I suggest there is a need to look beyond the surface presentation, whether handed out in the form of a press release or in the crime statistics which senior officers consistently use as an indication of social mayhem.
It is essential to look beyond the public utterance dressed up in  these metaphors of battle, and seek the structural forms which determine the ideological base.
It is here that an anthropological observing participation comes into its own, for in living with the semantics of the system the analyst has the potential to undertake a rarely used method of social research.
This contains the experience and depth of the insider's knowledge, which Holdaway (1979) recognizes is unlikely to become readily available, simply because ‘there is a lack of impetus within contemporary sociology to spend lengthy periods of observation in what may be uncomfortable research situations [with the police]’.
And here the problem really begins, for the ethnographer must explore beyond the public presentation of self, to seek the underlying discourses of police reality.
Inevitably this takes the researcher beyond the press release, the statistical return, or the ‘folk explanation’ and into an interpretive framework, perhaps to seek how these presentations are used (often unconsciously) as part of a well-constructed formula to replicate positions of power and support the ideology and practices of the institution.
Immediately the police officer/anthropologist sets out to undertake research or record fieldnotes he is forced to confront a moral dilemma.
This exists simply because he must necessarily reveal aspects of a closed and somewhat secretive society to the outside if he is to pursue any ethnography at all.
Furthermore, he will know that his contemporaries are not really too keen on its revelation: indeed they may well argue that the police have research facilities of their own which are geared up to the internal needs and interests of the institution (Benyon 1988: 21).
He becomes crucially aware that they have little need of any critical analysis, for as Benyon (ibid. 23) goes on to point out,
historically, the powerful have encouraged hagiography, not critical investigation….
And they have been in a position to determine the way they are investigated and the manner of their public exposure.
They have also, when confronted with [any]critical research findings, been quick to use this power to neutralize the critical impact…
Yet in such circumstances the insider's account has a potential to combine ‘action anthropology’, ‘applied anthropology’, and ‘pure anthropology’, to create a fully semantic analysis; and this raises the question of whether it will then be possible to publish and be damned?
For such special knowledge holds the potential for an  ethnographic interpretation of police culture which incorporates aspects of ‘practical mastery’(Bourdieu 1977) and to enlarge on what Kuper (1973: 238) has somewhat critically dismissed as ‘the prissy sterility of much of the methodological or reformist sociology’.
Such an insider's account will therefore hopefully achieve the ‘finer grain and detail’ MacDonald (1987) demanded of postmodern ‘anthropology at home’, while ‘practical mastery’of the ethnographic field should reduce the problems faced by McCabe and Sutcliffe (1978), who set out to pursue participant observation on the police and found that ‘it would be necessary for anyone wishing to fully understand the process of policing to take into account the difficulties in gaining access and an understanding of just what was going on’.
Seeking to unravel police decision-making in relation to the classification of crimes, McCabe and Sutcliffe (ibid.) admitted that as outsiders they were usually not quick enough to grasp the nuances of what was taking place before them.
They went on to suggest that where complex insider activities are being carried out in a sub-language designed to exclude the uninformed, the best ethnography would probably be carried out by the insider/ethnographer.
That this will require some radical reflexivity on the part of the insider is obvious, for it is almost inevitable that his revelations will not only create some discomfort for himself, but will almost certainly be unwelcome.
Even the research listed by the ‘independent’ Police Foundation or undertaken at the University Centres for Criminological Research (and largely dependent on government grants and funding by such bodies as the Economic and Social Research Council) often comes up against the anti — intellectual bias which permeates all levels in police thinking (Lewis 1976).
This facet of the culture is perhaps the reason why the British administrative and academic élites have obliquely indicated to the police that they do not consider them fit to be allowed to take charge of police research.
It may also be the reason why, in its forty-year history, the Police Staff College has never achieved any real academic status; for, as Lewis (ibid. 183) also points out:
there is a deep feeling that academic training gets between a policeman and his knowing and getting the respect of the crude masses of a very crude, very egalitarian and anti-intellectual European race…the police  have indeed a general belief that they know more psychology than academics.
Always the demand is for ‘practical’ skills, while academic analysis remains a despised pastime, so that even the Superintendents' Association (the equivalent of the Police Federation for the lower ranks) has similarly denied any place for intellectualism for its members.
At their 1974 conference they decided: ‘It is time to end the service's love affair with education’.
Although this conference comment is now well over fifteen years old it still holds good.
In 1987 when I attended the Intermediate Command Course at the Police Staff College with some thirty-five other superintendents from around Britain, I found that my Ph.D.
was the source of extreme curiosity and even some apprehension, and I watched (and recorded fieldnotes) as my new colleagues sparred warily with the ‘Doctor’ in their midst.
I realized I would need to convince them at the first opportunity that I was primarily a practical policeman and not an academic; and I also noted that while the college was keen to list the academic qualifications of those on the course, the participants quickly justified Lewis's assertions by playing them down to emphasize their history of praxis and practical mastery.
AN ANTHROPOLOGY OF THE SELF: PARTICIPANT OBSERVATION OR ESPIONAGE
Any insider who sets out to pursue a reflexive anthropology of policing eventually has to face difficulties which arise when he reaches an objective and analytic understanding of his society and its own specific versions of reality.
He must come to terms with living with this consciousness and with the inherent problems he will face in revealing this knowledge to the outside in an ethnographic account.
Moreover, he must come to terms with a new awareness of what he has previously accepted, perhaps without thinking, which under the intense microscope of social enquiry may well seem to verge on the ludicrous or to be morally indefensible.
And having long been supported by the institution he will be crucially aware that it expects a degree of loyalty verging on deference or acquiescence.
In such an archetypal world, where ‘good’ is constantly and insecurely balanced in an eternal struggle against ‘evil’, the  objective explication of the rituals and symbols which surround and mystify police work can seem tantamount to a treasonable act.
In 1979, James Anderton, the Christian moralist chief constable of Greater Manchester, described the greatest threat to law and order as stemming from ‘seditionist…interested groups who do not have the well-being of this country at heart and who mean to undermine democracy’(Thompson 1979: 380).
In the light of such a polemic stand, it begs the question whether the revelation of how crime figures are manipulated by the police to sustain institutional beliefs (see Chapter 5) could be said to undermine democracy or be classified as sedition.
For Anderton vehemently rejects the idea of any internal evaluation which might explore the moralities or philosophies of policing: ‘there is simply no room in the management and organization of police operations for vague, academic dissertations’(Police Review ; 90, 19 November 1982: 4684).
In his 1977 annual report, Sir David McNee, then commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, urged that ‘the libertarian should beware’.
In due course, his successor, Sir Kenneth Newman, echoed this anti-intellectual stance, when he warned insiders that ‘policemen must remember that they are practitioners, not crusaders; theirs is to do, not to righteously philosophise’(Police Journal 56, No. 1 (1983)).
Such pronouncements implicitly acknowledge police structures to be a logic upon which rationalizations, justifications, and systems of protection are built up.
To reveal these is to peel back a curtain and show this version of institutional order is only one social possibility, and furthermore is a continually manipulated experience.
For the insider such an exploration of the secular rituals and social constructs which govern police practice will hold what Myerhoff and Moore (1977: 18) have described as ‘the possibility that we will encounter ourselves making up conceptions of the world, society, our very selves.
We may slip into that fatal perspective of recognising culture as our construct, arbitrary, conventional, invented by mortals’.
Inevitably this perspective will create problems for the insider as he now comes to recognize the arbitrarily constructed nature of his universe.
For over a decade I lived with this new knowledge and with the ethical dilemma surrounding my own pursuit of insider research.
During the creation of a doctoral thesis and preparation of papers for seminars, I had to face the conscious problem of writing about a system which I know  prefers silence and links such reticence to ideas of ‘respect’, ‘order’, and ‘discipline’ in an all-encompassing paternalism.
And of course I knew that this hierarchical organization offers the possibility of reward and incorporation into the highest ranks to those who conform to such dictates.
The dilemma followed me through the publication of a few accounts of my researches.
This loyalty to the family (or force) is another lived quality which is imbued at every turn by practice and example.
Although rarely defined, it is often on the lips of the members, so that the phrase, ‘I don't want to seem disloyal, but…’ will often preface even the mildest internal criticism of any of the systems of policing.
This total reverence to the group binds ideas of silence, loyalty, and reticence together to create a positive category for belief and action and, in turn, links silence to other concepts of respect for the order of the institution.
In consequence, even the publication of an academic seminar paper carried out without formal approval could form a breach in the regulated structures of police existence and be subject to disciplinary control.
In such a world, the easy resolution of the ethical dilemma remains problematic, for as Anne Akeroyd (1984: 134) recognizes ‘there is not, nor ever likely to be any definitive agreement about the nature of either the problems or solutions [facing the social scientist and the question of ethics]’.
I have never completely resolved my own dilemma, for I do not think it has a simple resolution.
Unlike the natural sciences, which deal largely in results, the social sciences are rightly concerned for practice, perhaps because results are rarely possible in an exact mathematical sense.
Consequently, this ethnography will continually raise such matters simply to illustrate the dilemma as it arises, for I have consistently had to contend with the nature of an insider's breach of social boundaries.
Asked to comment on the publication potential of my Ph.D.
thesis (Young 1986), Mike Chatterton (1988) rightly homed in on this question of ethics, saying: ‘there is reference here to the moral dilemma(s) posed by ‘insiders’ using their access to do ethnography and what that entails regarding betraying confidences etc….
The way the writer resolved them is not adequately addressed…the issues are raised, but no explanation [is given]of  how they were resolved in practice.’
Of course there is no perfect solution.
I had the easy choice of remaining silent, or the more difficult one of addressing the problem at some length in various publications; which is how I resolved the practical difficulties.
This ethnography is therefore an attempt to meet the dilemma, for the problem of revelation and betrayal continues to surface and can only be resolved, at best, by overcoming these subjective feelings and pursuing compromises (Barnes 1981: 2).
Indeed, I believe, along with Akeroyd (1984: 154) that:
In a pluralist world and an increasingly pluralist discipline, consensus about ethical behaviour and research practices is unattainable and compromise seems inevitable…
The social researcher must make compromises…between roles as scientist and citizen; between commitment and impartiality; between openness and secrecy, honesty and deception; and between the public right to know and the citizen's right to privacy and protection…the onus for making decisions in practice rests with the individual researcher.
In the light of these points and Benyon's claims mentioned above, it seems inevitable that any insider analysis of policing seems destined to alarm.
To suggest from within the institution that these influential and powerful units of control are essentially ephemeral and arbitrary constructs, involved in very limited and narrow areas of practice, will almost certainly lead to a rejection of the account; and the findings are more than likely to be attributed the same metaphorical rejection as the activities of the villains and criminals, as was illustrated in the response to the study undertaken by the Policy Studies Institute outlined above.
For in a similar vein to the criminal ‘enemy’, the researcher's activities are across the bounds, a challenge to be taken on, attacked, and, destroyed or at least to be denied.
As Chatterton (1973: 107) has written:
on more than one occasion…senior ranking officers have made no bones about the fact that they attribute many of the problems of contemporary police work to the pernicious influence of the media and sociology!
Such people are radically opposed to the idea of sociologists conducting research on the police and long for a return to a ‘golden age’ when the proverbial veil of secrecy surrounded police work.
When the research is experiential, carried out by an insider, the publications can prove emotive and will almost certainly be career-problematic for the author.
Usually policemen know  the limits allowed by the organization and play safe.
Harry Templeton (1980), a police officer in North Wales, suggested:
when you read in Police Review that an officer has been awarded an M.A. after post-graduate study, it will probably be in a ‘safe’ subject such as business management.
Few officers who continue their academic studies ever consider sociological study of their own job.
Serving officers who attempt constructive criticism of the police, risk being labelled traitors and put their promotion prospects in jeopardy.
If internal criticism is unwelcome, the views of outsiders are even more likely to be seen as hostile and derogatory.
This risk to promotion chances is well understood and can be clearly illustrated.
In his Durham Business School M.Phil.
thesis, ‘Communications in a Disciplined Society’, a sergeant (Wilson 1978: 6) explained why he had chosen the Royal Navy in preference to the police in which to carry out his research: ‘[I]considered incompatible a progressive career within the police force, and the implications of carrying out research within that organization’.
In other words, Sergeant Wilson (who has since left the force) agreed to compromise to enhance his career opportunities rather than present any challenge to the system.
Obviously concerned that his analysis of the negative influence of discipline on the efficiency of systems of communication might offend or incite displeasure, he avoided confrontation; but he need not have worried.
For it received the neglect that a great deal of insider research achieves and was channelled (unopened) to me, accompanied by a two-line memo from a senior officer which suggested, ‘I understand you are doing some research; you may find this useful’.
In the following three years the thesis remained on my desk, unrequested by anyone else.
Any suggestions for improvements in communications or any critical findings it may have contained were negated by institutional neglect and the ‘silence’ which Arendt (1958) argues is a primary tool of authority operated to effect!
The police, of course, can never really be geared easily to incorporate structural challenge to their existing concepts of order and control, for they are set up to maintain the symbols and practice which has sustained the status quo .
It would be paradoxical for them to be in the vanguard of social change, for as Templeton (1980) points out, they are ‘there to preserve the structure; to uphold the state of play’.
But there are a few who are questioning the  state of play, and who agree with Ben Whitaker (1979: 312) when he urged ‘that police thinking would profit if it more often came out of its shell and concerned itself with wider questions about the role of the police and human relations’.
However, this is not always easy to achieve, as I found out when I first returned to work in 1977 after my degree course.
In order to continue postgraduate studies I had applied for some financial assistance for part-time fees, under a scheme created by the Home Office and set up specifically in recognition of a lack of higher educational qualifications in the police service (HO Circular 29/74).
This directive encourages officers to research and study in their own time and lists suitable subjects, which include ‘public administration, management studies, economics, law, criminology, social sciences, youth work, English language and literature and relevant modern languages’.
The circular goes on to point out that the list is not exhaustive and suggests other courses may be appropriate.
I had applied to continue full-time research following my degree course, but this had been turned down by my chief officers; however, I had been told that assistance for part-time study would almost certainly be approved in view of the national policy of encouraging officers to extend their educational qualifications.
I then found my application for financial assistance for part-time study had been rejected ‘because anthropology is not on the approved list of subjects (in the Circular)’(Memo from HQ 1977).
Eventually I was able to convince my senior officers that anthropology was one of the social sciences, perhaps only because I somewhat sardonically returned a memo which asked ‘why, if anthropology is not approved, have I just been allowed to read the subject on a Bramshill Scholarship, on full pay and allowances?’
Just over a year later, at a ‘Career Appraisal Interview’ with the chief constable, I was asked: ‘tell me, how did you find the law course at the polytechnic?’
I pointed out that I had not been to the polytechnic, but had been to Durham University on a scholarship — only the second the force had been awarded.
I was then  asked: ‘what's the difference between a law course at polytechnic and at the university?’
This assumption that policemen study law becomes axiomatic.
As Smith (ibid.) indicates, the cost of one scholarship (when he was writing in 1978) was about £30,000 and by the late 1980s this had risen to well over £100,000.
Yet some twelve months after I had graduated, I was now having my first interview with my chief constable who had no idea what I had studied or what result I had achieved.
This tendency to ignore those on scholarships is mentioned by Smith (ibid. 154):
with one exception, all [scholars]contacted have expressed strongly that the service did not appear to see the practical relevance of university training, did not know how to exploit the benefits gained by the individual and in many cases showed noticeable coolness to those who were part of it.
This ‘coolness’ is something other scholars have experienced.
An inspector reading humanities at Oxford, told me: ‘I felt cut off, with no contact back at work.
No one wished to know me, I was away and forgotten.’
Another inspector from Merseyside, reading social studies at Liverpool, said: ‘I felt isolated, not just ignored, but socially dead’(personal communication).
Smith (ibid. 157) also touches on the crucial feeling of potentiality which the university experience can produce in the individual, but which the police are generally unable to incorporate.
Yet another inspector returning to Leicester with a degree in psychology was set to work in the force vehicle store counting tyres.
Like many graduates stimulated by their experiences, he discovered that although he had been of sufficient calibre to acquire the offer of the scholarship in the first place, he now faced the inevitable service obsession with a rejection of academic prowess in preference for ‘practical skills in the real world’(ibid. 157):
the greatest problem with the current working of the scheme appears to relate to ‘re-entry’ into the Service…
The impact upon the personality expectations and the way of life of a mature scholar by the University experience is not appreciated by many of the police…
It is therefore difficult for him to appreciate the general view of the Service, that, on his return…he must re-establish his professional standing, even though a few years earlier the Service had sent him to University because he had proved himself to be a good, practical policeman.
For those who go on to read postgraduate studies, there is the further problem of publishing any research findings.
A police graduate I met at a seminar on ‘Research into the Police’, which we had both attended in a private capacity and without force blessing or financial assistance, later wrote to me:
there are always strong moves to keep studies under wraps.
There is a tendency for senior officers to suppress research findings and to advise those who see it as useful and important, to desist.
Usually career coercion will suffice to ensure that any troublesome thesis stays unpublished and out of the public eye.
In the late 1970s another insider academic experienced this autocratic preference for silence when he was served a notice under the Official Secrets Act.
He had proposed to publish his Ph.D.
thesis, and although apparently not very controversial, it invoked such extreme measures simply to ensure it remained under wraps.
It would, of course, have revealed some aspects of the variable world of police culture to the outside and this was unacceptable.
Another writer on the police met similar problems when he wished to write and publish.
I had discussed the problems of insider analysis with him at a 1988 Police Conference, where he described how, on return to his force after his undergraduate degree, he had asked for permission to publish research material.
His request was refused in a written memo from HQ, but no reason was given.
Unwilling to accept this constraint, he went on to ask ‘why not?’(again in written report) and was informed reasons were never given; the official line was simply to refuse all such requests.
Not unexpectedly, this officer left the police and moved into academic life.
Even the simple article sent to the magazine Police Review can be subject to vetting and many Force Orders demand this privilege.
Another inspector I know had problems with an innocuous piece written in a mildly conversational style.
This was put up for vetting to a nominated superintendent whose instinctive response was to deny its submission, suggesting it ‘looked as if it would be editorially unsuitable’.
He had come up against sterner stuff, however, and an assistant chief constable was called in to mediate and eventually agreed to send it on after the author urged that the editor of the magazine be allowed to decide (fieldnotes 1988).
Even a letter to the Police Review can be regarded as a form of indiscipline:
Writing to the Police Review
In a duty report to my chief constable I mentioned I had written to Police Review .
He sent me a memorandum directing me to inform him in future before I write to any newspaper periodical on matters appertaining to the force.
Do you consider that I may have committed a disciplinary offence?
Answer
A chief constable is perfectly entitled to insist on being informed when a member of his force writes to the press on matters appertaining to his force.
The Disciplinary Code in Schedule 1 to the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 contains an offence of ‘improper disclosure of information’, which is committed where a member of a police force without proper authority communicates to any person, any information which he has in his possession as a member of a police force.
This does not apply to matters of general interest, although some senior officers appear to have strange interpretations of their own.
(Police Review 26 August 1988: 1797)
Of course, the desire to obtain control of the written word has always been one indication of the autocratic mind.
This fear of open debate continues even when the publication is by a retired officer and when control is less easy for the chief officer to enforce:
Sir Peter Imbert, the Met Commissioner, has written to Met officers warning that he would take proceedings under the Official Secrets Act against police who break an internal discipline code which prohibits ‘improper disclosure of information’.
The step follows the newspaper serialisation of former D/Chief Supt. Drummond Marvin's account of sensational cases he handled as deputy head of the force's Serious Crime Squad.
(Police Review 26 June 1988: 1779)
There are shades of Peter Wright and Spycatcher here, with the warning to stay silent extending to ex-members of the ‘family’.
It is a salutary lesson on the stability of this precept to see Sir Peter following the precedent set by his predecessors in Sir David McNee and Sir Kenneth Newman, both of whom, as I have indicated above, rejected the internal desire to philosophize or be discursive.
In West Mercia, there have been regular reissues of Force  Orders to remind members to be circumspect in their dissertations and essays prepared for part-time diplomas in Management Services or the NEBS qualification which is now an integral part of inspector training.
The fear is always that the outside will be presented with the chance to gain knowledge and power at the expense of the institution; although this is often only obliquely implied:
Persons Undertaking Outside Study: Disclosure of Information
From time to time, and particularly in connection with external courses, police officers and civilian employees may have cause to write articles, dissertations, essays, etc., which require them to research information of a privileged nature.
It may not be…prudent for such information to be then read by other than police personnel.
Such information may not necessarily carry any security classification within the Service, but may simply reveal dispositions, working arrangements etc.
When such information is submitted to tutors or course directors etc., there is no guarantee of its circulation or copying.
All personnel who undertake external study or produce articles should be mindful of the dangers of revealing privileged information and should:
a) Use their own discretion on the use or reproduction of such information.
b) If in any doubt, seek the advice of a senior officer of the rank of Superintendent or above.
c) If it is considered imperative that such privileged information should be included on the paper and which [sic ]falls within the terms of the concern expressed above, then the whole should be submitted for approval by a Chief Officer…who will give a ruling as to its use and circulation.
Nothing in this order changes the already existing practices exercised in connection with courses or papers overseen by the Regional Inspector Training Unit or Police College.
In these cases a Senior Police Officer has ‘first read’ of any papers and all other personnel involved have been required to enter into an undertaking to respect the security of the information.
(Force Order w/e 28 November 1987).
In effect, such an order intends that all dissertations and papers will be submitted for vetting.
Any criteria for defining ‘privileged information’, or what the ‘dangers’ are in revealing such matters as dispositions (of manpower) are so vaguely incorporated as to  ensure that few will risk submitting an essay without approval, which might later be assessed as an ‘improper disclosure’.
The creation of this order at the time a new Official Secrets Bill was being pushed through Parliament by an increasingly interventionist government is significant, and the idea of a senior officer's having ‘first read’ of any essay to maintain the integrity of the institution manifests the importance of the legalized surveillance of allegedly dangerous material and enhances the separation of the world of control from that academic enquiry; although its implementation is only randomly applied.
Just as Sgt Wilson's thesis was channelled to me because I was known to be interested in research, so many police research departments now get allocated the task of reading the essays submitted by sergeants and inspectors for NEBS or DMS qualifications.
In 1988 a visiting colleague from the Royal Ulster Constabulary asked if it was part of my role in Systems Development Department to comment on such essays.
He told of his own difficulties in finding time to read all the variable essays submitted and knew of many that were never sent in at all.
For although Force Orders inevitably direct that such material will be submitted for assessment, it is typical that in a task-orientated institution which gives low priority or credence to the academic tome, the systems to ensure submission of the essays, or the ability to make much use of any useful ideas they contain, often remains sketchy.
As the director of the Police Foundation, Barrie Irving (1984: 4) commented, ‘Unlike their American counterparts, the British police community, together with their administrators, do not devour large quantities of written material [and]if a research project does not produce results which can be acted upon…no amount of careful editing and dissemination will make an impact.’
Research in the police, Irving further asserts, is a matter of pragmatics, eliminating philosophical enquiry into systems of belief, or how the knowledge of an ideology is transformed into action.
In the end, only the action is viable, so that all these essays tend to match the inside ethnography and are nullified by neglect or have any contentious matter treated as ‘privileged information’, for as Templeton (1980: 904) argues ‘the police fear that if you have a better understanding of society, you are in a better position to change it — the very exercise [they]are reluctant to engage in’.
Those who do go public are disloyal and there are thinly veiled  attempts to dismiss the value of any revelation they make, for they are expected to remain silent and uncritical.
When Ronald Gregory, the ex-chief constable of West Yorkshire, said little or nothing new about the ‘Yorkshire Ripper case’ in a series of newspaper articles, he was castigated in Police Review (1 July 1983) and they republished a 1979 photograph of him when ‘his loyalty was unquestioned’.
John Alderson, the ex-chief constable of Devon and Cornwall has suffered even more from his subsequent public persona, because of a move into academia, some critical publications, and a flirtation with the political life.
Police Review (18 February 1983) has an article on him by a superintendent, which is full of graphic metaphors clearly illustrating this idea of ‘traitors to the service’.
Alderson is revealingly described: ‘poor old John Alderson [has]gone careering off the rails,[and is]now shacked up with the liberal party…an intellectual liberal reformer with radical ideas [whose]philosophical mumbo jumbo, often incomprehensible, and not very original, did nothing to impress’.
Furthermore, ‘there have been questions about his loyalty’, for Alderson has had the temerity to caution the service about an apparent drift towards paramilitarism.
Needless to say the revelations made by John Stalker (1988) were also less than welcome to the service, and all around I heard my contemporaries condemn the fact that he had gone public.
Inevitably, I noted these criticisms were rarely in relation to what he had said (few had actually read the book), but rather were expressions of shocked outrage that he had failed to keep silent and say nothing at all.
Indeed, the fact that he had apparently used an editor from a Manchester newspaper for some of his purposes was latched onto and quoted as a sign that he was ‘suspect’ and ‘disloyal’.
One consequence of these modes of thought is that the service has to live out a continuous and enormous paradox.
Even at the same time as it publicly commends higher education, seeking out the graduate entrant, spending large sums on publicity to this  end, and funding access to degree courses on scholarships, it also holds to a central ethic of distrust of the academic.
Whitaker (1979: 229) clearly understands the way this rejection of training and education operates within the service:
at present good recruits often have to be chased to Bramshill [on the lengthy command courses], because chief constables are not anxious to spare able men, and officers themselves are reluctant to be separated from their families and homes, as well as having a fear that they might lose from being ‘out of sight, out of mind’ for promotion.
And although always implied rather than broadcast, this rejection of intellectualism is so well understood throughout the service that it has even affected those to whom Bramshill scholarships to University have been offered, and many turn them down.
I know several inspectors who have refused a college scholarship, arguing that the time spent away from the force was time spent in structural limbo, and it has become almost a common adage that time away is time lost in ‘the promotion stakes’.
All that is required, they feel, is the offer of a scholarship from the Police College, for it serves the same purpose on the c.v.
and reduces the need to spend time in limbo or the need on re-entry to reestablish oneself.
Furthermore, it reduces the risk of being labelled with the derogatory term of ‘academic’.
This marginality of academics continually comes to the fore and my fieldnotes are full of examples.
In 1987 at one of the regular meetings of superintendents, I listened as the deputy chief constable talked his way through a potential problem for the increasing numbers of graduates in the service, who ‘obviously cannot all make it to the top’.
Of course this has always been the case for all entrants, for there are only forty-three chief constables and the same number of deputies, so few have a chief officer's truncheon in their knapsack (to paraphrase an old army chestnut).
The inference in this was not really about the career chances of the still tiny percentage of graduates (who are obviously well aware that their chances of reaching the highest echelons are constrained by the limitations in the numbers of top posts), rather it was a reassertion  that those with a degree are almost a different species and remain a threat to the stability of the institution.
It is not uncommon for the police magazines to feature this antipathy to the academic, and especially the social science researcher:
When you take away all the sociological clap trap which is fashionable in some circles, policing is all about dealing with folk.
At the end of the day we must concern ourselves with the practicalities and not philosophies of dealing with everyday problems.
(Police Review , 18 May 1983)
now ‘body language’ has to be dressed up with a lot of sociological clap trap and paraded as some marvellous new technique, aimed at revolutionising police relations with the public.
If you believe that not only will you believe anything, you'll probably end up as a Doctor of Philosophy.
(Police magazine, May 1981; my emphases)
Inevitably those few insiders who do undertake postgraduate research in the social sciences are aware that they are involved in the creation of ‘clap trap’, and must know that this denigration stems from the implicit threat they pose to the structures of pedagogy and institutional power.
Those who pursue explication can expect to be seen as suspicious, for they embody the marginality of the anthropologist, described by Lévi-Strauss (1973: 67) as being someone who is ‘psychologically speaking maimed, an amputee’.
This maimed psyche, according to Francis Huxley (1970: 62), creates a specific concept of the self and makes the inside anthropologist ‘a mutilated man…in curious revolt against his own society’.
In such a world many graduates learn to play down their qualifications, for they know the hostility which exists towards academia and realize the significance of ‘practical ability’ gained in ‘the university of real life’.
Furthermore the graduate recruits can judge the derisory attitude to academics for themselves, simply by picking up most editions of Police magazine.
One example (September 1980) headed ‘University Challenge’ exemplifies this antipathy, with a full page of cartoons on graduate candidates illustrating a range of negative symbols.
These graduate applicants are shaggy, long haired, and bearded, reflecting a direct binary to the approved short back and sides.
Their need for thick-lensed ‘John Lennon’ spectacles implies they are physically imperfect as they slouch or lean against props; for these lazy, untidy creatures have techniques of the body which reveal major structuring  principles of police thinking.
Their clothes are bedraggled in a clear symbolic indication of bodily order and its antithesis, and illustrate a microcosmic representation of police values.
Bourdieu (1977: 94–5) describes these as a means by which
all totalitarian institutions (in Goffman's phrase) embody their principles in an inexplicit way, beyond the grasp of consciousness and exhort the essential by an implicit pedagogy, capable of instilling a whole cosmology, an ethic, a political philosophy through injunctions as insignificant as ‘stand up straight’.
It is little wonder then that social research is equated with ‘clap trap’ in police magazines, for they aim to support the beliefs of those who have taken on this unconscious cosmology, and for whom as Bourdieu (ibid.) indicates, such challenges would defy ‘the most natural manifestations of submission to the established order [and abolish]lateral possibilities’.
In consequence of this acquired system of generative schemes, an imbued belief is implanted in the institutional mind which verges on ‘the natural’, while Huxley's ‘mutilated man’ pursuing his insider's reflexivity seeks out the lateral possibility, and makes gestures against the principles of the organization.
In doing this the anthropologist ‘at home’ quickly comes to understand why he must always stand on the margins of structure.
For it is one of the dictums of the discipline of anthropology that it will reveal unwelcome truths:
the anthropologist is committed not simply to description, but to analysing and questioning the definitions and assumptions on which social groups base their existence and predicate their activities, and to unveiling that which may be concealed or unrecognised.
This makes the anthropologist at the least an uncomfortable associate, at the worst seem ‘dirty’, ‘dangerous’ or even ‘subversive’.
(Akeroyd 1980: 6)
Anthropology has been prominent in showing how the marginal in any society tends to pose problems for state institutions and governments; and the insider must anticipate that his conclusions might well be
frequently uncomfortable [and]may well challenge the assumptions of the institution.
Anthropological knowledge can seem, and often is, dangerous and subversive — not because we are good at digging up dirt (we  are), nor simply because we document what ‘actually happens’ rather than what is supposed to happen, but because our ways of defining situations and problems often raise questions in our minds about the fundamental assumptions on which any institution bases its own definitions, and indeed the assumptions on which it rests as an institution.
They get far more than they bargain for.
(Grillo 1980: 3)
In effect, the insider who reveals the structural formations of a system of power inverts that power and the revelation creates a situation where elements of ‘anti-structure’(Turner 1969, 1974) now present a version of how things might be constituted; and what has been seen as solid reality begins to be identified as only one social possibility.
In this observing participation, the ‘thick description’ which Geertz (1975) argued for comes hurtling at the ethnographer, so that the classic use of an ‘anthropological informant’is hardly necessary.
Rather it will be a case of the researcher finding a means of recording and sorting the mass of detail which continuously bombards him and presents him with the lateral possibilities which make the discipline potentially dangerous.
He will have little opportunity to stand back and examine the data in the cool light of the academic ‘ivory tower’.
Nor will he be able to take a sabbatical to formulate the complex structures of meaning lodged deep in the empirical material, which Lévi-Strauss (1976: 80) has argued are capable of linking together symbolic and metaphoric programmes to ‘reveal properties not immediately accessible to the (empirical) observation’.
To coin another military metaphor, he must ‘soldier on’ knowing that all of this activity might well smack of sedition.
Even the fact that someone inside is writing fieldnotes will produce unease, as I have experienced; and their collation can almost certainly be tantamount to something akin to espionage; for as Sean Conlin (1980) observed: ‘often our work can seem ‘political’ rather than scientific’.
WRITING THE ‘ESPIONAGE’
Because of this insider's knowledge, I chose to record my fieldnotes surreptitiously and with much burning of the midnight oil.
My practical mastery had made me acutely aware of the boundaries which separate those inside the institution from those  excluded from the specialist knowledge of ‘doing the business’ and I was more than ever aware of the suspicions which would have been aroused if I had introduced questions of an academic nature, or had distributed questionnaires.
Like Powdermaker (1967), who recorded fieldnotes in Mississippi only when she was away from her field data, I found I only took notes at the time if I was willing to risk begin interrogated about what I was going to do with the information I was recording.
Webb et al .
(1966: 72) recognized such unobtrusive measures have found favour in field-work and I discovered at an early stage that the problem remains one of revealing the structural warts of the system while somehow indicating that this need not be seditious; and indeed might even be of some value.
As it is, when I showed close colleagues my first working paper (Young 1979a) on experiences in a police bridewell (see Chapters 2 and 3), they were alarmed.
I was told on more than one occasion, that I should not really let outsiders see this sort of thing, even though it was agreed that what I had written was an accurate analysis of events.
In some respects, I think it was the detail of the ethnographic ‘thick description’ which most alarmed them; for as almost all of them wistfully pointed out: ‘it shows exactly how we do the business’.
In effect the insider who questions the gross systems of classification which define police practice seems set to join those deviants or criminals who contest the system of law and order by breaking its rules and regulations.
Any challenge to what is an almost xenophobic and dichotomous world of ‘order’ and ‘disorder’casts the social analyst and the critical criminologist onto the dark side of the binary.
To some extent these academic outsiders are ‘the enemy’ of police society, whose training and class aspirations makes them supporters of the status quo and resentful of liberal ideas or academic intrusion (Reiner 1978a).
When Sarah McCabe (1980) queried the logic of why just one police system should be entrusted with the control of crime, law, order, and social assistance, pointing out, ‘there is some disagreement about the use of the criminal law — unease about control of the streets…[which poses the question]who will be controlled and [who will be]assisted’, she found the tenor of her ‘thoughtful and moderate examination of the police role…was too much for the senior officers to whom it was presented, and they set out to discredit it with a will’(Greenhill 1981: 98).
It seems most likely then, that the increasing police budgets (up from £3.35 billion in 1988/9 to £4.1 billion in 1989/90), which have risen by over 50 per cent in real terms since 1979, will be used to maintain, defend, and expand on this hegemonic style.
For who within the service is seeking or is willing to dismantle these units whose power and autonomy has been growing in strides since the Royal Commission of 1960 and the subsequent Police Act of 1964 first created the amalgamated giants?
Today, in the early 1990s there seems to be every possibility their taste for autocracy and power might persuade the police that secrecy should take on a new dimension, so that sedition could acquire new status as a deviance, while even the ‘espionage’ of ethnography could well become actionable.
In this situation, research into the police could well become increasingly difficult and even less welcome than it was a decade ago.
At that time, Punch (1979) pointed out (in a comparison of facilities in Britain and Holland) that research into the police in Britain is not easy and
I think it would be more difficult to gain access and get co-operation [from a British Force].
Also there is more hostility towards academics than in Holland where their status is higher.
In the U.K. academics tend to be denigrated…
In practice some areas of police work are unresearchable, but in principle they shouldn't be.
If research can be done in Holland and the USA, I don't see why it shouldn't be done in Britain, except I suspect that some British police forces are just hostile to outsiders.
I think this is probably true of the Metropolitan Police; they have never really allowed any fundamental research on any sensitive issue.
You get people like Belson who was allowed to do a survey research of public opinion.
Few people have been allowed to do any extensive fieldwork.
Since this condemnation of research opportunity, few studies have penetrated deeply beneath the sensitive skin of ‘police culture’, and even though Chatterton in his notes to my thesis argued there has been a considerable amount of ‘participant police research’, I would question whether many of these inquiries achieved the finer grain and detail' of the insider's account, for they can never really know or tell if they have been excluded from the inner workings of police practice or prevented from gaining access to the hidden realities ‘contained inside the heads of the constables’.
Because of the élitism which such an organization of control wields, it is not surprising there is difficulty in incorporating the outside researcher, or in accepting his critical findings.
And  certainly that other main arm of executive control — the army — seems little better at this than the police, for the number of participant accounts of their deep structures remains negligible, supporting McCabe's (1980) contention that we should be asking of all of these costly institutions, ‘who is to be controlled by whom and for what reasons?’
Meanwhile, as Reiner (1985) suggests, the politicization of the police has proceeded at a pace, and can be illustrated by their growing willingness to respond to political dissent as a form of ‘crime’ or deviancy.
This trend is further displayed in their growing tendency to agree to be used as a pseudo-military arm of government in its socio-economic and industrial/political disputes with whole sections of society.
In 1985, Cressida Dick, a probationary constable, wrote a prize-winning essay which clearly showed an awareness of this politicization, and asked the sort of questions which few senior officers seemed to be thinking or voicing.
In her essay ‘Implications of the Miners' Strike’, she pointed out that:
the Government's seeming indifference to the effect of the dispute on police public relations,[should entitle the police]to wonder whether it is being used to preserve law and order or to implement government policy.
This view of the use of the police as agents of government economic policy was shared, frequently with concern, by much of the public…
The miners' strike marks a set-back for those who argue that police and politics don't mix…for the discussions generated will serve to accelerate the politicisation of the police…[and]has highlighted the presence of ACPO and the NRC [the co-ordinating National Reporting Centre], as bodies, set up without the authority of Parliament, of apparently unquantified and unaccountable power.
Such expansions of police power were forecast by E. P. Thompson (1980), who considered this to be a period which has no equal.
He argued, historically, that he knew ‘of no period in which the police have had such a loud and didactic public presence,…[or]when they have offered themselves as a distinct interest as one of the great ‘institutions’ and perhaps the first in the realm’.
In such a climate it seems even more suitable to pursue the creation of a radical, insider ethnography and in the not too distant past this even seemed to have official support.
Writing in a more liberal decade, the commandant of the Police Staff College (Lamford undated — but probably in the late 1960s) suggested:
it would seem desirable to encourage individual police officers to come [to the college]to do research on their own account.
The Staff College should be a place where serving officers have the opportunity to contemplate society as a whole and in particular to study and consider those liberal and humane values which are central to our society.
The college should have as its prime concern the nurture of ethics and integrity; they are the core of any professions.
Such a proposal is now of another era, however, and I was present when an ex-Dean of Academic Studies at the college presented a paper (Stead 1980) attacking the trend to expensive, amalgamated police units which had grown up in the previous two decades.
The appetite for power these immense forces display worried Stead, and he argued their style could only lead to an autocratic national system with a minister of central government at the apex.
His fears seem to be well founded, for a move towards regionalization is now occurring, with a proposal that the forty-three forces disappear into perhaps eight or nine giant regional units.
Stead argues that only constant inquiry (for which I could substitute ‘inside ethnography’) can prevent such an unacceptable trend, and it is some comfort to see a probationary policewoman, such as Cressida Dick (1985), pointing out the political compromises such autocracy can produce, but which few of the chief officers seem willing to admit or even acknowledge.
However, I am not hopeful that her example will force the institution to reassess its attitude to the critical account, for even the fears of someone like Stead, which came from a central location of police power at the Staff College at Bramshill, seem to have largely fallen on stony ground.
In the main, the college has produced little radical comment or research of note during the four decades of its existence, for the various chief officers have jealously ensured that any consolidation of ideological excellence at this location has been neutered, and under Home Office direction its senior courses have primarily been used to provide a stream of suitably acquiescent candidates for the ACPO ranks, who readily take on the symbols and metaphors of dominance which feed the appetite for power Stead warns against.
In 1987 I spent the summer at the college on the Intermediate Command Course and found it depressing to see just how little research was being sponsored or carried out there.
The vast  library on police matters was clearly under-used and there is obviously a need for a critical ethnography of the college itself, for it takes in numbers of senior and middle police managers each year, maintains a considerable staff of academics and visiting lecturers, but has singularly failed to provide an academically stimulating ‘university of policing’.
Even the civilian academics at the college seem to be nullified by the overriding police desire for circumspection in the written account and the preference for academic silence.
It could be anticipated that the college would have seen the creation of a continuous stream of books and papers generated by the rich source of material which pours through its gates, but this has hardly been the case.
Two books in the recent past (Pope and Weiner 1981 and Thackrah 1985) both contain veiled indications of the problems these civil service academics encounter when they write about the police.
In a forward to Modern Policing (Pope and Weiner ibid.),
Sir Kenneth Newman — then commandant — suggests that the book's claim to attention is that its contents are contributed by insiders; while in their introduction, the authors claim it goes some way to challenging Holdaway's claim (1979) that ‘research from the Police Staff College has not resulted in a major project on the police’.
However, an anonymous reviewer of the Pope and Weiner edition (Police Journal 1982), seems to disagree with their claims:
there is a consistent air of frustration in the writings of some of the social scientist contributors…it is almost as though they wish they were in closer touch with the operational side of the service.
Certainly the absence of contact is noticeable.
Furthermore, as these college-based insiders stress, their essays do not represent police college views or those of the Home Office; and both Thackrah (1985) and his publisher, James Tindall, take pains to ensure from the outset that we are aware than any views expressed in the book are ‘those of individual contributors, and not those of the college, the Home Office, or [even]the police service’.
One might suggest then that the ‘major project’ Holdaway recognized was missing from the college inventory is still to come!
Indeed the anonymous reviewer of the Pope and Weiner edition went on to propose that ‘if the police staff college is to fulfil its task [of producing a major project]with any credibility, it must  encourage its academic staff to go out into the field to study policing at first hand’.
Other challenges to social researchers to pursue a form of participant observation are to be occasionally found in the journals:
questions were being raised about what the police were doing, what they ought to be doing and how they ought to be organised and accountable.
The fact that these questions are being raised has significance for the authority of the police…and it is the single most important determinant of the style of policing.
Thus we need to explore in more concrete terms the operational aspects of the questions and the dilemmas they produce.
(Manning and Butler 1982: 338)
But if attempts to produce this concrete research are doomed to neglect or derision or to be defined as ‘espionage’, then what can be achieved?
The answer must be ‘not a great deal’; for none of the portents of success are immediately apparent.
WPC Dick's salutary essay (1985) changed little and generated few ripples on the ACPO pond, while one of the most powerfully critical books on policing in recent years (Jones 1980) seems to have had little effect on the structures of the organization, except, perhaps, to help draw its author — then a chief inspector — into the ACPO ranks.
Mervyn Jones (ibid.), in this book on organizational behaviours , presented some glaringly uncomfortable findings.
Critical of the way that status is attributed by the institution, his thesis was that even as the service proclaims ‘beat patrol work’ to be the basis of all good policework, it penalizes and stigmatizes those who remain there.
The young officer, he concluded, must escape at the first opportunity or risk being classified as an unambitious ‘no hoper’ at an early career stage.
A keenly stated desire to move into some area of specialization is a necessity, and, as a result, uniform patrol work becomes synonymous with failure and punishment.
Men get sent back from specialist posts to uniform duties as a punishment and the strength of this metaphorical move downwards or backwards (you can never move ‘up’ or ‘forwards’into uniform) is not lost on young officers.
Few prior to Jones had cared to admit this seditious point except in the columns of the Police Review , where disgruntled beat officers (often anonymously) indicate the paradox of being the revered and reviled base on which all the hierarchy is built.
Jones's book remained untouched on the shelves of Northumbria's modest library in its first two years, even though it had good reviews; and the influence of his research has been all but negligible.
For even though some attempt to give status to the ‘community or home beat officer’ has been made following Lord Scarman's (1981) report on the Brixton riots which gave something of a ‘slap on the wrist’to the service, the deference accorded to specialist posting or to detective work remains untouched.
In effect Jones's book revealed an unwelcome truth which no one really wanted to hear and which the service was able easily to diffuse and ignore.
Indeed when I was at the police college in 1987 and Jones was on the Senior Command Course prior to taking up a position as assistant chief constable, I took a straw poll among my immediate colleagues to see what influence such books achieve.
None had read the book or knew its detail, although one or two knew he had written something.
The real problem is that such research reveals modes of thought and practice which are well known and constituted, but which are necessarily concealed.
For who inside the system needs to be told what is well understood?
Silence continues to sustain the hegemony, and social change only occurs when irresistible and more powerful forces are brought to bear from outside (see Adams 1988).
Furthermore, such pressures are limited, thus creating a situation where
there has been hardly any research on the police compared with the large output of critical scholarship on industry, commerce, the civil service, the health service and education…what little direct research there has been on the police has scarcely begun to ask such fundamental questions as what is the police force and what is it doing.
This point (Wojtas 1982) occurs in a description of a new research centre for Police Studies at Strathclyde University, which is ‘to ask whether anyone is doing research on the police, what degree of co-operation they have met…and to encourage research by the police themselves’.
Once again, however, defensiveness won the day and when the Strathclyde Centre circulated forces asking them to co-operate in the venture, a decision was taken to withhold co-operation and a circular went round to this effect, suggesting the existing Home Office funded PRSU (Police Research Services  Unit) and the Home Office Research and Planning Unit were adequate for the needs of the service.
This latter unit (formerly the HO Research Unit) does provide some research material for those who seek it out and its bulletin is a reference source to recent government funded research, which is largely concerned with operational systems and the tools of policing.
However, I have never seen a copy of this circulated at the subdivision level at any location I have worked; and outside force HQ the availability of any research or analytic literature on policing falls off dramatically.
HO Circular (194/78) describing British and American research literature on policing is another typically apologetic, anti-intellectual document, for within its first few paragraphs it admits:
the implication of attempting to establish a central research information centre to give advice to chief officers about research findings,[or]collect, collate and distribute research of interest to the police service, and maintain an up-to-date index of research would be very considerable.
There are no plans to establish such a centre.
No one seems to have asked whether the Staff College could have taken on this job, but then again such anti-intellectualism is apparent even in the Bramshill Scholars' Association.
In 1985, they proposed to extend their role beyond that of an annual dining club for officers who had taken a degree through the police college scheme.
It was mooted the association
could offer a unique police view of current problems.
We could host University seminars to which speakers of note could be invited to attend.
In this way the Association could counter the Left Wing Type Seminars [sic]which were often very one sided and misrepresentative of current Police views…
The Chairman also suggested that the membership could publish papers.
This narrow academic proposal for a one-sided, right-wing debating group was circulated in August 1986, with options for the future of the association.
These were to be considered at the AGM on 20 September 1986 when the association would seek to create ‘a blend of social and professional academic pursuit’.
The options never reached a vote, however, as the meeting was cancelled for lack of support!
Perhaps in the light of the somewhat narrow academic bias outlined by this cream of police studentship, it is just as well the college was not allocated the task of collating and circulating research to chief officers!
In the early 1980s, many forces had reduced secondments to universities or polytechnics, for these had been somewhat unprogrammatic.
By 1987, the Home Office Research and Planning Unit Programme was indicating, ‘now that resources are more constrained, more stringent criteria of relevance must be applied to the funding of research for the Home Office’.
Four years previous, Northumbria decided to reduce the numbers allowed a secondment.
An assistant chief constable told a conference of senior officers: ‘with future recruitment, the number of graduates will increase’.
The conference was also told that as an alternative to the expense of sending officers to university, it was proposed to ‘direct officers to research a particular problem…and give them a short period to carry out intensive research’.
The emphasis on ‘directed’ research is mine and indicates the reduced potential for any ethnographic sedition, for which force would seek to direct officers to the critical analysis of its subcultural idiosyncrasies?
Furthermore, such short periods of ‘directed’ research can be shown favourably as a saving over any extended degree course in the budgets.
The emphasis of this ‘directed’(or controlled?) research, it was announced, ‘is to be on pragmatic, problem-solving enquiries’(i.e. policy-orientated research), which, it was explained, ‘would be of cost-effective advantage to the force’.
There seems to be little chance of any philosophical, unprogrammatic enquiry here which might be critical of the system; and no ‘espionage’ from within!
This cost-effective nature of a scholarship was a matter I had been asked to justify when I first asked my new assistant chief constable about the potential of postgraduate research as an ‘observing participator’.
I had mentioned the unquantifiable public relationships which could be generated during a secondment and argued for the intangible value of the many hundreds of contacts I had made which could not easily be costed in purely fiscal terms.
He dismissed this as irrelevant and his use of metaphor, in what  turned out to be an eighty-minute interview, was most revealing.
I later recorded he invariably used the idea of an ‘escape from real work’ to describe any research secondment; in doing so he embodied the common institutional fear of uncontrolled social movement across a divide or boundary into another society such as academia.
This is part of the ideological pedagogy which the institution uses to create and maintain defensive boundaries against the outsider or those who might produce a critical analysis of its systems; it is one major strength of the organization.
Again, as I recorded in a fieldnote, this assistant chief exhibited aspects of what I could only then describe as ‘institutional paranoia’, when he went on to deride an unnamed social scientist who had been allowed research facilities inside a police force (unspecified).
He dismissively described how this man had ‘come in, taken the material provided, and then had written a childish and critical book on the police, out of which he got a Ph.D.’
Again a metaphorical breach of a sacred boundary has occurred and an ‘enemy’ made a gain at the expense of the integrity of the inside!
It is this logic of practice which effectively negates most research and is perhaps the main reason that between 1979 and 1988, only one of the research papers I have compiled has been looked at by senior officers.
Neglectful silence is, of course, the most perfect means of maintaining the powerful integrity of the institutional boundaries against any criticisms.
During this period I have given readings and seminar papers at various academic centres, including the universities of Oxford, Durham, Edinburgh, Essex, Manchester, Lancaster, Newcastle, Sussex, and East Anglia, and have written a number of unpublished papers which I have given in seminars at other similar establishments.
On more than one occasion, I have included a bibliography when submitting a c.v.
to my senior command and in 1986 I informed my chief officers of the acceptance of my Ph.D.
thesis, in accordance with the directive laid down by Force Orders.
No one, of course , has asked to read it, for — if my argument is correct — the service has no need of any reminder of how  the ideology works or how to implement the paradigms which support their cultural norms.
Nor do they need their daily practice to be exposed to the analytic eye of anthropological ‘thick description’, for in their task-driven world there is little to be gained by reflecting on what they already live and understand.
Any need to analyse the ways in which the multi-variant police world forms a coherent and self-sustaining whole is material for the social scientist and not the practitioners, for they already live the system as a matter of course.
The police, therefore, have little to gain in promoting any exploration of their modes of thought, for analysis can only hold the possibility that the whole intricate system, to paraphrase Lévi-Strauss (1967), will be revealed ‘as an immense disorder [which]is organised in the form of a grammar’.
In consequence, police ethnography remains largely unwritten simply because it is unlikely the organization will be keen to reveal the ways this ‘immense disorder’ is constructed, for it is not in their nature to allow other individuals to create their classifications for them.
Indeed, institutional ideology sets out to ‘strait-jacket minds and bodies and overcome individual thought’(Foucault 1970).
Mary Douglas (1987: 92), in her analysis of How Institutions Think , pursues Foucault's argument a stage further to show that:
Institutions systematically direct and channel our perceptions into forms compatible with the relations they authorize.
They fix processes that are essentially dynamic, they hide their influence…
Add to all this that they endow themselves with rightness and send their mutual corroboration cascading through all levels of our information systems.
No wonder they easily recruit us into joining their narcissistic self-contemplation.
Any problems we try to think about are automatically transformed into their own organizational problems.
The solutions they proffer only come from the limited range of their own experience.
If the institution…is one that depends on participation, it will reply to our frantic questions: ‘more participation!’
If it is one that depends on authority, it will only reply: ‘More authority!’
Institutions have the pathetic megalomania of the computer whose whole vision of the world is its own programme.
This extremely perceptive analysis of the institutional mind fits the police world like a glove, and recent elaborations in policing, along with its growth in the mainstream of the daily social process, supports Douglas's contention (ibid.) that an institution which is dependent upon authority can only demand more of the  same.
In such ontological circumstances this allegedly public service must be singularly unsuited to objective assessment of any external demands for a reduction in its power or to encompassing any critical analysis which might cause loss of prestige.
Given this premise, we should not be surprised to find the police are in the forefront of support for proposals such as the introduction of identity cards; it was not surprising to find the 1988 Superintendents' Association conference not only supporting this motion, but arguing for the creation of twenty-four hour armed patrols throughout the country and making a plea for a national motorway squad.
Always the call will be for more power to the organization, so that the 1989 cry of alarm from the Police Federation conference about private security firms is based more on a fear that areas of influence are being taken from the institution than on beliefs that such groups are incompetent.
In a similar fashion, all the representative bodies of the police — ACPO, the Superintendents' Association, and the Police Federation — were outraged at the creation of the Crown Prosecution Service in the Prosecution of Offences Act in the mid-1980s; for one area of police power in the courts had been removed at one fell swoop and given to another arm of the executive.
So although in a liberal democracy it would seem practical and even suitable for the police to have a say in the way order is defined and maintained, as Foucault (1970) and Douglas (1987) have shown, this will inevitably take on an expansionist line; for anything other than bland support of the proposals of the institution will present a challenge or pose a threat.
This dilemma generates the paradox I have outlined above, where intellectualism and graduate recruitment become prized commodities and are publicly sought after as the organization seeks to elaborate its professionalism, but are simultaneously denigrated.
In such a world the very idea of research and academic prowess becomes charged with structural ambiguity simply because it creates the potential for outsiders to bring challenging concepts across boundaries which, at other times, are sacrosanct.
So what then is the position of the police practitioner who becomes an anthropologist?
He is unable to ‘switch off’ his analytic mind, for he becomes possessed of something which can best be described as ‘special knowledge’.
On the one hand he can support his understanding of the institutional expectations by simply  repeating those inculcated practices he has learned as a neophyte from the ‘stories of the great days of policing’, which are interminably repeated ‘at the charge room desk’ or ‘taken on at Nellie's knee’.
Alternatively he can use his understanding of the way the metaphors and structures of significance are used to sustain the institution, and thus reveal the system to be the product of a specific mode of thought, which is only one possibility among many.
He must be aware, however, that any antagonistic or critical assessment will not only be unwelcome, but coming from an insider will smell of blasphemy.
Anything other than an uncritical acceptance is a direct challenge to the idea of the rule of law which has sustained the police since their inception and which argues that the replication of a known system of order is the best means of containing those who need to be controlled.
Alternative readings or critical analysis of this entrenched reverence for a rule of law (which at times may well be out of step with a wider interpretation of ambiguous social behaviour) smacks of subversion simply because it denies the primacy of the institutional framework.
And surely, it can be argued, the understanding of what is to be ordered and who is to be disciplined has long been defined and subject to the practical mastery of the controllers.
In consequence, even when the insider retires and ostensibly leaves the family, he will be expected to maintain his silence, and although bland hagiographic biography has been acceptable in the past, there has been no place for the espionage of critical ethnography.
And even as the unlamented Official Secrets Act of 1911 groaned in its death throes in the late 1980s (to be replaced by an even more constraining measure), officers about to retire in West Mercia were presented with an official force form and asked to sign a ‘Declaration’ under the Act.
This reiterates the whole catch-all section 2 of the Official Secrets Act of 1911, as well as the scale of punishments laid down by the Official Secrets Act of 1920 for those who
possess any secret official code word, or password, or sketch, plan, model, article, note, document or information which relates to or is used in a prohibited place or anything in such a place, or which has been made or obtained in contravention of this Act, or which has been entrusted in confidence to him by any person holding office under Her Majesty or which  he has obtained or to which he has had access owing to his position as a person who is or has been employed under a person who holds or has held such an office or contract —[and who](a) communicates the code word, pass word, sketch, plan, model, article, note, document, or information to any person other than a person to whom he is authorised to communicate it, or a person to whom it is in the interest of the State his duty to communicate it, or (aa) uses the information in his possession for the benefit of any foreign power or in any other manner prejudicial to the safety or interests of the State, or (b) retains the sketch, plan, model, article, note, or document in his possession or control when he has no right to retain it or when it is contrary to his duty to retain it, or fails to comply with all directions issued by lawful authority with regard to the return or disposal thereof, or…
The form continues, listing other sections of the Act.
It makes it abundantly clear that even the possession and academic presentation of information necessary for an ethnography could be actionable.
For a considerable amount of inconsequential information owned by the institution is classed as confidential, even though its release could only be considered prejudicial to the safety and interests of the state by the most bigoted autocrat.
The need to get the retiring member to sign such a document indicates the institutional fear of the outside lying behind the threats which Sir Peter Imbert issued to those who would write controversial memoirs (Police Review , 26 August 1988); for the ‘family’ demands silence unto death from its members!
And even if an uncommissioned but critical ethnography is not considered to be in breach of the Official Secrets Act, it will most likely be construed as structural espionage and lie in breach of the Police Discipline Code as set out in Police Regulations.
Any internal disciplinary measure to contain such an account is much less likely to become of public concern in the way that the Clive Ponting or the Cathy Massiter prosecutions became notorious causes célèbres .
As a result of this all pervading desire for reticence it is possible to suggest that the presentation of research papers in seminars, the creation of an undirected thesis, not to mention the production of a book, could easily have placed me in breach of Regulation 6, which outlines the disciplinary offence of 
Improper disclosure of information, which offence is committed where a member of a police force (a) without proper authority communicates to any person, any information which he has in his possession as a member of a police force…
That I avoided such a course of action is because of my own understanding of what the institution would allow before it swung into action.
In effect, I kept a suitable silence and avoided direct confrontation, for I was well aware that the ultimate punishment under the regulations is expulsion or dismissal from the force, forfeiture of a considerable salary and pension, and, of course, the resulting immediate acquisition of true outsiderhood!
A Police Career Explored 
Introduction
In this chapter I propose to link the idea of subjective knowledge to an exploration of the insider's personal history.
I have mentioned aspects of the debate on the inclusion of the subjective self into an ethnography; now I hope to weave aspects of this subjective self into a scientific construct, revealing something of police culture along the way as I briefly explore some of my own early career moves.
‘SPECIAL KNOWLEDGE’: THE SUBJECTIVE FACTOR
In a seminal article, Pocock (1973) set out parameters for a personal anthropology.
He suggested personal meanings, cultural roots, and the historical equation inevitably means that any true translation of the field experience cannot avoid including a personal interpretation.
Inevitably this leads to the question of injecting matters of a subjective nature into the account.
Okely (1975) suggests:
the participant observer does have a problem of subjectivity.
This cannot be resolved by distancing, repression and short cuts…the specificity and individuality of the observer are ever present and must therefore be acknowledged, explored and put to creative use (my emphasis].
In the accounts of ‘anthropology at home’ currently being produced, the potential to include the personal is unlike that which exists here, for only rarely does the research material contain an account in which the analyst is the subject as well as the researcher.
Most fieldwork is simply episodic, made by an outsider moving in for a period to assess observed social behaviour.
In this case, however, I have been unable to make the separation and the  fieldwork is both empirical and continuous; it is diachronic and retrospective, taking in the historical with the contemporary.
And as Mary Douglas (1973: 15) had pointed out, ‘if we cannot bring the argument back from tribal ethnography to ourselves, then there is little point in starting it at all’.
Like Douglas, I see no point in setting up a false theoretical dichotomy between ‘us’, and ‘them’, creating separate realms and polarities of modern and archaic thought, for I anticipate my inclusion of the concept of self can help link the tribalism which haunts the police defensiveness to an understanding of their ‘modern’ beliefs, modes of thought, and action.
Hopefully this will allow the ethnography to extend on the interpretive analysis which Kuper (1973) termed ‘neostructural’ and which has since combined aspects of a feminist, semantic, and symbolic framework to generate what may well be a short-lived disciplinary ‘ism’of ‘post-modern’anthropology (Young 1989).
As an inside exploration of culture this might also be considered to be a ‘liminal’ or ‘liminoid’phenomenon (V. Turner 1974, 1977), for as it delves beneath the surface phenomena, the subjective analysis can reveal unconscious categories and transformational operations which lie between the dual poles and such exclusively preferred categories as ‘cops and robbers’.
It should then contain a generative formulation which cannot easily be suppressed or denied (T. Turner 1977), for such domains of power lying between functional systems of control and disorder are, as Victor Turner (1977: 45) reminds us, ‘not merely reversive, they are often subversive, representing radical critiques of the central structures [of a system]’.
Inside analysis incorporating a subjective ‘special knowledge’ should therefore inevitably encompass aspects of the ‘liminoid’and present a radical critique simply by revealing hidden structures to the outside.
The effect of living with this knowledge and using this skill raises the consciousness of the insider, perhaps giving him his most effective methodological tool.
For as a member of the institution, the insider/anthropologist is uniquely situated to move across the interfaces of his society.
He is qualified to think the unthinkable and to pose those questions which in normal circumstances would go unasked.
Because of his understanding of practice, he is able not only to show how police ideology is maintained, but even propose alternative models by merely writing down and presenting his knowledge.
For, as Gramsci pointed out in respect of those  institutions of the establishment, ‘hegemony…is not universal and ‘given’ to the continuing rule of a particular class.
It has to be won, reproduced and sustained’(taken from Hebdidge 1979: 16).
The way the police sustain this ideology of action to maintain their hegemony becomes clearly apparent to the researcher, and he in turn stands revealed.
To have advanced within the job and achieved rank means he is likely to have followed and supported institutional precedents without question, and to have unwittingly accepted and been involved in the reproduction of the narrow modes of thought and practice demanded by the culture.
It is this special knowledge, or gnosis, which hopefully can make the inside ethnography so different and illuminating.
Burridge (1969) has written most persuasively about the effects which fieldwork can have on the anthropologist, describing the prophetic experience this can produce.
He links this to the act of consciousness raising, which I consider presents the greatest problem for the insider who cannot leave the field or return to academia.
The insider/ethnographer can turn his understanding of an interpretive methodology to an assessment of his own actions, and see connections as if scales had been removed from his eyes.
However, he cannot always escape the results, or move away; and may not be able to use this newly acquired knowledge to amend much within the institution.
Yet I believe this new understanding must be included in the account, for as Blacking (1977: vii) pointed out in his preface to the Anthropology of the Body :
one solution…is to use subjectivity rather than try to push it aside…and [so]it might well be included in analyses and used consciously as a research tool.
If I understood him correctly, this is an aspect of what David Parkin described at the 1973 Association of Social Anthropologists Conference as Personal Anthropology.
By consciously using subjectivity as a research tool, the insider is peculiarly placed to generate what Geertz (1976) described as ‘an inward conceptual rhythm’, moving between the particular and the general.
Hopefully, he can use the creativity which exists between the experiential inside view and observational outside view of a cultural system to formulate an ethnography which incorporates ‘a continuous dialectical, tacking between the most local of detail and the most global of global structures in such a  way as to bring them into simultaneous view’(Geertz ibid. 235).
But it is not just how the new consciousness is to be used which produces problems in handling this new-found wisdom; it is the very acquisition of knowledge itself which makes the concept of self so dynamic.
This structural awareness can be as hard to handle as any decision to try to publish the account, for what has happened in the past and what is expected now from the insider is tied up with an understanding of how the institution of policing prefers to present a restricted image for outside consumption, as I have described above.
It all becomes uncomfortably apparent and that which had been lived and accepted is opened up in a revelatory manner, so that the vice of being caught up within the hegemonies of such a system designed to control a powerless underclass can become overbearing.
In such a situation, the necessary intellectual detachment often becomes difficult to sustain.
In extreme cases anthropologists have found such a role impossible to live with, for the field situation was beyond their previous imaginations.
Castenada (1970), for example, found he was dealing with new events and totally new ways of understanding.
As a result, he necessarily developed a new self-image, and took on a new social personality in the process.
In Castenada's case, he ‘enters a world so different that he comes to accept reality itself as nothing but a social construct, with effects so devastating…that ethnography becomes mysticism’(Goward 1984: 90).
For Jeanne Favret-Saada (1980), who set out to study witchcraft in the French Bocage, the only means of moving in on the discourse she hoped to understand was to become part of it.
Her involvement in the process of witching and un-witching was the single path to obtaining any information on the subject, for she found she was unable to operate ‘in the standard situation in which information is exchanged and where the ethnographer may hope to have neutral knowledge…about beliefs and practices’(ibid. 11).
In some ways I feel her peculiar dilemma parallels my own for she described her stance as one which distanced her from the classical anthropological mode, creating a ‘memorable adventure’, which she claims, ‘has marked me for life’(ibid. 22).
Favret-Saada's unique analysis (ibid. 1–28) of the bizarre subjective position she found herself in is a masterful assessment of the difficulties which arise when the ethnographer seeks to gain  knowledge of a social group which depends for its existence on ‘misknowledge’ or silence:
For anyone who wants to understand the meaning of [such a]discourse, there is no other solution but to practise it oneself, to become one's own informant…and to try and make explicit what one finds unstatable in oneself.
for it is difficult to see how the native could have any interest in the project of unveiling what can go on existing only if it remains veiled.
(ibid. 22)
In succumbing to ‘the temptation of subjectivism’(ibid. 23), she recognizes that it becomes impossible to put any distance between oneself and the ‘native’, or more importantly between oneself and oneself in such a situation.
In the world of an inside ethnography as Favret-Saada identifies, ‘one is never able to choose between subjectivism and the objective method as it was taught’(ibid. 23), so long as one wishes to find out answers which, in traditional ethnography, are often missing from the finite corpus of empirical observation.
This transformational stance, she goes on to argue, allows the ethnographer to have a personal discourse on aspects which are outside the usual limits of the body or corpus of collected material.
In my own case I had been taught by Okely to avoid the split between subjectivism and an objective reality, but I had no preparation to contend with the changes which the field experience created in me.
That which had been so familiar to me and accepted almost without thinking now took on a new and almost bizzare aspect.
My own ‘tribe’ became as foreign as those isolated, ‘primitive’pre-industrial societies which the traditional anthropologists sought out.
Once the semantics of police experience were revealed, I had to live with the problems experienced by both Castenada and Favret-Saada, although I demur from casting myself into their intellectual companionship.
Reality itself then became a construct of knowing and being known, and of living with the alternative possibility.
For personal transitions made across physical and psychic boundaries during the subjectivity of the field situation can produce disjunction; indeed they can paralyse.
In such a situation it is therefore all the more necessary to recognize the unique place the ethnographer holds and to capitalize on it.
During this time of subjective observing participation, the policeman/insider moves to the margins, to a point where analysis negates automatic approval or predisposition for a world of known categories and classifications.
His inquiries and interpretations will inevitably draw polluting and contaminating ideas to the surface, for they are a result of his place as an ‘institutional shaman’ and mirror his position as a liminal mover in the organization.
By defining this insider fieldwork (and the university experience which generated it) as a liminal situation, I am extending the Turnerian concept (1969, 1974) in which the individual moves temporarily into an unstructured and somewhat ambiguous state, during the initial process of passing through a rite de passage before returning to structure.
Here the marginality is less transitory and occurs in the post-tribal situation where the concept of liminality is less familiar to the discipline, even though transitions across spatial and temporal boundaries still create epistemological changes of the kind Turner describes.
In my own case, the model of transition through liminality might still produce a recognizable replication of the move through a rite de passage :
policeman → student → new policeman
But there seems more to it than that!
It is the total change in perspective and new semantic outlook which ensures that the subjective nature of the liminal journey can be used as an essential part of the analysis; for it can produce a dynamic simply because it incorporates aspects of a newly created ideological disjunction, as some classic accounts have shown.
So that now, with the dubious benefit of hindsight and a keen awareness that memory and retrospective versions of reality are often skewed, I feel the subjective account must of necessity become part of the ethnography  in which I play all of the parts.
I am the institutional member as well as the marginally moving player.
I am the anthropologist and the field of study.
Burridge (1979) writes of fieldwork:
every anthropologist has experienced ‘culture shock’; a temporary inability to grasp and act and think in the terms of the assumptions upon which the newly entered culture is based.
Not only is this shock experienced in fieldwork, while one learns the ways of a new culture, but it is experienced even more disconcertingly when one returns to one's own culture…two different worlds have met in the same person.
One alternative is insanity.
Another is to comprehend one world in terms of the other…
In this restricted sense, every anthropologist has some share in the experience of the prophet.
To weld the subjective with the objective, my personal anthropology includes material culled from various observational and ranked positions within the institution of policing and from across the years.
I have woven into the account experiences ranging from a reflection on uniform patrol work, to CID and specialist squad work; from the marginal world of a ‘punishment posting’ in a bridewell or prison, to the centrality of knowledge gained by spells in the centrality of headquarters postings.
The analysis spans a period when technology and communication techniques transformed the outward face of policing.
Hopefully the resulting ethnography will generate a new and clearer understanding of the nuances and specificities of police reality, incorporating what Bourdieu (1977) has called ‘a practical mastery built upon objectivist knowledge’.
A subjective element in the account provides a better potential to unravel the semantic patterns which structure the maintenance of this executive unit of power.
It introduces knowledge of the cultural metaphors and the symbolic capital by which the constantly changing gradations of disorder, order, crime, and social sin are determined and acted upon, or are ignored.
IN THE PAST: THE PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
During the period 1955 to 1978 I moved across classificatory police boundaries on more than one occasion.
After three years as  a cadet carrying out basic police tasks around the station, I was sworn in as a constable.
I joined the uniform branch on foot patrol in the city centre division of Newcastle upon Tyne City Police.
Immediately I was instructed that I had had the good fortune to be posted to ‘the division where real polising is done…’
There were only three divisions in the city — east, west, and central — and each of us in our own division knew we were the élite; for just as the men in the west were certain they were best, so the men from the east remained convinced of their own superiority.
And together we were emphatically co-operative that neighbouring forces were populated by lesser mortals.
The predominance these spatial constructs have for the ordinary constable is essential to an understanding of the police mind.
Ideas of centrality and marginality of place link to the status of activities and tie in with perceptions of derogatory and despised areas of operation.
As a result, actual and symbolic transitions across spatial boundaries continue to create a crucial means of analysing the way police reality deals with the changes in power politics at all levels within the institution, and of describing the way status can be won or lost.
The structural load which exists within seemingly minor career moves or internal transfers around the force is enormous.
Everyone inside knows or speculates endlessly on the politics of power implicit in the most minute gradations of change.
The weekly Force Orders which every force publishes for internal circulation have a section listing the latest transfers in departments, specialist units, and divisions.
‘Out on the ground’ these moves are seized on and discussed avidly.
The internal phone system springs into life and the moves are analysed or colleagues contacted to speculate on who has ‘blotted his copy book’, or who seems to be on his  way up the hierarchical tree in the mad scramble for position and preference.
From 1958 to 1963 I went through various initiation rites, learned the values of the institution, and underwent the training all new constables were then required to follow.
As a uniform constable, my boundaries were very clearly demarcated and my peers in the city centre division set out the parameters of my social reality.
I quickly became aware of what a ‘real polis’ was and more importantly what boundaries one had to cross to cease being real and in effect become unreal, inauspicious, and inhuman.
The derogatory phrase ‘he's not a real polis; he'll never be a polis as long as he's got a hole in his arse’ quickly set out markers to define who was one of us and who was not.
We were thief takers, while others outside were excluded, perhaps to be dismissively described as ‘mere uniform carriers’.
Douglas (1966: 1973) has described how the boundaries which lie between the structures of holiness and the anti-structure of pollution are potential power bases and always the source of emotive reaction.
Such relative positions were clearly set out for me in chains of metaphoric relevance, with ‘real polises’ largely symbolized by the use of the body and its social and physical space.
Each link in the chain expressed a perceived correct place and tied this into an all-encompassing behavioural ideology which in turn determined our action.
In the symbolic construction of this community (Cohen 1985) boundary images of inside and outside were elaborated to an intensity, making us crucially aware and ‘conscious…of dirt that has ambiguously got onto the wrong side of the frontier’(Leach 1976: 61).
In the police this desire for a clearly defined world of order derives from an implicit understanding that control of social behaviour is always surrounded by the dirt of structural ambivalence.
For ‘real polises’ there is a rarely articulated awareness that this ambiguity can always turn in on itself and be used for good or evil, or even as an instrument of oppression or release.
For even the least reflexive or philosophical seem to be aware of the potential for reversal inherent in this system of power, where the sacred and the profane have the possibility of turning upon each other at every conjunction.
During my early career, for instance, when one of the shift was caught and sentenced for a string of burglaries, the others skirted around their implicit knowledge that ‘there but for the  grace of God goes everyone’, and comforted themselves by recalling (with the aid of the hindsight-ometer) that he had ‘never been a real polis…always been a bit of a loner, something of an outsider…’
A knowledge of police systems therefore requires an analysis of both sides of the coin, to explore how anti-structure defines structure and in turn redefines and motivates other anti-structural elements in the system, for anti-structural activity has the potential to make bearable some of the constraints inherent in such a closed world as the police.
However in such an institution, the elements of anti-structure are often suppressed, denied, or concealed in an attempt to maintain the idealogical purity of the group.
Jung (1964) has described these hidden facets as being creatively generative, but possessed of danger in any confrontation and difficult if not impossible to harness; for they are in effect alternative domains of power.
In my early career, I set out to meet the demands of my peers and fulfil the necessary qualifications for assessment as a ‘real polis’; although there were few opportunities to flirt with any real forms of marginality!
I was in a numbered uniform of massive symbolic importance with nuances of style which clearly defined our social identity.
This uniform of dark serge symbolized our insider status and separated us completely from the ‘civvies’ out there in the rest of the world.
This use of uniform as a symbol of separation had not changed in 1977 on my return from university.
I found the same classificatory system in use with the same unconscious linguistic divisions being applied as I had learned in the mid-1950s.
Indeed, there was now more of an emphasis on the separation, with an enhanced denigration of civilians.
This elaboration indicates the process of social change, for it reveals an increasing separation between ‘real polises’ and a public who are much less likely now to accept police versions of reality; while increasing ‘civilianization’within the forces presents another perceived challenge to the defensive integrity and introspection of the institution.
Chaos now seemed poised to threaten the system from inside and without, and it is almost inevitable that the term ‘civvy’ should have become a derogatory reference.
As John Stalker (1988) pointed out when he retired from the service, he had made the transition and  had joined that group of persons pejoratively known to the police as ‘civilians’.
The structural invisibility enjoyed by the uniform wearer is a strange matter to experience.
You become a symbol with no personal identity beyond the small, specific numeral on the shoulder.
‘Civilians’ you know well can walk past in the street without recognition, for although the uniform itself is apparent it is a forceful barrier, expressing a demonstrative separation between the culture of control and the individuality of the controlled.
Like other symbolic non-verbal devices, the multi-vocal nuances of our uniform were used in a variety of other ways as boundary markers to maintain our cultural identity and define our institutional specificities.
Just as the white-coated doctors in hospitals symbolize the clean and purifying nature of the healer, so the dark uniform of the police symbolizes not just the force identity, but also the presence of the avenger, who purifies through retribution rather than by cure.
It is the marker of ‘force’ and hence continues to sustain the continuing paradox of ‘police force — police service’which remains unresolved, on which I will say more later in relation to the role of women police officers.
The dark uniform we wore had a military cap with polished brim, and in our fashioned tunics of soft serge and shiny boots we presented an avenging image, clothed in the symbolic colour of death and darkness.
Black is a light absorbent, non-reflective colour and most suitable for controllers who operate with a degree of social anonymity, upholding the rule of law and the abstractions of the legal system.
In such a world, individuality is never a prized characteristic, and an attempt in the early 1980s to remove the one remaining individualizing feature — the shoulder numeral or ‘collar number’— was correctly rejected by civilians as a structural move towards an even greater anonymity.
As Reiner (1980) suggested, the riot gear in which the police are increasingly seen, with shields, visored helmets, knee-length boots, and flame-proof overalls, enhances their avenging appearance.
I suspect it is no  accident the politics of the times seems to parallel the growing toughness of the police image, or that the police have taken on an increasing resemblance to the black-clothed enemies of goodness who sprinkle the popular science fantasy films such as Star Wars, Superman , and the like.
In these mass cultural replays of the eternal dichotomy between good and evil, the use of highly symbolic black uniforms as an indicator of anonymous evil predominates.
Within the separate police forces, the nuances of uniform difference were always embroidered by ‘real polises’ to produce symbolic boundaries from which to assess other uniform wearers.
Thus our contacts with firemen, St John Ambulance men, special constables, and the like were all used to define them as being somewhat ‘unreal’ and therefore slightly less than human.
Such groups were said to be like the foreigners in the adjacent forces, for it was constantly repeated that many wanted to join us but failed because of some inadequacy.
This was especially true of the Fire Service, our immediate neighbours, and it applied equally to those in the adjacent Gateshead Borough Police and Northumberland Constabulary, who were always talked of as being a lesser breed of mortals.
This characteristic supports Peter Evans (1977), then The Times's Home Affairs correspondent, who described the police as being ‘peculiarly tribal by nature’.
In the small forces of the late 1950s these separations were made much of, with those in the adjacent forces essentially seen as belonging to another tribe.
Even today, in the amalgamated forces, this structuring principle holds good; and many old hands still refer to the ‘real police forces’ as those small units they joined in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Quite often the divisional boundaries in the amalgamated force mirror the old, small force boundaries and men define themselves  in relation to their early experience with perhaps an inner city ethic, a large-town police style, or in the framework of a more rural situation.
In each case they inevitably begin to denigrate their opposite numbers for not doing ‘real police work’.
Tribalism in the pre-amalgamated forces produced a very constricted vision of the world, so that spatial concepts and a narrow geographical containment held a paramount place in determining police reality.
Today these are still of immense import, with men deriding those in another division or section, bragging that their villains are the toughest or their section tasks more numerous and arduous.
An expressed desire for rigidly determined geographical units separated from a despised neighbour occurs again and again in my fieldnotes, and is clearly illustrated in a note made in 1981, when a superintendent in a somewhat remote subdivision laughingly told me:
one of my sections in the subdivision is thinking of declaring UDI [unilateral declaration of independence]from the Divisional Headquarters…as for Headquarters and the Force organizational structure, well that's just a joke as far as these men are concerned.
This rejection of a distant headquarters and enhancement of their own special identity occurred some seven years after the last amalgamation.
In that same year I was posted to South Shields on the south bank of the River Tyne and quickly became aware that I had an enormous burden to carry, simply because I had spent all of my previous service on ‘the other side of the river’.
At one point a uniform sergeant listening to me discuss some tactic, gloomily pointed out that my style was not theirs; but then, he rationalized, ‘how could it be, you're from the north side of the river’.
The emphatic denigration contained in this locational insult had to be heard to be understood, and in many ways it paralleled the dismissive tone used to deride the ‘civvy’, for nuances of speech and tone have immense meaning to insiders.
Figure 1 shows the existing Northumbria Police area where most of the ethnographic data was collected.
This force is an amalgam of nine smaller units (Figure 2), some of which went into the melting pot in 1969.
The remainder were taken up in the amalgamations of 1974, which coincided with the creation of the Metropolitan Councils, and today's amalgamated forces often seem to owe as much to local and national political opportunity     than to any operational logic; and even two decades after the first melding together of the small forces, attempts to standardize uniform and systems of operation has consistently failed to dislodge many localized, small-scale beliefs and practices.
In 1958 then, I was a member of what we knew was the premier force in the area with the external boundaries of the adjacent forces as our immediate threshold to what Douglas (1966: 137) had called ‘new status’.
Minor nuances of detail in our respective uniforms were built upon to form a taxonomy of meaning and used to maintain our in-group (or tribal) knowledge of ourselves.
Not unnaturally a police world values uniformity, for as the language infers it embodies the essentials of a system obsessed with physical and ideological concepts of order and discipline.
Massively symbolized by the uniform itself, as Douglas (1973: 16) indicates, this obsession tends to focus on the body, for ‘the more value people set on social constraints, the more value they set on symbols of bodily control’.
Helmets exemplified this ‘new status’ for ‘real polises’, for they were not worn in the city force, but were part of the apparel of the surrounding Northumberland County force, whose immediate boundary was only some three miles north of our divisional centre.
They policed Northumberland with its rural areas, small towns, country villages, and tracts of moorland and hills.
It was an alien place to us city-dwellers, and both their uniform style and their culture was despised.
‘County’ men were transferred around at short intervals, while we were static in the city, never moving more than a mile or so between the three divisions to undertake real ‘city work’.
We had to be 5′ 10″ at least and most were 6′ 0″ or over.
They were ‘dwarfs’ at 5′ 8″ and were disparagingly said to ‘need a helmet to help them appear big enough’.
Other differences of practice were exaggerated to suggest they were ‘the foreigners’ and we were ‘real’.
We could purchase our own houses while they lived in police colonies, denied the privilege of house purchase until they had fifteen years' service; this classified them as ‘peasants, serfs, living in the feudal world of tithed cottages’.
After an eight-hour shift we went home — off duty — free men, while they in contrast went to their police houses and were available for ‘discretional duty’, at the call of the system twenty-four hours a day; proving we were independent free men and they were slaves!
All of these social differences were embodied in the symbol of uniform.
Our expensive, good-quality tunics were well cut and belted, while our ‘guard’ style cap, set up at the front to emulate the officer class, made us different.
Helmets and unbelted tunics were for the despised ‘county men’, ‘those sheep-dippers up the road in the sticks’ whom we continually used to reassert our own status by looking on them as ‘hicksville country cousins’and definitely not ‘real polises’.
To the south across the Rive Tyne lay Gateshead Borough Police, a small force with less manpower and fewer resources than our unit in the city.
They also wore the helmet, like the similarly attired British Transport Police at the main railway station (who are also despised as police marginals).
Like the county ‘sheepdippers’ and the borough men, both the specials and the British Transport Police were used to sustain a view of our own preeminence.
To my contemporaries then at this time, a helmet was possessed of immense symbolic importance.
We saw this one item almost as a totemic object, tabooed for our clan, and filled with a spirit of otherness.
Later, when I was a city detective in the early 1960s, we again used clothing to mark off our separation and dirty, ragged tramps shuffling off to shelter in rubble-filled dens under the Tyne Bridge would become a referent to our despised neighbours: ‘look [we would point]there's a Gateshead detective hurrying off on the scent…
’. Again Douglas (1966: 138) has suggested there is a liaison which exists between the physical body and its use as an expression of the social, so that one becomes a paradigm for the other: ‘the [human]body is a model which can stand for any bounded system…
’. It should come as no surprise, therefore, to find that a well-disciplined human body with clearly defined parameters of correctness will provide a symbolic mirror of the  preferred police social formation in which the human condition can be enacted.
We can also expect to find that any discrepancy in this preferred social formation will be reflected and transferred to the physical body as a metaphor of chaos.
These adjacent police forces were physically aberrant in nuance of bodily style and were therefore deemed to be socially incorrect.
In their metaphorical indiscipline they had gained ‘new status’ and slipped across a boundary into marginality, for as Foucault (1977: 25) has suggested, the idea of discipline revolves around control of the physical body and ‘proceeds from the distribution of individuals in space…it is always the body that is at issue — the body and its forces, their utility and their docility, their distribution and their punishment’.
This disposition of the body reflects an institutional ideal of the social distribution of individuals in spatial purity, and is a major structuring principle for police organization; examples of this will emerge throughout the ethnography.
As ‘real polises’ we were correctly distributed in space and our bodies were properly turned out with the symbols of order.
These modes of thought are so deeply embedded in the collective conscious that ten years after the amalgamations, when the chief constable (from the south) replaced the flat cap with helmets, a number of ex-city men could not discuss the impending change without exhibiting distress and described this event as being something of an Armageddon, even though the expensive guard-style cap of the pre-amalgamation days had long since given way to what was always derided as ‘a cheap and nasty alternative’.
Some continued to make a stance and in 1982 I worked with a sergeant who lovingly took out his old city cap each nightshift and wore it as a symbol of everything which had been lost in 1969, when, as the station graffiti had then affirmed, ‘T.J.F.’ and a fall from Eden had occurred.
Conversely, many of those in the amalgamated force who had previously worn helmets in their earlier life and had been moved into flat caps in 1969 welcomed the return to ‘natural’ apparel and their own version of a correct bodily disposition which had been prescribed in a 1958 edition of the Northumberland County Police Standing Orders.
This was set out in a section headed ‘Dress and Deportment’, and illustrates Foucault's point (ibid.) that in such situations the body is ‘docile’ to authoritative orders from above.
Nothing is left to chance.
Even the angle of the helmet is defined; and the order ends with the instruction: ‘the strap will be worn under the point of the chin, but during the summer months the strap maybe tucked inside the helmet’.
I recall summer commenced on 1 May in Newcastle for our ‘shirt sleeve order’; meanwhile at the other end of the Northumbrian body, para. 32 of the order commands that ‘trousers will be worn with the bottoms of the trouser legs, at the front, just touching the instep’.
Twenty-five years later in West Mercia, as a newly promoted superintendent, I listened at my first conference as my peers discussed a chief constable's agreement which allowed officers to discard ties in hot weather and wear open-necked shirts.
For over an hour the meeting wrestled with an undefined problem in the order.
No one had thought to specify how many shirt buttons could be undone and fear was now patently manifest that some uncontrollable disorder would be let loose should more than one button be opened to reveal ‘chest hair, or even a medallion’.
Underlying the disquiet was a strong current of belief that the act of going tieless was tantamount to social chaos!
Four years later, as I mentioned above, I was party to the same fear at Bramshill, in relation to the use of the Nato sweater.
One of my colleagues, no doubt swayed by the heat of the discussion, turned on me sitting in my short-sleeved uniform shirt, and rebuked me with the warning that ‘in my force, you'd be disciplined for mutilating police property…
’. Initially I was puzzled, until I realized he thought I had cut off my shirt sleeves, for in his force (noted for its disciplined enforcement of a correct uniform presentation), all uniform shirts had long sleeves.
These few examples show the constancy of a principle which defines police reality across time and space.
Ideas of identity and insider integrity in the late 1980s are sustained by the same symbols of status and denigration which have existed since at least the mid-1950s.
And of course, all of the ‘stories of the great days of policing’, told ‘at the charge room desk’ were passed on to me by a series of venerable ‘real polises’, who, in turn, had learned these structures of significance in their own formative years, often before the Second World War.
The rigidity of such concepts and their retention in the institutional psyche enables the organization to deflect the aberrant ideas of any new social order, simply because of the strength of these dispositions.
Such generative practices structured my early experience, and built a constructed hierarchy of ‘us’ and ‘them’which was set up and passed on to all initiates.
For analytic purposes, these can be cast into a binary model, suggesting positive and negative polarities of:
Such spatial and temporal fixations are also deliberately elaborated in other institutions of control, such as the armed forces.
There we find similar bodily constructs built up as series of organizing principles, so that the other regiment or unit is perceived to operate in some kind of polluted time and space, and its aberrant nuances of uniform styling used as a marker of significant difference.
The police also use concepts of a disciplined body in their dealings to effect the ‘capture’ of the local villains (or ‘prigs’).
In any public confrontation a quick assessment and early resolution is the order of the day, for on the streets pragmatism always rules and ‘real polises’ set out immediately to ‘fix’their adversaries by using deeply imbued constructs relating to time and space.
Always the disorderly acts of the ‘prig’ must be stopped, curtailed, arrested, disciplined, and contained; and in pursuit of a ‘docile body’the law inevitably seeks to negate, constrain, prevent, and deny movement.
For the legal process demands that incidents and occurrences be ideally fixed in time and space.
Because the  ‘prig’ has to be nailed, it comes as no surprise to find that electronic tagging seems set to join the introduction of ID cards as a means of controlling the ‘dangerous classes’, for as many anthropologists have shown, the concept of movement itself is possessed of dangerous ambiguity and prevents easy classification.
it is essentially a nomadic principle, remaining deeply resented and problematic to most dominant, sedentary political systems and their law enforcers.
Concepts of social movement are therefore synonymous with problems of social change, for they are antagonistic to conservative beliefs; and this gives a further insight into why the idea of social research is antithetical to police thought and has seditious connotations for an institution in which metaphors of stasis are of paramount importance.
It also reveals why movement becomes problematic for ‘real polises’, for it defeats a belief in a fixed and bounded world.
Yet movement is the very essence of being human and of the human condition which policing sets out to nullify.
It therefore creates something of a paradox which ensures that those who make a marginal move are inevitably referred back ‘to the centre’, as being the realm of ‘real policing’.
I have many examples in my fieldnotes which show this mode of thought to be so ingrained, that even when the possibility of making such a journey ‘back’ to basic police work has long since evaporated, the supremacy of the belief still remains:
I am in Corporate Planning at HQ, as part of a department which incorporates Research, Computer Development and Communications.
The Chief Superintendent is being posted to division after heading the department for some 2 years.
He has a ‘track record’ in uniform, CID, Fraud Squad, and Complaints and Discipline.
He talks enthusiastically about ‘getting back to some real police work’ in ‘the real world’, even though his responsibilities as Divisional Commander will be mainly administrative and give him little or no contact with the ‘dangerous classes’.
We take the piss out of him, because of this idea that he will be doing ‘real police work’, but we all know that divisional work has higher status for a Chief Supt. than Research, and this is the cause for celebration.
Within 3 days of his successor's arrival, we have a Dept. meeting where our new Chief Superintendent outlines his plans.
In a run down on the style of deference he anticipates (which I note will stifle any critical point from ‘below decks’), he talks about his length of tenure and how long it will be before he can ‘escape back into the real world’.
The research  manager (a civvy) who is aware of my research interests grins across the room as this desire to ‘escape’ back into ‘real work’is reinforced by yet another Chief Supt. (From fieldnotes, 1988)
The inherent dilemma caused by movement is encapsulated in this fieldnote.
Senior officers applaud a world of ‘real work’, to which they can never return, and implicitly deny the world of managerial power to which they now belong.
Their proclaimed wish to ‘return to real work’ is a contradiction, for it denies their own political scramblings to move out of the grinding realities of shift work.
No wonder the ‘troops on the ground’ are cynical, for they know ‘real work’is for young officers and is something to leave behind at the first opportunity!
RIGHTS OF SEPARATION: THE MARGINS OF THE CID
Van Gennep's ideas on ‘rites of separation’(1960) are a useful means of interpreting the social and spatial movements undertaken by the ethnographer as policeman, as he moves out from the early uniformed position of centrality described above.
Each separation contains symbolic significance, incorporating transitional stages of liminality.
At times it is even possible to lay out for examination the intense post-liminal rites and ceremonies of reincorporation required by the police institution as it seeks to draw the marginal mover back into the fold.
Usually, however, the social move is merely in the form of a transfer within well-developed sections of police society where the new experience is structured by the same ideology and beliefs which have gone before.
Occasionally, however, the insider is moved across a new boundary severe enough to create a rite of separation and provide the scope for an introspective analysis to generate something akin to a new vision.
In this situation, the marginal mover acquires the power to reinterpret the way his institutional structure governs a desire for a rigidified world of immobility, and to understand why, for example, those few policemen who move into other areas, such as probation work or the legal profession, become totally suspect.
Transition to the outside destroys the manufactured reality of one ‘real world’ and two ex-police probation officers I knew became  the equivalent of potential ‘prigs’.
Again it is this incomprehension of social mobility which seems to have caused my ACC to describe an officer who took a degree and then left to become a solicitor as ‘a bad experience for the force’(and not a gain for society).
And it is the same logic which attributes those few out of the 120,000 officers who pursue schemes designed to accelerate promotion with the derisory and metaphorically ephemeral classification of ‘high-flyers’ or ‘butterfly boys’.
I now see that between 1958 and 1977 I was involved in what might well be described as a social drama of movement, often crossing boundaries into very marginal areas of policing, where the institutional ideal of ordered definition fails simply because the ‘use of power and exercise of authority are based in ambiguity and particular interpretations of [what is often]poorly framed legislation’(Burton 1980).
In 1963 I became a CID aide or trainee detective, engaged in run-of-the-mill work dealing with a flow of petty crime.
My only training and instruction for the job was given by a detective chief inspector, who told us to ‘get out there and lock up thieves’.
I was relatively successful and after three or four months moved into the Criminal Investigation Department, as a detective constable, pursuing local villains for the thefts, shopbreakings, burglaries, and petty frauds which were our bread and butter.
I had joined a group who are still fixated on a classification of ‘disorder’ which homes in on those who attack property,; and since the amassing of property has been a primary aim of capitalist society, it should come as no surprise to find that to prevent the dispossessed from simply taking from the élite has been the primary structuring principle of policing.
Once again, however, the declared aim and the reality are not actually coterminous, and prevention as such has always had lower status than the task of catching those who do the taking.
Crime prevention is despised work for detectives for it holds no place for the drama of the chase and no opportunity for the symbolic warfare which exists in the battles between ‘polises’ and ‘prigs’.
The result is that the ‘war against crime’ fought by detectives becomes a symbolic re-enactment of conflicts in the economic world at large, between those who have material property and power and those who labour and are dispossessed.
Whether there is any social morality or justice in such a system is not a matter which the detectives are given to question; nor do  they spend much time in reflecting on why some dubious property acquisition is outside their terms of reference, or what the relationship is of such practices to the maintenance of position and power.
In the main, they are instilled with the pragmatic games of pursuit they play with the local petty thief; and if asked to consider the wider nature of their role, they tend to fall back on protestations of political neutrality.
This is another skewed reality, of course, for in their pursuit of the ‘prig’ they are merely following a version of justice which depends on blind acquiescence to establishment values of honesty.
Leach (1977) has shown the ephemerality which lies in any attempt to classify deviance on a global scale; for what is criminal in one society or at one point in time is relative to that time and place and to who holds the discourse on power.
The private delicts of one group may well be public crimes in another society, or acceptable social behaviour in a third, especially when the abhorrence of certain social behaviour wanes over time.
In such inversions of social regard we can again see how movement will tend to confound the police preference for and reliance on a rigidly maintained classificatory world.
The changing values attributed to our own private delicts such as divorce, slander, adultery, debt, libel, blasphemy, obedience to church, and the like, have turned some earlier ‘crimes’ into matters now governed by other social mores.
With the public appropriation of certain categories of property, however, the police have been on more certain ground, for the status attributed to the ‘capture of the thief’ has remained fairly constant, at least since the police were created as a public body.
The detective therefore has a legitimate target in the thief (again the metaphor is based in militarism); and this is currently reinforced by the politics of materialism.
The statistical expansion of recorded crimes and a success largely determined by detection rates support the inevitable institutional contention that more control is a necessity, and has been a corner-stone in police ideology for the whole of my service.
Always the quantitative element is emphasized by the CID at the expense of any qualitative aspect of social order or harmony.
I will expand further on this dichotomy between quality and quantity of ‘crime’ in Chapter 5, but would argue that the chase for numerical detections in which detectives everywhere are immersed moves them across another conceptual boundary and takes them into a  statistical world away from their previous world as ‘real polises’where the central classifier of conflict with the ‘prig’remains, as ever, in a power struggle over the body (Foucault 1977).
There is no doubt the uniform policemen see their one-time associates in the CID as having crossed a divide, while the detectives know they have joined a closed and somewhat élite family group, whose strengths include the inside support of other members of that society.
In many cases becoming a detective relies on a quiet system of patronage; of being invited in by those already inside with power.
Having watched and assessed the track record of some young officer, the middle-ranking detectives will perhaps put him forward as a candidate, and I have watched as potential members were admitted only after a series of phone calls had ensured their acceptability to the department.
I have also seen written applications for the CID ridiculed by those inside, and listened to the expressions of disbelief that these naïve applicants were ‘so short of shillings that they didn't realise that admission was by invitation only’.
I have also had to tell others they are unlikely to get in and then try to explain the politics of the department to them and watch their dismay when they realize that, perhaps regardless of merit, they do not fit in.
Once inside, the new detective will quickly meld into the department's style, pursuing its rituals to form a new link in the tradition of the CID.
In my own case I was given a section — a small area in the central division — with just over 300 crimes per year.
Most of these were undetectable in that there were few enquiries I could pursue after the event; for example, the purse stolen by an unknown thief an hour or two prior to the report and perhaps with the exact time and location of the theft unknown left little chance for skilled investigation.
We were well aware of our limitations long before David Steer (1980) pointed out that ‘the great majority of crime detections involve little of what the public would perceive as real detective ability’.
In a number of ways, both vocal and non-vocal, the uniform branch disparagingly refer to this separation which occurs between themselves and their detective colleagues.
They home in on what they see as the uncontrolled nature of CID work, and sneer and begrudge the detective his apparent freedom of movement.
They are also well aware of the limited ability of detectives simply to go out and detect crime and know but cannot easily articulate that the symbolic import of  the detection rate is a manipulation (see Chapter 5).
All of this creates the fractured rivalry which has existed during the whole of my service and which has survived attempts by management to ‘weld the uniform and C.I.D.
into a more cohesive unit on Division’(taken from a Divisional Order).
Inevitably such attempts are going to fail, simply because the two units have different perceptions of police reality and their own structures of significance to maintain.
As a result of the primacy of the statistical world we now inhabit, the quantity of detections obtained by each detective through the ‘write-off’, ‘the NFA detection’, or ‘the TIC’ becomes all important.
The quality of ‘capture’ which is often said to be the major aim of the department becomes another ‘lip service’to the outside world, although once again the symbolic content of this truth is multi-vocal.
A better version of reality is that although the quality of ‘capture’ has tremendous semantic significance for both uniform policeman and detective, it rarely leads to large numbers of detections for the monthly, quarterly, or annual reports.
Indeed the quality ‘capture’ often means a lot of work with perhaps only one detection — if that — at the end of the day.
During my relatively short period as a city detective, I was implicitly aware that quality had to be sacrificed to quantity, for the ‘arrest list’ was checked monthly and the numerical totals counted.
However this did not stop us making lists of those quality ‘prigs’ we would have liked to eliminate.
In a game similar to that devised for the radio show Desert Island Discs , we listed those who would get one bullet from a six-gun, and placed them in order of preference, much in the way the FBI listed the top wanted men in the USA.
Our lists contained the names of the family ‘prigs’ we knew were professional thieves and burglars; and of whom I was advised on my arrival in the department by an old detective: ‘you only get one chance a year to nail these bastards if you are lucky, so when you do, its got to be watertight’.
Again the élitism in the department is largely symbolic, for although  detectives talk continuously of their special knowledge of the world of ‘prigs’, and despise the uniform branch as ‘wollies’, often it is the uniform ‘polis’ who responds to a call and effects the ‘capture’, after which the detective moves in to ‘squeeze him dry’.
The detective has therefore moved away from the centrally important activity of seizing the villains into a manipulated world where the paper exercise of statistical detections is used to assuage politicians, the media, and a public obsessed with the moral panic of increasing crime rates.
Furthermore, the detectives are no longer in that basic symbol of police identity — the uniform.
They are less constrained and have more individuality in their ‘civvy’ clothes, although there are strict, but unwritten rules about what is acceptable dress (sombre suits and ties) and what is disordered and undisciplined (jeans, T-shirts, training shoes, and the like).
In the late 1950s this order of dress was even more carefully observed and I saw a detective sergeant ordered home to change from Harris tweed jacket and flannels into ‘proper clothing’.
By 1965 things had eased, but my detective inspector still railed against my three-quarter length corduroy car-coat with its red lining.
He moaned about ‘declining standards’ and fondly recalled his own early days when each detective had to wear a dark striped, three-piece suit, an Anthony Eden homburg, and a watch chain at the correct angle.
Today, the detectives on the shoplifting squads, the burglary teams, and the crime squads are casual, but are still clean and orderly (‘prigs’ assert they can still spot ‘a horney’because of his tidy style and his shoes).
However, it is at the CID social functions which are sprinkled throughout the year (especially at Christmas and any departmental promotion) that you can clearly observe the CID style.
To walk into a pub function room as I have often done during the ten years I was collecting fieldnotes and see two or three hundred detectives in their ‘uniform’ of modern suit and tie, neat haircut, and the fashionable moustache of the times, is to be visibly reminded that there is a narrow symbolic range of bodily correctness within which all policemen can properly operate.
And even in this conformity the detectives are moving away from the uniform policeman's concept of correct  dress, for they are wearing ‘civvy’ clothing like those despised outsiders they have learned to keep at a distance.
Furthermore they can move without the constraining presence of the very noticeable uniform and its ‘big hat’.
Inflation of the theatricality of the social drama leads detectives to lay emphasis on ‘the big job’ and the arrest of the professional ‘prig’who commits the big burglary or pulls off a daring robbery.
The cold truth is that such captures are all too rare and it is a daily influx of petty offenders and successfully detected trivia that makes up the major part of the detective's world.
The uniform ‘polis’, by contrast, feels that regardless of the offence or its value, he is primarily dealing ‘at first hand’ with ‘prigs’and is thus fulfilling another metaphorically prized position as ‘a good collar feeler’.
His ‘real work’ always lies in the bodily activity of physically capturing the ‘prig’, often to have this dangerous business transformed by a detective who then negotiates justice with the adversary, in the essential CID cause of returning a good detection rate.
As a result, the uniform ‘polises’ often complain that ‘the quality of prig has been forsaken to be replaced by quantity’.
This qualitative/quantitative dilemma produces a further schism between uniformed policeman and detectives, for CID systems of maximizing and negotiating both the crimes recorded and their eventual classification can drive a wedge between the two units.
Once again the result is disjunction, for it is quality and not quantitative measures in the work experience which produce self-esteem for the individual.
As Pirsig (1979: 277) correctly observes, qualitative value
is the predecessor of structure.
It is the pre-intellectual awareness that gives rise to it.
Our structural reality is pre-selected on the basis of value and really to understand structured reality requires an understanding of the value source from which it is derived.
One further consequence of attributing pre-eminence to quantity in relation to detection rates means that the ‘prig’ who ‘clears his slate’(admits to lots of crimes, no matter how trivial) becomes a prized catch, simply because he helps the figures.
His arrest, as I have suggested, will often be made by a uniform ‘polis’ whose  physical handling of ‘the body’(the person apprehended) will be tempered by an acute awareness of the need to maintain physical domination.
The immediacy of this world of conflict demands that regardless of his proximity to the metaphorical dirt he is controlling, he needs to erect and maintain social and psychological barriers and separate himself conceptually from the ‘prig’.
The detective on the other hand, immediately sets out to reduce these culturally created separations, for he needs to negotiate a statistical reality with the ‘dirty prig opposition’.
The ‘real polis’ is programmed to maintain a conceptual purity by maintaining structural distance, while the detective, of necessity, is forced to reduce this to carry out his deal with ‘the dirt’.
By reducing the social space between the dichotomies of ordered law enforcers and uncontrolled ‘prigs’, the detective necessarily returns a degree of humanity to the ‘prig’ which the uniform ‘collar feeler’is always structured to deny.
The lowly ‘polis’, with little or no power in the system, deplores this situation and complains of its escalation, while the detectives moan about the incompetence of the uniform ‘wollies’ who never get close enough to their prisoners to extract their own ‘coughs’or admissions and who fail to understand that the system largely depends on the ability of the department to manipulate a statistical norm in detected crimes.
Stead (1980: 305), like Mervyn Jones (1980), has also pointed out how police organization attributes low status to beat work, and asks the service to reconsider the value of the patrol officer:
I would enter a plea that I have often made that the street officer's authority…and discretion should be given better recognition.
It has always seemed to me rather sad that almost any move from beat duty is regarded as a promotion.
Such a plea, although laudable, has little chance of becoming reality in the present organizational set-up, for it ignores the semantic difference in the uniformed ‘polis's’ role and that of the 10–15 per cent of the institution who form the élite in the CID.
For the uniformed ‘wollies’ at the bottom of the hierarchical pile, any move  into detective work can have parallels with a marginal movement.
It becomes a rite of separation into an area where the detective's need to ‘juggle with statistics and detection rates’ is diametrically opposed to the constantly voiced uniform preference for action which is simply programmed to ‘nail the prig down’.
Once again the language is vital to the analysis, for the term ‘juggling’ is widely used in relation to detection rates and carries with it an understanding that what is happening belongs to a world where movement conceals as often as it reveals.
In contrast ‘nailing the prig down’ is a quintessential statement about the value to uniform ‘polises’of stasis, containment, and spatial control.
Such vivid, metaphoric language epitomizes and illustrates the ultimate truths and values of the police world.
In effect, even those who move across the margins into CID work have produced the first structural crack in the preferred coherent model of uniformed and unitary policing.
FURTHER INTO LIMBO
In 1966 I moved from the world of ‘real polising’ into areas of operational marginality which were further to confound the preference for the clearly delineated police world I had been brought up in.
Although still nominally under the CID organizational structure, and still holding the title of detective, I was detailed to deal with the new and very ambiguous ‘prig’— the drug user.
As half of the first full-time two man drug squad in the North-East of England, I was tasked with defining and dealing with the new social aberration of ‘flower power’, ‘the counter culture’, and the ‘psychedelic trip’.
This was an era when phrases such as‘turning on’, ‘dropping out’, and ‘scoring shit’ moved into the language; and when our newly discovered deviants caused an incredible moral panic as wreathed in clouds of incense or cannabis smoke and symbolically clutching well thumbed copies of iconic tomes such as the I Ching , they joined the ‘hippie trail to Katmandu’.
Victor Turner (1969, 1974) has explored facets of the anti-structure, liminality, and communitas which are contained in such periods, developing these from Van Gennep's earlier work on rites de passage (1960).
However, he also suggested he would prefer to restrict the use of the concept of ‘liminality’ to those ritual periods in small-scale societies which all must pass through, and use the term ‘liminoid’for those anti-structural periods personified by the ‘counter-culture’of the 1960s (1978: 287).
Whether you prefer to follow Turner, and use the idea of a ‘liminoid’ period for those times and situations when only some members of a society pass through the rite of separation, is a matter of personal choice.
However, I find Turner's work on the results of such movement into the liminal state to be a very useful way of interpreting what an insider experiences when he moves to the margins of his own domain, and I suspect that many such transformations across fiercely defended boundaries of cultural experience lend the individual the chance to stand aside and reflect on his subjective place in the order of things.
Whether or not the opportunity is taken up is another matter!
In many ways these reflexive moments are invaluable in helping to explain the specificities of what Evans-Pritchard (1951) suggested we might consider as an ‘anthropological history’, especially as these alternative periods and the movement through the liminal phase create points in a social process when aspects of structure seem to be made more clearly apparent to the analyst.
Turner has also stressed the subversive character of the betwixt and between state of liminality which helps to explain the drives, inversions, and paradigms of the counter-cultural form, and which enhances the potential for the liminal journey to illuminate the postures and pedantic reactions of the dominant ideology to such periods of social upheaval.
In this instance, established authority and its police were set to oppose the threat posed by this new anti-structure, for the counter-culture renounced power and society feared their challenge, as it has feared the unworldly in every age.
In this liminoid phase, which extended almost across a decade, as Turner (1969: 155–6) points out,
one often finds a simplification, even elimination of social structure in the British sense, and an amplification of structure in Lévi-Strauss' sense.
We find social relationships simplified, while myth and ritual are elaborated…if liminality is regarded as a time and place of withdrawal from normal modes of social action, it can be seen as potentially a period of scrutinization of the central values and axioms of the culture in which it occurs.
Movement from the centralities of ‘real polising’ in uniform, via the CID, into the marginal fringes of an extended period of drug squad work, had a profound influence on the absolute tenets of policing I had absorbed over the previous decade.
In effect this was a period of withdrawal from a rigidly structured police world to a world turned upside down; where, in a ‘counter-cultural’ way, we were to find that the strict terms of reference we had carefully built up over the years no longer seemed to have relevance.
My own ‘anthropological history’ in this liminoid phase became extended over eight years, until 1974, and not only gave me time to reflect on many of the controls we were required to impose, but also to consider the nature of the social harm these unworldly folk devils and ‘drug fiends’were actually causing; for established society has never really known how to handle the unworldly easily.
My own marginality with its reflexive potential in some ways mirrored their experience, for some members of the counter-culture stood apart, in a position which allowed them to renounce, ridicule, or reject society's cherished structures of significance.
As Turner (ibid. 99–100) records, this is a time in social history, when
the values of communitas are strikingly present in the literature and behaviour of what came to be known as the ‘beat generation’, who were succeeded by the ‘hippies’…[and who]opt out of the status-bound social order and acquire the stigmata of the lowly…
An emphasis on spontaneity, immediacy and the ‘existence’ throws into relief one of the senses in which communitas contrasts with structure.
Communitas is of the now; structure is rooted in the past and extends into the future through language, law and custom.
Another binary is created here, for we became separated in our communitas of spontaneity from the rigid belief systems and certainties of a police structure rooted in language, law, and custom.
Indeed there were many policemen who were totally unable to comprehend, never mind live in the haphazard world of  marginality which we now inhabited.
Yet there were those who moved easily around the margins, and I am certain the profound effects of this liminal time extended to more than a few of us who made this transition into structural limbo.
We had moved to the edges of our previously closed system of thought and action, both physically and philosophically, and almost implicitly came to recognize that the ‘foundation metaphors’ which Turner identifies as being crucial to transformational experience of liminality were making paradigmatic statements about our own cultural format; although I know we would have been unable to articulate this.
In effect, the alternatives presented to the ‘counter-culture’ by the liminal experience were also available to some of us in our marginal police world, and we were forced to see that those concepts of order and disorder we had once taken almost as the natural way of things were in fact only one model for society; a single framework for social action!
Social organization, we learned, was conventional and man-made and there were often realistic alternatives.
In our marginal universe, we pursued offences which were then not even classified as crimes in the Home Office Standard list, and were pitched into a new philosophical world structured by a number of alternative social constructs.
These were amplified by a variety of non-verbal sign-systems such as gesture, posture, music, clothing, gender relationships, as well as other aspects of the hippie life related to an alternative political and social belief which were alien to our experience.
These inevitably came to influence our own structures of significance and were made apparent by changes in our own subculture of style.
Our modes of dress and consequent loss of deference to the rigidities of rank and other previously respected apparatus of the hierarchical system were all influenced.
Deference to concepts of order based on such signifiers as exact time keeping, definitive shift systems, spatial purity, clearly demarcated terms of address, and other measures designed to maintain the systems of control were irrevocably loosened.
In addition, we became experts in a new and complex world where everything from the intricacies of a changing semantic of underground language to the knowledge that tetrahydrocannabinol (THE) was the active ingredient of cannabis separated us from our previous associations and took us into a world where few in  the organization could begin to operate with comfort.
Inevitably, over such a long period, I became less institutionalized, more able to function as an individual in relation to belief and action and not merely accept the organization's definition of things; and this is a profoundly un-police like state of affairs!
There was no predetermined police model to follow in dealing with our ‘counter-cultural’ clients, no previous police experience to allow us easily to slot hippie behaviour into any comfortable niche.
Unlike the skin-heads and punks of a later generation, or the teddy boys who preceded this era, many ‘flower children’ were non-violent and in their communitas even exhibited something of a constructive element.
The philosophy which they never tired of expounding to us included visions of a new world, which although sketchy and inevitably idealistic often showed an artistic and positively creative side to their existence.
It was often difficult to dislike the gentle, painted hippies, even though they subscribed to a strange new communal, non-hierarchic lifestyle incorporating the unlawful use of ‘dope’.
This undermined any pre-ordained police logic we might have employed to define them, so that pressures to produce a unidimensional model of ‘polis — prig’ were simply unable to be maintained, although we did home in on such facets as their long hair and frequently unwashed state to polarize them as binary ‘animals’, in contrast to our human status.
And so although they were still the opposition, they could rarely be classified as ‘real prigs’.
We therefore became aberrant policemen simply because what we were now living was not programmed by previous organizational knowledge and habit.
The squad I ran became what can only be described as more ‘disordered’ and ‘polluted’than had been the accepted norm, and we exhibited many verbal and nonverbal signals of this divergent nature.
Our clothing became less sombre and much more casual and varied.
Our hair became longer and — in police terms — almost verged on the wild, confirming Hallpike,(1969: 260), who argued: ‘the hypothesis I wish to advance in this article [is]that long hair is associated with being outside society and that the cutting of hair symbolizes re-entering society, or living under a particularly disciplinary regime within society….
I would formulate the theory as ‘cutting the hair equals social control’…
’. The police obsession with hair returns again and again in my fieldnotes.
Its use as a means of defining  order or to set against those outside creates a subcultural style, which is reinforced continually.
In a 1978 fieldnote I recorded:
a young probationary constable is recommended to shave off his fashionable mandarin moustache before his first appraisal with the Divisional commander (who himself has a 1940s style bush under his nose).
There is no reason, and he declines the verbal advice he has been given by his Inspector, so this has now become an ‘order’.
It is a disciplinary offence to defy an order from a senior officer, so he can only carry on if he is prepared to take on his immediate boss.
In a similar vein, a cartoon in Police magazine (January 1981) repeats an old joke but puts it into the mouth of a totally bald senior officer.
He pulls the hair of a young uniformed constable, shouting at him, ‘If God had intended policemen to have hair he wouldn't have created barbers’.
This use of hair as a symbol of social disorder reflects Benthall's contention (1976) that an obsessive interest in the body was a result of people turning to its use as a medium of expression, because of their individual inability to shape modern technological and bureaucratic society.
He argues that the body is an ideal vehicle for representing and symbolizing coherent models of experience and, at times, presents an intense framework for cultural expression.
And at this point when a range of established values were under scrutiny, the body was made to carry a new symbolic load which reflected the change from the social conformity of the previous decades.
Anthropology has played a significant part in illustrating ways in which symbolic use is made of the body to make statements about the condition of society itself (Mauss 1935, Douglas 1973, Blacking 1977, etc.), and hair became an apposite symbolic indicator of the problems the forces of control were faced with at this time.
Disordered hair is constantly used to reflect social chaos by the police and is a prime signifier of everything that is offensive to the world of ‘real polising’.
Its role in defining the structural marginality of ‘Community Policing’ departments, for example, can be illustrated by another item taken from Police Review (11 July 1980: 1449).
There, an Inspector Fusco pleads for men to be returned to beat patrol from community projects, for these he realizes are ‘an admirable aspiration, until one starts to notice that community involvement officers come to work to spend much of their time in track suits or jeans and tee shirts, and some grow  longer hair and beards and mix with the locals’.
There is no irony in this; indeed this is firmly in line with many similar statements collected in fieldnotes, which consider it to be totally inappropriate for policemen to mirror the style of the locals if they wear track suits or jeans or sport longer hair and beards.
For although it is constantly argued that the police represent and are drawn from the community they serve, the cultural style required in the body of the police officer inevitably sets him slightly apart from the ‘civvies’ outside the institution, especially where such symbolic use of clothing and beards or hair is the province of the youthful innovator.
Always the police prefer to exhibit bodily constraint in their styles, for restraint and decorum have a symbolic history as an indication of subcultural insider purity, a comfort with a vanishing status quo, and a rejection of the changing outside world.
This restraint expected in police hair was clearly illustrated in a large poster exhibited in the Northumbria police training department in the early 1980s, which ordered: ‘male hair will be clear of the collar…[and]sideburns will not extend below the centre of the ear…’.
Faris (1968), exploring the way such symbols come to represent complex conceptual domains, coined the phrase ‘symbols of high meaning capacity’, which exactly fits the structural significance hair has for police ideology.
In effect it becomes a reflection of an almost puritanical social containment of the individual, with metaphoric import as a statement of correctness for the society outside.
Furthermore, it is also used to denote a belief in the uncontrollable and wildly sensual nature of women.
Joseph Wambaugh (1976: 6–7), in his picaresque novel The Choirboys , uses the symbolic load contained in the control of hair to illustrate the dysfunction between ‘real’ Los Angeles cops and their incompetent, corrupt, and inept hierarchies.
Wambaugh, himself an ex-cop, describes the ways in which wildly autocratic and psychotic bosses set out to undermine their own ‘front line troops on the streets’ and describes a manual which mirrors the poster in the Northumbria police training department described above:
Lieutenant Treadwell a figure of fun and contempt to the real cops after his hair started falling out in tufts, earned his way back into Commander Moss' good graces by authoring that portion of the Los Angeles Police Department manual which reads
Sideburns
Sideburns shall not extend below the bottom of the outer ear opening (the top of the earlobe) and shall end in a clean-shaven horizontal line.
The flare (terminal portion of the sideburn) shall not exceed the width of the main portion of the sideburn by more than one-fourth on the unflared width.
Moustaches
A short neatly trimmed moustache of natural colour may be worn.
Moustaches shall not extend below the vermilion border of the upper lip or the corners of the mouth and may not extend to the side more than one-quarter inch beyond the corners of the mouth…
This symbolic import of bodily hair in a novel about Los Angeles policemen is mirrored in the Force Orders of most British police forces and is part of an overarching use of bodily order and control as a marker of police purity.
I will expand on this dichotomy between the clean and the polluted in the next chapter when I detail the ethnography of being a ‘real polis’; however, these few examples indicate the cultural preference and the conceptual challenge which our appearance must have presented as we embraced aspects of the bodily style of our ‘counter-cultural’ antagonists.
Our lengthening hair and use of vibrant colour contrasted markedly with the accepted plain-clothes form of the detectives, so that the drug-squad style became a marker of cultural anomaly.
Photographs of the squad taken in the early 1970s still evoke surprise in police circles, simply because they display such strong imagery of an unacceptable style, and at the time were made much of in the media, who saw the newsworthy potential of policemen in a disorderly form.
In effect we were becoming structurally and visibly undisciplined, in a world where discipline has its import spelled out  on every occasion.
For example, Section 5, para. 14 of the West Mercia Force Standing Orders is entitled the ‘Maintenance of Discipline’, and contends:
Discipline is the foundation of the Force and means not only the performance of specific orders but implies a willing and prompt obedience, proper respect to senior officers and loyalty to the service.
Over the years I watched as senior officers struggled to come to terms with our bizarre presence, which overcame any respect they might have had for our practical mastery of dealing with a world they were wary of.
Of course, our bodily forms and somewhat disorganized working systems were in contradiction to their understanding of the correct codes of policing.
We must have often seemed to deny them the obedience and ‘proper respect’ demanded by the institution, for we obviously did not emulate their style and in effect were a vision of impurity existing right inside the body of the organization.
On more than one occasion I caught senior management using our symbolic disorder to dress down young constables.
One superintendent, keen to control the length of hair of his men, used to shout angrily at his probationers and young officers: ‘are you trying to get a bloody transfer to join those long-haired yobs in the drug squad?’
On another occasion when I was involved in the tense process of bringing prisoners into the charge room in the central bridewell in Newcastle, a very precise ex-detective colleague (by then a neat, uniformed chief inspector) stopped me to exclaim on my appearance.
I had been up most of the night on surveillance and, dressed in ‘raggies’ in a seedy dockside pub outside my own police area, had posed as a ‘driver’for a drug-dealer.
I was somewhat dishevelled and unshaven: ‘Look at the state of you [he exclaimed].
What a mess!
I never thought I'd live to see the day when a detective inspector would look like this.’
I was too involved in the capture and too tired to do other than make light of his comment.
In the same way I was unable to do much else but grin and bear it when my then assistant chief constable (crime), Ken Oxford (later to be the chief constable of Merseyside) implicitly restated police concepts of correct bodily order, when he jokingly told a group of visiting journalists who had come to do a story on this wayward group of detectives, ‘we pay him a plain clothes allowance you know’.
There were few terms of  reference for our operations and no previous squad activity to base our actions on.
In effect we defined our own ‘real work’ and those activities we felt should have credence were given priority, so the role we pursued simply evolved.
Initially we had to start from scratch to find out about drug use and drug users, for we were not even one-eyed kings in this land of the blind; and we quickly found we were delving into a new and complex social world.
Many of our clients were from sections of society which had few previous dealings or contacts with the police.
Some were embarrassingly naive about the rules of engagement and readily admitted their drug use even when we had little or no evidence to prove the point; a most ‘un-prig’ like quality!
A good proportion of our work concerned our availability to act as an unacknowledged arm of the social welfare service to drug users in crisis situations, providing a front-line service for the ‘speed freaks who's OD'd on the results of a bent script’, or the ‘acid heads having a bad trip’, for we were in the streets, the pubs, the clubs, the crash pads, and communal houses frequented by the new ‘alternative society’.
Much of our daily work was ten years in advance of the official police community involvement programmes and yet our actions were only an extension of those social welfare activities the police have been heavily involved in for generations, but which are never given status as ‘real police work’ simply because of the institutional emphasis placed upon summons lists, numbers of arrests, crime detections, and other statistical returns.
Many of our new ‘counter-cultural’ deviants were articulate and presented very cogent arguments relating to their allegedly victimless ‘crimes’.
For example, they would link their cannabis use and an alternative ideology or religious vision to challenge our somewhat static version of social reality.
Many of the ‘underground’ at this period in social history were consciously making a journey towards a new spiritual growth; and this, as Furlong (1973: 106) suggests,
resulted in the controllers making…a puritan attack directed at the drug taking of the (underground) movement; and since the drug-scene is complex and confused, and we have little time in which to develop a reliable folk-lore about drugs and how to take them (as we have long ago done about alcohol), they have been particularly successful in fostering anxiety among teachers, parents and establishment figures.
Our part in this ‘controlling puritan attack’ consisted of making the occasional arrest, while pursuing the unquantifiable social role which filled most of our time.
Furlong is correct, however, in suggesting that anxiety was rife, and because of this and establishment obsessions with a belief in a statistical truth we were constantly being asked to give numerical estimates of how many there were ‘out there’ who were ‘fixing’, ‘using the weed’, or ‘dropping acid’.
During the first three years of full-time drug squad work (1966–8) arrests totalled some sixty-four persons — or less than two per month.
In this same period I saw many hundreds of users who never featured in the arrest tables and took many to hospital.
I acted as unofficial welfare officer for others and spent untold hours merely listening as the unworldly struggled to achieve the alternative vision of a new heaven on earth.
Our sixty-four arrests included a few for the traditional crimes of burglary (but now at chemist's shops), forgery (but of NHS prescriptions, not bank notes), as well as the new offences of unlawful possession of amphetamine or LSD.
Court cases and the resulting media responses given to these new ‘drug fiends’(to use the phrase coined by Stanley Cohen (1973)) verged almost on the hysterical (see Young 1977), and moral entrepreneurs began to press for more controls and increased action.
Questions were raised in the House of Commons about a group of local hippies arrested early in 1967, and local MPs vied with each other to be in the vanguard of efforts to control the ‘army of secret drug takers in the area…(who need to be) brought back from the brink of madness’(Newcastle Evening Chronicle : 27 February 1967).
Much of this fervour, as Furlong suggests (1973), occurred because of social confusion about this new activity.
There was no existing model to use as a comparison of events and so the moral majority focused on clearly visible symbols such as disordered hair, clothing, and lifestyle, to articulate their fear of the ‘alternative society’ and its drug fiends.
One result of this moral panic was that, even as the anxiety mentioned by Furlong (ibid.) forced us to react to these public demands with some arrests, we insiders with ‘special knowledge’, who were working face to face with the counter-culture, knew there was a different social reality abroad which we could never adequately explain to the entrepreneur or encapsulate for the media headline.
In effect this was a time when new worlds and new social structures were being forged; and in many ways we were closer to the world of the underground than that of the moral majority, for we were walking the same ground and like many in the alternative society were (somewhat unsystematically) following an essential and perennial theme of history — that of man's journey as ‘hero’.
In this search for a new spiritual awareness, they — like us — were finding new possibilities to achieve a revived sense of what it is to be truly human in the transformational experience.
This is basically the same anthropological journey pursued by Lévi-Strauss (1973) in Tristes Tropiques , which remains a suitable precursor for most of the current reflexive ethnography.
In this account, Lévi-Strauss uses the ‘hero's journey’ to self-analysis in the field as a means of achieving or engendering knowledge (see also Caplan 1988); emphasizing that it is the journey to self-awareness itself, and not the arrival, which is the most important aspect of the rite de passage .
The forces produced in the individual on such occasions, in what Jung (1964) calls a ‘journey to individuation’, manifest themselves in a number of very persuasive ways and in this case led to some radical reassessments of the existing moral, philosophic, political, and aesthetic order.
These influences have also  been likened to the forces effected by a millenarian journey to a new faith (Jacobi 1967), for they are compelled by an integration of the ego and the unconscious into a vision which demands more from society than the ‘acceptable satisfactions’.
Indeed many of the counter-cultural ideas had troublesome millenarian or semi-religious elements which owed little to the existing moralities or acceptable satisfactions.
One notable effect the alternative social format contained lay in the assault upon the senses which occurred at a pragmatic level.
No one who was around in the late 1960s can have avoided the flood of changes which swept through the dress, sexual codes, language, food styles, cinema, literature, music, and other generative aspects of the new counter-culture.
Many of these have since been taken on by the wider society and are to be found in all its corners influencing even those who would now deny them any real significance and tend to look back on the decade as only times of silliness and self-indulgence.
At the heart of the counter-culture there also lay a vision that was politically troublesome.
As Turner (1974: 245) has shown in his essay Passages, Margins and Poverty , this philosophy epitomized the concept of movement as a rite of passage into liminality.
It possessed a sense of communitas that was essentially perceived as being dangerous to structure:
there is no doubt that from the perspective of incumbents in positions of command or maintenance in structure, communitas — even when it becomes normative — represents a real danger, and indeed for all those, including even political leaders who spend much of their lives in structural role playing, it represents a temptation.
Of course not all policemen are in absolute positions of command even though they represent the maintenance of structure in more than a symbolic way; and few can move into communitas to experience the temptations described above.
Once again Turner (ibid. 241) outlines the constraints of structure and the potentiality of standing outside:
men who are heavily involved in jural-political, overt and conscious structure are not free to meditate and speculate on the combinations and oppositions of thought; they are themselves too crucially involved in the combinations and oppositions of social and political structure and  stratification.
They are in the heat of battle, in the ‘arena’, competing for office, participating in feuds, factions and coalitions.
This involvement entails such affects as anxiety, aggression, envy, fear, exultation, an emotional flooding which does not encourage either rational or wise reflection.
But in ritual liminality they are placed, so to speak outside the total system…transiently, they become men apart.
Like Furlong (1973) Turner defines the effects of the juropolitical role as being possessed of anxiety and denying the reflexive possibility.
While for those thrust into a position of ‘ritual liminality’ there is the possibility of becoming ‘men apart’, of standing aside and though not necessarily following political alternatives posed by any counter-culture, undertaking the hero's journey merely by seeking to comment on the social condition they now see with new eyes.
The resulting path to individuation means the conscious and the unconscious polarities within the individual become joined, so that the anthropological journeyman hero experiences a kind of crisis; for as Jacobi (1967: 22) points out:
to look such truths in the eye is a test of courage.
It demands insight into the necessity of growing old, and the courage to renounce what is no longer compatible with it.
For only when one is able to discriminate between what must be discarded and what still remains as valuable for the future will one also be able to decide whether one is ready to strike out in the new direction consciously and positively.
With benefit of the ‘hindsight-ometer’, it can be argued that my own movement into a structural limbo contained aspects of the unconscious journey towards a new self-knowledge, when the old values were able to be adjusted if not discarded; so that it was possible to break through the constraints imposed by the inculcated patterns of police culture, albeit in something of an unprogrammatic and fragmented manner.
Through the daily use of our special knowledge of the counter-culture, we were forced to acknowledge and come to grips with many of the complex social factors surrounding some drug use, which a legal framework could never adequately encompass.
We now had to grapple with problems of ethics, with questions of morality and of personal philosophy, as we tried to draw a simple police code of practice  together to frame those new deviancies created in the 1960s by the Acts of Parliament relating to drug use.
Furthermore, the reading I did for the lectures I was called to give as a ‘drugs expert’ generated queries about such ambiguous areas as victimless crimes and interference in private acts, and altogether raised more questions than were solved.
This acquisition of special knowledge meant that when I was called to give evidence to the Advisory Council on Drug Abuse (chaired by Baroness Wooton) on the use of cannabis, I was perhaps more inclined to dwell on the symbolic dangers attributed to its use than on any alleged physical harm, simply because I was now aware that any reality in relation to cannabis use was more complex than could be contained in some easy binary of social value — medical debilitation.
Such awareness provided another means for the obsessive anxieties of the establishment to be counterbalanced from within, and as Jacobi (1967: 22) suggests, created the potential ability to look truths in the eye and ‘the courage to renounce what is no longer compatible’.
This, however, produces a further paradox, for this reflexive style, welding the practical mastery and special knowledge of the subjective insider to an objective interpretation of events is not one the institution of policing is  geared up to handle.
We were now floating between a world of the street-wise, the gentle hippie, the communal ‘crash pad’, the lecture hall, the courts, the addiction unit or hospital casualty department, and the front page.
Our peers included our recent colleagues of yesterday in uniform and in the CID, but also took in the professor of psychiatry, the Home Office Drugs Branch official, the NHS executive, the sociologist, and the media hack.
Ours was now a multiple reality and our structural ambivalence can be illustrated by one example when one of the squad created a blazer badge in heraldic style (although we could never have been seen in a blazer at this time when faded denim was the order of the day).
This badge had crossed hypodermic syringes and a Latin motto which when translated, read: ‘Bodies in the cells, names in the papers’.
The blazer badge reinforced the ‘capture of bodies’ philosophy which had sustained our earlier lives, but was created at the same time that I was compiling a paper for presentation at the national BMA police surgeons' conference.
I believe they came to hear jolly conference stories about ‘drug fiends’ and ‘acid heads’, but the paper concluded:
it would seem that the economics of the socially approved tobacco and alcohol industries means that we have to accept 42,000 deaths annually from cigarettes, and the cost to society of 50,000 alcoholics.
These drug casualties are the price of minimal control and an accepted licence to use some drugs.
It seems that we must similarly accept the quoted 3,000 poisoning deaths and 100,000 hospitalizations per year from barbiturate overdose, because the industry contributes £168 million each year in exports…
Meanwhile, we the wise, to quote Erving Goffman (1963) are allowed increasing manpower to pursue the cannabis/hallucinogenic using folk devil and to present the incompetent and the inept from the hippie element to the courts and the public for their solace; and to assure them that drug taking is being stamped out.
Such material clearly illustrates the new modes of thought we were developing.
Our new semantic understanding was therefore linked to the changing epiphenomena of dress, hair, clothing, and the other symbols of the body I have mentioned; but it was also manifest in an irrepressible need to reinterpret and question the social condition, for I had journeyed beyond the norms of the police system, where action to control is preferably a simple  matter of enforcing the rules and regulations as they stand.
Yet this move into anti-structure was merely beginning.
The unconventional, questioning form I had begun to pursue was rewarded by an invitation in 1972 to attend United Nations European Social Affairs Division in Geneva.
‘Experts’ from a variety of European agencies were brought together to discuss and report on the various cross-cultural attitudes to drug-taking among young people.
In this setting the qualitative was constantly under evaluation at the expense of the quantitative measure, for the ‘wise’ amongst us who were present knew that the statistical return often gives a skewed version of complex social events, although it speaks volumes about the way our systems of control are generated and maintained.
In this even more marginal world of cross-cultural perception and social contrast, the statistical truths I was consistently having to produce for local politicians, senior officers, the press, and the public in Newcastle were of little value, especially when discussion on the structures surrounding approval or illegality of some drug use was a matter which might encompass problems of economic, geographical, cultural, or even religious boundaries, or more likely the changing political whim or opportunity of the moment.
FROM LIMBO TO THE OUTSIDE WORLD
Shortly after the United Nations experience, I attended a middle management course at the national Police Staff College at Bramshill in Hampshire.
This was known as ‘the Inspectors’ Course, and is now referred to as the ‘Junior Command Course’.
Of the 500-plus inspectors who attended the college each year on the course, a handful were awarded what is known as a Home Office Bramshill Scholarship.
This took the form of a recommendation to a university willing to take on an inspector, who often had none of the usual qualifications.
Two weeks after my course finished and I was back in the ‘real world’ on a murder enquiry, I received notification I had been awarded the second scholarship in the force.
My predecessor had read law and obtained a first, but I chose to read social anthropology simply because of a pleasure in the subject.
As I have shown above, there is a strong tendency in the  organization to dismiss the social sciences, and it therefore seems fair to suggest that any police officer who elects to read for a degree in that discipline is knowingly placing himself into a position of outsider.
My inclination to reject law as a possible course was incomprehensible to many, and while I was waiting to go to university I was constantly challenged about this.
If I had failed to get a place in a law school and had been forced to take something else as a second choice then this would have been acceptable.
But to avoid law and list anthropology as a first choice was inexplicable:
…why study — what's it called — anthropology?
What's wrong with law?
Surely as a policeman it would be more useful for you to take a law degree…
I would have thought it was your duty to take law…
(From fieldnotes: detective sgt., 10 years' service)
Thus the move into academia and the world of the social sciences was a move across a further conceptual boundary, another movement across time and space, encompassing another rite de passage .
It can be likened to becoming ‘them’ or no longer being ‘us’, for I had further increased my distance from the working lives of the ‘real polises’and had moved out of their known world to become an outsider, a liminal mover.
At university I chanced to meet a detective sergeant who had been in the Durham drug squad outside the Sociology building in New Elvet, Durham city.
He was now in the CID in the city and somewhat tentatively asked what subject I was reading.
He seemed relieved when I told him I was reading anthropology and, looking somewhat apprehensively over his shoulder at the sociology building, he muttered ‘well thank goodness you're not taking bloody sociology, with all those left wing bastards who hate the polis’.
An inspector who came to Durham at the same time as myself to read Law and the Sociology of Law, found the latter course  required a move to concepts outside normal police experience.
Coming from a police family and married to a police officer, her inculcated beliefs were such that the alternative concepts which the sociology of law posed were beyond acceptability.
From a perspective in anthropology where social systems were all equally valid, I teased her about cultural police rigidities which caused this rejection of the alternative views she was being asked to examine, to the point where she refused to lunch with me in the Students' Union, because, ‘you're one of those bloody communists I have to listen to’.
Few former colleagues had much idea of what anthropology was and many seemed never to even have heard the word.
For they live in a world of practice, where the idea of the rule of law forms an ideology or religion, replacing the waning moral power of the church (Hughes 1987: 29).
Its practitioners operate in a world constrained by a belief in the immediate implementation of the legal precept, in which it becomes axiomatic that even the academic/criminologist will remain outside the world of praxis.
For criminologists surely ‘can never be successfully involved at the sharp end, or pointy end, dealing with angry men on the cold, hard streets’(from fieldnotes).
Typically stereotyped as being ‘absent-minded’ cartoon types, intellectuals and academics are considered to inhabit ivory towers and need protection in their naïvety.
Mythological stories about them suggest they are necessarily seen in this simplistic way to reaffirm to ‘real polises’ that it is they who are the true inhabitants of the pragmatic world of conflict and action.
One story of how a local university academic had come into the police station to report his car missing, because he had forgotten where he had parked it, was repeated with relish; while another which I told on my return from university satisfied these deeply held views of the ‘intellectual's’ practical ineptitude:
I tell a small group about a noted professor who was spotted at a tutorial wearing one red and one green sock.
He was described by one of his students as being ‘a brilliant man but so practically inept that he needed help to cross the road safely’.
A detective listening to this story nodded gravely, for it confirmed his beliefs, and as he said, ‘these academics cannot operate in the cut and thrust of the real world, can they?’
When policemen label one of their colleagues with the term ‘academic’ it is always a derogatory term of reference, while ‘college  man’is another derisory phrase used to define that tiny percentage who gain accelerated promotion through one of the special course or graduate entry schemes generated through the police staff college.
Whitaker (1979: 229) records how these ‘college men’ are described sardonically at police station level, as ‘plastic men — who know all about how to hold a knife and fork, but nothing about how to catch villains’.
During a sojourn in Northumbria one of these ‘academic high-flyers’ remained implacably ‘not one of us’, and I heard him summed up in the following terms:
…bloody man is in the fast-lane; comes off at junction 7 for a year or so here, and then he'll be off and away at junction 8, on to his chief's job somewhere else…and look at him!
He's one of them educated bastards who wouldn't know his arse from his elbow on a Friday night in the Bigg Market…
(From fieldnotes)
This ‘high-flyer’ was then in his early thirties.
When he did leave for his next promotion, the ‘real polises’ reading his c.v.
in the local press joked that if he had done all the write-up said then he must have joined the police when he, was about 7!
One officer who had worked with him during his short stay in the force laughingly told colleagues that this ‘college man’ definitely had one arrest — because he would willingly recall details of his big moment for anyone who was prepared to listen.
‘College men’ or ‘academics’are considered to be potentially dangerous and polluting because of their limited understanding of the ‘polis's’real world; for they never stay long enough to experience the depth and complexities of the activities which lend him his ‘special knowledge’.
Consequently they are said to be only suitable for the rarified world of HQ where men with no ‘bottle’ and the non-combatants have fled.
This retreat into the safety of headquarters with its separation from reality is the route for these ‘bastards with no teeth’; it is the rightful place for those ‘nine-til-five administrators who turn up when real polises have been up and at it for hours, and then ask their daft questions because of their lack of practical experience’.
It is the world of ‘ESSO’ men (Every Saturday and Sunday Off), and the ‘real polis's’scorn is reflected in some of the language of definition which I have outlined here.
Now, as a consequence of my eight marginal years on a drug  squad, visits to the United Nations, and the three years at university reading a subject which few knew anything about, but would be willing to dismiss along with all of the social sciences, I was in danger of being irrevocably cast into the mould of being a ‘college man’ or academic.
I was close to being ‘one of them’ and definitely ‘not one of us’because of an acquired list of significant differences.
Given that the police are essentially an organization constrained by an ingrained respect for the pragmatism of action — regardless of the lip-service paid to the police college, the ‘special course’, or the university scholarship — it was inevitable that the hierarchy would follow the dictates of institutional philosophy and pull the marginal mover in from the periphery; for there is a boundary beyond which the pilgrim cannot be allowed to stray.
In all the legends or tales of the journey to individuation and knowledge, the liminal mover always returns to the centre and is reconstituted into structure.
With hindsight, it was inevitable my application to continue full-time study would be refused, for in their eyes I had wandered long enough in the margins and so my hierarchy now ordered that I return to the basics of uniform police duties.
