The News
Thin blue smoke poured straight up from the freshly mortared chimney of the McCullochs' house in Weem.
It tinged the air with a smell of herbs and whisky.
Old Donald had put three more peats on the fire.
His daughter Mary said it was all he was good for — using up fuel that others had cut.
She was a scold — whenever she was near him he felt in the wrong and wondered anxiously what it was he ought to have done.
But between them, he told himself, they had made this nest comfortable.
He looked up with satisfaction at the panelling of the new box-beds — comfort and decency for all three of them, while others in the village still slept on the floor like beasts.
And the stone seats beside the fire would be replaced with benches, once Cameron brought the rest of the spare timber he had promised from the linen mill he was building for the Flemyngs at Aberfeldy.
Cameron made him uneasy with his dark, closed look, the way he stopped and thought silently before he answered you.
But he got things done, he was a weighty man to have in the village, no doubt of that.
Old Donald touched the peats with his fingers to bring more of the dry brown fibres above the flames.
His thick fingers with their horny' nails that stood away from the flesh took no harm from the heat.
He wanted to feel warmed through to his spine, to have the comfort steal into him like strong ale.
It would soothe away the worries that ached in his head, even on this hazy gold morning of early September, with a fine harvest coming and plenty of work for the young men in the new town.
A clack of shoes in the road outside.
High-pitched shouts.
He looked up startled, his eyes fire-dazzled, trying to focus on the door through the dusty levels of sunlight from the two small windows.
It flung open and slammed back against the wall.
Mary burst in.
She stared at him and seemed not to see him.
She sat down on the floor and took great heaving breaths as though she had come up a hill with a burden beyond her strength.
‘What is wrong with you?’ her father asked.
‘The lists,’ she said through her big breaths, which were trembling now.
‘Robertson — has made up — his lists.’
‘Lists — what lists?’
The old man was taking refuge in confusion.
She glared at him and her impatience at his frailty began to neutralize her fear.
‘You know very well what lists — marking down the young men for the wars.’
‘Will Donald be named?’
‘He is twenty-one, is he not?
And not married?’
‘They may not call on them.
They surely have enough already.’
‘You know nothing.’
She stared in anger at the old man's face, at his eyes which goggled anxiously at hers, then roved off when she met his look, his lips which caved in on his gums and mumbled and tightened as though he was always eating.
Did she have to shoulder his fears too? had he no strength left at all to feed into their little supply?
‘If his name is there, he is in mortal danger, and if the French war gets worse, they will be taking them all.’
‘They may not be sending them abroad —‘That is what they promised when James enlisted.’
Her heart cramped now as she thought of her husband's folly in plumping for the easy money, as it had seemed, after three bad harvests — his airy promise to come home soon — his failure to return after his regiment had been disbanded in Madras and left to make its own way back round half the world.
‘That is what they promised Morag Mackintosh and big Mary, and Sheila Stewart, and Flora MacGregor.
And they are all widows now.
James was a fool, but Donald will be a pressed man and a slave.
And so will a hundred others from hereabouts.
No no no!’
She rose on to her knees and looked as though she was praying, but her eyes were fully open and the clenched look on her remarkably white face with its mannish black eyebrows suddenly reminded him of her dead mother.
‘We will not lie down under this.’
She said it with an almost questioning tone, as though listening to the sound of her own defiance to gauge how real it was.
But her hands were gripping into fists.
‘What will you do?’
He looked scared and she pitied him.
‘Och — give them a dose of Archibald Menzies's medicine.
A bit of a ride down the road and a chance to change their minds.’
She giggled unexpectedly.
‘There will be a good crowd at church tomorrow, that is for sure.
Where is Donald?’
‘Gone after rabbits, up the hill.’
‘He would be better doing a day at the mill.’
Her return to mere domestic grievances was a relief after the nightmare about the army.
He felt hungry, and went through to the cool room at the back for a bowl of sheep's milk and some bits of potato.
When he came back, she had gone.
From the front door he could see her walking along the road past the graveyard with three of her friends, their heavy skirts swinging.
As he sat by the fire softening potatoes between his gums, he felt pleased with himself.
If they took a whirl at the minister, he would have a fine sight of the fun.
Two days ago when they had carted out Menzies the minister and Fleming the young teacher from along the road at Dull and danced round them like children at a Halloween fire and stuck them up on horses, facing backwards, and paraded them past the door and down the road to Aberfeldy, he had flung a soft carrot himself and caught the man on the side of his face.
He had deserved all he got — was that what ministers and teachers were paid for? to draw up the militia lists and condemn the young men to the barracks and the camps, to swamp fever in the Indies and their legs and arms blown off?
Young Donald — his eyes were clear black-brown, like a lochan stained with peat, his hair was curly like a bull's poll, and he had been a lovely lad until his father went away, clever with his hands, whittling pieces of wood and glueing them to make little windmills and watermills.
The wheel he had mounted on a bit of rod from Stewart's smithy still turned freely in the burn at the side of the kail-yard.
If he was taken for the army, the light in their house would be damped out forever.
Who would reap the corn and the flax, or milk the ewes?
Mary would work like a slave, but a woman could not take the animals to market, though he knew of widows living alone, soldiers' wives mostly, who farmed on in a rough way by themselves, their cattle straying and mixing with the herds of others, their oats still standing in November…
Old Donald chuckled in himself as the scene in the road came over him again.
The horse had stopped, held its tail out stiffly, and dunged a yard beneath the minster's gaping face.
A young lad had called out, ‘See what the beasts think of the Act!’
And another had capped that: ‘Aye — send a dollop of it down to London!’
They had spirit enough for anything.
They would need it, to match the military.
Down in Tranent, which was somewhere near Edinburgh, and anything could have happened there — but old Donald had had this from Cameron  himself, and he got newspapers by the carrier's cart from Dunkeld — some miners had sworn not to serve, even if the King called on them, and the Volunteers had chased them into the cornfields and played havoc with their sabres…
That was a bad dream — like the ‘Forty-five again.
He had brooded himself into a black dwam, and when the door opened again he started violently and spilled the last of the milk on his legs.
Young Donald was grinning at him with his new look of mockery.
‘Where have you been?’
The old man was trying to imitate his daughter's sharpness.
‘Your mother was after you.
The hay you left lying last night will spoil when the rain comes.’
‘Rain?
The sky is clear as glass.
Grand weather to be after the girls or the rabbits.’
Young Donald leaned his long-barrelled small-shot gun in the corner by the door and then his face darkened over.
‘What did she want?’
‘She thought you would be working.
There is the timber to pay —‘There is nobody working from here to Killin.
Do you know what they have done there?
They have taken Fergusson the teacher, while he was nailing up the lists, and stripped him and tarred him —‘Donald — you would not do that!
They will put them in the gaol for that!’
Young Donald coolly considered his grandfather's staring look of fright and answered him deliberately: ‘No — I would not dirty my’ hands on a bit of a teacher.
But they will never get the Killin lads.
They are off into the hills and they will hide there as outlaws till the Act is lifted.’
‘Would you do that, Donald?
Would you hide if you had to?’
The lad looked suspicious.
‘Have you been hatching something up with her — to stow me away?’
‘She only wants you safe —‘She wants me safe from Jean.
Well — if she had taken kindlier to her a year ago, we might have been wed by now, and I would have escaped the list.’
He glowered at old Donald, as though to brand the accusation on to him too.
Then he looked suddenly sulky like a child.
‘Tell her, if she comes back bothering about the hay, she can turn it herself.
Unless she's too busy flinging mud at ministers.’
The Conversation
Angus Cameron looked incredulous, permanently.
His friend James Menzies the wine merchant, in whose house he lodged, had said once, infuriated after a two-hour argument, ‘Angus — do you believe nothing completely?’
After thinking about it, Cameron replied, ‘James, I was told a good thing once, by the sawyer at Bunarkaig.
I used to help there as a boy.
‘Angus,’ he said, ‘if anybody ever says anything to you, think to yourself, How can I disagree with that?
And if you cannot, well then you might believe it.’
And that is the best thing I ever heard.’
They sat in the parlour, on the evening of Saturday, September 2nd, waiting for Menzies' man Allan Stewart to come back with the news from Blair Atoll.
They were disputing strategies for the resistance and drinking red wine from France — sour claret, which had proved hard to sell.
The room had the look of a tattered nest — piles of newspapers were stacked against the walls, empty stone bottles stood about with dust on their shoulders like soldiers after a battle.
The hearth was drifted up with cinders that had been left uncleared when today's fire was lit.
Mrs Menzies had died five years before, killed by malaria and stomach trouble from their time in Bengal.
Menzies himself had a yellow face with a stained-looking flush on each cheekbone, and when he felt a bout of fever coming on, he drank to drown the symptoms.
Now he looked over at Cameron, taking stock of the quizzical lift of his right eyebrow when he looked out below his black fringe, the down-turn of his mouth under his long curved nose, and began to recapitulate his argument with care, uncomfortably aware that Angus might think he was trying not to sound drunk.
‘Consider, Angus,’ he said.
‘They have seized the Session Books at Auchtergaven, and Kirkmichael, and Logierait, and — and many another place.
So the lists cannot be drawn up.
So the Act cannot be applied.
That strikes to the root.’
‘The root?
We wheedled the book ourselves out of that gullible weakling Fleming over at Dull.
But Menzies had had copies made already.
They are crafty.
We must be craftier.’
‘Och, craft…they need frightening.
The Auchtergaven men broke in at night with their faces blacked and knives in their hands.
Old MacCormack wet himself —’ James laughed and spilled wine.
‘He must have been terrified.’
‘Terror is all very well, but it breeds revenge.
I say, discredit them.
Menzies and Fleming will never forget that two hours riding backwards, with every soul from Dull to Aberfeldy having a good look at their humiliation.’
‘So they'll want vengeance too.’
‘But nobody will join them in it, because nobody respects them.
They are butts now.
But old MacCormack is a victim.
Blackfaced men with knives!
They sound like pirates, or ruffians.
A few wild men playing a violent game.
And when the big men, the Lord Lieutenants and the Colonels of Volunteers, when they get violent back, how do we resist?
We are many, but we are unarmed.
Like the Tranent folk.’
‘We can soon change that.’
‘Well…
There are fifty muskets in the Duke's armoury at Blair Castle.
How do we get them?
Only by going there in thousands, outnumbering his tenants, talking to them , until they feel their power, and disarm their masters.
And how do we muster thousands?
Our people will never come out unless they understand the reasons for all this stir.
But once they know …
You can keep a people ignorant but you cannot make them ignorant —‘Tom Paine?’
‘Who else?
Do you think I could rise to such wisdom?’
This sounded ironical but James could not fathom which way its edge was turned — was Angus actually mocking Paine, his chosen prophet, or merely depreciating himself?
Angus was too deep — you never knew…
Ruffled, and pent-up in his urge to plump for some outright and decisive plan, he grabbed the poker and hit the smouldering coals.
A red one jumped out on to the floorboards and they began to smoke.
Menzies threw his wine onto the coal, it fizzed, and a reek of bonfires filled the room.
Cameron was shaking with laughter, looking on and making no move to help.
Steps clicked on the stones outside and Allan Stewart came in, out of breath, his red hair darkened and sticking to his forehead.
James at once poured him wine from a fresh jug and  refilled his own glass and Cameron's.
‘You're early,’ he said.
‘I hardly expected you before midnight.’
‘The Faskally boatman brought me across the foot of the loch and I came straight over the hill to the Brig of Grandtully.’
‘So he is friendly?’
‘They are all friendly on that side.’
Stewart's eyes were alight and he was drinking the claret down like water.
‘It is like Hallow-fair from Ballinluig up to Blair.
I went for a sup to Widow Duff's howff, of course—, ‘Of course .’
‘Well, where else would you go to meet up with the Duke and his followers?’
(The ‘Duke of Lennox’ was John McLaggan, a horse dealer from Grandtully.)
‘And was the Duke on his feet or his back?’
‘I think his head was clear enough, for all it was going round.
You know he is known to everybody —‘As a rogue.’
‘And a singer, and a clown with plenty of good stories to tell folk while he wheedles out their money.
His sons have been to every place and farm along the Tummel.
Every family with a young man knows they may lose him to the war, and they are as furious about it as a swarm of bees.
Or Alex and Donald say they are, and I believe them.
They are all outside their houses, staring along the roads, waiting for something.’
He stopped talking, still breathing hard, and held his glass out frankly for a fill of wine, like a child asking for milk.
James poured, then held the spout of the jug over Cameron's glass.
Why was he saying nothing? asking no questions?
Surely this was the news they had most wanted to hear.
‘Angus?’ he said, but Cameron was looking past him at Allan Stewart, sceptical and intent.
He said at last, ‘So what plan has come out of all this buzzing and swarming?’
‘It will suit you, Angus,’ Stewart said, laughing and unabashed.
‘They have done their homework too — they have it down on paper.
A letter for the Duke of Atholl.’
‘Saying what?’
‘I would have brought a copy away but they wanted them all.
They ask the Duke to do away with the Act, because it will turn the Atholl Highlanders into slaves, and if he will not, they will fight to the last drop of their blood.’
‘With targe and claymore? and a roar and a rush downhill?’
Cameron's voice dried up their excitement like a dose of paregoric.
‘Does MacLaggan want them to charge against the muskets, and make a Culloden in Strath Tummel?
Does he know what has happened in Tranent?,
‘Come on, Angus, he said no such thing.’
Menzies was querulous, an ache in the head was interfering with his thoughts.
‘They will confront the Duke —‘Will he let them up the drive?
If more than forty-nine go up there, he will read the Riot Act.’
Allan Stewart had flushed with discomfiture at the defusing of his story.
‘He will have no option but to meet them, man.
You should see them — they were ringing the Castle round when I came away, and making themselves fires for the night on Cnoc na Lude across the Tilt.
If the Duke looks out from his eastern windows, he will see crowds of flames dancing among the tree trunks, a hundred fires and a dozen folk round every fire.’
Cameron looked steadily at him for a while until Stewart turned his head with a little toss and swallowed down his wine.
Cameron got up and went over to the back window.
In the north their own wooded hill rose up.
It showed as a black absence of stars in the lower sky.
No fires here yet.
Above it the Plough was tilted and he followed the line of the two stars at its end until he found the Pole Star.
His thoughts were running north and west, up into Lochaber, the oakwoods and pinewoods at the foot of Loch Arkaig which had cradled him in his boyhood.
It would be peaceful there.
But the Act threatened his people too…
James looked at his back for a full minute, then asked, ‘Are you wishing it was like that here — fires on the hill?’
‘Well, it is not,’ Cameron said without turning.
‘But it could be?’
‘Oh aye — all sorts of things could be.
Fair rents.
Fair leases.
No king, no throne for him to sit on —‘Now you are the dreamer.’
It has happened in France, Cameron felt like saying, and then the thought of the gulf between France and Scotland came over him so dauntingly that he suffered a backwash of despair.
Lochaber…
He thought of the autumn day fourteen years before when his father had taken him through the hills towards Morar.
He had been pestering him for a while for stories about the grandparents he had never known.
At last big Angus said, ‘Very well — let us go and see the old place — if we can find it.’
They had walked by Murlaggan at the head of the loch and up Glen Pean.
Midges drawn by the smell of their sweat swarmed round their heads and young Angus began to regret his curiosity, but his father's face was set and dark in a way that froze out complaints, or chatter of any kind.
Long before they had passed the watershed and were looking over into the jaws of the mountains at the head of Loch Morar, young Angus felt he had strayed into a foreign country.
The black mouths of the peat haggs reminded him of stories about ghosts and murders.
Suppose they lost the solid path between these pools?
The ground quaked as they walked on it.
He looked back.
All landmarks that he knew had long since sunk out of sight beyond the rise.
And they had all that way to travel back…
But now his father was slackening the pace and looking round him.
‘Is this it?’
The moor looked empty.
Big Angus stared at him as though he was not there.
It was along ago, young Angus thought.
Maybe he has forgotten.
They trudged on again, their feet following a vein of beaten earth under the thickness of the heather.
Ahead, a low cairn of granite boulders rose clear of the moor.
And another.
They were shaped — they were the shells of cottages, each one reduced to its ground plan, one course of massive stones, roughly masoned, with rounded ones at the four corners.
Big Angus was pointing along a stretch of turf between the shells.
‘There is the street.
And there —’ He stopped and seemed to struggle.
His hands rose into the air and clenched, as though he was wrestling a bullock by its horns.
‘That is my father's house.’
He pointed.
‘My mother was born there.’
He pointed at a shell on the far side of the street.
‘They fired the thatch —’ His hands gripped and whitened.
‘They fired every house and they ran the men down like deer.
The women and children had gone off to the caves —, ‘Did you not fight?’
Young Angus felt hot with rage and wrong.
His father was more than six foot and could toss the caber further than any man in Bunarkaig.
He could have laid in wait for the soldiers and split their heads and —‘Fight?
Some of us knew what that meant by then.
The bold spirits stood and made a show until the muskets cut them down or sent them fleeing.
The rest of us crouched under the bank of the river.’
He pointed across a meadow overgrown with rushes.
‘When we put our heads up, we saw the fires, and the swords slicing away.
When they had killed three sheep and roasted them in the middle of the street  and ridden off with the rest of the flock, and the cattle and the horses and the hens, we buried the dead — we were at it for most of a day — and then we went off east into Arkaig.
And now I am sorry I came back.
But you had to know.’
Young Angus thought, You were a coward — no you were not — what else could you have done?
He grew up that day, and never again saw his father as a being who could do anything and was never at a loss.
His mother looked nervously at them as they came in long after dark — she was obdurately against the recalling of ‘the bad old times’ and she would neither ask them what they had seen nor let them tell her.
It had been his first and only history lesson, and throughout their hungry and needy years in Bunarkaig he never lost the sense that they lived under threat, that government was pitiless, and that some day they would have to fight again for the right to live at peace in their own place.
He surfaced from his thoughts and turned back to the room.
James was slouched back in his chair with his mouth a little open.
Allan Stewart was starting to clear away the mess of jugs and pots with a deliberate clatter.
Sensing the need to gather the loose strands of the evening into one firm fabric, Cameron said, ‘Tomorrow then — we go to hear Archibald Menzies preach at Dull., James was staggered.
‘We have taken care of him already.
We had better torment our own man next.’
‘No,’ said Cameron, wishing that James would think harder and spoil less for a mere sporting occasion.
‘James MacDiarmid will be expecting us, so we will let him stew a bit.
Allan here can keep an eye on this place, and handle ambitious little Robertson if he tries to nail up his damned lists.
I think we should cover Dull, and see whether the man there has had his wits cleared by the smell of fresh shite under his nose.’
The Sermon
The Reverend Archibald Menzies, minister to the stony and muddy village of Dull, was not exactly the pride of his parishioners — he had little chance of being that, since he had been chosen by the laird, not elected by the people.
But they took some wicked pleasure in his fame as the most extraordinary vocal artiste in the whole Synod of Dunkeld.
He used the complete gamut of his voice, from a growl like a dog warning its master that it has a sore foot to a high, exalted monotone which he kept for perorations; and when he was using the words of an Old Testament lament, Isaiah or Zephaniah, to make a piteous effect, he had been known to put his head back and yowl like a tom-cat.
The congregation usually watched him with a perverse relish which he mistook for devout attention, but this Sunday afternoon there was palpably an added curiosity to see how well he managed to live down the shaming comedy he had enacted on horseback a few days before.
As he made his way down the path from the manse between the round-shouldered granite gravestones, his face looked pink, as though he had recently shaved in scalding water.
Some people at the church door caught his eye and smiled and bowed respectfully but others looked away and exchanged glances with grinning friends.
As he put his foot on the doorstep, a young man seemed to jostle him — it was young McCulloch from Weem, the sulky handsome lad with the curly head — why had he come hanging about here instead of hearing his own man preach in Weem?
To stir up mischief, no doubt, and to eye Jean Bruce, the blacksmith's daughter — they had been seen strolling about in the gloaming more than once, laughing quietly together and holding hands.
But there were other interesting visitors from down the strath — Cameron the builder, who came late, and sat in a pew near the back beside Donald Stewart, the blacksmith from Grandtully.
Soon the door was closed, leaving outside, among the gravestones and round the Cross, a small and growing crowd who lingered on with a sense that the entertainment might not be over.
A psalm droned and swelled.
The minister read a lesson from Job, chapter 2.
When he came to the words, ‘Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou still retain thy integrity?’,
Cameron began to wonder if Mr Menzies was identifying himself with Job, and when he ended ringingly on ‘Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil?’, the suspicion was confirmed.
Clear yellow sunlight shone through the window-panes, making a pattern of diamonds on the plasterwork.
Children in the congregation watched the diamonds slowly grow squarer, less elongated, as the sun moved down the sky.
Another psalm.
The shuffling and rustling of bodies settling again into the pews.
A resigned silence congealed over the rows of people and the Reverend Archibald Menzies gripped the edges of the lectern, closed his eyes and raised his face to the ceiling, then looked down at the serried faces and spoke.
‘I will speak to you today on a text from that book, the Book of Exodus, which is so replete with wisdom concerning the leader and the led.
The Book of Exodus, chapter 16, at verse 6.’
He paused to let the devout look up the passage in their Bibles.
‘And Moses and Aaron said unto all the children of Israel, At even, then ye shall know that the Lord hath brought you out from the land of Egypt: And in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of the Lord ; for that he heareth your murmurings against the Lord : and what are we, that ye murmur against us?
And Moses said, This shall be, when the Lord shall give you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for that the Lord heareth your murmurings, which ye murmur against him: and what are we? your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord .’
Mr Menzies' exposition was fluent.
It swelled, diminished, and swelled again like an oratorio.
At times his voice went through its paces almost independently of the sense.
When he repeated the text (which he did frequently), ‘And in the morning’ would boom suddenly and dozy members of the congregation twitched, wondering if they had missed something.
What they had missed was an elegant argument in which Mr Menzies cast himself as Moses, the much-wronged and sorely-tried shepherd to the Israelites, and his session clerk and schoolmaster James Robertson as the faithful lieutenant Aaron.
‘For Moses and Aaron knew, they knew full well,’ said Mr Menzies  in a sorrowful coo, ‘that their lot was a thankless one.
But equally,’ his voice surged, ‘they knew that the Lord would provide.
And they were not mistaken, for He did provide, and provide abundantly: quails and bread, ‘and he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.’
But were they satisfied?
I fear not, for indeed ‘they hearkened not unto Moses’, they murmured against him, and against Aaron, which is to say, they murmured against the Lord, for was it not the Lord Himself, speaking and working in Moses, who had brought them out from the land of Egypt?’
And so the words turned back on themselves, phrases reappeared, seeming to confirm other phrases, merely repeating themselves, clicking into place with a semblance of logic which nicely disguised the truth that all these words were nothing but a glittering fabric which hovered above the ground, unwinding endlessly, slipping between the fingers, beguiling like a mirage, taking on whatever shape the conjuror wanted, and leading nowhere.
Cameron now expected a glancing reference to Exodus 32 and a figuring of Aaron the idolator as the rebel and troublemaker who seduced the honest Israelites with the golden calf of dangerous principles.
But if Mr Menzies had thought of this he must have been keeping it for another Sunday.
Evidently he had decided to finish on a note of grave and reproachful dignity.
‘For those were troublous times,’ he said on a downward-curving cadence, ‘and such times have come again, but take heart: for ‘when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.
And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome: but the noise of them that sing do I hear’.’
He finished, face raised and eyes closed, and at once gave out the final psalm.
Mr Menzies had enunciated ‘them that sing’ with noticeable pleasure in the resonant properties of the words.
Looking at his glistening face, his cheeks and forehead like apple-skins, Cameron wondered what fired him most at this moment — self-satisfaction? or a true pleasure in poetic language?
Whichever it was, he did live well.
He was entirely suited to enjoy the hospitality at the Castle, to relish Sir John's venison and cranberry sauce and compliment him on the beauty of his larches.
I am envying him, thought Cameron sardonically.
Outside, single shouts sounded — a threatening growl from several voices together — hens squawking.
Startled faces turned as they sang, then turned back and looked at the pulpit.
Mr Menzies said the benediction, it seemed at a deliberately dragging pace.
Everyone filed out, pushing a little, finding it hard to maintain their Sunday solemnity.
The graveyard was packed with people, more were arriving down the farm lanes and along the main road from east and west.
On the boulder that lay against the rough stone stump of the Cross two men were standing, waving torn papers and conducting the crowd in a chorus of jeers.
Cameron caught sight of young McCulloch from Weem, standing beside Jean Bruce with his arm round her waist.
He shouldered towards them and asked, ‘What is going on?’
Donald McCulloch was jubilant.
‘Oh, three of the Duke's boobies from Blair Castle came riding up with bits of paper — some rubbish about the Act.
So the lads here knocked them from their horses, and stripped off their breeches’— Jean Bruce giggled and he paused to cuddle her and kiss her cheek —‘and sent them back to Atholl.
Their horses are in the park — three good ones, too.’
‘What do these papers say?’
‘Who can tell?
They are in English,’ Donald said contemptuously.
Beside the Cross one of the men had torn a paper into little bits and scattered them, to a groaning catcall from the crowd.
The other man shook his head, held up his paper, and shouted out, ‘Can anybody read this?’
‘Give me a look at it,’ Cameron shouted back.
Faces turned, bodies gave way a little, and he went up to the Cross and took the crumpled sheet.
He scanned it — it was little more than a text of the Act.
He reminded himself of the details and exulted as he saw what he could do with it.
‘Here is a polite letter from the Duke of Atholl,’ he said loudly, waving the paper.
‘And you know he rarely bothers to address us.
But now he wants our young men, so he is gracious.
They want six thousand,’ he paused, ‘not more, a mere six thousand.
They are to serve as long as the war lasts, and a month on top of that, they are to serve in Scotland only’— someone cheered —‘or so it says, and you can ask Widow McCulloch, or Widow McGregor, if they have heard that anywhere before.
The parish schoolmasters are to make up the lists, and I am sure they will oblige.
Every man from nineteen to twenty-three is liable, except for married men with two or more children, and sailors, and apprentices — whoever heard of apprentices as old as that?’ he jeered, and the crowd jeered with him.
‘And except for ministers, of course— we cannot do without them ; or schoolmasters — the Lord Lieutenants will need them to draw up more lists and sign  away more lives when the six thousand have bled and died in France, or Spain, or India.’
A hoarse, angry noise came from the crowd and faces turned to look at Fleming the teacher, who was standing near the manse under a yew tree.
‘Objections to be heard by the Deputy Lieutenants — all honourable men, I am sure, and well above military age.
They have sons, no doubt, but most of them will be in the Volunteers already, and I see that they too are exempt.
Each district to be balloted to produce its squad for the six thousand, and if the ballot brings up your name,’ he paused again and saw the hundreds of eyes fixed on his, ‘then you must go off to the Army, or else pay £10 to hire a substitute.
So there is the Duke's special message for the people of Strathtay.
It will have to be answered, so we had better talk about it in the shelter of our homes, and in the morning we can send and tell him what we think.’
There was silence at that, an air of waiting for more.
But presently the crowd loosened into smaller groups and a good many people went off into the village or set off for outlying farms.
Fleming the teacher had gone into the manse as soon as Cameron finished.
Cameron found Donald Stewart and set off beside him towards Weem, which lay among its woodlands in a light blue haze of evening smoke.
‘Will we meet in the morning, then?
And had the Grandtully folk best come up the glen and join on at Dull?’
Stewart was thirsting for action, his colour high.
But Cameron felt spent with the effort of the past hour and would say only, ‘Let us see if anything went on at Weem.’
And it had: James Menzies and Allan Stewart were full of it.
An unprecedented crowd, with quite a few strange faces, had gathered round the church door before the afternoon service.
John Robertson the schoolmaster had come ‘trotting along from the manse, looking full of himself and with not a word to say to anyone’.
He had brought out his lists, four sheets, and had got them half fixed to the door when Allan knocked him aside and tore them down and then spent an hour, with James's help, going down the names and telling the young men to their faces whether or not they were listed.
A great anger had heated up, one of Robertson's new windows had been shattered by a stone, and the womenfolk had made a move to drag the teacher out and throw him in the river.
But by then he had taken refuge in the church, and the service must have been little more than a conversation between him and old MacDiarmid, because not another soul had dared to run the gauntlet and go inside when the clock struck three.
The Signing
The conference in James Menzies' house that night was brief.
Camerun would not drink, feeling his head hum already with the gathering pressure in the village and with his compulsive second thoughts about his speech.
He knew he had simplified the matter when he said the six thousand would be sent abroad to the War — simplified it and coloured it blood-red.
To make an effect?
Like Menzies the preacher?
Was he himself as calculating and vain as that?
But surely it was right to warn the people, to make them feel their plight.
It was a time for fierce tactics, not for scruples.
But the scruples would spawn in his head, giving a cynical taint to his image of himself.
He sighed tiredly, as though he had been working for a full day with stone and timber, and tried to listen to James Menzies, who was well away, drinking whisky with Allan and simmering with the news from the west, where the lists had been torn down from the church doors at Fortingall and Kenmore, and from Blair Atholl: the Duke's factor had had to meet a crowd of more than a thousand and the Duke had signed a paper swearing not to impose the Act.
James seemed in a fever.
He was stoking the fire unnecessarily until the flames raced up the chimney.
‘So — should we beard Sir John at once, and serve him our ultimatum?
Come on, man — the folk are ripe and ready.’
‘I would wait a day or two,’ Cameron answered reluctantly.
‘But they will not ask me.’
They did ask him, however, and they came in hundreds for the purpose.
He felt he had scarcely fallen asleep, he was dreaming of a black river, with no banks, yet there was something there, a source of light that he wanted to reach, which he could not reach against the cold drive of the current…
He woke in a sweat — voices — a dog barking.
Someone entered the room and he recognized Allan Stewart's voice.
‘There is a crowd here, asking for you.’
‘What time is it?’
‘Not sunrise yet.
But near it.’
Cameron got out of bed and dressed, feeling unreal.
He expected a few dozen people.
But the ranks and clusters of them stretched uncountably into the darkness.
He turned to James in amazement and saw that he was enjoying his surprise, as though it confirmed one of his arguments.
Keen wafts of pine resin sharpened the air.
Torches were bubbling out flames and streaming smoke.
A man coughed and Mary McCulloch's voice said, ‘Snuff it well in, Dugald.
It will clear your chest.’
The few people who were visible looked like a crew of spectres as the shadowed hollows in their faces shifted with the wavering of the flames.
Instinctively the two men were looking for faces that they knew — Mary McCulloch and her friends, big Mary as tall as a man, red-haired Flora.
Cameron recognized several of his workment from Aberfeldy and warmed to their comradeship — he had talked little politics with them (in the aftermath of the big treason trials, caution had seemed advisable) but he had passed on his newspapers and one of the men came from Lochaber like himself.
People were stamping their feet and putting their hands in their armpits against the chill of an open, starry night.
One person looked at another, grinning or expressionless.
Few were talking.
The current of force in them was eddying slowly round — it had reached a level stretch after whatever rush had carried them here.
No weapons were to be seen but a good many shepherds' crooks and plenty of rough sticks cut from birch or alder.
Cameron felt called upon to act.
But why him?
He wanted the choices and decisions to be clear.
But in this new raw situation that was flooding up round them, nothing could be clear, not yet.
He turned to Menzies and said, ‘Who all is here?
Aberfeldy and Weem, but who else?’
‘They say they have gathered in all who would come out from the north side down to Pitnacree, and the south side as far up as Kenmore., ‘The Grandtully crowd?
The ‘Duke's’ army?
We will need them.
We will need everybody.’
‘The word has gone up every road and track.
Look — they are still flocking in.’
A ripple of new arrivals was making the front row press forwards.
Cameron and Menzies were squeezed back nearly into the house, and big Mary, finding herself hard up against Menzies, took his arm, cleared a space with a sideways butt of her hip, and twirled once round with him.
‘Come away, James!’ she said loudly.
‘This is better  than a ceilidh.’
He twirled her again, hands clapped a rhythm, and faces glowed briefly as pipes were lit.
Cameron turned back into the house for his cloak and tried to order his thoughts as the last fogginess of sleep evaporated in his head.
If James was right and they could count on contingents from every part of the strath, they would be a force indeed — a mass big enough to frighten the most assured gentleman.
Would the others make for Castle Menzies?
Where else?
You had to trust folk.
They knew their business, more or less.
They knew the owners, the well-to-do, the grandees back from Jamaica and Bengal who sat here now behind tall walls and drew their rents.
Down beyond the fork where the Taly joined the Tummel another world began — the world of government.
The axis that joined Edinburgh to London — that was the lightning-rod of power.
Sir John Menzies was part of that, by his marriage to Atholl's daughter, and Atholl dined and intrigued with the Lord Advocate when he went to Edinburgh for the season.
Each of these men occupied a bastion.
Well, they had penetrated Atholl's bastion and he had had to meet ‘his’ people man to man, and man to woman, on a level, with no intermediary.
Menzies the old bon vivant had not a fraction of Atholl's strength, he would not dare to turn them away, and if he did they would go in there with sticks and clubs and — As Cameron felt his anger rising, he swallowed it, took up his own cherrywood stick from the corner, and went hack outside.
A pale yellow lustre was growing low down in the east, making feathery silhouettes out of the black stands of trees along the bends in the river.
Faces turned as he came out and sleepy people started to get up from the low walls and boulders it the side of the road.
James nodded to him as though for confirmation and then said loudly, ‘Let us go to the Castle —’ He became aware that the further reaches of the crowd were out of hearing and shouted at the top of his voice, ‘Let us go — along to the Castle — and let us see — what John Menzies — will do about the Act!’
Scattered cheers answered him, big Mary gave a ‘Heeuggh!’ like a dancer, and the whole throng began to move along the road westwards, past the dark silent façade of the inn, the equally silent church and manse, towards the gates of Castle Menzies.
Sir John Menzies had a recurrent dream, especially on the nights when his young wife would not have him in the bed beside her, or he had been drinking late, and he slept in the side bedroom, which  was tall and narrow with two pistols perched on nails in the wall.
He dreamed, each time, of his plantation in Jamaica — banana palms leafed like green fountains, bright orange papaws clustered at the top of their naked stems, a noise of surf quickened the air with its rustling freshness.
All the animals were dying.
A cat lay outside the front door, one of its eyes protruding in a grotesque bubble with the iris leering darkly from its rim.
Butterflies as big as birds fell down from the branches, wings flopping limply.
A golden oriole lay on its side in the twilight of a banana grove; a column of ants was passing to and from the bedraggled corpse.
A thud of chopping — movement between the tree trunks — a labourer was coming towards him, one of the consignment of convicts he had ordered through a merchant in Bideford, he had his machete in his hand, he was not menacing, he held out his spare hand in a strange appeal, lifting his face, which was crossed by deep scars, wounds across his eyes had puckered them right in so that he moved like a blind sleeper, closer and closer — Sir John woke up sweating, surprised to find himself alone, and then remembered: he had been drinking with his cousin Alexander Menzies of Bolfracks, the last bottle must have sent him under.
His head was swinging and throbbing like a bell, The bell was ringing — absurd!
Was there a wind to swing the great plantation bell which he had brought home and hung on the oak beside the east gate?
He got up in his night-shirt and looked incredulously out at the twigs of the stately chestnut tree in front of the castle.
They were motionless.
Someone at the bell — why did his factor and nephew Robert not go out and stop them?
What could be happening?
In a spasm of irritation he pulled a cloak over his nightshirt, took down a pistol from the wall, and went downstairs into the chilly, stone-smelling darkness of the ground floor, looking for servants.
As big Mary pulled heartily at the pleated rope of the bell, a loud murmur of voices and footsteps sounded along the road west.
The dawn light showed a crowd of men and women with a pack of dogs running beside them.
Cameron and James recognized none of the faces.
The men wore short kilts of grey homespun, their hair was flowing or knotted at the back, most were bearded: the uplanders had arrived from the Glen of Keltney.
Now, surely, the whole of Strathtay was going to turn out.
Looking down from a small window in the lodge house, the factor Robert Menzies was terrified to see the throngs  of people, like herds of cattle milling at a tryst.
Amongst them he saw, with a further pang, Joseph Stewart, the laird of Foss beside Loch Tummel.
What on earth —?
As he watched, a young lad suddenly stooped behind Stewart and made a piggy-back, another lad shouldered him, and over he went, falling heavily while people nearest roared and laughed.
He was a prisoner, then?
Thunderous knocks hit the door downstairs, the bell clanged and clanged.
‘Lock the door behind me!’ he said to his wife.
He went out on to the landing, opened a window, and called out to the crowd: ‘What do you want? who are you?’
‘We want you, dearie!’ a woman shouted.
Above the laughter a man's voice carried and Robert Menzies recognized the wine-merchant from Weem.
‘We have business with the laird,’ James Menzies shouted above the bell.
‘So get him down here.’
‘I do the laird's business.
But not before the sun is up.
Come back at nine o'clock.’
A roar greeted his effort at authority and dirt spattered him, making him blink and cower.
If he could see the culprits!
But it was hard to pick out faces that he knew in the swaying mass of heads.
‘Put on your breeches and get your master.
Our business is personal with him and if you get between us —’ The factor waited for the threat but a tall cloaked figure standing beside Menzies had pulled his arm to forestall him.
‘Take off your nightshirt and come down like a man!’— a catcall from the body of the crowd.
Hooves sounded.
To his left, along the drive, he saw the grey-haired minister from Weem arriving at a gallop.
The gatekeeper opened half the gate to let him through.
Before he could close it the crowd swarmed past him in their hundreds and set off towards the castle at a trot.
James Robertson, teacher at Weem and Session Clerk to the Reverend James MacDiarmid, was wakened by the minister in the dim bluish light of dawn.
He slept on a straw pallet in the low attic space at the Widow MacIntosh's and these days he hated to wake up.
Sleeping was no better — fleabites tormented him, fears plagued him like bad dreams.
His colleague Fleming's humiliation on horseback had made him dread the same thing for himself.
And the ordeal of putting up the lists — he could still feel the brute weight of Allan Stewart's shoulder  jolting him aside, the smell of whisky on his breath, and then the twilit hours lying low beside the minister in the church, waiting for the hubbub outside to die away.
He shuddered awake.
Mr MacDiarmid's long yellow face and white hair were close above him.
‘Robertson!
Robertson!
Are you not awake, man?
Half the parish has been roaring past your door.’
‘You will wake Widow MacIntosh —‘She is not here, you fool — she has gone off with the mob.’
‘Where?
What —‘They are off to the Castle, where else?
They will be mobbing Sir John by now.
I will ride there and maybe pass them among the trees.
You follow as fast as you can.’
‘Me?
What —‘You know the business.’
The minister's wintry face looked acid with disapproval.
‘These people are all mad to escape the Act.
Well, we have a duty to draw up the lists, and manage the ballot, and by God we will carry it out and support Sir John, or else there will be madness and misrule here for evermore.
Now — dress yourself and come.’
He went out and Robertson heard the hooves of his garron clopping on the road.
He got up and dressed as though in a trance, and set off for the Castle with the hangdog look of a condemned man.
In the smithy house at Dull, Jean Bruce hail lain silently under the covers until her four little sisters and brothers had stopped fidgeting in the oppressive atmosphere and her parents had started to snore.
When she heard the shrill call, like an owl but human, she slipped out and joined her lover in the little barn beside the byre.
She and Donald had started to take risks — they wanted each other so much that the reality of other people had dimmed for them, half the time they felt cloaked in invisibility.
And now that Donald's name was on the militia list, the thought of being parted obsessed them and they made love as though each time was the last time.
Just now they had been utterly careless about the noise they made in the hay.
The open night sky had not yet cooled the air, they were sweating, yet they still lay close together and the soft milk-and-blood smell of her breasts soothed his nostrils.
But the worry surfaced again.
‘If you go for a soldier’— she had said it fifty times — it will stop us getting wed.
And if you go to England —‘
‘There are other things could stop us marrying.’
He was disinclined to disturb the well-being of the moment.
‘Only because I am very young.
And father likes you.
And they married young enough — mother was sixteen when she had me.
But you do not sound bothered…
’ Anxiety was making her touchy, unsure even of him.
‘Not bothered!’
He was stung to speech.
‘Who will have to march and bleed, and live on filth?
Who will lose his legs —‘And sleep without his girl —‘‘My family have been through all this already.
Where is my father?
Rotting in India, or Africa?
Where is he?’
‘He should never have gone.’
At that he turned his face round and glared at her.
‘If there is an army, men will go off to it, if they are poor.’
‘I know — I know.’
She cuddled close to him again, to soothe away the friction of disagreement.
‘But they will never take you, Don — I will hide you here — no, I will hide you up at the old shieling hut — or we could run away west into Rannoch —‘There are forts everywhere.
But the islands might be safe…
’ So they romanced for a time, whispering on the edge of sleep, until a noise of footsteps, first a few and then large numbers, came from the road outside.
‘What is that?’
Jean startled awake.
He was listening.
‘The Keltney people?
Making for the Castle?
Look — the sky is lightening.
We had better join them.’
She shook his hand.
‘Donald — if you go straight there, folk will know where you have been.’
He laughed.
‘I will say I was catching a stray.’
He put his arm round her waist and kissed her hard.
‘Jeannie — if you come, I will meet you among the crowd.
Otherwise — tonight, and I will give the call.
Jeannie —’ They kissed again and then he was gone, running after the uplanders to catch them at Camserney mill.
It was like a drovers' camp in front of Castle Menzies.
The light of the risen sun was glittering now on the tall glazed windows of the central part and glowing like honey on the yellow walls.
Perfection, thought Cameron — dominance and wealth most perfectly crystallized in dressed stone, sleek plasterwork, trees planted in a picturesque frame.
It looked as though nothing would ever shake it.
Behind some  of the panes pale blurs of faces could be seen watching — womenfolk and servants.
When people in the crowd pointed and called, the blurs disappeared.
Down on the grass and on the bare earth under the chestnut tree, dozens of people now squatted at their ease among the sheep and their droppings, drinking from skin water-bottles and smaller stone ones of ale or whisky.
Most people had stayed on their feet, expectant and alert, and frankly curious to size up the laird's domestic arrangements while they had the chance.
Women were remarking on the window hangings —‘You could hang my whole downstairs with one of those red curtains,’ said Mary McCulloch, ‘and have a length left over for the beds.’
A good many boys and girls had joined the crowd now and shouts of laughter broke out as a few of them came out from the gate in the kitchen-garden wall, their hands full of ripe peaches, their chins dripping with juice.
On the edge of the gravel near the front door, Cameron and James Menzies conferred with Allan, Donald Stewart the blacksmith, and John Stewart the pedlar from Newbigging, who seemed to have been everywhere in the past twenty-four hours.
The factor had gone into the castle, ‘to get his orders from his master,’ as Cameron put it.
The men were hotching for action, but what response could be dragged out of those granite walls and that oak door?
Cameron was resolved on one thing.
‘We will not waste our time chopping logic with that underling.
We talk to the laird only.’
‘The old man will never come out.’
‘Last week he might not have.
But now that Atholl has given way and condescended to meet the people —‘He is a diplomat,’ said John Stewart.
‘But this man here has a temper.’
‘His factor will be feeling it now, for letting us through the gates.’
James Menzies laughed.
‘I would like to have seen him holding us back with an old sword in his hand.’
‘Pistols, more likely,’ said Allan, ‘and a musket or two.
Remember the old man is a sportsman — good at killing, and at chasing slaves.
He is cornered now — maybe he will come out red-eyed like a bear.’
‘So long as we get him out’— Cameron was still cagey.
‘We talk to him only — do you agree?
And we keep him prisoner here till he signs.
Have you the paper?’
Menzies felt in his pocket.
‘Yes, it's safe., The low thick door had swung open.
As the factor came out, it shut behind him and they heard the bars and chains go on.
Robert  Menzies was nervous, his eyes flickered everywhere, but he had his message pat.
‘Sir John will meet a spokesman this afternoon — if you have anything particular to say.
But now you are to leave his land peaceably —‘A murmur rose in a crescendo and drowned him out.
The people at the front were shouting at him, the news of his message was running through the crowd like a grass fire.
Somewhere a bagpipe skirled.
‘Tell the laird,’ James Menzies began, then raised his voice so that he could be heard as well by the crowd as by the factor.
‘Tell the laird,’ he shouted out, ‘that we will have him out here, to hear us for himself — that is what we came for and we will stand here till we see him.
We need his name, in his own hand, on a paper against the Act.
And if he stays behind that door’— the mounting gale of voices behind him was lifting him as he spoke, he wanted to jump on the factor, grab his hair and swing him against the door like a battering ram —‘we will fire the roof! and smoke him out!’
A pulse of pressure from behind threw them against the factor, he turned and jumped for the door, beat on it, it opened abruptly, and he fell inside.
Cameron turned and rose on tiptoe — the Grandtully crowd had arrived in force, the ‘Duke of Lennox’ in the lead, he was striding across the grass with an oak-tree branch slanting across his chest like a sceptre, its green sprays nodding on his shoulder.
A piper marched beside him, the patched black bag of his pipes under his arm, the chanter blowing a reel.
The Duke was revelling in the occasion, his toothless mouth curved up in a great leer like the mask of comedy.
When the boys saw him, they ran towards him, calling out shrilly ‘Up the Duke!’ he swung his sceptre at them and they ducked, shrieking.
Shoals of people were coming up the drive from the west gate — Cameron recognized faces that he knew from the sawmill at Kenmore.
Amongst them walked a gentleman in an expensive greatcoat, his arms firmly held — another hostage.
Good tactics, whether planned or not — the more gentry were pinned down here, the fewer were left to muster the Volunteers or ride off with news to the Deputies at Blairgowrie.
Dust hung in the air now, making it yellow and the sun orange.
People coughed.
Someone had fainted and a woman was loosening his shirt and running water over his head.
Up in the chestnut branches girls and boys were clambering about, hitting at the spiked green conkers and knocking them down on to the heads below.
Somewhere behind the east wing of the castle glass shattered.
Menzies had better  come out soon.
As Cameron surveyed the crowd, trying to make a rough count, he saw some women cracking stone bottles against their cudgels, stripping off their stockings, and packing them with shards and handfuls of gravel from the forecourt.
In the hall of the castle Sir John was reasoning with a group of servants while Lady Charlotte had hysterics under the portrait of a clan chief of the sixteenth century — an armoured and bearded warrior who looked down with an imperious black stare.
At one side the Reverend James MacDiarmid was standing in his dark clothes with the conspicuously expressionless demeanour of an undertaker's mute.
The servants wanted to flee, by a back door.
‘McDougal, calm them down!’
Menzies barked fiercely at his butler.
‘This is a castle, not a cottage, we could sit here in safety for a year.’
Glass cracked and splintered in the passage through to the kitchens.
A maid jumped and began to scream shrilly on the same note as her mistress.
‘Robert’— he turned on his factor —‘you should have made it plain —‘Nothing is plain out there, I tell you.
It is like hanging day in the Grassmarket.
You should see their eyes.’
‘I will not parley with a rabble.’
‘Bring Menzies of Weem in here, then.
What else can we do?’
‘You said he was obdurate.
Who else is there?
Are they all cottars and tinkers?’
‘There is that tall sharp fellow from the new factory — Cameron.
They say he made a speech at Dull.’
‘A speech!
A farrago of treason.
We will have no speeches here.
Come on — let us beard this lot and send them packing.
The half of them are on my rent-roll anyway.’
He looked with displeasure at the frantic figure of his wife and said tersely to the housekeeper, ‘Mrs McDougal, have you no smelling salts?
Or you might try brandy — it cures most fits.
Come, MacDiarmid.
Robert, open the door.’
A funeral silence had come over the gathering.
Hundreds of eyes stared fixedly as the laird stepped out onto the gravel and stood for a moment with his chin jutting and his mouth pulled down, like a general reviewing his troops.
Behind him the minister stood as straight and shadowy as a cypress tree.
Two servants came out, labouring  under the weight of a kitchen table.
The factor showed them with fussy gestures where to set it.
They went back for chairs and then the laird, the factor, and the minister sat down weightily, like judges.
Cameron could sense James Menzies fidgeting and breathing beside him and he wondered if he had had a dram.
Then James spoke up.
‘Good morning, Sir John.
Mr MacDiarmid — it is Monday now, you know.
Are you here to bless us?’
‘I am here in duty bound to assist Sir John.’
‘Oh, he will need that.
But where is little Robertson, to do your writing for you?’
‘The Session Clerk has been informed.
He should be here by now.’
And he was — a small figure in a drab coat, lurking at the side of the crowd, speaking to nobody.
MacDiarmid waved him forward with a commanding sweep of his arm and he came and sat at the end of the table.
There was a pause while everyone present wondered how to proceed.
Abruptly the laird smiled, looking from face to face along the front row, and said, ‘Well, well — it is a fine morning for it.
Shall we —‘But James had mentally worded his speech a dozen times and would not be forestalled.
‘You cannot pretend not to know our purpose,’ he began, so loudly that the laird's head went back.
‘We are all here as free men — not tenants, and not plaintiffs or slaves but free people who are determined to remain so.
Now this Act will bind six thousand of us — I am not speaking in my own interest, I am well past the age — but this Act will empty the glens of the young active men — and how can they marry if they are in barracks and camps in England, or in France if you send them there — you say you will not…
’ He was wandering now, his voice had dropped as he struggled to keep his thread and a restlessness at the back of the gathering broke out in shouts of ‘Speak up!
What did he say?’ and then ‘Where is Cameron?
Tell Cameron to put the case.’
Angus looked at his friend.
James's face had reddened with confusion but he managed to give him a nod which said ‘Go on.’
Cameron half-turned, to speak as much to the crowd as to the table, put his head back, and spoke slowly, pausing between his sentences.
‘Sir John Menzies, and Mr MacDiarmid, represent the important people of this place.
They have the power to send the rest of us into the ranks of the army, if they like, or into prison or the colonies.
But if we are free citizens’— he paused on the word, feeling it alien but unable to think of another —‘if we are not slaves, we must have liberty  to say ‘No, we have no dispute with France — we have business here at home which matters more than anything else on earth — we will not learn to play with swords, or blow out brains with bullets.’
Now, we cannot speak to the government, but we can speak to you.’
He turned and let his eyes lock with the laird's, the minister's, and the factor's, each one in turn, while they stared back and tried to look perfectly blank.
‘You are sitting here because you have the power, and if that is true, then you can use it as well for us as against us.
I hope you do not approve of this Act — if you do, there is not another man or woman in all this country who does.
And you must know that, because we are all here.
Count us.’
He paused again.
‘Now, we are asking you’— he stressed the word with some irony —‘we are asking you to join with us in a petition to the government for relief from the Act.
What do you say?’
The laird had been studying Cameron with unwavering attention.
Now he looked down at the table top, then sideways at his colleagues and back at Cameron.
‘I have listened to you, Mr Cameron,’ he said finally, ‘and you have spoken for the people of Tayside.
I believe, however, you come from somewhere else?’
Cameron smiled at that, a tight smile with his mouth closed.
‘Yes, I come from Lochaber, and the Lochaber people, if they were here, would be at one with the people of Breadalbane.
I can say that because I now belong to them both.
Now, can we do business?’
The last word came out fiercely and the force of it set off a slow noise from the crowd, like surf on a beach.
Menzies half turned as though to consult the minister, then said abruptly: ‘You may petition if you like.’
‘But will you join us?
And will you?’
Cameron leaned towards the minister, who straightened his back still more but said nothing.
Sir John was sitting perfectly still, his hands pressed between his knees, his forehead red under his wig.
‘A petition can be proper enough,’ he said very deliberately.
‘But what will it say — have you thought of that?’
‘Oh yes,’ said Cameron, ‘there has been plenty of thinking.
We will have words for you in a minute,’ and he turned round to the crowd.
‘Have we leave to write down what you are all agreed upon?’ he shouted in his loudest voice.
‘Can we do that?’
There was a roar of assent and the gathering began to stir and kindle into easier feelings — neighbours muttered to each other and laughter came from the Grandtully part of the crowd.
Cameron was speaking to the people  nearest him, gathering suggestions, prompting, trying to draw in James Menzies, who looked sullen after his poor showing.
Finally Cameron turned back to the table and said, ‘We have agreed on a text.
Will you hear it?’
The laird nodded and Cameron said curtly to Robertson the teacher, ‘Take this down.’
‘What will I write with? or on?’
The man was bridling at being treated like a minion.
I have paper here — properly stamped.
I suppose there are pens in the castle.’
They were brought and Cameron dictated slowly, cheers punctuating his sentences.
‘We, the country people of Tayside in Perth, living between Fortingall in the west, Foss on Tummel in the north, and Logierait in the east, do solemnly petition your Worship to exempt us from the Militia Act passed in July this year, 1797, for it would submit us to hardship and bondage, which we believe to be no duty of ours.’
He paused, and this was taken as a signal for a round of cheers and shouts.
‘Is that enough?’ he asked the front ranks of the crowd.
‘Go on — make him sign,’ a young man shouted back and Cameron recognized young McCulloch from Weem.
Robertson had caught up with the words and passed the manuscript, still wet, to the laird.
‘Give me the pen,’ said Menzies.
Silently he corrected a word, silently he endorsed it.
He stood up, stony-faced, and was turning to the door when James Menzies held up his hand and said, ‘Wait — wait — that is only half the business.’
The laird frowned.
‘You have your petition —‘We have that, but we need our safety and liberty as well.
You must commit yourself, and so must all the gentry, to take no vengeance for today's work.
You must keep the soldiers out of here.’
There was a loud cheer at that.
The laird waited for it to finish and said scornfully, ‘How can I do that?
That is in the hands of the government.’
Cameron was demurring too.
‘Wait, James — what is the use of making him pretend to powers?’
‘Whose side are you on?’
Menzies snapped back.
‘We need security.’
‘Of course we do, but it must be plausible.
If it looks forced, it will count for nothing., Angus and John Stewart were restive now and young McCulloch was jeering openly.
But Cameron would not budge.
‘There is only one way to decide,’ he said, and jumped up on the table, making  Robertson flinch.
‘Here is the issue,’ he shouted out.
‘Do we ask Sir John to restrain the soldiers — which he cannot do — or do we bind him not to pursue or hound us for this action?
If you are for the latter, shout out Aye.
What do you say?
Do you say Aye?’
There was a great shout of Aye.
‘Or do you say No?’
A few calls answered him.
‘The Ayes have it.’
He jumped down and began again to dictate.
‘We hereby solemnly declare that we shall use no forcible means to apprehend, confine, or imprison any person assistant whatever who has appeared at Castle Menzies or elsewhere, or in any part of Perth on prior days.
Further that we shall petition government tor an abolition and nullifying of the foresaid Act from the records of British parliament; that the members of parliament for this county shall present this petition, or any annexed thereto, to the two Houses of Parliament, and to the Privy Council, during the prorogation of parliament —‘Menzies was seething and he broke in on the last words.
‘This goes much too far.’
He stood up as he spoke.
‘They will never believe this — they will know it was extorted.’
‘Very well —’ Cameron trumped him instantly.
‘Add this: ‘and this we shall do of our own free will and accord’.’
He smiled straight into Menzies' smouldering look and said, ‘Will you swear to this?’
‘Swear?
Swear?
And how am I to swear?’
‘Sir John’— Cameron sounded appalled —‘is there any God but one?
Swear as you usually do.
Now, Robertson, add this: ‘of our own free will and accord — as we shall answer to God.’
That is very fine.
I think we have it now.
Robertson — fresh ink, and we will round it off in style.
Sir John — your name first — you are the leader here.
Where is Joseph Stewart of Foss?’
The young man was passed through the crowd, looking haggard, and he signed without a word.
‘And who is that?’
Cameron pointed at the hostage among the Kenmore crowd.
He in his turn signed: ‘William Stewart of Garth’.
Cameron turned back to the table.
‘Mr MacDiarmid — you have had a heavy responsibility for the Act — we had better have your name too.’
Donald McCulloch was grinning to his friends.
‘It is a poor thing,’ he called out, ‘when ministers turn recruiting sergeants!’
MacDiarmid took the quill and signed, his face like a paper mask.
The Grandtully piper, sensing the climax of the gathering, had filled his bag and set.
off on a steady marching tune.
The Duke held up his branch like a banner and began to lead the way along to the east gate, but a large part of the crowd stayed in a half-circle round the group at the table, as though waiting for the victor's crow in the cockfight.
‘Clear the grounds!’ the factor was shouting.
‘Clear the grounds!’
Young McCulloch raised his cudgel and lunged at him.
The factor jumped back.
McCulloch laughed and turned away.
Cameron folded the paper and gave it to James Menzies.
‘Let us meet outside the gates,’ he said, ‘and draw up the day's work.’
‘And take a vote on it?’
Cameron seemed to ignore the dig.
‘There is enough to do,’ he said, and let out a long breath.
‘We had better get some horses.’
The Reel
Before the crowd could drift off, Cameron got up on the massive stone gate-post and called on them to swear an oath.
The words drew on his memory of a secret meeting he had gone to at the end of his first year in Glasgow.
It had looked like a melodrama — a little group in a candle-lit attic, holding up their arms with fists clenched and swearing to do or die.
But they had meant it, and he was eager now to bring everybody together in a fine, hard point of resolve, in case zeal slackened and died away in the holiday atmosphere of this soft, comfortable afternoon.
The hills themselves looked asleep, the heather glowed dust-blue in the hazy light, and the people, after a night of little sleep and hours of walking and standing, now looked stunned as they sat on the grassy banks, leaned on dykes, or lay on their backs in the hayfields, munching oatcakes and drinking the last of their water.
Some little groups were going off to west and east, but most hung on with a sense that the next thing now demanded to be done.
Cameron raised his right hand, clenched his fist, and spoke in a relaxed voice.
‘Very good.
We have seen to one of them.
But there are plenty more.
There is Alexander Menzies of Bolfracks.’
He pointed across the river at a squat grey house on the far bank with a stand of trees behind it.
‘And further down there is Hope Steuart of Ballechin — a hard man to crack, no doubt.
And Alexander McGlashan of Eastertyre — you know them all, and they know you, and by now they will be expecting us.
Well — will we disappoint them?
Will we?
People kindled a little.
Some shouted, ‘No, no,’ and a woman called out, ‘Come on then, Angus — let us go and have our dinners at Bolfracks!’
‘I am hungry too,’ he answered her.
‘Maybe some of these nice gentlemen will offer us meat.
But first things first.
Are we all resolved to finish this day's work?’
He looked from one tired face to another.
A few had turned on their sides in the hay and cradled their heads on their arms.
‘All right.
We have started well.
But if you are truly  resolved, then pledge it now, swear an oath — come on — let us see all hands raised — come on now — every hand high…
’ The little army was stirring to its feet, movement ran from front to back of the broad crowd like hackles rising.
‘Let me see your hands.’
Hundreds of arms were standing up stiffly now like bristling branches.
‘Let us bind ourselves now by this oath — say it with me.
We do swear —’ He paused, and a murmur followed him with some clearer, harsher voices audible amongst it: ‘We do swear —’He went on: ‘Never to swerve,’and they said it together, ‘Never to swerve — from our present path — till we have cleansed the country — or this oppressive Act.
And we do swear — never to betray — the name of any friend.’
The collective voice rumbled to a close.
Cameron jumped down from the granite post and walked over to his little committee.
They were looking at him with an air that mingled irony and respect.
He felt like justifying himself, at least to James.
But other things mattered more.
Another castle to be stormed.
For the sake of a scrap of paper.
His sudden lapse of morale took him by surprise, like a qualm in his stomach.
No food since broth and bread last night.
It was mad to charge on like this.
But momentum was the thing — self-doubt came sneaking in as soon as they let up.
Why wait for horses?
There would not be a horse for everybody.
‘James,’ he decided, ‘station yourself here — let five hundred folk come past, then come yourself.
Allan — the same, then follow after James.
We can wade the river at the shallows.
Gather on the terrace under the house.
Donald — take the tail of the crowd.’
And the swarm of people flowed down the path, stumbling on stones where a burn ran in winter or after thunderstorms, between the silvery wands of rowans with their clusters of blood-drops and the quivering tapestry of the alders, down into the Tay which ran from the west like molten iron, too flashing bright to look at, and over the Tay, wet to the waist; the girls and boys who had not gone home were prancing and shrieking when they fell full length.
But one grey-haired uplander disappeared into a hole below a boulder and was pulled out by the hair and carried back towards Keltney on a stretcher of cut branches.
Up the slope, at the top of his semi-circular steps, Alexander Menzies was waiting for them in his best silk coat like a dandy at a ball, with a straightfaced young man standing by his side.
James bowed ironically and offered them the document; Alexander Menzies pretended to think about it for a full five minutes and signed it with  extraordinary flourishes that made the pen splutter and seemed to say, ‘Very well, I will humour your ridiculous ritual.’
James was remembering the young man now, William, the laird's son, a surgeon in the Army; here was trouble.
The young man scanned the paper, held it out, and as James's fingers reached for it, dropped it, eyed him, and said in a carrying voice, ‘I see you are mad, but does even a lunatic suppose that one of His Majesty's officers would bind himself to oppose the law and refrain from arresting criminals?’
They went for him then, Alexander and Donald McLaggan, the Duke's two sons, dragged him from his father's side so that his head bounced on the steps, lifted him bleeding, like foresters keeping a dying deer clear of the hounds, and started to carry him down to the river ‘just to cool him off’ but Cameron ran and gripped Donald's shoulder and shouted, ‘If you injure an officer it is treason on top of sedition,’so they carried him back and laid him carefully at his father's feet.
Cameron was thinking ahead now.
In an hour we will be at Aberfeldy, at the Flemyngs' house at Moness, how can I besiege my employers?
Why put my head into the bear's jaws before I have to?
So he divided the people, half to scour the right bank of the river down the forested links and narrows as far as the meadows above Logierait and force a signature from every proprietor, half to come with him to the north side; they would all meet at Haugh of Ballechin after the sun had set and plan for tomorrow.
The McLaggans had put grass halters round the necks of a few of Menzies' horses; Cameron rode on one; from the back in his dark coat he looked like a preacher leading away the faithful to a field communion.
James Menzies and the McLaggans, riding on horses, led the rest away on the long climb of the hill to Dunskiag, a gaunt treeless place where the owner lived without a woman and three great staghounds with long coarse hair slavered to get at them, wrenching their chains.
They did not waste time there but headed downhill, taking the shepherds' road that slanted luminous green between clusters of birches, their shadows stretching ahead like gawky giants so that the children jigged to make the shadows jump and curved their fingers from their heads to give the giants silhouettes like devils.
The Flemyngs would be away, no doubt, ‘at a banquet in Perth’, and they were; a butler spoke to them from an upper window and asked them would they kindly leave a message so they marked the house with dirt and rotten potatoes while the servants rushed to bar the shutters over the windows.
The last of the sunlight was diffusing through the trellis of oaks and evergreens in a yellow sparkle; single rays pierced through like stings; in the gloaming.
Aberfeldy was a ghost town.
The laddering and scaffolding round the half-built mill reared up emptily like the skeleton of a forest.
All their energies had run low now.
James was wondering, were they pirates doomed to plunge forever after another quarry?
His head throbbed with drink and sunsmite and the bony bouncing of his horse — time to rest and replenish.
He led his army round by Anderson's howff.
Anderson seemed to be the only person at home; he sold them jugs of ale, small beer for the children; James's credit was good for a stone jar of whisky and one of the Duke's men was detailed to carry it on his back in a wicker frame.
They might have become becalmed there as their heads ballooned with the drink but the Duke told his piper to rouse their feet with a steady march, ‘Murdo Mackenzie of Torridon’, and they headed off downstream towards Grandtully past the standing stone, the quiet watcher, while damp black shadow massed in the river-channel as though the night came from there.
on the far bank Cameron had outstripped them, his army moving steadily down the strath, winning signatures at the house of Cluny, at Clochfoldich and Pitnacree, by the solid slow avalanche of their numbers, massing quietly round each house, hammering three times on each door.
By this time every gentleman knew what was expected of him: Cameron never dismounted, he leaned from the saddle and passed the paper down to the angry, helpless proprietor and took it back signed.
The west windows of Hope Steuart's place at Ballechin flared with sunset, as though fires blazed inside it.
Cameron passed it by, the man could stew in his choler for a while, and when the dark came on and his servants and womenfolk grued at every owl-call or salmon-splash from the river, his defiance would burn lower and he would give his name.
While most of the people rested in the river meadow, shivering as the layers of fog brimmed round them, Cameron and a few strong runners made for the Tummel above the confluence, crossed it, and found the people of Atholl and Tulliemet overflowing the howff at Widow Duff's, supping broth, chewing mutton, throwing ribs to the dogs.
They had made sure of the few proprietors between there and Dunkeld; the Duke of Atholl's authority was weaker here; tomorrow would be the hard day when they made a drive up to Moulin and  Faskally: perhaps they should go and terrify them now while darkness made them lonely?
That took care of Strathtummel; Atholl would get Up in the morning to find half his country crumbling under his feet.
Cameron turned back up the Tay, glad that the harvest of names was nearly home.
The darkness ahead was flickering, shapes of trees appeared and vanished, cheering surged like surf — here was their other army — James and the Duke were standing on a rock conducting the dancers, who were reeling in eights, linking and whirling between the bonfires.
The two young McLaggans were taunting and prodding at a trio of hostages, Thomson the constable, Bisset the minister, and the old soldier Major Alexander McGlashan of Eastertyre; they stood in a huddle with their eyes staring, while young McCulloch staggered up to them and shoved stalks of bracken into their hair.
Cameron went and spoke to James angrily, in a quiet voice, What were they doing, holding a ceilidh?
Or making their people safe against the Act?
James laughed, ‘Look at them, Angus, look at the people, they are rampant now, this is better than ‘Forty-five, nobody is dying, no royal fop is leading us into the bog.
Give us a word, Angus — go on — make these ‘gentlemen’ swear the oath!
They will never forget it!
Neither will we!
For once they are dancing to our music.’
So Angus got up on to the rock and held his fist high and told young McCulloch to stand the hostages on a knoll where everyone could see them and called out the oath above the drone of the pipe: ‘We do swear — never to swerve — from our present path — till we have cleansed the country — of this oppressive Act.
And we do swear — never to betray — the name of any friend.’
The Major and the minister and the constable repeated it after him in low voices, the crowd gave them a round of applause, the reel was over.
They tramped along to Ballechin among the ferns and sheltering oaks, smelling the cheesey smell of cows among the mist.
Hope Steuart had felled a tree across the track, two men with cudgels were standing sentry behind it, they dropped the clubs and ran when the whole wood came at them, the darkness between the trees turned into people, people everywhere, herds and thickets of them surrounding the low tower-house.
Hope Steuart had leaned two loaded muskets against the doorjambs; he turned to pick one up but the Duke's two sons were on him, twisting his arms behind him.
He struggled and roared out, ‘I see you, James Menzies, I charge you with sedition,’ and the Duke roared back, ‘We charge you with tyranny, trail him round the house, lads, show his servants who is the master now.’
They carted him like a scarecrow, his heels scoring the gravel, but he was as stubborn as a pig in a cart, he would never squeal without a hard prod; Donald Stewart the blacksmith had to grip his wrist to make him sign the paper.
The Building
Donald McCulloch came back from ‘the reel of Ballechin' long after his mother, and when he got up at last next morning, the cold porridge had been thrown out to the hens.
He pretended not to mind.
His mother and grandfather were eyeing him as he emerged from the bed and felt the nag of their expectation that he would go off at once to earn a day's wage at Aberfeldy.
He pulled on his boots in silence.
Bits of mud fell on the floor.
‘Where were you, then?’ his mother snapped at once.
‘Along at Dull till all hours?’
Her ill-humour was nothing but a habit.
‘You have a habit of ill-humour’— his thoughts spoke themselves before he could stop them.
But she probed on undeterred.
‘I saw you both at the Castle, then I lost you.’
He hated her way of alluding to Jean but never saying her name.
‘I sent Jean home before we crossed the river.
The McLaggans were spoiling for a fight and I thought the lairds might have the mettle to retaliate.’
‘Oh, he takes care of her then,’ old Donald jeered to Mary, trying to side with her.
But she wanted no allies.
she could think of nothing but her son.
She was consumed with gauging his mood, foreseeing every move he made, hag-ridden by the spectres of all the troubles he could bring down on himself and them.
Donald felt the pressure from her and stared from one to the other, letting them feel his defiance and distaste.
‘What am I doing here,’ he said at last, ‘between two old scolds?’
She easily matched him.
‘Go away to the army, then — you will be your own man there.’
She had said too much.
Old Donald looked at her, shocked and her son straightened as though lashed and flung out of the house.
Across the bridge in Aberfeldy more people than usual were standing about on the dried mud of the half-built streets.
Beside the stone  shell of the Flemyngs' new mill, at the back of a piece of ground it now shared with a new carpet factory, long-haired cattle were browsing desultorily among mudded grass and stacks of timber.
Drovers had pastured their herds here for many years but their customary right had vanished when Flemyng bought the ground and it was a daily vexation of Cameron's to move the animals out from among his materials and even from inside the unfinished walls.
‘Come on now, mind my beasts,’ a drover would say, standing up among the Golds of the plaid in which he had spent the night and putting on a practised tone of wheedling grievance.
‘Look there, they are startling and snorting now — you have frightened them and they will not eat before the journey.
No no, they will never make a price in Perth now you have terrified them,’ and Cameron would have to spend a good few shillings to make the drove move on.
Now the grey dew had gone from the grass, pats of dung steamed where the cattle had been standing, and Cameron, in his shirt-sleeves with a cloth tying back his long black hair, was supervising the winching up of timbers for the roof.
He had an audience: perhaps twenty people had gathered round the site, idly expectant, smoking and calling out.
As the men at the windlass rope heaved and a long timber started to rise up and swing, the wheel on the pulley squealed like an injured dog and the man stationed at the top of the wall took a stickful of thick grease from a pot, leaned out, and worked it into the axle.
Cameron pretended not to see young Donald till he was close beside him, then turned in mock surprise and said to him, ‘Well well, Donald — we had given you up.
Now, suppose I have taken enough men on already —‘Donald laughed.
‘If there is no room here, there is plenty up on the hill, and where do you think I would like to be?’
But he took off his jacket and went round the back to work with the sawyers who were cutting joists to a length.
The work hummed on for a while.
After an hour James Menzies came across the bridge from Weem, aggrieved at Cameron for leaving him to sleep late.
‘And where was Allan Stewart?’ asked Cameron innocently.
‘Ach, where was anyone last night?’
James retorted, and he went over to unlock his warehouse and take delivery of a cartload of barrels from Dunkeld.
As Cameron turned back to the mill, he saw a small coach coming along the Grandtully road with a pair of deerhounds loping at its wheels and a man on horseback behind it dressed in an expensive tweed cloak.
The Flemyng entourage, he said to himself, now what will he find fault with today, and what news will he have heard?
The coach trundled briskly past, browning everyone with dust; the deerhounds checked and growled thunderously at the town dogs until James Flemyng called them loudly to heel.
He reined in his horse beside Cameron.
‘Mr Cameron —’ he began.
‘Good morning, Mr Flemyng.’
‘Good morning.
The work goes on again, I see, now that the — holiday — is over.
I trust the ‘holiday’ is over?’
He was looking past Cameron at the mill, eyeing each workman in turn as though to memorize his face, then looking back at Cameron.
‘We are ahead of ourselves, Mr Flemyng, as you know.
The mortar is set before the frosts, and the roof will be on well before the snow.’
‘It must be, Mr Cameron., ‘It will be, Mr Flemyng.’
Their gazes locked for a second and then Flemyng followed his wife up the road towards their disfigured house among the birch trees.
McCulloch had watched the comedy with his most provocative look.
‘Well, Angus, how do you think they will like the new decorations to their house?’
Cameron was unamused.
‘Let us hope his butler was too drunk to remember faces,’ he said shortly, and turned back to the work.
By noon eighteen joists had been nailed into position against the roof-tree but they were short of nails and little Willie McGlashan had been sent off to Grandtully to order a load from Donald Stewart's smithy.
They all took a break then, to eat their oatcakes and drink jugs of beer from Anderson's.
Sandy McGlashan, the windlass man, climbed down the ladder and came to sit beside Cameron.
He was small and agile, bow-legged and with a rubbery face that squirmed in on to his toothless gums as he chewed.
‘Bolfracks had a rough time, then?’
He was eyeing Cameron sideways.
‘Oh, he knuckled under, but the young man made a great show of being a soldier and the McLaggans went to cool him down.’
McGlashan was sniggering.
‘I heard that too.
Oh aye, it was a bad day for the house of Bolfracks — no doubt about it — very bad — oh aye.
High time they had a fall, eh?’
‘No doubt it is., ‘Oh aye, high time and past time.
Menzies of Bolfracks is a stony devil, so was his father.
I know that — none better — I do.’
The man  was hotching with his story and Cameron had no need to prompt him.
‘Now — if we are going to roast the lairds, and get some rights at last, do you think we can win our lease back from old Menzies — do you think so, Angus?’
‘Your lease, Sandy?
I thought you were a townser., ‘A townser?
We have only perched in Weem, and now here.
My grandfather was born at Farrochil, on Bolfracks Hill — we would still be there — but was my father to slave at carting stones from the Menzies's quarry for old Wade to build his damned bridge?
He was a farmer, not a labourer — why should he put his plough-team between Menzies’ shafts to drag his damned stones for him?
Well — he would not, and the laird turned him out for it — he turned him out and sent him off and we have had no land since and he put nobody else into Upper Farrochil — he only wanted it for himself.
He was a magnate, Angus.
Like his son today.
They coin money at Bolfracks.
But we will have them out now, eh?
They will never stop us now.’
As his excitement steadied, he focused on Cameron again and waited, simmering, for his opinion.
‘Sixty-five years ago, Sandy.’
Cameron's voice came slowly.
‘A long time for a claim to run.’
‘Well, I have a long memory.
Especially for a grudge.
Will I take your jug to the howff, Angus?’
‘No no, I have no head for it today.’
Cameron wanted time to think; he was in a turmoil of emotions; he felt for Sandy's grievance even while he was blenching at the man's mad certainty that a day of reckoning was near.
And underneath these feelings he felt some hot, dark stirrings in himself.
What were they?
A desire to retaliate — against whom?
Against landowners whose own fathers had had to flee from the Crown's killers in ‘Forty-six?
Yet here, on the verge of the Lowlands, most of the gentry had hedged their bets; some had even entertained the Butcher as he progressed triumphally from one massacre to the next and had then bought over the gutted glens and stocked them with the great sheep.
He looked round the littered site, at its dried browns and darkened greens, and considered the men who were sitting round quietly talking and blowing smoke at the swarming flies.
He did not know of one who had anything to thank the Flemyngs for, or old Menzies at the Castle.
Since the busy fencings and ditchings of the previous thirty years, the men who farmed the best land had flourished all the more; they could afford the rents for the greater acreage under the plough.
But the families in the little awkward places, at the heads of the small glens, on boggy ground that would not drain — they were nearly helpless, they trembled on the threshold of destitution, impaled on the horn of the one-year lease, uncertain whether it was worth going into debt to improve the ground and knowing that, even if they did, they could still be turned out next term day and their place annexed to the holding of a better-off neighbour.
Not one of these men here came from a lower-lying farm (except Donald McCulloch, and their place was only a slip of ground between the steep hill and the road).
When the mill was finished, a few of them might get work in it (but the Flemyngs wanted girls for it because they would work more days).
The rest would have to go off as wage-labourers to the Lowlands.
Or to the regiments.
The deathly regiments.
He stood up and stretched, yawning to squeeze the bad thoughts out of his head.
Sandy McGlashan was not yet back from Anderson's.
He walked over to the timber stack along with a sawyer called Iain Logan whom he knew well — they were both friends of Donald Gillies at Camserney mill.
As Cameron started to pick out wood to finish the forward half of the roof, Iain said to him quietly, ‘Sandy McGlashan is not the only man with troubles.
You know my brother's sawmill at the waterfall above Moness?
The Flemyngs would close it if they could.
James Flemyng has been at my father, complaining about dirt in the water and the noise of the saws and axes.
It is not that at all.
He wants the place.
And it is only a patch!
With a damp, rotten house on it!’
‘Is the water dirty?’
Logan looked at him almost scornfully.
‘You could drink from it, except after a spate.
The Flemyngs can think of nothing but fences, and these fancy trees’(he meant Sir John's larches).
‘I would have put a torch to their damned house yesterday, if I had had some tinder.
He sends his factor up to terrify my father — after dark — when I have gone over to Camserney with Alastair.
I tell you, one night, if we knew he was coming, we would wait for him round the back and pitch him down the falls!’
‘And hang for it?’
‘Angus’— he dropped the timber he was lifting, letting it clank off the others, and turned to look at him with widened eyes and squared mouth, like the face of someone taking a great strain.
‘Is there no thing, no thing at all, which you would swing for?
If it came to it?
You know that Alastair split and cut these planks on our own saw-bed.
If Flemyng forces us out, then we will have nothing left but our hands.’
‘They might get you anyway.
Is Alastair not listed?’
‘Aye — he is just twenty-one.
My little brother!’
‘So we had better choke this Act —‘All right.
But that is just the start.’
They carried timber together for a while after that, one at each end of the planks, eyeing each other with set little smiles.
The mood seemed similar at many places on the site — less whistling and singing than usual, more talking.
People who had been out together at Castle Menzies, then on down to the Reel of Ballechin, conversed steadily, opening up their private problems to each other with a freedom well beyond the usual.
Two masons who were chiselling at the finials which Flemyng had ordered for the gables would stop their clinking from time to time to confirm something that one or other had said.
Both were landless men who depended on being allowed to pasture their milk-cows on the water-meadows down at Ballechin, and as Cameron caught the drift of their intent talk and occasional sardonic laughter, he wondered again how many names had been put to faces during yesterday's hurly-burly.
The shadows had grown long by the time Sandy McGlashan came back from Anderson's howff.
‘What do I see?’ he exclaimed.
‘Work, work, work, like Noah's sons at the Ark.
And here was I, thinking you could not be building a roof without nails.
Well, well, well…
‘He put his foot between the two bottom rungs of the ladder and then caught at the upright to save himself from staggering.
Carefully he tried again but Cameron took his arm and told him not to hurry unduly, the joists had only been pinned in place and they were still waiting for the long nails from Grandtully.
Work slowed to a halt until Donald Steuart clattered up on his cart and began to lift down hefty canvas bags from the tailboard.
‘Sorry, Angus,’ he was saying, ‘my lad from Ballinluig never turned up, I had to get my father to blow the bellows — ouch! some of them are still hot — that bag has charred, spread them out to cool, or keep them for tomorrow.
Unless you want to burn down Flemyng's mill before it is up.’
‘Aye, why not?’ said Iain Logan.
‘It would keep us working.’
‘What a week!’
Donald Stewart was talking and working in a steady frenzy.
‘And it is not over yet — you know we have Mary to marry off to Alex McLaggan this Friday coming.
Will you be there, Angus?
We want you there.
And Iain — and Alastair, of course, and your father, if he will come so far., ‘I will come so far,’ Sandy McGlashan proclaimed from six rungs  up the ladder, ‘and I willing them a song of William Ross's to send them on their away.
‘I went to woo a young girl’, he trolled out,
‘As fair as a swan,
But I turned for home
Like a bald old man.
On a misty Sunday —‘
‘All right, Sandy, keep it for the wedding.
Young Donald — will you bring your Jean?
She had better see what is in store for her.’
Donald McCulloch grinned with pleasure and then turned it into a look of complicity for the younger men.
James Menzies had locked up his warehouse for the day and come over in time to be included in the lengthening list.
‘Mind now, Donald,’ he put in, ‘or Angus will be telling you to keep it down to forty-nine.
A fine thing for a wedding if the laird came in and read the Riot Act.’
Donald pretended to grow grave at this.
‘There is a lot in that.
Supposing they came down on us with Thomson the constable from Pitnacree — they could arrest us all, and behead the movement!,
‘No no, you have it wrong, Donald,’ James Menzies objected.
‘There are no leaders here — we are all on a level.
What do you say, Angus?’
Cameron was taking off his head-band and shaking out his hair.
‘I say we are all leaders.
Sandy can lead the singing.
And Donald can lead the cart.
And James can lead the toasts.
And even old MacDiarmid can had a prayer.
As for the laird —’ he looked round with a quick black glint, ‘he can lead us by the nose.’
A rising sound between a crow and a cheer came up from the men.
Along at Moness House James Flemyng and his wife looked at each other apprehensively and wondered if it was time to bar the shutters.
Next day and the day after that Mr Flemyng rode his horse along the slope south of the town, as though to exercise his dogs, and looked down at the site through an opera-glass, trying to make out whether the workmen were forming a mob.
He had no idea that little Willie McGlashan was posted in the trees just below Moness.
As soon as the gentleman came round from the stables on his horse, the lad pelted down town and across the building sites to alert the men.
By this time they were starting to review the situation steadily, forecasting the Duke of Atholl's likely moves, wording formal requests for warrants  to meet in larger groups, arguing furiously over the likelihood of being able to get weapons from the armouries at Atholl or Taymouth Castle.
When Willie came running, they at once dispersed around the site.
Through his glass James Flemyng observed a fine exhibition of model workmen sawing and hammering industriously at his great new masterwork.
The Wedding
On the night of Thursday Cameron slept badly, for no reason that he knew of.
The river dream came to him again, he was wading deep into the current, its coldness griped him by the crutch, shocking him, he must reach that bluish hovering light on the far bank — trees towering above — a house, a tall bulky building towering above him…
He half-woke, and saw the window-square glimmering with the pallor of sunrise…
The river again, the far bank was nearer but here was a black smooth stretch, he half knew that he was dreaming, he wanted to stop the dream and he wanted to get across, if only he could raise his mouth and nostrils above the swell of the water…
He made himself wake finally and lay under the covers feeling weak and hot, as though he had been spending energy incessantly all night.
Outside the day was fine enough, too clear perhaps; each roughness on the skyline was sharply visible, as though it might rain later.
Just now the autumnal coolth was tonic and he breathed it in like drinking draughts of fresh milk, then took dippersful of water from the butt at the side of the house and sluiced his head into activity.
In other parts of the house James Menzies and Allan Stewart were stirring with a clumping of boots.
In an hour they were all ready and stood in the parlour looking humorously at each other in their best shirts of white linen and clean breeches.
James's had a brown mark on the leg the shape of an iron.
When Allan grinned knowingly at it, he said, ‘Oh aye — this house needs a woman., ‘Maybe we will find a willing girl at the wedding,’ Allan suggested.
‘Donald's other daughters are like their father — too hefty in the arm.
No man will ever cow them.’
‘Did I say a Stewart?
The Duke will bring a fine tail with him —‘The McLaggan women — do not mention them, they would eat you alive!’
You are hard to please, James — I wonder you ever married,’ said Cameron, then regretted he had spoken.
‘Kirsty was a gem — there is nobody else like that.’
James's eyes filled suddenly with tears, he wiped it them and looked disbelievingly at the wet on his fingers.
‘Ach, come on, you would think I had been at the whisky already.
Let us get on the road.’
They stepped out briskly in the chill of evaporating rime and dew.
By the time they came to the sharp bend at Borlick they had caught up with the McCulloch family, old Donald limping and muttering to himself, Donald hand in hand with Jean, Mary and her friend big Mary striding on ahead, their arms pulled down by heavy baskets of pies and eggs.
‘Where so old Iain Logan?’ said old Donald irritably as they came abreast.
‘They will have gone down by the other side,’ said Allan Stewart, ‘it is their quickest way.’
‘Ach — I was sure he would be with you — we could have taken our own time then.
‘Take it now, Father,’ said Mary, putting down her baskets and easing her shoulders.
‘What is the use of dying on the way to a wedding?’
They all moved off together down the tawny dust of the road, close beside the shingle banks and black deeps of the river.
Here it ran between quiet green glades, the remnant of an oak wood which had been stripped to build ships for the navy and then, in a last plundering, to make charcoal for the insatiable furnaces and foundries down at Carron forge.
But here a thin frieze of very old trees had been preserved for the delectation of the lairds who looked out from their houses on the slopes — Cluny, Grandtully, Clochfoldich, Pitcastle.
At two of the gates on the roads up to thy houses dogs had been stationed, chained to posts newly hammered in.
The animals barked themselves hoarse as the little party tramped past and they were amused to see men watching them, one from behind a ruined byre, another behind a thick tree-trunk.
‘What can the lairds be frightened of?’ asked Menzies innocently.
He waved and the man dodged further behind the tree.
‘Once they are frightened of their own servants, then we will know we are doing well,’ said Cameron.
Donald McCulloch was humming to get a tune going.
After a little he remembered it and sang out loud,
‘George of Hanover,
When you came to London 
You piped a feeble tune
To charm yourself a kingdom…‘
The others took it up, humming or singing, and walked in time to it until old Donald got breathless and they had to saunter for a while.
jean had her arm round Donald's waist now and from time to time she skipped, roused by the fighting spirits of the menfolk.
Well before noon, beside a small church whose roof sagged under clumps of grass and willow-herb, they came to the bridge over to Grandtully and looked across at the dense little settlement, lumpish houses made of undressed river boulders with brown smoke streaming through their heather thatch, hovels of branches littered through the trees, a few solid cottages with level roof-trees.
It was a place of moss and mud and standing pools, myriads of flies twirled in the sun-rays, and dogs and children ran out to greet the newcomers in a raucous chorus.
Behind a one-storey inn the Duke and his tribe of brothers and uncles lived in a cluster of rough stone houses, one built onto the end of the next as the family grew.
Their sheep-fanks and cattle-pounds spread away, across land rented from the inn-keeper, in a close mesh of stone dykes.
Droves of grey and brown horses grazed on the haugh beyond, milling round the still point of a tall grey monolith which thrust up through the turf like a stone sword.
Little clusters of guests were standing about on the cobblestones between the houses, looking at a loss.
Mary McCulloch and big Mary went straight along to the Duke's house with their loads of food and as they went in the Duke came out, dressed in a long plaid of turquoise blue, and had a quick low word with them.
‘Now what is going on?’
James Menzies asked the others.
‘I have seen livelier funerals.’
But the Duke was coming over with his usual smile, broad and toothless, mantled with crazy mirth.
He saw their questioning looks and said, ‘No bother, no bother at all.
Donald came down two hours ago, and would you believe it, Bisset will not come to marry them.’
‘He will not marry —‘He will not marry them.
And why?
Not because we made a fool of him at the Reel on Monday, no no, not at all.
He says that the church is dangerous —‘not fit for a man of God to officiate at a most solemn sacrament’.’
The Duke intoned the words in a hollow boom like a ghost in a graveyard.
James Menzies burst out laughing.
‘It is as well he is not a Papist, then, or the Pope would take off his frock., ‘He what?’
‘Take off his frock.
That is what they do to wicked priests.’
‘Is that so, now?
At least our ministers wear trousers — though you would wonder, if Bisset is frightened to come here among the desperate sinners of Grandtully.’
‘Have you tried at another manse?’ asked Cameron.
‘It is not worth shoe-leather.
After this past week they will all be thinking the same.’
‘What will you do, then?’
That is up to you.
The Duke gave him a squint grin.
‘To me?’
The Duke leered more than ever.
‘Well — Donald asked me to ask you — would you do the honours?’
‘Ach, come on, man, what does he mean?’
‘Just that.
We need a little ceremony’— he dropped his voice —‘it will keep the women happy.
What do you say?
The marriage is the man and the woman wedding each other, that is the common law we all believe in.
What does the minister do but add the mumbo-jumbo and the bit of paper?’
‘That is right, of course it is.
But why pick on me?
I have no —‘You have a black coat and a long tongue, Angus — they can hear you from the back of the crowd.’
‘I should have stayed at home,’ said Cameron.
‘Not at all,’ said James Menzies.
‘Think of it — if Flemyng sacks you, you can get a job as a preacher.’
‘Good man, Angus,’ said the Duke, clapping Cameron's shoulder.
‘Will you go along and tell them, now?
And say we are coming in no time at all.’
The families of guests were drifting along the river bank towards Donald Steuart's a quarter of a mile upstream.
They looked like thy camp followers of an army, with their bundles of food, but they were carrying their best shoes in their hands.
One or two looked questioningly at Cameron but he was absorbed in thinking up phrases.
What could he say?
Declare them man and wife?
Not declare — pronounce.
The one was as pompous as the other.
He would ask young Alex for the ring, and see that it was put well on Mary's finger, he would wish them to be happy and fruitful and true to one another and that nothing would ever part them.
And that was what he said, at one o'clock in the afternoon, in the smithy yard at Ballinluig.
The house  was much too small; people made a deep ring round the couple and Cameron, standing on the cobbles among piles of bar and rod iron, the children perched on tree-stumps and on the lower branches of the very old yew tree which made a dark thicket with its multiple trunks.
Donald's wife Aileen looked upset and redeyed, without a minister the occasion seemed rough and ready, no better than a ceilidh, unlawful even, and her misgivings about the McLaggans had all revived.
She glanced repeatedly at her daughter in the long white linen gown which had been her own wedding dress.
But Mary was delighting quietly in the atmosphere of freedom.
The ordeal she had expected had turned into fun.
Her father stood behind her, sweating and beaming, and behind the bridegroom stood the Duke, tall and shaggy, holding a long pine branch covered with fresh green cones.
The clusters of needles spread above the young couple's heads like a canopy.
Angus Cameron stood up on the oak stump which Donald used as a chopping-block, held out his hand to each part of the crowd as though drawing them into the circuit of the ceremony, and said, at first quietly, then gaining volume as he felt the truth of his words: ‘Alexander McLaggan, Mary Stewart — you love each other, and must wed each other , and that is right and good.
We all of us feel your happiness and we have come to celebrate it with you, and with your families.
Alex — have you the ring?’
The young man passed it up, the little circlet of gold glistening between the tips of his thick hard fingers.
‘All right, Alex, but that is for you to do, I have only to make sure you do it right.’
Laughter rustled quietly through the crowd.
‘Now, Mary — will you accept this ring from Alexander McLaggan?’
The girl tried to say ‘Yes’ but her mouth had dried and she had to swallow before the word would come.
‘Now Alexander, do you give her the ring.’
Alex put it on her finger with a sure movement, took her by both hands, and kissed her closely on the mouth.
The Duke held his branch still higher, waving it slowly from side to side, and the piper started a long, echoing note on his drone.
‘Now,’ said Cameron, letting his voice peal round the yard, ‘we wish you happiness and health, Alexander and Mary McLaggan.
We wish you will be fruitful, and true to one another.
And we wish and trust that no ill will of man or woman, and no act of government, will ever come between you.’
The piper was moving into the ring of people.
When everyone expected him to break into a nimble tune, he played a slow air that sounded Irish in the long luxuriant unfolding of each phrase.
People  listened entranced, laced together by the tendrils of the melody.
It finished, he tapped his foot, one two three four, and then he did launch into a jig, springy and violent.
Young Donald McCulloch whooped and two of the McLaggan girls whooped with him.
Donald Steuart had his arms round his daughter and son-in-law.
He squeezed them and kissed them and went off into the house.
Bumping noises came and he reappeared carrying a door.
His wife was bringing out heavy ashets piled with pies, her daughters brought out clothsful of new loaves, still steaming.
Now Donald was bracing himself to take the weight of the heavier outer door and Donald McLaggan was helping him, easing it up off its hinges.
The guests were crowding slowly past the wedded couple, kissing them, shaking their hands.
Sandy McGlashan had arrived late, his hair plastered down with sweat; he was spluttering over the tale, to whoever would listen, of how he had ‘come up flemyng and Menzies of Bolfracks, in the street at Aberfeldy, they had their heads together and were plotting something wicked, no doubt about it, if only he could have heard what they were saying’.
Young Donald listened sceptically for a moment.
Jean was pulling him by the hand towards the dance.
‘Ah well,’ he said finally, ‘if he tried to get his own back for his son's trouble, we will have to crack his head too,’and he swept off into the dance.
Jean's black curly hair Hew out as they swung round and her cheeks, always so ripe that they looked as though they would bleed at the touch of a straw, reddened more richly than ever.
At one end of the heavier door, now held up on trestles, Donald had hefted a stone jar of whisky into position and Donald McLaggan was drawing off cupsful and handing them out.
People were blowing on their bowls of broth and mingling its savours of onions and mutton with the harsh fire of the whisky.
Aileen Stewart had placed an eighteen-inch pie in the very centre of the board; its summit gleamed yellow with a basting of egg.
Donald held up their biggest knife, kissed its blade, and cleft the crust.
Steam puffed out and people cheered.
‘Where is Angus Cameron?’
Donald shouted out.
‘Come on, Angus, you have earned your meat!’
He heaped a plate for him and Cameron took it thankfully.
Still caught in a clench of emotion after the effort of the ceremony, he had accepted a spilling cup of whisky from Donald McLaggan and drained it as though it was milk to quench a thirst.
Now he felt his brain slowly expanding, the noise and sunshine seemed  to have entered his skull, and he badly wanted some food to settle the turbid churning of his feelings.
At the far end of the yard the Duke had planted his branch in the ground and was sitting under it like a potentate.
Now he beckoned Cameron over and shook him formally by the hand.
‘I heard the bit of politics in your address.
And that was good.
That was right.
We are deep into it now, and there is no avoiding it.
Did you hear the news from Atholl?’
‘No — nothing for a day or two.’
‘The Society teacher at Fincastle — Forbes.
A few folk went to his place before sunrise yesterday, just to let him know he had better have no hand in the lists.
Well, he fired a pistol and someone went for him with the blade of a scythe.’
‘Fincastle?
Where is that?’
Cameron was trying to concentrate.
‘Not two miles from Atholl Castle — across the ford and over the hill.
The damned Duke will make the worst of it.’
‘Is the man dead?’
‘Dead enough.
They took him away on a cart, soaked with blood from head to foot.’
‘Like a soldier…
I know, I know — we want no battles here.
But they hate the Act so bitterly, not everybody will hold back their hands forever.
Are you trying to stop your people carrying blades of any kind?’
‘They will do what they like.’
The Duke gave him a quick, keen look.
‘What about your folk?’
‘They had none at Castle Menzies, as you know.
And I saw none at Ballechin.
Some women had stockingsful of stones that would have felled a bullock.
I would not stop that.
We have to show our mettle.’
‘Well, I did not expect that from you.’
The Duke laughed with pleasure.
‘Let us drink to that.’
He held up his cup, clinked it on Cameron's, and gave him a deliberate nod.
The audience was over.
But Cameron could hardly move away — the dancers filled the yard, flying toes and heels banged against the shins of the onlooking elders as the dancers twirled.
Donald McLaggan had gone too far with Flora Stewart, swinging so wildly that the girl flung against the smaller table and fell onto it with her hair in the great bowl of broth.
For a moment she looked furiously at Donald, her teeth bared like a cat's, then she shook her hair out, spattering Donald with bree and barley, and hauled him back into the dance.
Sandy McGlashan had taken out a little yellow fiddle and was adding a frenzied strum of strings to the piper's  notes.
As the dancers changed partners, set to each other, backed away, then set again and spun with crossed arms, Donald McCulloch became masterful, gripping the girls' hands strongly, spinning so hard that the balls of their feet ached on the cobbles, and passing them on with an almost lordly flourish of his arm.
Jean felt belittled; for as long as the dance lasted she seemed no more to him than any girl there, but then he came round to her again and clasped her closely as they stepped it down the aisle between the lines of dancers.
Sandy McGlashan was wild now with the sound of his own music.
When the dance ended and everyone was standing in clusters, sweating and smiling and breathing heavily, he sang out in a high voice with a laugh in it —
‘When I reached her window,
The watch-dog heard.
He started barking,
She never said a word.
There was nothing for it
But to cower and hide
Like one who lacked the courage
To give a girl a ride.
I cannot sleep a wink now,
Bed I cannot abide
For my merry member
Rising by my side.’
There were ooh's and aah's when he finished, and some unbridled laughter.
Aileen was looking dubiously at her husband but he was in no mood to disapprove.
He winked at the Duke and called across to him, ‘What a grand thing, your Honour, to have a wedding without a minister!’
The Duke did his stately bow at that and then Donald was calling for another song.
Some of the veterans were on the point of giving tongue but young Donald McCulloch was on his feet and moving into the middle of the ring, he was full of himself, sparkling with mischief but with an undertow of ardour.
‘Duncan Ban MacIntyre wrote a song for his wife Mary.
I do not know if Alex used it to court his Mary — he must have used something —‘The joke was unconscious but crowing laughter came from the young  men beside the whisky jar.
Donald silenced them as he sang the first line, rather solemnly, in a rich baritone:
‘I went into the thickets
To cut a wand of love
And searched among the saplings
That clustered close above.
One branch was all blossom,
I gently curved it down,
No-one else must cut it,
I claimed it for my own.’
His tribute was meant for Alex and Mary McLaggan, but as he sang he half turned towards Jean, he could not keep his look away from her, and as the words enveloped her she felt herself choking in a warm cocoon, her cheeks burned unbearably, he should not be doing this, it was too much in front of so many friends and strangers.
‘My net was in clear water,
I hauled strongly in
And landed me a sea-trout
As lustrous as a swan.
The share I won has made me
Content in heart and head —
Star of my early mornings,
Dear partner of my bed.’
It was too much but she loved him for it and let him kiss her when he came and stood beside her again.
There were cries of applause and as they died down Donald Stewart turned to Cameron and said, ‘Now, Angus, let us hear from you.’
‘Och — I have said my say already.’
Cameron realized he was having to form his words carefully.
He felt a brimful of yearning — of some mixture of emotions that were hardly expressible, that must pour outwards.
‘Come on, Angus,’ Donald persisted, ‘let us hear a song from over the mountains.
Come on, now —’ He had no need to say more because Cameron had risen to his feet in the greying light and a song was coming from him in a steady flow of sound and a hard gravelly voice that resonated like a pipe.
‘I grieve for the white bodies
Scattered over the hills
Without shroud or coffin
Or burial in holes.
Those who survived the battle
Lie in the hulks in chains.
We are called ‘rebels’
And the Whig reigns…’
‘John Roy Stewart,’ he said, sitting down heavily.
‘Well — if he hated the massacre, he should not have been at the battle.’
Iain Logan had been listening to him as though fascinated by the stress of experience which had lengthened Cameron's face and closed his black brows over his eyes.
‘You are right, Angus,’ he said excitably.
‘Hired murderers — in it for the blood money.
Flemyng of Moness is no better, you know, no better at all.
You know where his father got his money?
Canada — trading rubbish for furs.
And why was he there at all?
Army quarter-master — selling off the soldiers’ rations to the traders in Quebec.
And why were the soldiers — the soldiers — why were they…
'He had lost his thread and Cameron's head was too ravelled to think much about it anyway.
In the gloaming the Weem folk made their way home along the dark gorge of the road.
Above their heads bats flickered almost invisibly between the treetops.
Donald and Jean had disappeared and Mary was in a black mood, striding along and making old Donald gasp.
Behind them the nests of little lights at Ballinluig and Grandtully had dimmed to orange sparks in the fine drizzle.
‘That was a sad song for a wedding, Angus,’ said James Menzies after a time.
‘It would be a sad thing,’ Angus answered at once, ‘if Alex was taken away from his Mary into the army when they were not a year married.’
Or if my Donald was taken, married or not, Mary McCulloch was thinking.
But she kept the thought to herself.
For a mile or two nothing more was said.
They knew when they were opposite Pitcaple, and then Cluny, by the barking of the dogs and the rattle of their chains.
‘They would have our throats out if they could get at us.’
Allan Stewart's voice sounded tiredly out of the darkness.
Cameron had not the energy to reply, but he was thinking, So would their masters.
Dogs would do it to us with their teeth but they have laws and guns instead.
They had passed through the blackest part of the valley now and it was a relief to see a light or two at Weem, and across the invisible river at Aberfeldy.
The McCullochs turned into their cottage with a brief good-night and Cameron, James, and Allan let themselves into the tall, silent house along the road.
It smelled of wine dregs, damp soot, and whitewash.
A day's work still to do before the Sabbath and they would have sore heads in the morning.
But at least their wits would have cleared again in time for Sunday's meetings and the next milestone in the struggle.
The Speech
If they managed to exact a sworn and written abrogation of the Act from every single proprietor in the strath (and over into Tummel and down past Dunkeld), at least they would have built a paper wall round themselves.
More than that?
How keep the gentry to it?
How reach through and past them to the axis of power?
It felt like hauling on a rope that ran half round the world.
You strained till thy blood came — still no movement at the far end.
They would never get the Act repealed.
Make it unworkable — yes, do that.
How?
The Tranent folk had had a notion (but look whit happened to them)— say to the government, ‘You cannot trust us if ever you make us fight.’
The young men must resolve to be mutinous.
How could they stick to it, though, once they were under a sergeant-major, a trained bully, lashed to a gun carriage and flogged to pieces?
They must not go at all.
They must lie low here, amongst their own folk, where they know the ground, where they can be fed.
But.
But the government troops are devils in the thoroughness of their searching and destroying — would it be like ‘Forty-six again?
Houses burnt — gardens and orchards uprooted — herds and flocks driven off wholesale — sparing nobody, even when there was no proof to likelihood that the family was harbouring a wanted man…
No — the government will find it hard to sustain that again, when there has been no army in the field against them — no pitched battles — no weapons, even.
Maybe our weakness is our strength, thought Cameron — we are seen to be democrats , nothing like the Prince's bands of warriors.
But they hate the very word ‘democrat’!
To Atholl's friends in Edinburgh, the Dundases, the Abercrombies, a ‘democrat’ is the worst thing, a wrecker, a traitor.
And our own people here have never heard the word at all…
Is that it?
To disappear the young men into their own terrain, make use of every cave and wood (and send them over the water if need be)?
Not till after the harvest.
People would never put up with it before then.
If we can afford to wait that long.
To organize it will demand utter  secrecy — utter.
Anything less and we might as well not do it at all.
There must be several hundred quiet, individual meetings with individual families.
If the broad plan is agreed.
How to discuss it secretly?
Probably there are government spies amongst us already (but who? which friend at the wedding?
Which fellow-workman?).
We must do two things together (Cameron found his thoughts concentrating to a point at last).
We must keep up the pressure on the lairds, the stream of meetings, so that we are all welded together, we feel our accumulated powers, day in day out.
And the lairds believe that that is all.
Under the cover of the hubbub we must organize the families, until each listed man knows where he will go, and who will feed him, when the platoon comes to march him off.
Cameron's brain reeled slightly under the weight of all these alternatives.
He had better try them out to James.
They were walking steadily up the strath, past Castle Menzies, looking unreal in its composed beauty under early Sunday sunshine, past the close-built cottages and huts of Dull which looked like scree left by a spate, heaped-up boulders, shaggy heather thatch, dykes built recently with field stones and already falling down.
Now they could see the broad glitter or Loch Tay, and in the foreground their destination, the gable or Kenmore church perched on its knoll at the loch-end.
Down every track and path and road the knots and files of people were converging.
If the minister had been looking out from his manse windows, he would have thought that his prophecy had found honour in its own country at last.
In fact the service would be nearly over, if Cameron and Menzies had timed it right.
They felt they had done well enough already to endure the service at Dull, and that there was no need to martyr themselves yet again (the Reverend William MacIvor's sermons were notoriously long and repetitious).
Cameron looked at Menzies and said, ‘James — what will come of today's work?’
‘What we said,, James answered, mildly surprised.
‘Petitions against the Act from all the villages.
Signatures in forty-nines to escape the Riot Act.
Undertakings to be won from the lairds binding themselves to undertake nothing punitive against tenants seen at meetings.’
Cameron let him finish.
‘Do you think it is enough?’
‘Nothing is enough, so long as we have no hand in government.’
‘We are putting paper chains on their arms; they can break them with a gesture.’
They stopped and looked at each other and James laughed.
‘We  are talking ourselves into a fine slough!
It must be the Sabbath getting into our bones., ‘It is as well to take a full look at the worst.’
Cameron would not let him go.
‘You know well enough, James — you must have thought — once the government is resolved, and we have talked ourselves hoarse and there is no ink left in the country — then the dragoons will come in and cart the young men away as though we have done nothing.
We might as well be praying !’
‘The young men should take to the hills.’
Cameron looked at him to make sure he was in earnest.
‘I was thinking just that myself.’
‘But if they do, we should go with them.
If you were Atholl, who would you come for first?
Why, Cameron king of the rebels and Menzies his henchman.’
‘Leave us aside.
I will never go to prison.
But leave us out of it just now.
There is enough to do, if all the listed men are to be visited and spoken to.’
‘A few have gone off already.
From Killin, and Rannoch of course— they like this kind of thing up there.’
‘Oh aye, in this easy weather.
But how will they live through the winter?’
By now they were in among thickening crowds of people, nodding to acquaintances and looking out for their own key men from down the valley.
There were the Logan brothers from Moness, watchful, keeping to themselves.
There was Sandy McGlashan, carrying his fiddle in a bag.
There was Donald from the smithy, joking with young McLaggan from Grandtully and two of his own daughters — they had brought parcels of food and bottles of drink and looked ready for a good day's outing.
Young McCulloch was on his own — where was Jean?
Clusters of dark clothes marked out contingents from up Keltney and beyond.
A solid snake of people still wound back along the north shore of the loch.
A waft of singing sounded from the church, like a great collective musical groan, with an overtone of keening — the final psalm.
People presently came flowing out of the door and spread between the gravestones.
A few went home.
Most stayed, under the shadowy evergreens, among the tall sycamores and beeches on the bluff above the water.
Cameron waited for the minister to finish his ritual of nodding and handshaking with the congregation.
He then passed quickly through the crowd, eyes studiously on the ground, black gown folded round  him like a rook's wings.
The crowd was still thickening, filling back down the high street, but it looked like time to start.
As Cameron opened with his usual explanation of the Act, he did not know that the Reverend William McIvor, a tall whiskery man with coarse orange hair and very pale blue eyes, had stayed outside his manse, in the cover of a thick yew tree, and was listening hard with a hand cupped round his ear.
‘This Act will enslave you,’ he heard Cameron saying, ‘and not only the young men among you but every family with a son who is in his prime.
For how are we to bring in the corn harvest with all those strong hands and strong arms gone?
You will manage — oh yes — although you have no servants to feed your animals or cook your meat for you — you will manage , although you are a year married with a wee child learning to walk, and no wet-nurse to mind it for you while you milk the beasts — and no young husband to thatch your house above your head.
The lords in parliament, and in the courthouse and the castle, they do not know how we live — they know nothing about us, except that we will die for them, to protect their forts in India and in Scotland ’— his voice sharpened suddenly, his arm swung round and pointed north and a gust of response rose out of the crowd —‘we have always been good at that, their demands can never be satisfied, regiments for the colonies, indentured servants and labourers for the plantations, they have scoured Scotland like a killing wind and the men have been whirled away in the blast of it.
When the Philadelphia — now remember this name — when the Philadelphia put into Stornoway in Lewis, and gleaned young boys from the beach, and stowed them in the hold like trade-goods, what constable or what factor raised his arm or his stick to stop the slavers?
When seven slave-ships — now this is true — when seven slave-ships were cruising in the sound between Taransay and Harris, did Lord MacDonald's men protect Lord MacDonald's tenants?
Not at all— the price was too good — MacDonald's factor was far too busy agreeing a price for the young folk that he sold to the Carolina merchants.
When the pressgang came to Aberdeen last year’(had it been last year?
Near enough), ‘did the baillies and the constables protect the citizens from the bully-boys with their clubs and handcuffs?
Oh no — never — the bribe was far too great to refuse — they ran a cordon round the Green and delivered over their own folk to the men-of-war.
Where will it end,’ he cried out, ‘where will it end?’(feeling the helplessness in his own depths, knowing that to the crowd it came as an incitement to great anger).
The  feeling was soughing through them, every face was turned fully towards him, features naked, eyes widened (they were too expectant, too dependent on the next sally, their wills must be gathered up and channelled towards an irresistible action).
‘It will never end until we feel our powers, until we see how few and weak they are’(this was the merest wishfulness), ‘and how strong they are, for consider what they have now, and in what sort of a country we are living.
The forts and barracks have gone up, an iron chain along the Great Glen, an iron ring round the coasts —you have built it for them, you have clamped these fetters on your own wrists, and I do not excuse myself — my first work was mending the roof of the arsenal at Fort Augustus in 1784.
I should have known better, but we are learning now.
We are not free people under this Constitution — not any longer, if we ever were.
There is a Bastille in every glen and firth, and this Act is the final fetter’(but it would not be, there would be plenty more).
‘Let them put it on you and you are done for at last— food for the cannons, and the swamp-fever, and the hulks.
But remember’— he had lifted an arm now and was prodding with his forefinger as though pointing to the furthest corners of the country (he was feeling the attention of the crowd and letting it recharge his energy), ‘the people are mightier than a lord.’
He paused, letting the crowd dwell on the proverb (hearing the rooks caw above his head).
‘The people are mightier than a lord, and if we know that, we — can — not — be — put — down.’
Each of the words came out separately with the force of an oak peg hammered into a hole.
A roar of arousal sounded out at once and he spoke above it, formal and explanatory now (letting the standard phrases quell his own misgivings).
‘It is very clear what we must do.
We petition against the Act, a petition to go from every parish.
We must all join in this — there is no room for anyone to hang back.
We have paper and ink here — make a start now if you have not already.
No more than forty-nine names on a paper, or the Deputy-Lieutenants will infer a gathering of illegal size and bring in the soldiers under the Riot Act.
Do not fail ’— he was having to shout now above the stir (was everything clear? or had he only thrown water on a fire?)—‘do not fail to put in a clause calling on the proprietors to undertake nothing punitive against tenants seen at meetings.
We are within the Constitution as it stands, nothing illegal is going on and we claim the right to be treated as democratic citizens assembling as we are free to do.
We carry no weapons, the guns are all in Taymouth Castle, but if they threaten us or fire on us’(behind the yew the minister listened harder than ever), ‘then we will reply in kind .
‘Now, can everybody see a paper?
James — Alastair — Iain — Donald — Angus — hold them up.
There are our arguments — I believe we can muster sixteen thousand names — they must listen to that.
So sign your names, friends, or make a mark if need be.
We must have one great voice in this, and it must come from every quarter, up to Rannoch, along the loch to Glen Ogle and Loch Earn.
We will meet at Fortingall tomorrow, and let us make it the biggest meeting of all — the Glen Lyon folk will join us there, and once Breadalbane joins with Atholl, then they will know that the whole people is on thy move.
I know there is hay to cut and turn, but it is the harvest that will suffer if we let the Act stand.
So come to Fortingall, to the Green, at noon.
Now — can everybody reach a paper?’
In the midst of the crowd a huddle of men and women were using a flat-topped gravestone as a table.
The point of the quill broke through the paper where it lay over an incised letter and a woman in the group pushed the man with the pen and crowed out, ‘Donal, you great fool — the King will never read that now!’
People were flocking round each paper, jostling and craning to see what it said and who had signed so far.
The fringes of the crowd loosened and eddied is people slipped away and stragglers arrived.
Over at the manse the Reverend William McIvor, in a drab overcoat, let himself out by the back door and rode off to the north-east by a back path through the woods near Taymouth Castle, keeping his grey garron on a tight rein and stepping slowly so that the hoof-beats were nearly soundless.
Hemmed in by bicks and shoulders, besieged by people wanting to shake his hand, put questions, or merely to remind him of past meetings, Cameron was struggling to respond and make each person feel attended to.
He still felt naked and drained after the speech, yet now was the time to be weaving more individuals firmly into thy spreading fabric.
We only have the year's agreement on our place — will the laird turn us out if Kenneth signs the paper?’ a nervous yellow-haired woman was asking him.
Her face was only a foot from his.
‘Who is the owner?’ he started to ask.
A surge in the crowd behind him jolted him forwards and he saved himself, and the woman, by setting his feet wide and holding onto her shoulders.
He smelt smoke in her hair, felt her flesh soft under her shawl, and then a further quake in the crowd parted them.
He rose up on tiptoe, looking round for James, Allan, and the rest.
The crowd was gradually thinning.
The papers, covered with crosses  and signatures, were passing back to the organizers.
Within an hour Allan, Donald the smith, and the Logan brothers had set off down the strath to Weem with the petitions in a leather wallet, to add to the already thick bunch in James's strong-box, and Cameron and James had got horses from a sympathizer in the village and rode off towards the narrow glen of Keltney.
Among its tortuous water-courses, its hidden back-glens and caves and dark deformed woods choked with fallen trees knee-deep in moss, there might be refuges for a hundred listed men, if the worst happened.
And word of the meeting at Fortingall must be spread.
The sawyers at the government mill at Kinlochrannoch were good friends of Cameron's, and might try to bring out their neighbours, although they themselves were still felt to be incomers.
If the people from the hill farms around the loch foot could be mobilized, they would add a fierce thrust to the movement.
If they kept to themselves, the whole northern end of the area might as well be written off.
The Sawmill
An eagle planed over miles of country without a single flapping of its wings, curving and rising on the air currents generated by the warmed mass of Schiehallion.
In eleven miles Cameron and Menzies had passed three houses — all the fewer people to betray the refugees, they told each other.
The fewer also to provide food.
How to balance out these factors?
Their eyes followed thy bird as its image shrank and lost itself in space.
All around them the shoulders of the hills were browned by the fading of the heather, dulled by the weakening sunshine, their expanses turned dusty-blank as though a great grinding had sifted down on them, decades of labour and hardship, and left them blinded.
A desert, Menzies thought, a wilderness where you might just manage to survive for forty days and forty nights, especially if there was an angel at hand to minister to you.
He thought of trying this fancy on Cameron but his face looked so closed and dark, eyes narrowed and mouth-corners turned right down, that it forbade pleasantry.
Cameron was thinking: Those upland folk who were at Kenmore this morning — they nearly all kept on towards Tummel when we forked north-west for Rannoch.
So: up there they are with us, some of them; but here we might as well be among foreigners.
Are we stretching our lines too far?
The whole campaign dragged on him with a dead weight at this moment.
‘The people are mightier than a lord’— it was easily said.
But they were so scattered, their power diffused through a thousand little steadings — not concentrated into arsenals and parliaments and prisons.
You had to tell yourself, again and again, that there were links between all the little homes, filaments that tensed and hummed with power when the time came.
Look how readily the thousand had turned out to besiege the laird at Castle Menzies!
Yet all that feeling, all that energy, discharged itself into the void so long as it did not flow down one of the channels that made the great wheels turn — in Edinburgh, in London and Paris.
Our people should be there.
How can a belted knight speak for us?
It is  in his interest to speak against us, to force up rents, not fix them fairly, to give his friends a charter to chop down our forests.
Our trees, he thought, as the moss-green heads and bronze trunks of the pines round Dunalastair came into sight — our meadows in the low lands round the lochs.
How could it have come about, he marvelled afresh, that they had parcelled it out and tied it up with strings of law?
He knew full well: by Acts of Parliament, voted by landlords to benefit their like.
In France they had loosed the strings.
Paine was across there now, it was said, helping to write new laws.
If he came back, to spread the word, no doubt they would hang him like a felon.
But he had written his book — the people in Glasgow and Paisley knew it by heart, nearly — now it was up to themselves.
They trotted west straight into the broad golden glare of the sun and came among the scattered settlements of the Rannoch people.
The houses were huts — branches and small tree-trunks caulked with turf.
Plumes of shining pink and amber grass flourished on the thatch of their roofs.
As the horses trotted past, kicking up gravel from the rough road, women in dark-brown shawls picked up their babies and shouted at their children to come inside — as though strangers from the east were liable to spell trouble.
‘It must have been like this in Arkaig when my father first went there,’ Cameron said to Menzies.
‘How did he ever settle?’
‘Perhaps he was as savage as they,’ Menzies replied.
‘Och yes, that is true — not like your fine slave-traders and moneylenders down at Perth.’
Cameron turned off down a churned, peaty track towards the wooden roofs and palings of the sawmill.
Among orange mounds of dust and evil black pools the sawyers squatted, self-reliant Lowlanders who perched here like colonists and were tolerated because the sub-tenants and cottagers on the poorest land could get a few days felling trees when they were desperate.
A man was sitting on the ground outside his house.
He looked up at the horses, shading his eyes against a sting of sun from the west.
He was tall, sun-reddened, with a big lower jaw and a nose like a wedge.
He was smoking a clay pipe and his hair was speckled with sawdust.
‘Angus Cameron!’ he said and got to his feet.
The two shook hands and Cameron introduced Menzies.
‘James Menzies — my partner.
Kenneth Byers.’
‘Is that in business, now, or in politics?’ asked Byers.
‘Business!
What do you take me for?’
Cameron pretended to be affronted.
‘Ach well — I thought you were all in the money down there.’
‘Gunsmiths are doing well,’ said Menzies.
‘And chainmakers, and bankers., ‘And lawyers and spies,’ said Cameron.
Byers regarded them quizzically.
‘You should move up here, then.
If you want to starve in peace.
Come on inside — the midges will devour you if you don't smoke.’
The hut had a muddy wooden floor, patched at the edges where the planks had rotted.
A partition of rough studding hung with ragged cloths divided the room into two.
In the public end a fire flamed in a stone hearth.
Black pots stood steaming on a pair of hobs.
On a bench a young woman with red hair had been suckling her baby.
Now she tidied herself up, arranged her shawl on her forehead, and soothed the baby, who was still nuzzling for her breast.
‘Ella — here is Angus Cameron.
And he has brought his partner, Mr Menzies.
You're in luck — we found a fowl this morning, and it didn't look too well, so we had to put it out of its misery.’
‘No wonder they look darkly at you hereabouts, if you steal their fowls.’
‘What?
I wouldn't take an egg from the village folk.
No no, this fat old bird was round the back of Bunrannoch House, when I took wee Alex for a walk.
They've plenty to spare, and they're always in among other folk's corn.
The laird robs his tenants and his hens steal the harvest.
Sit down — will you take a dram?’
They all, except Ella, took a pull at a stone bottle of fierce whisky.
‘How is wee Alex?’ asked Cameron.
‘Is he five yet?’
‘Five past Easter.
When were you here last?’
‘The end of March, when the drifts cleared from the road past Keltney falls.’
‘You came about the timber for the mill at Aberfeldy.’
‘I did.
We are still at it.
But it is not easy to keep working just at present.’
‘Does James Flemyng keep you up to the mark?’
‘Och, he comes snapping about, with his dogs and his ‘man’.
He calls McHarg the factor ‘his man’.
‘I heard you were busy at other things.
Ella — where was I hearing the news?’
‘Down at Atholl, when you went for the new blades,’ his wife answered from beside the fireplace.
The baby was lying in a cradle of osiers, crooning to itself like a wood-pigeon.
‘It s all a stramash of gossip down there, Angus,’ said Byers, giving his visitors a look.
‘How your mob have murdered a teacher, and thrashed the Duke's servants nearly to death.
Well — I believed the half of it.’
‘That might be a bit too much.’
Cameron was moved to deny the atrocities — he could see the doubts twingeing across Byers's forehead.
But there were other things to find out.
‘What else did you hear?
Any word of the petitions?’
‘Petitions?
They said there was a wild night or it somewhere down about Ballinluig.
They called you ‘King Cameron’.
I thought to myself', that doesn't sound like Angus.
But I said nothing.’
Cameron and Menzies were looking seriously at each other.
Where to start?
How to convey the gist?
‘Seventeen lairds have sworn to oppose the Militia Act,’ said Menzies flatly.
‘And six thousand people have come out to the meetings.’
‘I heard there were great crowds about.
What's next, then?’
Cameron did not want to be asked this.
Byers was offering him the bottle.
He drank and let the burn of the whisky pass slowly down his gullet.
‘We are meeting again tomorrow, at Fortingall.
Drawing in the Glenlyon folk, and your neighbours here, we hope.
Once all this country is solid against the Act, and all across the Lowlands, then the government must think again.’
‘Do governments do that?
And anyway — suppose the war hots up, and they're desperate for men?’
‘Our people are steeling themselves, Kenneth,’ James Menzies said at once, talking excitedly.
‘They mean business.
They will never follow a drum now.
March when a laird's son gives an order?
They know the lairds are straw men now!’
Cameron watched for the effect or this on the sawyer's face.
Byers heard Menzies out, looked over at Cameron as though wondering whether he believed this too, and then stood up and stretched.
He knocked his pipe out on the stone above the fire.
‘I wonder if they will take orders once they have red coats on,’ he said at last.
‘I believe the Breadalbane men were up in arms against their commanders down at Glasgow a few years back.
But now there's a war on, and everybody's frightened at the French…
’ He let his words trail off.
They all went over to the fire for plates of meat and bread.
In his mind Cameron continued the argument throughout the meal.
He found in Byers a bracing scepticism like his own.
Yet speculation was actually fruitless now.
They were no longer debating the  rights of man at a Club for Equality and Reform.
They had committed themselves to a movement and had no option but to drive it through to its end.
What he wanted from Byers above all was an offer — a plausible offer — to bring two hundred people down to Fortingall.
And this was what Byers could not make.
They sat on arguing for three hours while Ella went into the other end of the house and sang quietly to the baby and wee Alex came home filthy from playing and sat drowsily beside the fire, chewing at the bones of the fowl.
The hut was sweltering with smoke and steam and everybody scratched as vermin crept and bit under their clothes.
But it was no better outside: midges boiled in clouds out of the sodden peat around the saw-bed and the timber stacks.
Byers felt the pressure on him to offer something and was restive under it like a dog on a tether.
‘You know my position,’ he broke out at last.
‘I work here but I don't belong here.’
Am I any different, Cameron was wondering to himself, and Byers, sensing the thought, grew more heated.
‘Do you know what it's like when people turn away before you've finished speaking?
Or refuse you milk or an egg when you have an ailing wean?
The government put this here after ‘Forty-six because they wanted one spot of safety in a wilderness of hatred, and because they thought they might as well get some good of this country once they'd ruined it.
Well — it might have happened yesterday, for the Rannoch folk.
They can bear a grudge forever, like a fire in a mine.
Don't you know that, Angus?
You speak their language, man!’
His eyes were wide with stress, his face glared with fire-heat and whisky.
Menzies tried to intervene.
‘Surely, then, Kenneth, this great grudge of theirs will bring them out against the enlistment?’
Byers turned on him as Ella came through to ask them to hush their voices.
For a moment he looked from Menzies to Cameron and back again, then he nodded his head towards the doorway.
Once they were outside, he pointed across the level land towards the loch.
‘Look,’ he said.
Perfectly calm water mirrored a sky which shaded from smoky orange through turquoise to night blue, reflecting nothing but the sheerness of space, unlit by stars.
Smoke wisped up from huts invisible among the bunched darkness of trees and spread in faint blue webs.
Silhouetted against the gleam of the water human figures moved about.
Cameron and Menzies recognized the swaying shoulders of men leaning as they scythed, the reach and drag of women raking and turning the cut hay.
‘Those are the folk you want to walk fifteen miles to your meeting,’ Byers said in a low voice.
‘In the middle of the hay harvest.
With the weather holding.’
‘There will be fewer to bring it in next year, when the listed men have gone.’
Menzies brought out the familiar argument.
‘They will settle for the devil they know.
Who doesn't?
They get mad here after the last wisp of hay — I've seen old women down on their knees, gleaning it with their fingers.’
Byers's voice had tightened with compassion and distaste.
Menzies started to answer but Cameron put his hand on his arm, shook his head slightly, and said to Byers, ‘I see the trouble.
It is softer down our way and there is hay enough.
But, Kenneth — there is a war now — it is between the government and us.
They are going to draw the young men out of the country like pith out of a rush.
We cannot let that happen — can we?’
‘No.’
Byers's voice was low, even sulky.
‘No — we can't.’
‘So we need all help, all resources, everybody, if we are to win, and save ourselves.’
Cameron was speaking in a low-pitched, pressing whisper.
‘And there is a thing that this wild part is very good for.
A refuge, Kenneth — a haven.
Will they harbour some listed men here, if it comes to it?
Would they do that, do you think?’
‘The redcoats will go through the houses like a fire!
Remember ‘Forty-six —‘Not in the houses.
They must lie up in the caves, if we do send refugees here, and in the pinewoods and the tall juniper — they will do even in the winter.
So long as your people will take them food.
And so long as they pass them through Rannoch to the west if need be.
Are there no families who would do that?’
‘The sawyers would do it — that makes fourteen houses.
And a good many are obliged to us for the work they get here.
Anyway, they would never give a man away to the soldiers…‘
Before Cameron and Menzies left they had written down lists of safe houses, sources of milk and meal, and secure points further west.
A frail safety-net had started to take shape.
They rode east and south under a moonless sky alive with stars, the lustre of the Milky Way making a faint track across the zenith.
Their heads seethed with possibilities, worries, further problems.
As the deep black shadow in Glen Keltney closed over them, they moved slowly nearer home in a trance of fatigue.
The Hayfields
At two in the morning Cameron and Menzies were still sleepwalking between the ragged dykes of Dull, swaying and nodding in the saddle, letting the horses pick the way.
Blenching at the last few miles, shivering as sweat and dew ran down their backs, they turned into Donald Gillies's yard at Camserney sawmill.
The house door was locked.
They stabled their horses round the back and bedded amongst dry hay with their cloaks wrapped round them.
Noises of chopping reached them as they lay there in the morning, feeling stiff and foul.
They went indoors to find Donald splitting wood to start the fire.
He pretended to be unsurprised.
‘We knew you were there.
The dog was whining and wanting out at you.’
‘But you could not have known it was us.’
Cameron enjoyed teasing him.
‘That dog has powers,’ Gillies insisted.
‘One time, a tinker put in a day here, mending pans, and at night off he went, with my best tools hidden in his bundle.
Well — at Dunkeld fair that autumn, Roy here bites a man in the calf of his leg — it was the tinker!’
‘Would he bite a recruiting sergeant?’ asked Menzies.
‘Or a teacher, for the matter of that?’
‘Is that why you are here?’
Gillies turned back to the fire and spoke to them over his shoulder.
‘Still drumming up followers for your meetings.’
‘We were benighted after a long day's ride to Rannoch, ordering floor timber for the mill.’
Cameron covered up without thinking it out.
Donald Gillies was a friend.
But he had kept well clear of the struggle against the Act — why?
‘Will we see you today at Fortingall, Donald?’
‘Fortingall?
That is a fair step.
I am not —’ He stopped and looked round, almost in alarm, at a noise outside the door.
His wife Aileen came in with pails of milk, scolding at two little girls for clinging onto her skirt and making her spill.
‘Early visitors,’ she said with a keen look.
‘And I have no water boiled yet for the porridge.’
‘We must get on the road at once,’ said Cameron, still diplomatic, while Menzies longed for a hot drink.
‘Take a bite of cheese with you.’
Aileen Gillies was all brisk agreement as she wrapped up some food in a cloth and gave it to them while her husband busied himself with laying the fire.
He saw them to the door but when they rode past a minute later, it was already shut.
‘Well,, said Cameron, after a silent mile, ‘he was a friend before.
Or anyway he sold me timber.’
‘I blame the woman.’
Menzies trotted out his hobby-horse right away.
‘Keeping her man under her eye and calling it looking after him.’
‘The Weem women have not been behind-hand — they would have stormed Castle Menzies on their own., ‘There is a bit more spirit down our way — more spirit and more cash.’
They remembered this two hours later as they stood on the meadow in front of the big house at Fortingall, waiting for a crowd to gather.
Heavy mists mantled the forested slopes behind the village, parted silently to show the crests of trees like seaweed under a tide, then closed again.
A few dark tracks criss-crossed the grey dew.
Black cattle snuffed and chewed.
Little knots of people stood about eyeing each other with an air of wondering why they had come at all.
When a larger group came tramping in behind a piper, Cameron and Menzies recognized some stalwarts from Foss on Tummel.
They went over to greet them and gather details of the events on Sunday when they were said to have ringed the churchyard and exacted an oath against the Act from all the gentlemen in the congregation.
But the latest news was discouraging — they had met few supporters on the road down Keltney, a handful from the far side of Tummel, not a soul from Rannoch.
‘Wait till they come down from Glen Lyon.’
Menzies was determinedly positive.
But they waited, and the roads north and west remained quiet.
The grey rocks on the hillsides wore shut faces.
The barking of two ravens sounded like syllables in a foreign language.
A traveller or two, pedlars and shepherds, were persuaded to join the few hundred who were there by the weight of glowering disapproval from dozens of faces when they showed signs of passing by.
But no massed contingents from up Glen Lyon and none from along Loch Tay.
‘Has Breadalbane cowed you all with his recruiting and his threats?’
Menzies asked a grey-haired man who stood bundled up in his plaid, tall and erect as though he was ready to take root.
‘Och well, a terrible lot have gone to the colours, that is true.
They get the shilling, and a golden promise, and they think they will come back alive one day.’
‘Those who do come back should tell the young men what to expect.’
‘You can tell a young man nothing.
Thirteen went to the wars in Canada from my village, four came back.
And they have had little enough to say.
I think they are ashamed.’
The mist was shearing from the hillsides like a fleece, the air lightening and warming.
A good drying day.
People were moving slowly off to east and west.
Cameron and Menzies looked at each other, searching for signs of belief that something could still be made of the occasion.
The men from Foss were restive.
One of them called across, ‘Give us a word, then.
Tell them what is in the Act, and what to do.’
With a great qualm mining at him inwardly, Cameron got up on a tree stump and said his piece.
The scattered crowd drew closer together and listened quietly, but when he gave his warning about the Riot Act, glances were exchanged, a few grinned openly, and a wit called out, ‘They must know the law here — that is why they have all stayed at home.’
There was nothing else to be done.
The threads of connection binding the people into a fabric seemed to have thinned to invisibility, the little steadings turned in on themselves like snails in a drought.
Cameron and Menzies collected a few names for their lists of contacts — the tall old man, who came from Camusvachan in Glen Lyon, the red-haired MacLennan brothers from Foss.
They arranged to come that way again next Sunday and then turned their horses eastwards for the long ride home.
Each man was struggling to fill the hollow that had opened inside him, to bridge it over with some kind of reasonable structure while saying nothing about it as though afraid it might crumble if it was exposed to the light.
‘Maybe we stretched too far beyond our own place,’ Menzies hazarded at last.
This was uncomfortably like Cameron's thought of yesterday and he shrank from admitting it.
In any case it was much further up to Tummelside.
But the Foss men were famously militant, they had been ever since a young minister with lordly tastes and little scholarship had been foisted on them by the laird twelve years before and  they had first boycotted him, then run him down the road on a cart.
Cameron sensed Menzies waiting for some words — any words.
He roused himself to say, ‘Maybe.
Yet Atholl is as far, and we have good ties with them.
There will be many causes, James — let us not be speculating, and frightening ourselves.
Everybody in Strathtay is awake now — they know .
And that is the first thing.
Now we have to convert all this commitment into real results and save the listed men.
The rest is just froth if we fail in that.’
He had reined his horse to a stop and was searching Menzies' eyes for complete agreement — for more, for energy to carry it out.
‘James — when we have rested and supped, we will make a start — do you agree?
Near home, in our own place.
Will you go to Moness and see the Logans and sound them out about hiding?
Get them to think of their own best refuge.
And I will see the McCullochs.’
‘Two families…
’ Menzies was wilting under the enormity of the work.
‘The army will have them all in barracks before we have saved the first ten men!’
‘Wait a bit.
Some others — the best ones — Donald the smith, and maybe Iain Logan, the real sterling men — they can join in once we have their agreement.
Then our net will grow.
Your Allan, too, of course., ‘Allan?
He talks like a mill-wheel.
We had better tell him nothing., It was the second cover-up of the day.
Cameron felt the dirtiness of conspiracy seeping into his being.
‘He will not become sounder by being mistrusted,’ he said sharply.
‘Ach, James — he is in your household.
You must decide.’
They had built up the fabric in their minds again and could even feel some weary well-being as they neared Weem and saw it sheltering between the steep hills and the flood plain of the Tay.
The low lands were patched with hayfields at every stage of readiness, from bleached yellow to ferny green, and across the coloured surfaces people moved as though they were stitching and knitting at its texture, arms pulling on rakes, backs stooped under burdens on their way to the steadings.
Far up on the left, above the inn and the cottage row, two other figures moved, blue and white, not haymakers — Jean Bruce and young Donald, walking hand in hand amongst the bents of a neglected field at the furthest point of the McCullochs' holding.
For years it had not been worked.
A grey building with a sagging roof stood inside a stone enclosure with a wind-blown rowan tree beside it.
Its berries glistened red under the burnish of the breeze, which came in uneasy gusts  from the south and east.
Below them the strath spread its pattern like a map.
‘I feel like a bird,’ said Jean.
She held out her arms and spread her fingers gracefully, pleasuring herself in Donald's admiration.
As he looked at her, his face closed over with a faintly embarrassed incredulity.
‘A bird?’ he chaffed her.
‘Are you a hen, then?
Or a duck?’
‘Donald McCulloch!
I am a wild-flying pigeon.’
‘Yes, you are a pigeon.’
He stopped and turned her towards him and tried to kiss her on the mouth.
Over his shoulder she was looking at the derelict house.
Should she mention it now?
She let him kiss her, his tongue on hers, and then she eased him on across the field, her arm curved closely round his waist.
‘Who lived here, Don?’ she asked him.
They parted a way through the tough bracken that choked the enclosure and their feet found the path to the front door.
‘Old Donald's uncle Murdo was here for a while.
He was never bothered to marry, or to do anything else very much, they say.
He just let the place go.
And there is enough easier land for us down-by.’
They bent their heads under the lintel and stepped inside.
Dusky light came from the two small front windows between the toothed leaves of nettles.
A rent in the old thatch let in a piercing beam of sunlight.
Jean held up her hand to it and when it made a bright white spot on her palm, she closed her fingers over it and pretended to give it into Donald's hand, like a delicacy.
He laughed and turned away to the hearth.
An old kettle with a hole burnt in its bottom lay on its side in a drift of twigs and old mortar.
The small earthenware cup of an oil lamp stood in a neuk in the wall with the stub of a candle beside it, stuck in a mess of wax.
‘You can think of it with a fire going and a light burning,, Jean said.
‘It would be cosy enough.’
‘There are plenty peats in the hill behind,’ Donald answered.
‘father brought me up here on his back in the spring one year, and I sat in the moor while he and old Donald were digging peats.
I fell in the brown water and fouled my frock, and the men never heeded, of course, but there was the devil to pay when we got home at night.’
‘Would it take much work to make it sound and tight again?’ she asked in a carefully ordinary voice.
‘This place?
The walls are straight enough.
But och, who would  want to live here, out of it all, and with a weary hill to climb…
‘Young folk with a bit of spirit.’
He turned, beginning to see her meaning.
She took him by the hands and said eagerly, ‘Don —we could live here — it is right for us — would you like that, Don?’
‘What?’
He laughed incredulously.
‘We will live with mother and old Donald — you know that.’
Her whole face drooped and she blushed with chagrin.
‘I think you want that, living under their feet, and their scolding and groaning.
Why do you not want our own place?’
‘Because we have a good house already, with the new beds and windows.
There is a year of my work in it.’
He looked mulish now, with his hard-eyed expression that she dreaded, that seemed to treat her as nothing.
‘It is not ours, Donald.
This could be ours.
Think of it with the garden cleared and new fruit-trees put in —‘They would never take up here.
Look at the lean of the rowan.’
‘Och well, berry bushes will grow well enough behind the wall.
And stock will graze down that tough grass and sweeten it again.’
She brought out her trump card: ‘If we bring this into use, it will raise the value of your holding, and that will please your mother.’
‘And if we raise its value, then Robert Menzies will raise our rent.’
They looked squarely and intently at each other for a full minute, as blankly as strangers, trying each other for traces of concession or agreement or affection, even.
Outside at the back a curlew piped, a lonely single sound, and among the weeds of the garden sparrows cheeped and quarrelled in shrill bursts of noise.
Cameron stepped between the stunted apple-trees and knocked on the McCulloch' new front door.
No sound from inside.
He stood for a minute, appraising the close-fitted timbers and sleek varnish, then knocked again.
‘Who is there?’
Mary's voice.
It had a frantic note.
‘Angus Cameron.’
‘Oh —’ Her voice seemed to choke.
He went in doubtingly.
Mary was kneeling with her head and shoulders inside the dark cave of a box-bed.
She turned and Cameron saw, under her arm, old Donald's face, eyes staring fixedly, his mouth drooping at one side, a shine of saliva on his chin.
‘Mary — what is ado?’
‘Father has — Father has — oh, he is very ill, it took him yesterday.’
She drew in a great sharp breath which shook her shoulders, then wiped the old man's chin with a cloth.
‘Has Donald gone for a doctor?’
‘I sent him yesterday.
The man from Dunkeld will come today or tomorrow — if he thinks it is worth his trouble.’
‘I missed Donald at Fortingall.
Is it a fit?’
‘A fit of some kind.
His right side has gone.
Oh Angus — has the trouble turned his brain?’
‘No, why?
There is nothing desperate going on.
It would be worse if the army —’ But it was no time to be arguing.
Was it right even to burden the family with his plan?
To do nothing might be worse — Allan had greeted them at the house with the news (fresh from the great oven of rumour, the widow Duff's at Ballinluig) that a file of English soldiers had ridden out from Perth.
‘Mary,’ he said carefully, ‘you have your own troubles now.
I just wanted a wee word with Donald.
Is he out at the back?’
‘I sent him into the hay.
We must bring it in whatever else.’
Her voice sounded mechanical as though she were drawing a shutter across her pains and fears.
‘Go on through and see him if you must.
She turned back into the bed as a sound came from old Donald's mouth.
In the narrow field that sloped upwards at the back between scrubby thickets Donald's rake lay with its teeth in a swathe.
Most of the field was still quilted with cut hay.
It had been so dry that two days under the warm sun had been enough without letting it stand in stooks or draping it on the hedges.
Now it could go straight to the byre.
Cameron looked round the neighbouring fields, some shorn close and yellow, some still fledged with feathery grass and sparkling with daisies and buttercups.
It was close here — midges crawled on his forehead under his fringe — abstractedly he took the handle of the rake and rumpled it lightly across the nearest hay, turning it over.
The green of it was bleached through and through.
Perhaps he should stay till Donald reappeared, help him clear the field and talk as they worked?
Up at the old house, Donald kicked the kettle in a spasm of impatience and said angrily to Jean, ‘Why are you putting me in a vice?
You know that I have to work the land down there.
The old man will never be good for much now.’
‘You could work it and live here, Don — why are you angry?’
‘You know why — I am the man of that house since my father…
Why should we not live there?’
‘Under your mother's eye?’
Jean was suddenly shrill with frustration.
‘And her thumb.
Alex McLaggan and Mary have their own roof at Grandtully, even if it is next door to his father.
I want to live with you , Donald, not with your old folk.
What do you want-me or them?’
‘That is a trap.’
Donald had his brow lowered now like a bullock and his eyes were hot.
‘Why am I here at all?
I would be better off in Canada, free of all these tethers.’
He flung out of the door, crushed through the bracken, and strode down the hill at his fastest pace.
She ran after him, calling his name.
Cameron raked on for half an hour, making loose heaps up the middle of the field.
Once a dark toad clambered away towards the little burn at the side of the field.
It must have been lucky to escape the sickles, he mused, as he watched its clumsy struggling across the cut stalks.
Invisible grasshoppers were churring like little birds.
When Mary came out, she found him standing still with his back to the sun, looking down the river towards the shady woodlands round Grandtully.
He had started out to make a rough count of the houses to be visited and then let his thoughts drift into a reverie of his own old home, the far tropical look of the mountain skyline beyond Loch Arkaig on the rare hot days.
‘Where is the boy gone?’ her voice broke in sharply.
‘His rake was here — no other sign of him.’
‘Gone after his girl.
Look at that queer sky.
If a thunder-plump comes, we will lose this good grass.’
He gave her the rake and she went vigorously at the hay while he plaited a grass rope to put round a burden and heft it down to the byre.
‘Once the harvest is in, Mary’— he put his question abruptly —‘could you manage here in spite of old Donald's ailment — I mean, if Donald was away?’
‘Away?
The soldiers will get nobody from here.
We will be meeting them with a hail of stones if they show their faces.’
‘Stones against guns, Mary?
It is all supposition; the gentry may have swung the government against the Act by now.
But just suppose — if they do send in dragoons with guns to take the men away — we are helpless, then, you know we are.
So let us think of that.’
He  paused.
‘If a deadly beast was coming for you, what would you do?
Fight or hide?’
‘Hide.’
She was looking at him questioningly but he could see she had caught his drift.
‘You believe the listed lads should hide?’
‘Perhaps we should try it.’
Now it was out, it seemed hare-brained.
‘Do you think we could feed them if they were in refuges in the woods and the back glens?’
‘Of course we could.
We know the country, and there is a lot of it.’
‘But the redcoats are good hunters.
In ‘Forty-six they spared nothing.’
‘There is a war on now.
If we do it right, we can engage more soldiers than they would gain if they caught the lot.’
‘Mary — you should have been in the government.’
‘Oh aye.
And I would not have made the war in the first place.’
Feet sounded on the slope above the field and Donald came into sight, Jean close behind him, her face fiery.
Donald grabbed the rake from his mother and began to ply it hard, bouncing its teeth on the parched ground under the stalks.
Mary said hullo to Jean and then gave her son a shrewd look.
Feeling out of place, Cameron laid his rope on the ground, bundled a mass of hay onto it, and began to make a slip-knot round it.
Dry herb smells filled his nostrils.
Now the whole family was here, he must broach the scheme and work out the details of at least one refuge.
Was young Donald sound enough to be sent to contact other families?
‘Donald and Jean,’ he said, and waited till he had their attention.
‘Here is a secret matter, and it is a mortal secret.
We are thinking that the listed men must each have a refuge ready, if this Act is not withdrawn.
Where they can lie low.
Donald — it is your decision.
What do you say?’
‘A refuge?’
His voice was barbed with irony.
‘A cave?
A desert island?’
Cameron deflected the jeer.
‘A cave can be a trap.
But there are other kinds of shelter.
Would you lie low, if it came to it?’
‘And skulk like a fox?
Until I starved?
We never reckoned with this when we went and trounced the lairds!’
‘We have to think ahead now,’ Cameron began, but Donald was staring at him like an enemy.
Then he threw his rake down, took two paces across the field, and spoke into his mother's face.
‘I suppose you agree with this?
To keep me on a string?
I will never do it.
There is more freedom in Canada and that is where I will go.
Jean agrees.’
‘I never —’ the girl started to say.
Mary's fury forestalled her.
‘You say that — with your grandfather drooling in his bed!
And your friends threatened with the press-gang!
And your father —‘My father?
He got out of here, though it was to the colours.
Maybe the place is too narrow, that we all want to leave it.’
Jean was clinging onto his arm, as though to stop him inflicting more hurt.
As Mary looked at the couple, the fire seemed to die in her.
She turned to Cameron in a little movement of appeal.
‘They will do what they like,’ she said to him.
‘The soldiers will come for him and they will be sitting here, dreaming about Ontario.’
The Ride
The thunder broke not long after sunset, as Cameron and Menzies sat with a jug of wine, reckoning up the day's gains and setbacks.
Iain and Alastair Logan had agreed at once that Alastair must go into hiding.
At first they assumed that he could find a place among the steep woods behind Camserney and be supplied by their good friends Donald and Aileen Gillies at the mill.
Menzies squashed this with his news of how cool the Gillieses had been in the morning.
‘Sheep and goats now, eh?’ said Iain in his tight-lipped way.
‘All right, then — Alastair can go up through the Glen of the Birks and use the old byre below Urlar.
The Urlar folk will neither help nor hinder — you know how close they are.’
After that Menzies had walked along the hill to Duntaylor and Dunacree (leaving out the lonely man at Dunskiag with his terrifying dogs).
Both these families had sons of about twenty, both had been in the crowd that won the signature from Menzies of Bolfracks.
They saw the sense of the plan and agreed to find refuges for the boys in the thick forest between Bolfracks and Kenmore.
‘It was dry work,’ Menzies summed up, ‘so I came back then for some refreshment.
It must be like this for a minister paying his visits.
No wonder they like a dram at every house.’
Outside the thunder grumbled; it sounded pent up, unable to discharge itself.
Cameron found himself saddened and frustrated by the episode at the McCullochs' — it brought the dilemma of the movement to a point.
The real, mortal urgency of the situation could erode and trickle away like powder under the crush of people's domestic troubles.
Which they were used to.
Which were always there and would outlast even the war.
But so many would not come back from the war.
They seemed to realize that always too late — when it had happened.
He had a vision of the people of the country, walking and walking in endless droves, like pilgrims, across a battlefield shaken by the explosions of guns; and as the smoke blew into their eyes, the  people turned, desperate to see their homes again, but behind them a great dark channel had opened, with torn precipitous sides, and there was no way back…
The thunder thumped from some nearer point, the glass vibrated in the window, and Cameron came out of his doze to find Menzies grinning quizzically at him and offering him some more claret.
He shook his head.
‘I will sleep without that tonight.
Today went on forever.
Like yesterday.
Will we plan tomorrow's work in the morning?’
‘I thought you would have to go to the mill?’
‘Aye, but with luck we will do little there.
No planks for the flooring yet, and if it is raining we cannot be on the roof.
Maybe we can talk quietly to a few of the men — one of the masons from Ballechin has a son who must be twenty.’
Cameron slept instantly, and woke and dreamed and woke and dreamed for hours — the river, the cold shock of the water between his legs, the glimmer of light on the far shore, the current filling his mouth, he swam against it, it helped him, he struck out as smoothly as a seal, skimming effortlessly, he could power onwards forever, the water buoying him, his hand stroking it easily backwards without a splash…
I have never swum in my life, he thought, is he lay wakefully at dawn.
Rain dripped outside, drummed heavily, then slackened again.
He went over the Tay to Aberfeldy more to keep Flemyng quiet than with any hope of working.
The masons were busy with their mallets and chisels inside a makeshift hut on the site and it was easy to talk to them privately.
They had worked together for several years and the elder of them readily agreed to help supply the other's son if he went into hiding in the woods above Eastertyre.
Both men were dubious about how long someone would be able to endure in the winter, equally they could think of no alternative.
‘Do you think,’ the elder man wondered, his face as grey as his hair with stone-dust, ‘that the generals really want to go into the war with an army of pressed men?’
‘It is hard to put yourself in the mind of a general,, Cameron answered.
‘But they seem to trust in the power of the nine-tailed whip, and they will continue in that until a regiment breaks out of its barracks and makes its own way home.’
The masons smiled at his fancy and went on with their work.
The day passed.
Few men turned up for work — no Sandy McGlashan, and no Donald McCulloch of course.
Cameron wondered if it would be possible to raise the matter with him again, and bring him into a more realistic frame of mind, before the soldiers came.
If they came.
During the afternoon, while he sat idly chatting to a few men in the masons' lean-to, James Menzies arrived, his brown horse soaked black.
He looked full of himself but Cameron steered him across the street into the privacy of his store before he would let him talk.
‘Why bother to be secret?’
Menzies asked.
‘There is that much talk about hiding and plotting down Grandtully anyway —‘What!
Has that mad Duke been blethering?
I said to be chary of the McLaggans —‘No no, there is no harm really.
Only I went to Donald Stewart's smithy and Mary was there, chatting to her mother, so by the time I had fixed things up with Donald and went along to Grandtully to explain the plan to Alex, Mary had already gone back and told him.
Ah, young love — she was sitting with her arm round him, crying silently.
She looked like Kirsty when I first went off to Bengal —‘Menzies stopped, his own eyes watering, while Cameron let his temper sink back to normal after the gratuitous alarm.
‘What does the Duke say, then?’
‘Oh, he was not at home.
He is off on a stravaig past Atholl, looking for cheap horses.
Alex will tell him tonight.
No’— he forestalled Cameron's objection —‘you know as well as I do, Angus, the Duke is daft but he is clever, and he has an entry to every house from Atholl to Dunkeld.
We cannot do without his cunning, or his tinker friends.
And if his own son has to take to the hills —‘Yes, well — is Alex sound, then?’
‘He is, he sees the sense in hiding.
But he scarcely thinks it will come to that.’
‘He means he wants to stay in bed with Mary.’
‘Of course he does, but he knows the score.
He and his brother are going to organize the soundest folk among their cousins and get the word to the boys on the other side from Pitnacree up to Cluny.
It is good work, this, Angus, it is bringing the thing home to plenty folk who have only been in it for the furore so far, for the chance to squeeze their girls in the crowd and all that kind of thing.
Even if they do not have to hide, they will be like lieutenants to us now —‘
‘So long as we are not like generals to them.’
Cameron shuddered inwardly, remembering his vision of the evening before and his exchange with the masons just now.
‘Well, sometimes a lead is necessary.
Think of these last few days.
Who else has been planning anything, or thinking ahead at all?
A few at Foss — one or two at Kenmore.
We cannot be like Red Indians, sitting in a circle and acting as one man., ‘Do you think we have lost that forever?’
Menzies looked at him in astonishment, then took his flask from his hip pocket and offered him a dram.
‘You will be saying next that that is what they are doing in France.
Easy on the whisky — there is not much left after the great crack we had at the McLaggans’.
Typical James, thought Cameron, as he handed back the flask and looked at his friend's flushed face: we are plotting to save our lives and he turns it into a holiday.
He looked round the cool gloom of the store, rows of small barrels and big jars clad in wicker, standing on shelves and on the floor, inside thick windowless walls.
Like some fantastic prison, where you could drink so deeply and so long that you forgot your bondage.
They went home at the end of the afternoon, just is the cloud slid back like a shutter and let clear yellow light stream along the valley from the west.
The evening was spent uncomfortably, biting back remarks that might have let the hiding plan slip out prematurely to Allan Stewart.
James Menzies woke abruptly.
Still dark.
A scratching at the window.
Like a claw.
A rose-tree branch?
Too regular.
He got up into the chilly darkness and went to look.
A spectre with a shock of wild black hair — the pedlar, John Stewart the pedlar.
He had not been seen since Castle Menzies.
They had missed his flute at the wedding.
He mouthed and gesticulated — what did he mean?
Menzies gestured towards the front door and went through to draw the bolt.
Stewart came in sweating and gasping, almost too desperate to form words.
‘Soldiers — on the road from Tummel — at Keltney, nearly —‘
‘How many?’
‘Eighteen.
An officer.
And a bigwig, a stranger.’
‘Riding?’
‘All of them.’
‘Who are they?’
‘Who?
Blur coats — black helmets.
I will go and —‘Wait, John.
We must know their weapons and —‘There are other folk to tell!’
Stewart was suddenly violent, he backed away from Menzies, came up against the door, turned, and was gone.
A pony's hooves rattled on the road outside.
Twenty mounted men!
With swords?
How many guns?
They might turn west along the strath and not…
Menzies struggled to stop the racing of his mind and sort out the options coolly.
The damp wind blowing in at the open door made him shiver and he went to wake the others.
In a minute the three of them were huddled in cloaks, by the light of two candles and the last glow of the embers, trying to think quickly.
‘They may be making for Kenmore.’
Menzies was staving off their fears.
‘Why come that way?’
Cameron objected.
‘Soldiers from Stirling would have come by Crieff and Amulree, or if it is the Perth lot, then by Dunkeld and the lower strath.’
‘To avoid the strath — they must know it is all ours., ‘Then who is the big-wig?
Did John Stewart not name him?’
‘He ran off before I asked.’
‘You should have — Well, he is gone now…
Some law agent?
James — they are coming for us.’
‘I said they would — I said we should find our own refuge!’
‘And skimp the other work?
Allan — how long do you give them?’
Allan Stewart had been itching to speak.
‘How long?
Oh — five miles — half an hour if they mean business…
Come on, let us load and prime the fowling guns.’
‘Why, Allan?’
Cameron asked soberly.
‘To keep them off — to defend ourselves!’
His blue eyes had fired up with excitement.
‘Allan!’
Cameron was sincerely amused — he found himself weirdly untroubled, as though he was watching a fantasy unfolding in which he was barely implicated.
‘They would break in in a trice, while you were putting fresh shot in your fowling gun, and cut us into mincemeat.
If we have half an hour, the first thing is to burn the lists.
And the petitions.’
‘And destroy the work?’
Allan Stewart was appalled.
‘The work is destroyed already — if they are coming for us.’
‘But there is no offence in the petitions.’
‘We have committed no offence!
But still they are after us!
What do the petitions do but name many thousands of folk?
The government could pick up anyone they wanted and prosecute at their leisure, if we made them a present of all those names.
James — do you agree?’
‘Ach, burn the lot — burn the house.’
Menzies had slumped suddenly.
He was looking into vacancy with dull eyes.
‘James!,
Cameron wanted to bring him round.
But there was time  now for nothing but actions.
Without another word the three of them dressed and then, by the small yellow light of the candles, they opened the strong-box and fed the many leaves of paper one by one into the embers.
Flames lit up, for a moment, the soot-flowers trembling in the flue.
Black layers curled and then collapsed.
Cameron and Menzies looked at each other, their eyes gutted of all expression.
Allan Stewart went to the door.
‘I will get horses now.’
He was looking at them as though they were ill or crazed.
‘To run off?
Why?’
‘Angus!’
Stewart strode over and seized Cameron by the front of his cloak.
‘You have only minutes now!’
‘No.
You go if you like — you should go.’
‘Come on, Angus!’
The man had scarcely heard him.
Cameron turned to face Menzies.
‘James — I am for staying here — do you agree?’
‘Let Allan get the horses.’
Menzies' voice was low and automatic.
‘James — I say we stay.
Flight is guilty.
If we stay, we can defend ourselves.’
‘With the guns?’
‘With arguments.’
Cameron felt the frailty of the position as he spoke.
‘We could not incriminate the others — well, at least their names are safe now.
But we will speak up for ourselves.’
‘Och, we are doomed now.’
A thudding outside, which they felt with their feet before they heard it.
A flurry of bangs hit the door and before Allan Stewart could shoot back the bolt gun-butts had burst through the timbers, the bolt and its socket tore the jamb away, and soldiers in blue coats and white breeches were stepping in across the wreckage.
More bangs from the rear of the house, the door through to the kitchen slammed back against the wall, the room filled with soldiers, and in the wrecked doorway a tall, slim officer was making a small ceremony of ushering in a man with long grey hair and a black coat.
‘Sheriff Chalmers,’ said the officer in a clear London voice, ‘your men, I believe.’
‘Angus Cameron?’ asked the sheriff.
He took a folded document from his pocket and looked at it.
‘Is this James Menzies?’
He looked at Allan Stewart.
‘Or —?’
Menzies stood up very straight and arranged his clothes.
‘I am James Menzies, owner of this place, and I demand to know your business.’
Sheriff Chalmers eyed him sourly.
‘I think you know the ‘business’.
I am to arrest you, and Mr Cameron, on charges arising from the mobbing and sundry other disturbances in this district.
You will be examined in Perth, with a view to preferring formal charges.
Captain Colberg — will you proceed with the prisoners, while I search these premises for evidence?
I will follow on presently, with Constable Thomson from Pitnacree.’
‘I wish you would remain under the protection of my men.
But I must be guided by you, sir.’
His voice changed abruptly.
‘By twos — right about —march !’
Cameron and Menzies found themselves moving out of the door in a file of soldiers whose feet were already walking in step.
Allan Stewart's mouth was open, his eyes big with accusation.
In the darkness horses loomed.
A squeak and trundle of wheels — the post-chaise from the inn.
Cameron and Menzies felt themselves half-lifted inside by the arms.
Then they were rocking past the shut faces of the village houses towards the black thickets down the river.
In the gloaming before sunrise they saw each other 's features as pale apparitions.
They clasped hands and held them clasped for a time.
Tension choked them: they could feel it rising up their throats, threatening to swamp their brains.
They wanted to pass it off through words — none would come.
Outside, shapes began to materialize — heads, implements — they wanted to recognize friends but they could see nothing but shawls, cloaks, silhouettes.
The muzzle of a gun poked up — would they be caught in crossfire?
The tines of a fork rattled to the glass of the little window, a face stared in just inches away, they recognized Donald McCulloch before he whisked backwards out of sight.
The panel splintered above Cameron's head, the tip of a scythe-blade broke through, shone for a moment, disappeared.
Nightmare was rising round them.
They heard Angus's name shouted out —‘Cameron!
Cameron!
Fight for Cameron!’
Normality flowed into them again, their neighbourhood was out there, friends and fellows, the animals grazing in the fields, the hens roosting in their houses, chimneys and hearths and beds, from all the steadings the people were coming now and would save them.
The glossy black haunch of a horse rubbed against the window.
Colberg's voice: ‘Cameron!
Menzies!
You have brought this on your own heads.
My troopers may not manage to hold back from firing now.
Tell these people to go home !’
Cameron and Menzies looked at each other—‘tell these people’!
Cameron shot down the little casement of the window and roared out in his own language, with the whole strength of his voice, ‘We are here, friends!
Stay with us now!
Get word to the McLaggans!’
Colberg was still there, fuming.
‘Send them home !
We shall not fire first.
But if your men attack we shall mow them down.
There are women here, you know.’
Mary McCulloch, Cameron thought, and big Mary and Aileen Stewart and her Mary, and the McLaggan girls — they are all with us.
The sun must have cleared the hill beyond Grandtully, its light showed them weapons bristling above a river of faces, small boys with cudgels, women with stockingsful of stones and shards, men with shot-guns and blades set in poles.
A horse-rider towered amongst them, forcing against them like a rock in a torrent.
Cameron recognized Hope Steuart of Ballechin.
‘Captain Colberg!’
He was shouting in English.
‘A thousand people have blocked Grandtully bridge.
They say they will have the prisoners or they'll cut you down.’
‘I shall fire if I have to’— the captain's carrying voice.
‘Cameron!
Menzies!’
Hope Steuart's voice.
‘You must tell your people — tell them you are going voluntarily — there is bloodshed threatening here.’
‘We will not say that!’
Cameron's voice shouted back.
‘We are arrested for resisting government — our people know —‘Your people will be cut down…
’ Steuart's voice diminished as the mass of people blocked his way and the coach forged ahead.
Colberg's voice: ‘Load your pistols.
No shots until ordered.
Coachman — halt.
Sergeant Collier — rein in here.
Stand with the men.
I shall speak to the people at the bridgehead.’
Against the broad yellow light Cameron and Menzies could see the officer in silhouette, walking his horse forwards to meet a crowd in the road where it levelled out after the sharp rise from the bridge across to Grandtully.
People flowed round him, shouting.
A hush — he was talking — Cameron and Menzies strained to hear but caught only his tone, several notes lower than his sharp pitch of command.
He laughed.
He leaned down from the saddle, took off his glove, held out his hand to the spokesman nearest him — Alex McLaggan (where was the Duke?).
And Alex was accepting the hand-clasp — Cameron and Menzies were rising from the bench to shout a warning, a plea — the coach jerked under them, flinging them backwards, their heads banged on the panelling, they were pounding down the hill towards  the crowd, Colberg's voice yelling ‘At them! at them!’, people reeling away on both sides, jumping onto the parapet, a woman screaming, a red wound slashed along her brow.
The coach tore onwards, lurching and jumping.
They were jounced mercilessly on the narrow fitted bench.
Brilliant light dazzled in at the left-hand window as they swept past Balnaguard, Balmacneil, Kinnaird.
Low thatched houses crouched between hill and riverbank.
Their minds reeled, sickness churned as they struggled to save themselves from injury.
We should have run for it.
We should have run for it.
We should have run for it.
The words dinned in Cameron's head.
They taunted him like a rope dangling just out of reach.
We should have run for it.
To undo this moment — to force time backwards — to be again at the moment of choice back at the house…
Futile.
Defeat entered him like a heart attack, stunning the centre of his system.
He looked at James, wanting to speak and hear — nothing would come.
Menzies was crouching back on the bench, his legs braced, like a cornered hare frozen in a last effort to baffle the enemy.
Now they were rattling between the massive oaks of Glenvinean.
Across the river the tiled roofs of Dunkeld looked warm and homely, like a picture from another world.
‘Steady now’— Colberg's voice.
‘We shall bait at Inver inn and I shall cross the ferry for fresh horses.
Sergeant Collier — the prisoners may refresh themselves., The party was drawing up with a jingle and a grinding of hooves on a cobbled forecourt.
Three sides of a square surrounded them with high walls and rows of windows.
Cameron and Menzies stepped down, staggered, and were supported into the inn.
In a brown-panelled room smelling of tobacco they sat on opposite sides of a cold hearth full of cinders, swallowing hot wine and water under the blue eyes of Sergeant Collier, who was looking at them with intent curiosity like a man staring at a two-headed dog in a freak show.
‘If only they had saved us.
They should have held solid at the bridge.’
‘If they had, the troopers would have had their heads off.’
‘But they were armed!
Donald Stewart owns three guns’— Menzies spoke in a pressing whisper —‘there were spears there, and pikes —‘Who wins a battle — professionals or enthusiasts?’
‘A thousand of us could have swamped them.’
‘At a cost.’
‘There is always a cost.’
Shouts came in a chorus from outside.
Four troopers had them by  the arms and were hustling them out into the coach.
A horse whinnied and reared; the troop trotted quickly out of the inn yard towards the high road; Colberg rode up as hundreds of people — women, children, men — ran out of the woods along the riverbank upstream.
A sharp shout of command — twelve troopers ranged themselves across the road.
The people had stopped in their tracks, women were making their children stand behind them.
Three men stepped forward to meet Colberg: Donald Stewart, a gun across his arm, Donald McLaggan, holding a shaft with a curved blade at its end, and someone unknown to Cameron and Menzies, also with a gun.
Colberg drew his sabre slowly and held it sloped on his shoulder.
He looked elegant, as though presenting arms in some courtly ritual.
‘Hand over Cameron!’
Donald McLaggan was speaking in a loud high voice, for their own benefit, they guessed.
‘Hand over Angus Cameron and James Menzies!
You have seized them for no crime at all.
Or if you keep them, there are four hundred of us here and two thousand on their way, and we will cut you down to a man.’
Again Colberg used his casual voice.
‘Come, sir, my charges have only to give bail against their appearance at the Assize Court.
They'll be with you again in a day or two, if you don't hold us up.
Come now, be reasonable.’
McLaggan shouted louder than before.
‘Surrender Cameron and Menzies or the whole country will be fired!’
Donald Stewart was speaking to Colberg: ‘What is the charge?
You have taken away innocent men.
We must know the charge.’
‘That's a legal matter, it will all arrange itself presently,’ Colberg answered on a light note of reassurance.
His voice rose suddenly: ‘By twos — to the right about —march !’
The Grandtully men were looking thunderstruck.
Cameron saw Donald half turn to the crowd, then swing back round and raise his gun.
The coach wrenched forwards, the spurred boot of the trooper next them stabbed at his horse's side, blood spurted and red drops hit the window.
The gables and chimneys of Dunkeld slewed out of sight, a hill bristling with trees reared steeply above them, sunlight glanced from rapids in the river.
Then they were plunging into shadow between the woods of Birnam, hauled along like a leaf on a mill-race, and the hedges and trees never ceased to rock backwards past their staring eyes or the horses to gallop onwards with shoulders working and manes streaming until they were in sight of Perth.
By then Cameron's mind was rousing itself from shock, there were many things he wanted to say to James, but the  moment they stepped down under the massive archway of the prison they were hustled in opposite directions.
There was a stench of urine, like a foul byre.
The last Menzies saw of him was his head turning, his mouth uttering inaudible words, as a heavy door ground backwards and then slammed shut.
The Prison
The gaoler who usually dealt with Cameron was called Jamie — he called himself Jamie, like a little boy who has not long learned to speak.
One of his eyes squinted outwards, he looked massively strong, he always edged in sideways, moving the heavy door with his right shoulder.
He seemed friendly: one day he sat down on Cameron's pallet bed, looking sheepish.
A choking smell of pig-offal and old sweat came from him.
He hugged Cameron and said, ‘Mister Campsie, Mister Campsie’— his voice cooed on a high note, not his at all, as though he was possessed by the spirit of a woman who had nursed him once.
Slaver ran down from a corner of his mouth.
He seemed to fall asleep, leaning heavily onto Cameron.
He could hardly ease himself free from the great stinking weight.
The day after, Jamie came in with the wooden dish of porridge, held it out to Cameron, then twitched it away when he reached for it and turned it upside down.
The grey mass fell onto the flagstones.
Jamie backed away, laughing, and slammed the door shut behind him.
The mess lay there for two days.
Luckily the flies had gone by now.
At night there was frost.
In the morning white rime coated the sill of the barred window-space.
It would be better, it might even be bearable, if only he knew what had become of James.
Had they left him in Perth, to keep the two of them well separate?
Yet Edinburgh was presumably safer, if the government was still worried about the turbulence of the Strath Tay people.
(Was it, though?
Perhaps by now they had been totally cowed.)
One morning Jamie conducted him down two flights of stairs and into a long high apartment, like a baronial hall.
Shabby men were walking about, in ones and twos.
At once Cameron was looking in every face, craving familiar features.
There were none.
After a time  he nerved himself to say to a couple of youngish men, ‘Have you heard at all about a man called Menzies?
James Menzies?,
They looked derisive.
‘Haff you heard at aal apout a maan caald Menzies?’ one asked the other in a broad parody of the Gaelic accent.
‘Ach, they're all called Menzies in here,’ his friend replied.
‘Aye, that's it,’ said the other.
‘A bad lot, the Menzieses.’
The men laughed in Cameron's face and they both turned away.
At an early stage he worked out that the cell faced west.
Direct light came onto the sill and jambs of the embrasure at about the time when the noises of wheels and voices from the street were at their loudest.
As they quietened, the sun-colours on the stone yellowed, oranged, reddened.
After dark, drunken shouts, merry and angry, echoed up from the street.
Once a man sang with a little laugh in his voice,
‘She pit aff her petticoat
An’ I pit aff my sark
An' we sweatit at the yokie
As we pleughed the muckle park.’
The refrain tailed off down the street:
‘Hi-dum-do, tum-a-hi dum-day,
Hi-dum-do…‘
He hated the dirt; he wanted to touch nothing; he lay on his side, trying not to let his ribs come against the inside of his shirt or his hand touch the blanket.
He breathed through his mouth to try and not smell the fungus smell from his crutch.
Fiery itches tormented him — in his arse, below his armpits and inside his thighs where the fleas had bitten most.
A big-wig came to examine him.
‘Cameron — you are required below to give evidence before the Lord Advocate's officers.’
He lay and stared at the wall.
‘Cameron!
You are to come now., He concentrated on positioning his shoulder so that it was in a cave formed by a fold of the stiff, harsh blanket, untouched by it.
‘It is an offence, Cameron, to withhold information required in a due process of law.’
He addressed the wall.
‘I will speak to you again when I am clean.’
Shoes scuffed the flagstones.
The door clunked shut.
He focused  again on the patterns made by damp and mould on a patch of distempered mortar level with his eyes — a piece of coastline seen from a hill, headlands enclosing a bay with a wide curve.
As the light failed, it came to look like the mysterious seas on the moon.
He dreamed that he was amongst dark waters, on a mudbank just above the surface.
Faces appeared, water streaming from their eye-sockets.
He forced them back and down and in, his fingers slipping on their cheeks and brows; they turned into mud, shiny and viscous.
He knew he must have betrayed someone.
But what had he done?
Or left undone?
The petitions and lists — there was the weakness!
They had not crushed the ashes in the hearth, the ink would still show up the names, if that sheriff had thought to look!
And the strongbox!
Could he be sure they had emptied it of its last sheet?
He tried to visualize its brown wooden bottom — he could not — there must still have been at least one sheet there.
Would he ever know which friends and fellows he had delivered over to the government in that one fatally careless moment?
Jamie began to let him out daily, down three flights of stairs to a yard where buckets of water stood beside a drain.
He could sluice himself, shuddering, take off his clothes and scrub them on a stone kerb, then hang them one by one out of the window.
They dried slowly.
No doubt this ‘concession’ was to soften him up for the next examination.
Unnerved by his betrayal nightmare, he wanted more desperately than ever to escape and flee.
One moment of confusion and he might give someone away, or incriminate himself.
After bringing in the evening meal one night (some ribs of mutton with a jacket potato — they were softening him up), Jamie left the door unlocked.
Cameron chewed slowly.
His gums were aching.
He eyed the door, expecting the handle to turn or a key to rattle in the lock.
It was perfectly quiet (no sounds ever reached him from the rest of the Tolbooth; it was hard to believe that it existed, the street below was more real).
He put the platter on the floor and got up stiffly.
He put on his cloak and padded over to the door.
Tried the handle delicately.
It turned.
He pulled.
The door opened.
He looked out.
The corridor dusky.
Empty.
He padded past the other cell doors and reached the door at the end of the corridor — massive, clenched together  with square-headed nails.
He grasped its iron ring-handle and pulled confidently.
The door did not budge.
He wrenched in a spasm of desperation and tore a fingernail.
The door was as rooted in the wall as a pine-tree in the ground.
Heartburn rose in his throat, tears in his eyes.
He turned back down the corridor, which was now as dark as a catacomb.
Were the other cells unlocked?
He tried a door.
It gave.
The cell inside was empty.
So was the next one.
And the next.
Hollow cubes drained of all life, movement, noise.
They might have been like this for three centuries, and could be for three centuries more.
Sucking his torn finger-end, he went into the cell next his own and sat on the floor, his back against the wall, looking at the scraps of scratched lettering on the distemper opposite him.
LAT THAIM SAY — what did that mean?
ALEX R FRASER.
1746.
JN OGILVY 1694 — he would not write ANGUS CAMERON in his cell, it would be like leaving a vital part of himself here forever.
Lower down the wall, an unfinished sentence: PRINCE WAS.
Lower still a woman's name, with green mould edging up to cover it: ANN — BELOVED.
Perhaps his worst betrayal had been nothing to do with unburnt papers, it had been whatever he had conceded, or let slip, or left ambiguous, at the second long examination after arriving in Edinburgh.
Three big-wigs; two clerks at one side, scratching continuously with their pens.
Yes, he was aware of the provisions of the Riot Act.
No, he had never ‘flouted’ it; on the contrary, he had repeatedly counselled meeting in forty-nines at the most.
No, they had not ‘intimidated’ the proprietors, they had urged them to sign documents pledging themselves to appeal to government to rescind the Act.
‘Urged’?
Yes, urged.
By a show of force?
By reasoned arguments concerning the hardship it would bring upon the district if some hundreds of the most able-bodied young men had to go.
‘Mr Cameron, are you suggesting that your repeated speeches — and mind, we have abundant eye-witness testimony concerning them — contained no word about the driving out of proprietors?
Or of ministers and teachers?
Or the desirability of a republican form of government?,
‘Not at all— I was concerned with one thing only, this Act and the difficulties and sufferings it entails, that kind of thing.’
‘Kind of thing’?
Be exact.’
‘The numbers of men who might be taken.
The likelihood of their serving at home or oversea —‘Were you not aware of the government's express assurance on the latter point?’
‘Oh — a crisis, a set-back in the war, could surely force the government to send more men to France or elsewhere.’
‘Given the known sympathies of yourself and your associates with the ‘republic’ in France, you would clearly be eager to counsel young men against warring with that country —‘‘Associates’?
I have friends —‘You are fencing.
We know very well that during your time in Glasgow you became familiar with the secret and unlawful society styling itself the ‘United Scotsmen’.
It would be convenient to know the extent of its following in Perth.’
Pause.
‘And Mr Cameron — it might be convenient for you as well. t, ‘If I could tell you…
‘Yes?’
‘I would not tell you if I could.
I will never name any ‘associate’— any friend or fellow of mine.’
‘We are not asking for names, Mr Cameron.
Did I ask for names?
General evidence of the activities of that society would be quite sufficient for the time being.’
Pause.
‘The present charges against you are not immutable.
If you are reasonable, we shall be too.’
Had he struck a bargain, or seemed to have?
He spent many hours of darkness, sweating lightly in spite or the autumn and early winter cold, wishing some of his replies unsaid, and wishing above all that he had said anything at all after the examiner's last remark.
His silence must have seemed like complicity.
Now they expected information from him.
When he turned out to have nothing to give, how would they punish him?
As for their hint of a concession, he hated the thought of that loophole being closed.
And hated himself for depending on it.
The conflicting thoughts gnawed at his mind like wasps at a timber.
In the meantime the meat continued in the evenings.
Who, if anyone, had been the spies?
On the very day after his arrival in the Tolbooth, the Lord Advocate's officers already knew the name, the trade, and the movements of several people (the Duke, Iain Logan, young Donald McCulloch).
To think of a traitor amongst their own  people lacerated him as much as the thought of Iain or Donald lying in some cell.
But someone must have been slipping amongst them like a stoat, noting, memorizing, carrying word stealthily to the Duke of Atholl.
James had said that John Stewart the pedlar had seemed frantic that night — more so than the emergency warranted?
It was true he was footloose, and unmarried.
And he had not been seen for some days.
But surely, if he had been spying, he would have had to continue coming to all the meetings?
There was no end to such supposings — he shook his head like a dog with a bad ear, trying to rid himself of these crawling thoughts.
Sandy McGlashan — why had he been off work that Tuesday?
He was notoriously avid for every shilling he could earn.
And he had seemed almost to be currying favour when he was tumbling out the story of his family's lost lease, trying to get Cameron to agree that the lairds were done for now.
Cameron thought of the wee man's rubbery face, his busy scurrying movements — his compulsive drinking.
He must have needed money badly for that…
No — stop — this was a cancer of mistrust, spreading through him, eating him.
They implant this.
They keep us poor, till we are desperate for bribes.
But why is one man open to a bribe, while another is utterly staunch?
His neck and shoulders gradually became so stiff that he had to turn in one piece from the waist up.
When he got up in the morning, his ankles felt ricketty.
But he made himself walk to and fro a hundred times, slowly at first, then more briskly, to keep up some sense of health.
One morning big dry snowflakes starred the rime on the sill.
The sky never seemed to wake up and about the middle of the day it darkened.
More flakes sifted down like meal, sifted and sifted, drifting in at the embrasure and lying on the flagstones, unmelting.
When Jamie came in with the food at gloaming, Cameron asked him for another blanket.
‘Naaa,’ Jamie said on a coyly taunting note, ‘naaa, I winna.’
He went out, slamming the door.
Later that night he brought a ragged brown blanket.
It smelled of horses.
Time was rolling over him like a huge millstone, a broad grey abrasive surface turning and turning just above him, crushing him smaller, wearing him away.
He reached out for something outside his prison and found The Rights of Man , he concentrated on passages he  knew well and summoned them up word for word.
‘Rank talks about its fine blue ribbon like a girl, and…
’ What was next?
Its garter —‘It shows its garter like a child.
It — it—’ It was no good, they were going from him.
He sweated coldly, shut his eyes, and forced the words to come: ‘It is from the elevated mind of France that the folly of titles has fallen.
It has outgrown the baby-clothes of Count and Duke and breeched itself in manhood, it has put down the dwarf and set up the man.’
A tune was sounding in his head — something from a magazine a friend had sent from Glasgow.
For a' that and' that…
He focused his mind still more sharply and some lines came out clear:
For a' that and a' that,
His ribband, star, and a' that,
The man of independent mind
He looks and laughs at a' that.
A prince can mak a belted knight,
A marquis, duke, and a' that,
But an honest man's aboon his might,
Gude faith he mauna fa' that…
The lowland poet, Burns.
Had he read Paine, then?
Cameron laughed aloud.
It was a nice thought, the lovers of liberty lighting their beacons there, and there, and there.
They burned and burned, driving back the darkness.
When would Paine be able to come back? and live again in his own country?
He knew that to face their defeat in Strath Tay (he assumed defeat now) would be too wounding, too dispiriting: it would bring him near despair.
If he was still himself, he should be able to face it.
It began to be a test — the test — of whether he could still live with himself once the months (but probably it would be years) of imprisonment were over.
Why had they failed?
He found that his feet had cramped in a clench of anguish.
He pulled his toes backwards, hard, to ease the cramp.
No, he was not ready yet to face the defeat.
Perhaps after the hot food in the evening?
Yesterday's meat and vegetables had been high — soft and sweet with badness — he had made himself swallow it and then in the night the shite had poured out of him until he was too weak to stand.
He must wait till the poison had all gone.
Then he  could think back over the rising and understand and admit its weaknesses and set himself to imagine a better future…
This small piece of reasoning was as frail as wormwood — memories welled and streamed in his head, washing away all effort at steady thinking.
Colberg galled him most — the officer's gentlemanly aplomb helping him to swim like an eel under and between the weapons of a thousand angry people.
Colberg was confident .
They themselves had not been so.
They had at Castle Menzies — at the sunrise of the movement, striding from house to house, irresistible.
They should have kept that up — the Castle, Bolfracks, Ballechin, Kenmore, Fortingall…
The gentle mists draped over their moment of failure, when impetus ran down, as though they had no goal ahead of them.
They had not.
To save six thousand men, that was goal enough?
But they had merely asked for it — petitioned — begged — like ‘humble servants’— if your Grace would graciously grant…
How to exact this ‘favour’, that was what had never been thrashed out (except for some loose talk of getting weapons from castle armouries).
He and James should have broached it early on, devised sanctions (the withholding of rents; the blocking of highways and sieging of the big houses), called for practical suggestions from among the crowds — all that tradesmen's and farmers' skill and nous and energy, coalesced for a moment into a great ball of force, then left to collapse under its own weight, to crumble again into its thousands of separated grains…
We have not the gift of combining, he thought bitterly.
The clans are gone and we stray about, waifs in our own homeland, letting government suck us in and swallow us and spew us out on foreign shores.
They can combine.
Behind Colberg, the sheriff.
Behind the sheriff, the duke.
Behind him the king.
What an irony — the republican ideas they had accused him of propagating were exactly what he had left unsaid, and should have said.
No good to say that Strathtay was not ready for them.
If they had said this about the Paris workmen, Louis would still be on the throne…
Through all the turnings of his thoughts one image dogged him — Colberg's face, so sharply carved, his eyes a wee bit slanting at the corners, his nostrils cut on a long shallow curve, his forehead not rounded but angled above the glossy black hairs at the outside ends of his eyebrows.
A professional cavalier, who enjoyed excelling at the game of soldiering, who gave his orders with the perfect authority of a corps whose drills have been tempered by a score of successful wars, a hundred victories, a million unsung deaths.
They prepared Cameron for his appearance in the High Court of Justiciary by one final interview, a dry recapitulation of what had been said before, with the slightest of hints that it would go well for him if he divulged something about the United Scotsmen, who evidently still preyed on their minds.
The days had lengthened slightly, measured by the breadth of the pale sunlight on the sill.
He was stupefied with cold.
When the officer said, ‘You will be charged with sedition, over and above the mobbing, but in certain circumstances that might not be pressed,’ Cameron distressed himself by making a small, indefinite sound which could well have been taken for agreement.
A quick, bewildering passage through cold air, strange faces turning to look, a flapping of black gowns topped by frosty wigs.
Dark corridors smelling of snuff and dead flowers.
The court-room, high, with ceiling timbers like branches in a forest.
At the far end, a judge in a high-backed chair, looking at him once over little gold-rimmed spectacles, then disregarding him.
Charges were read (in a strong Lowland accent) by a tall stooped grey figure, like a heron.
Black figures stirred and poked their heads at each other like rooks in a rookery.
Sedition, mobbing, rioting (so ‘sedition’ had not been dropped).
A constable had him by the arm and was turning him about — was that all? no arguments?
The musty corridors again — dazzle of sunshine.
As he was handed back into the Tolbooth, there was a bustle at another door — a man's face, focusing suddenly into familiarity: James, a patch of high colour on each cheekbone, red on white, his hair more grizzled than Cameron remembered, looking ahead of him with wide eyes.
No time to shout out — the door clunked behind him.
Hot liquid of tears brimmed in his head.
He felt as abject as a convalescent child and had to be helped up the three stone flights to his cell.
It seemed filled with people — officers, clerks, a constable.
‘Mr Cameron’— a bigwig with painfully slow and clear articulation, his back to the window, his features invisible —‘now that the charges have been preferred, you would be well advised to apply for bail.’
He gaped stupidly.
(Where was James?
In court?
Would he come back here tonight?)
‘Bail?’
‘Your trial will of course commence tomorrow.
However, a short stay may well be granted against bail, to enable you to order your affairs, and in particular to find guarantors.’
‘I would like to see my friend, James Menzies.’
A pause.
No sound of movement in the cell.
The clear, harsh voice  again: ‘There is reason to believe that an application for bail would be allowed.’
The cell was emptying.
Cameron was staring at the shut door.
It felt like the underside of his coffin-lid.
Confinement, which had gradually become accustomed and endurable, now chafed like chains.
He wanted to roar out James's name, his own name, to scream for help, he tried to pull up on the sill but his fingers scrabbled uselessly and he dropped back.
He fell onto his pallet, breathing hard.
Slowly the offer of bail was seeping into his understanding.
It was a nasty joke.
It was a trick.
If he was freed tomorrow, they would follow him (to the underground den of the United Scotsmen, no doubt).
But no deep thought was needed: he would accept their offer and see what happened.
The law-machine was clanking and clattering to its own weird rhythm.
Let it carry him along for a bit longer.
Where was James?
He would ask Jamie in the evening.
But Jamie was replaced that night by a tall, white-faced man who said nothing when he handed in the plate of food.
When Cameron spoke to him, he pointed to his ears and shook his head.
In the morning Cameron felt exhausted.
His dreams had come back after many nights which had seemed as empty as death, dreams of walking between high hedges, it was daylight on the other side of them but gloaming where he was and thick earth rose up to his knees, to his waist, stopping him, he tried to open his mouth but his jaw-bones jammed, he was choking…
Again the movement through fresh air and corridors (the smell was not old flowers but cloth and mildew, like church).
The judge looked at him as though along an oval tunnel lined with gowns and faces.
‘Accordingly,’ he was saying, ‘I grant bail for the sum of £500 against your appearance in this court tomorrow, when trial will duly commence.’
£500!
A vile joke — he could as well sprout wings and fly straight up to the sun as find that sum!
In the Tolbooth they stayed in a panelled room on the ground floor.
The officer with the harsh voice was advising him that the money would be ‘charged to the Lord Advocate's account’ if he himself could not ‘procure the funds’.
A quarter of an hour later he stood alone at the edge of the High Street with as little notion of his next steps as a soldier discharged in Madras with the whole of India, Arabia, and Africa lying between him and his homeland.
