WHY ME?
Leena Dhingra
I couldn't possibly do that.
And why me anyway?
I wouldn't know where to start.
Well yes, I suppose I could give it a try but I don't want to promise anything.
It's just that…well, I need to feel touched by a topic, connected.
I put the phone down with a frown, grabbed my books, bag and coat, raced through the door and down the street and reached the bus stop breathless.
I looked at my watch automatically, and then again more carefully.
Could it have stopped?
The second hand was going round, but…
I asked someone, who smiled at my look of incredulity.
I had arrived at the bus stop two hours early.
I carried my bewilderment into the coffee shop and tried to drown it along with the froth of my cappuccino.
Why did I rush out like that?
I was still frowning and my throat felt constricted.
I had literally run away — from Englishness!
Well, I just won't do it.
I'll ring up and say that it's not for me.
I started to sip my coffee.
In any case, I don't have to do it if I don't want to.
Who are you trying to fool!
Ha!
I asked myself and returned to folding the froth into the coffee.
What was it you said on the phone about needing to feel connected, affected, moved?
And can you honestly say you are unaffected?
Obviously there is some problem which I shall attempt to diagnose.
Location, Sensation, Modalities, Concomitants I repeated, having decided to walk to my class in town.
Location, Sensation, Modalities, Concomitants, That's what one needs for diagnosis!
I remembered my homeopathy seminars…
Playing as a child on the Paris pavements, my ten-year-old companion asked me, ‘Why do you speak in English?
You're not English and you've never even been to England.’
‘I don't know, but I just do.
It's spoken around me.’
‘Well I don't like English.’
‘But why, you've never been there either.’
‘And I never will!
They killed Joan of Arc!Ça me suffit !’
‘But that was ages ago!’
‘And so?’
Back at home I asked my mother why we spoke in English.
She shook her head, ‘I know it's very bad.
I am ashamed,’ and immediately started to talk in Hindi, in the manner of an elementary language lesson, as though to jog my memory of my long forgotten mother tongue.
In any case she didn't answer my question.
Location, Sensation, Modalities, Concominants I muttered looking around me, trying to imprint some image of elusive Englishness.
The location of Englishness is clear.
It's here.
All around.
This is it.
Of course, what it is, I don't know.
But this is where it's supposed to be.
So the first point is: Englishness Eludes.
Sensation: What does it feel like?
To me, it's a constriction in the throat.
A closed club.
No admittance.
You either are or you're not.
Englishness Excludes.
Modality.
The procedure to find out.
I could just try and ask people.
See then about concomitants.
I met a friend at the college library and we went out for a coffee.
‘What is Englishness?
What about the ‘habit of command’.’
‘Isn't that a bit cliché or at any rate, passé?’
‘Well, yes and no, You know the saying: ‘The fish is gone but the smell remains.’
The empire too may be long gone, but you'd never think it listening to the cricket commentators.
For them the Imperial Sun shines on undiminished !
That's Englishness!
You could write about that.’
‘What cricket and all that?
I wouldn't know what to say.’
My friend laughed.
‘And you want to write abut Englishness!’
‘No I don't want to write about Englishness.
I've been asked to write about it and I said I'd give it a think.’
My tone was defensive and I could feel the tenseness returning.
‘Well it's nothing to get upset about.
Just say that you don't want to do it.’
‘Yes, I think I will.
And I'm not upset, it's something else…’
‘Could it be fear?’
‘But of what?’
‘Fear of exposure, maybe?’
‘Exposure!’
I stirred my coffee.
This time there was no froth to fold into it.
‘Yes, maybe.
I'm certainly affected by the whole idea in the strangest manner, quite paranoid.
In fact I even found myself trying to diagnose it like an illness, analysing it in terms of location, sensation, modalities, concomitants.’
‘What?’
‘To find the correct homeopathic remedy for any condition, the symptoms are diagnosed in those terms, and the Materia Medica places them under those headings: location, sensation etc.’
My friend laughed.
‘Well some people might agree  with you that Englishness was a condition of a kind.
A sort of dis-ease .’
Be stiffened himself to illustrate his point.
‘It's highly contagious as well.
I think you've caught it.
In fact, I think that we all get affected by it through prolonged exposure.
It rubs off.
You could approach your writing from that angle.
No?’
I laughed.
‘It's an interesting idea.
But how exactly?’
‘I don't know.
Something about Englishness and its effect on you?
Couldn't you distance yourself from it somehow?’
‘I could.
I could write as if it was someone else…’
‘Yes that's right, a character from a play or a novel.
You might discover something.’
‘You never know.
I might.
But I'll give it a try.
Thanks.’
‘Let me know how you get along.’
I liked the idea.
I got some paper and wrote:Englishness and its effect on…
I stopped to find her a name.
I decided on an anagram, Neela.
Neela is a woman in her 4Os, living in London.
She left India, the land of her birth when she was a small child.
India was partitioned and her home lost.
She was brought up between India, Europe, and England.
Of course today, England is a part of Europe, but when Neela was growing up, England never saw itself as a part of Europe.
If it ever did, it was always as a part which was apart, separate, a ‘precious stone set in the silver sea.
A sceptered Isle!’
Neela was aware of this difference.
But what did this difference mean to Neela?
Or rather how did it feel?
Europe appeared to accept her difference and individuality, whereas England demanded that she should somehow conform, assimilate, and yet at the same time, there was no way in which it was possible to really ‘assimilate’.
In fact it wasn't even allowed.
In any case, assimilation never meant any real acceptance or belonging.
Basically it grew out of the idea that what the West represented, and the English middle class best of all, was something to emulate, look up to, admire — all the rest was just a bit rude and best if it politely disappeared.
This then was the paradox Neela grew up with and had to learn to grow out of.
So, in England a whole part of her personality remained buried.
And she had so perfected this technique of politely disappearing, that she had to live almost half her life before she came to realize that she had almost disappeared to her own self!
That self now needed to be discovered — but where?
And how?
She picked up a pen, and started to write, in English.
‘So she became a writer in English, but without Englishness presumably?’ asked my friend when we met again.
‘I wasn't just trapped in the tower, I also had the key to the door.
Do you see?’
‘I see that you're a hell of a lot more cheerful.’
‘And do you know what I'd like to do?’
‘Go out for a coffee.’
‘No.
Crumpets and tea.’
THE GHOST IN THE WOOD
Judith Kazantzis
She is staying with Harriet.
Just one wary night, before she goes to America, at Harriet's weekend cottage in Norfolk.
There is a little wood to one side of the lawn, and a large stubble field to the other.
Mist is rising, a bat flies round Jen's head and then away over the thatch.
An owl hoots.
‘Is it always so stunning?’
‘In the winter I visit Mummy in Norwich instead.
I brought her out here last weekend.’
Her sister Harriet has had the cottage for two years.
Harriet knows how to get a cheap mortgage.
Such a place is as beyond Jen as Xanadu.
Jen's two years older.
She has been teaching in North Kensington.
Harriet's a property consultant in Mayfair.
They don't quarrel.
Suppertime and deep blue dusk.
Harriet is barbecuing pork kebabs, which w ill be as exotic as her long hair swinging blonde white over the glowing charcoal.
Jen's hair is coppery/gingery and short.
Jeff loves it; he strokes his hand over her head as if she were a child.
But when she gets to America she's vowed it will be longer and lighter.
‘It's so like Lacings.’
‘I'm a country gal at heart.
Though I'm off to Singapore on Wednesday.
Big deal — big development.
Cheers.’
They toast her ‘engagement’ and Harriet's deal in red wine out of tall crystal goblets.
Harriet charmingly apologizes: ‘I forgot!
Jeff rang before you arrived.
He'll ring again.
I love the Deep South honey in his voice.’
‘Didn't I tell you he's a New Yorker?’ she smiles back.
‘Sure.
What was it like being proposed to by a New York City Planner with a voice to melt molasses by?’
‘Lovely.’
She's not going to confide immediately.
‘Could do without Mommy though.
We paid her my first big visit in Brooklyn, she hadn't met me except on the phone.
And all she could do,’ Harriet, she says silently, what a betrayer you make me, immediately, ‘all she could do was ask about the Royals, was Diana as beautiful as in Newsweek.’
‘Yes, I suppose that would have irritated a Socialist Republican Feminist like you.’
They drink.
It's a warm good wine; it hits some little sore spot.
Jennifer, she scolds herself, be warm too, more affectionate.
Harriet has laid on a midsummer's night farewell, just the two of us, sisters.
Didn't we share a bath when we were little, ride ponies together when we were bigger?
Just us, fair and dark, peas in a pod, little and large (well, I exaggerate here, she's smaller, more slender; but then Jeff, he's given me new trust in my ass).
‘Won't you miss old England?’
‘I'll miss the kids.
But I'll be teaching again over there.’
Just before the bell on her last day, Sharon and Maria dumped a huge card on her desk: of the Statue of Liberty togged out as Batperson, all welcoming Batcape.
‘Oood luck and tons of love from 2.3.’
X's everywhere.
They were all, her included, madly laughing.
Michael Morrissey looked at her with his white face.
Afterwards she visited the Head.
He was short and tended to get jostled crossing the playground.
‘Off to the land of opportunity, are you?’ he said jovially and reproachfully.
He was more concerned to get her last report on  Michael Morrissey who, now he told her, had a grown brother in the IRA and so, as the Head put it, the family had been made unwelcome in Northern Ireland.
‘I'm really sorry to leave,’ she said sincerely.
‘I hope to teach in public schools in New York, I mean New York public schools.’
‘Keep up the good work,’ he waved her farewell, ‘tell the next child to come in.’
On the tube home she felt like crying, not because she had left, but for Sharon and Maria, not to say Michael.
For herself she was relieved she didn't have to struggle to harness their zippy, anarchic minds any more to a future of filing and fast food shoppers — till for Christ's sake let's get married and turn on the telly and have some peace.
Maybe in another neck of the woods, with Jeff's kind of cheerful, simple yet not stupid, certainty, she would make good…
For, she thinks, if privileged spoiled people like her can't get off their backsides and put their money where their mouth is…
‘I love teaching.
It's just that the powers that be treat us teachers like dirt.
And now with opting out…’
‘I tend to think,’ says Harriet, ‘teachers in state schools get paid pretty well.
What d'you think of my wine?’
‘You know I wouldn't know.
But, great.’
‘I got given a crate of this, it's Château Margaux, by the small, fat and lecherous owner of one third of Singapore.
Chin chin.
Actually he was a Jap.’
Jeff, she calls.
I'm homesick for you.
Just a yearning only, no lust.
And call, you snake — Manhattan — Norfolk.
Now a tiny red salamander of lust does pierce me.
I've seen salamanders in green woods north of New York, with Jeff.
Call soon, you snake.
‘The kebabs are brilliant.’
She'd forgotten Harriet was a great cook.
Harriet, fair-plaited, a tea-towel round her middle, another round her front as wide as the nuns still wore their dicky fronts at school.
Helping Mummy stir the cake mixture.
‘Go 'way.
You can't have any.
I helped, you were just reading.’
‘…I'll do it for the Young Farmers sometime.’
‘Young Farmers?’
‘Not your thing.
They're all scientists really, plus businessmen.
I'll marry one when I've made my first million, and we'll run an enormous model farm.
No hedges, and peas as high as an elephant's eye.’
‘Pouring nitrates into the dykes to poison the villagers, sort of thing?’
Harriet sits calmly in her flowery chintz deckchair.
She is calm too, of course.
‘You really shouldn't believe those funny Green men, love, it's all a scare to queer water privatization.
Just because the Government's doing so fabulously well.’
‘Harriet…’
‘You do-gooders are always so serious…
Listen.’
it's just about dark and Harriet's hair flies out and glimmers as she moves her head.
‘I think I heard Maggie just then.
She flies around her wood all night.
Like the Holy Ghost, ascending and descending on the foreheads of the Apostles, only in Maggie's case it's voles and fieldmice.’
‘Maggie is?’
‘My barn owl.
Isn't England wonderful, Jen…’
‘But now I want to ask you something, seriously,’ Harriet's voice softens.
Now they can't see each other 's face, just Harriet's hair glimmering.
Jen feels sad.
Whatever it is, now the moment's here that she came for, that she half foresaw, she won't tell.
A long train ride to an owl called Maggie.
She drinks up.
‘I've been wondering, now it seems, well, you're leaving, why did you turn Socialist?
Was it the nuns at school?
Or Daddy, with all his William Morris-type talk.
We turned out so different — I'm curious.’
Curious?
Curious way to ask, she thinks.
Very funny way, she muses.
Daddy dead and Lacings gone.
Why ask?
Mummy in her Norwich fiat now.
No more tawny owls in the tall Scotch pines.
No more croquet lawn; Daddy, longlegged in shorts and a big blue T shirt, coaching us girls to play.
Harriet and I as teenagers bashing each other into the lavender bushes.
‘So competitive,’ he would mock groan.
Of course.
Tall man, booming out laughter and orders, watching us, adoring us.
Harriet more: the prettier; bumptious, cheeky.
But it was she the older, the larger and clumsier, who listened to him over supper.
He told them This Island Story from Wat Tyler's point of view.
He voted Labour even, amazingly; like no one they knew.
Down from his stocked shelves he took Shirley and The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists .
‘Jen, try this one.
You'll see how…
’ She lay on her bed for hours leading righteous riots of millhands against languid tophatted fops or hardfaced bowlerhatted men of iron and steel.
Harriet, she regrets softly, I've no answer for you.
‘Harriet, your cornfield's the spit image of the one at home.’
She remembers the way the sun would sink down as the combine sliced out the last ranks of the wheat.
Rabbits would dash out of their losing darkness, and the village boys would chase them with sticks and yells, careful not to get in front of the two who had the guns.
That year, she was fourteen?
She scrambled over the garden fence and joined them, shy, thrilled.
A rabbit dodged between her feet and made it to the hedgerow.
A groan from Paul, standing on her right.
‘Good old Jen.’
He worked at the local riding stable cum farm.
She went there for her weekly ecstasy, her Sunday ride.
Paul was longlegged, in stained breeches.
His yellow hair flopped into his blue eyes as he did up her girths for her.
The Sunday before she had asked him to come to tea.
‘Would you like to come to tea?’
In a mumble downwards.
Paul didn't appear to notice.
Also then, they had a cousin, Nigel, to stay.
More spots than manly growth.
He did have a red MG.
Harriet polished the fenders furiously but then she stopped.
Nigel had fallen for Jill, the punky purple-haired girl at the garage.
Their mother used to click her  lips surreptitiously as Jill filled the car up.
‘Heard the latest?’ said Harriet in the kitchen where they were lounging and doing nothing as usual.
‘Paul the Ape Brown is going out with El Tarty Queen of El Garage.
Isn't it just too, too, darlings?’
Eyeing her and Nigel and speaking to the air.
Harriet read film and gossip column mags voraciously.
She couldn't summon up a whacky death-dealing reply and went into their mother's beautiful garden to cry.
Nigel meanwhile went for the beer.
‘So you're a fucking Commie,’ he said to her on her return.
‘No, I don't think so,’ she said, ‘I think I'm pretty much in the English Christian Socialist tradition, you know.’
Nigel's spots became crimson.
‘When Margaret Thatcher gets in you and your bloody unions better watch out.’
That was it.
She was a Peculiar Young Person locally, a Socialist.
She despised them all: dupes, hackettes, lackeys.
Harriet played in tennis doubles and her public school boyfriends crowded in to eat her jam tarts.
Meanwhile she thought about bosses and masses.
She never imagined her little sister, exasperating as she was, would join the bosses.
Harriet.
She sees her, the little sister.
Earlier memories again.
Shelling peas on the sunny lawn with Janey, their help, and Janey getting red with annoyance as she and Harriet ate them up, all but seven.
The two of them tickling staid Janey, one on each side until she couldn't help laughing, and the seven peas rolled away.
And her saying, ‘Harriet, you're so greedy!’
And Harriet opening her mouth but then both of them giggling wildly.
But then, Harriet with her fair-haired plaits and smooth round forehead jiggling off to help Mummy do the shopping.
They'd come back chatting merrily.
Then they made jam tarts.
‘My Princess Harriet,’ said Daddy, yes he did, as they paraded in with the silver tea things and the three dead-at-birth jam tarts.
She sees: Mummy and Harriet together.
Oh well, let them get on with it.
It was a long time ago.
Later still again, she was doing her A's, there was Daddy talking  to them over the shepherd's pie about Keir Hardie, and her saying, ‘Oh gosh I see, yes —!’ and Mummy laughing, ‘Can we all eat and not so much learned talk.
Janey's waiting for the washing up and then she's off.’
And Daddy, ‘Of course, dear.
Just one thing, Jennifer…
’ But those years he would go into his study afterwards with the coffee her mother made, to smoke his pipe and look over a case, and he shut the door.
Then he took them all to Mexico.
Mexico!
Her balding country solicitor Daddy.
It must have cost the earth, package and all.
Did he know he would die a few years later?
It was hot, hot.
They saw the temple of the sun and the temple of the moon, driving out of the huge city past a tangle of ravines and yellow clifftops hung with shacks of corrugated iron and this and that.
Fowl, pigs and human kids played among yellow and white plastic rubbish — water containers, Exxon oil bottles.
In the heart of the vast city, Daddy again, his brown eyes bright, you could see his sparse hair growing down by the minute into the Hippie pigtail he'd been too young or too old and always too respectable to wear…
Well, he showed them his real find, the Rivera murals, the white-clothed indigenos who were being liberated, the obese bosses with their cigars tumbling, the beautiful Mayan prostitute cheeking the bourgeois couple in Almeida Park.
‘The Latin races know how to make a revolution,’ he said waving his specs in the empty gallery.
‘Now this is a truly Socialist country.
Even its skeletons dance for joy, for love.’
Poor Daddy.
Poor Daddy, she cries.
It wasn't the nuns, Harriet, who gave me my guilt, my conscience (do you have a conscience, Harriet?).
The day I went up to university I left you all, country gentry all…country where my father was stifling.
She sees that Harriet is quietly gazing at her in the red firelight.
The trouble is, Harriet is beautiful and her sister.
She feels soothed in the familiar Norfolk  darkness…
What can she please her with?
Murdoch
‘Have I told you about Niall?’ she asks.
‘No…
Quick, have some more Oriental plonk.’
‘Niall was Mr First.
At Oxford.
I met him at the Labour Club.
I was totally petrified — so I went with another girl, my first feminist incidentally.’
‘I was your first feminist!’
‘No, you were a crypto-Post-feminist; now you're a fully fledged Post-feminist.’
Fair enough.
Harriet had gone straight into property after her A's and left home, funnily enough, before she did.
It had bemused her, hearing.
It was the time of the Miners Strike; just afterwards.
She had instructed herself to forget Harriet.
Harriet lights a cigarette.
‘So Niall?
Was he incredibly handsome?’
‘King of the Irish, greeny eyes, Irish eyebrows, Irish lashes.
He spoke brilliantly on secondary picketing and the police.
Afterwards in the pub someone told me he would probably be sent down.
He'd been beaten up once and arrested once.’
‘Oh God, the dreaded Scargill.’
‘Harriet…’
‘No, go on.
Did he ask you out?’
‘Not till the second meeting.
I spent the time before it boning up on things like Troops Out .
So I jumped in, eloquently I thought, to second Niall's resolution, to be released to the press if agreed: that the Labour Party should make annual contributions to the IRA — Yes I did -I was in a wonderful whirl, you see, the whole ant-heap had suddenly become vivid, and, um, deconstructable; I forgot Wat Tyler and Keir Hardie, and saw rich and poor as it all is today, internationally struggling, the classes — well, you couldn't understand…
’‘I've always admired your conviction,’ Harriet says unexpectedly; but then: ‘I'm sorry, he sounds dire.
Possibly dangerous.
You mean he was your First?’
‘He was James Connolly to me, anti-Imperialist,
Socialist.
Everything right.
You ought to listen and learn, Harriet,’ she says earnestly.
‘D'you want me to go on?’
‘Wouldn't miss it,’ Harriet says.
‘Look —’
‘Look, isn't it possible to tease each other about our politics —’
‘Look, I simply don't connect with that,’ she answers sincerely, ‘We should respect each other, just because.
Let's talk about something more sisterly.
How're your roses?’
‘Fine, thanks.’
Harriet sloshes her some more wine.
In the trees a little wind dies away.
‘And so what happened?’
‘Well, someone got up and said I couldn't propose throwing redcoats out of Belfast because there weren't any nowadays.
I said I was a historian.
And Niall got up and said, music to my ears, that Erin's soil wasn't green either but we all knew what it meant…
Then he went on, to amplify what he called my brave intervention.
After that…’
She falls silent.
Sometimes still, those greeny eyes.
She's glad Jeff's are brown.
An impression only of Niall's black hair flying, awkward jumble on her hearthrug of arms and legs.
She cried out.
It was her nail scissors that she'd been searching for days, lost under the hearthrug and pressing into her hip; and the cry was also her virginity, small and bewildered and gone.
Afterwards somehow an argument started.
Were they both unhappy?
Niall sending her up in his lilting Belfast voice for claiming Irish blood.
‘I've an uncle farming in the Sou — the twenty-six counties.’
‘He a Prod, Jenny?’
‘It's not the same thing down there.
W.B. Yeats was a Protestant you know.’
‘I did know,’ he said; then putting on the style, ‘Your uncle's grandaddy's granddaddy, came over with that murthering bugger Cromwell, did he, English Jenny?’
‘Niall, I'm terribly pro  Troops Out…
’‘Shame on ye, ye plump English trollope,’ he giggled suddenly and rolled onto her again.
She got the scissors out just in time.
Now she thinks, not his cock but his tongue, I should have cut his tongue out with them, his slow quicksilver tongue; for he partly took me backwards out of my joy, into an old timidity that's there still; and it's made a meal of me sometimes teaching, when the sharper ones have had me squirming for my lazy luck.
Going back to a big house and long lawns, Jen? said Michael Morrissey's eyes last week.
No, she answers their stare, it's not true any more.
If Niall turns up in the dock for blowing up redcoats, I'll feel guilty.
And defiant, against Harriet and her lords.
And defiant, against Niall and his.
And sad, because I wanted to join him.
I wanted him to approve of me.
Oh Jeff, ring, you soft-drawling American snake.
‘Well,’ says Harriet in the darkness.
‘Aren't you going to spill the beans?
Here, you haven't been drinking.’
Her voice is flat, not bright like five minutes ago.
They've been sitting during this meditation on her short useless history as a Socialist, they've been sitting in the dark and now the moon rises, full and amber against a bar of cloud and Harriet's face is bowed; a drink at one hand; and a cigarette droops glowing from the other.
‘It was a washout actually,’ she answers.
‘I lay on my nail scissors by mistake — they were under the rug — and just at the moment, well, to be graphic, an awful pain from outside was all I could feel.’
Pause.
‘Well,’ Harriet murmurs, ‘you always were untidy.’
Has she drunk too much?
Jen thinks: I don't think I'm very tipsy at all.
This evening seems to be going up the spout.
‘Er, how about opening another bottle?’
Docilely Harriet pads off and comes back and they gurgle out what she knows is the sweated labour of  Singapore.
Harriet lights up and recrosses her legs.
How slim and white they seem in the moonlight.
Harriet comments, ‘When I come to your wedding in the slums of Brooklyn you can do me the honours.’
‘We're only going to the old registry office,’ she says.
‘I wouldn't get married at all except I need to work over there.
Jeff thinks the same way.’
‘You really are going?
You won't miss us?’
In the other voice she hears a softness and immediately, softly then, she hears herself answering ‘I'll miss you.
And Mummy.
Visit me, Harriet, promise?’
Harriet is smoking again.
She thinks, I wish she wouldn't.
But the smoke is fragrant, it curls up into the perfume of jasmine or climbing roses somewhere behind by the cottage door.
Which of the two?
Oh Lord, she has forgotten the country.
‘I don't think you should go, not yet…
’ Harriet says softly.
‘Harriet love.’
Her heart melts.
‘I'm going to be away increasingly in the next few years.
With work getting heavier.
And so.’
Go carefully, she warns.
I'm listening, she pleads: I know we're chalk and cheese but.
We took each other, body and soul, for granted when we were little, Harriet, we don't quarrel, we don't.
‘Mummy's arthritis can only get worse.
Have you thought about what your emigration means to her?
Who, to come to my point, is to shoulder the responsibility?’
‘I…you brought me all the way up here…moonlight and dinner, to tell me this?’
She laughs angrily.
‘Harriet, you shouldn't have.’
Shushing herself:: calm down Jennifer…
It's true, I haven't given much thought to Mummy.
She seemed thrilled when I told her.
I'm not irresponsible, thirty twelve-year-olds over a year…
‘Calm down,’ Harriet says out of moonlight, coldly.
‘You think I'm being selfish.
That's weird; coming from you.’
Woa, Jennifer.
We're sisters, I'm a feminist, all we've got.
We work to be friends.
We respect each other.
‘Ah,’ Harriet drinks delicately, the moon blanches her hair even paler, even whiter, ‘what d'you mean by that?’
Springing up she feels not more powerful but even clumsier, so she sits down again.
‘This perfect life of yours, you really just grab grab grab it from others.
This was a farm labourer's cottage obviously —’ she recalls Niall, this time with some pleasure: ‘Why've you got it?’
She throws out her right hand.
‘You wreck the countryside, you wreck the towns, now not content with England you're off to wreck Singapore.’
‘You know fuck-all, Jen,’ Harriet bursts out laughing.
‘Didn't teach you much at Oxford, did they?
Who's ‘you’ for example?’
Cow, she implodes.
I've better things to do than make a fool of myself with you.
O.K. get what you want.
‘Thatcherism, the developers,, the City, the multi-nationals, the Pentagon, the international arms industry,’ big breath, ‘the whole military industrial complex!’she yells.
She jumps up.
So does Harriet.
They're eyeballing each other.
The cornfield, the wood, whose side are they on?
Goddess, she calls happily, I've wanted to shout these things at her for years.
The great naming curses flutter into the bland night.
And this about their mother.
Anyway she's Harriet's guest.
W ill Harriet turn her out?
Shall she sleep in wood or cornfield?
‘Sorry.’
She sits.
‘Oh do go on,’ Harriet hovers above, laughing, ‘it's not as if we didn't all know how virtuous you feel.’
To hell with guest, she thinks.
‘Come off it,’ Harriet carries on with a sudden jerk.
‘You're all so smug you repel me.
You think if I hadn't bought it and done it up at enormous personal cost this cottage would still be standing?’
Her voice changes notes.
‘While you've been sitting on your intellectual arses alternately pitying yourselves and the so-called workers, it's my hard work, my money that's been  keeping this country —’ Stalking off indoors; the door shuts.
‘Harriet!’
Oh to hell with it.
‘I don't want to quarrel.
It's your patch.
Shall I leave?’
‘You're jealous.’
Tittering from inside.
Blonde hair shining, visible, in the shadow, through the mullioned hall window.
‘Jealous?
When d'you meet any real people apart from those limousine sharks and cordless telephone freaks who never met an ordinary person, don't know any ordinary people: how they live, we live, nor how we die, I mean how they die.’
Mexicans in the moonlight, surging towards her over the stubble, old wrinkled women, kids with the bulbous stomachs, things to be honest she didn't see because they drove past too quickly on the motorway.
But, she defies her, I do know, you stupid woman.
How about life in the Westway high rises.
The two Bangladeshi boys I had for remedial English all this year.
White-shirted beyond belief, incredibly anxious to please, to do the English thing.
Of course.
They're the lucky ones.
The door unbolts.
Harriet comes out with a bottle.
‘You are,’ she says comfortably.
‘You're not the only teacher in state schools I know.
Friend of mine's just quit.
Awful loutish children, cynical staff.
And she went into it out of real idealism, not just as an ego trip to prove oneself to one's dead father —’
‘Fuck you.
I'm going.’
‘Feel free, martyr.’
Harriet sits down, begins to hum the Marseillaise.
The cork pops up.
Jen sits down.
They sit silently.
She wants to cry.
Why?
Then she has some wine.
Harriet stretches out her hand and tops her up.
‘I'm sorry.
Oh Christ.
Jen?’
‘I'll have to wait for Jeff to phone, that's all.’
After another pause.
‘Is it Jeff, Harriet?’
‘You're getting out,’ Harriet whispers, ‘admit you're getting out.’
Hardening again: ‘Isn't Jeff a way of getting out; as well…
Why are you so hypocritical?’
It pierces her.
My Jeff?
‘Damn you.
No.’
Salamander, I love you.
Rescue me.
I'm incredibly lazy but I do think I've found the right way or at least a better way than hers to live.
No cottage, thanks.
‘Harriet, if I got what you get a year, I'd invest it to…support the Sandinistas in Nicaragua or something.
I wouldn't just use it to grab grab grab with.
Or,’ she leans forward but only the beautiful hair shines, ‘I might just buy a bomb after all —’
Harriet comes out of darkness to pour only herself some more.
Jen grabs for the bottle and it drops down on the grass and rolls away, glug, gurgle.
They beth splutter with anger and burst into silly giggles, wrestling.
Harriet makes for her wine cellar.
‘Hey, what about my bomb?’ she shouts after her.
‘Prig, you old prig, even terrorism a virtue.
Daddy wouldn't have liked that.’
Two filled crystal goblets later (perhaps she won't go after all), ‘Hypocrites, both of you,’ Harriet continues.
‘You screwing the IRA and Daddy boring Mummy and me over the roast beef with what a socialist champion you were, daughter after his own heart.’
‘Cheers.’
She waggles her goblet.
‘Never knew that, promise.
Always felt…you were the one, really…
He didn't much like you being a property shark, I suppose?’
‘Property management consultant.
Don't try to rile me again, Jennifer, you are my guest.’
‘Sorry, no offence meant…
Just to be clear, what's this ‘prig’, ‘hypocrite’.
Not sure if I can stay the night yet.
Bitterness not good for our souls, Harriet.’
‘Well, prig.
You are.
You're such a killjoy, misery.
I invite you up here and all you think is whether the dyke is full of nitrates poisoning the villagers.’
‘Didn't.’
‘Did.’
‘I said —’
‘Guilty.
That's what you want to make me.
Nuns' stuff.
Guilty.
Oh I'm not.
I'm incredibly proud of what  I've achieved.
Of Where I Am Today, just like Maggie, however scornful you get.
And wimps like Daddy.
Always trying to pass along their failure.’
Harriet's voice drops but she's not listening.
Harriet's explaining that she gives a service, something about helping people realize their dreams.
‘He wasn't a failure.’
She's dizzy, she's a long way off.
There's more light, Harriet has switched on the kitchen light.
Now leaning forward from out of the flowery deckchair: ‘You know he died in debt.
No, you didn't, did you, darling.
So we lost Lacings.
But that's no surprise.
The question is, for the last three years, who's been helping to look after Mummy?
Who, darling?
St. Jennifer, Big Sister, Robin Hood of the workers — Who's been looking after Mummy, d'you imagine?’
‘You, she, never told me, never.’
The kitchen light skids across the lawn.
‘Mummy pleaded with me not.
I was beginning to make some money.
You were doing your finals.
It went on from there.’
A fiat, furious voice.
‘If it wasn't for the drink, I mightn't have told you.
Mummy will be upset.
You know, Jen, she's rather in awe of you.’
The harsh voice.
It twists in her guts.
‘I'll help of course, now…’ she mutters.
‘It's not the money…’
‘Oh.
Then.
You think I'm terrible, unforgivable to go?’
‘I don't mind, really, what you are or aren't.
It's being here, Jennifer, being here.
Someone to be around.
Like a daughter?
Well, you see, that's how I think.’
Harriet, she begins to talk, feeling the wine in her head, and talking faster, you are telling me how you bought this pretty scenery for Mummy's sake, partly.
I understand.
Mummy visits from Norwich.
Janey can visit too, from where she's retired to.
It's all brilliant.
I didn't even ask.
Janey sends me Christmas cards.
I think I w ill wander in round the lawn, out of the light.
I send her cards.
Last Christmas she sent me a bluetit  and I sent her a robin redbreast, a bloody great Robin Redbreast.
I raise my arm, my finger traces a bird on the shape of the moon over the trees in front of me.
So, Jennifer, Ms. hypocrite, how d'you feel?
Well, nothing.
I feel, nothing.
To break away, to London, a bedsit, a rather cozy bedsit, laughter and plonk, moaning in the staffroom, and laughter, and exhaustion, and nothing, nothing achieved, not for the kids, not by me.
I…
I…
I…
People like Niall, like Michael Morrissey, who do know what it is like to be poor and shat on, the bottom of the whole U.K. heap, they know I'm nothing when they set eyes on me.
Nothing.
Like my stupid father.
What did he ever do?
A few cases on legal aid, a sub to the Fabians, maybe a sub to the Nicaragua Solidarity Campaign.
It's Harriet who's the something, a good little capitalist something looking after her family plus not to forget the old Babushka.
Yes, smiles Harriet, tossing her hair, tearing down hovels and putting up Far Eastern hotels, I'm making the world safer for my family — Bam, punch in the nose for Salim and Sharon and Michael…
I've seen them after all (she's talking still faster)…for Harriet they're just future factory fodder.
All right, less cant…
No, I guess I might not want to spend my life teaching.
But, to do something relevant!
It'll be better, more straightforward with Jeff and away from home.
Bigger country, not one tight little prejudiced clapped out topheavy society, less breathing down one's neck.
As for Harriet who supports the family and stays, she doesn't like rough kids, she just plays in a rough ballgame.
Come midnight: the two of us sisters bashing each other into the lavender bushes.
Who shall be higher in the eyes of Heaven.
She potters over, ‘I'm going for a walk, so if I feel sick I won't puke all over your lawn.’
‘Running away again, you hypocrite,’ Harriet says drowsily, leaning over to slop some wine into her glass as she meanders past.
Hypocrite, she weeps to herself.
Blundering into Harriet's treetrunks.
The glimpsed lawn seems all of a sudden to have shrunk, to shine like a tiny stage set, Harriet's slumped figure centre stage and the consoling bulk of the cottage thatch as backdrop.
She puts her arms gingerly and tenderly round an inscrutable black trunk.
Is it oak, ash or thorn?
How do I get to own a tree? she cries up.
I want a tree.
I want the tall high beechtrees round my bedroom window, I want the night rustle of the wind round the house, in moonlight or the beginning of rain or storms…
I want the clouds sweeping over the stubble when I creep and stand on the front steps after reading all night, and our owls hoot, and everyone's sleeping upstairs, sleeping sound, in quiet bedrooms.
And all the time I'm taking further steps away.
First, here in my own country, a few baby steps, and now, other people, other places, other lands.
‘I'll be your home,’ said Jeff with loving arrogance when she grew panicky.
But one man, one person, can't be home, she has to keep from panicking, trust she's doing right, that's all.
She sees: not Harriet…but her mother.
…She was crouching over some flower bed, I see her, always, extracting some weed or other.
How hunky dory she kept it all.
The flowers I loved were hers.
She with, it's true, Janey's help, cooked, served, washed up, cleaned, drove us here, there and everywhere, the doctor, school, the dentist, up to London for nerve-racking bouts of clothes shopping, she had the Nigels to stay, and laughed at the J ills at the garage and I'd've died if she'd found out about Paul.
She gave us parties and disapproved of me teaching: Jennifer darling, surely you can get a job in a nice private girls' school But when I was 14 and had awful tonsillitis she brought me lemon and honey and sat on the edge of the pillow holding my damp hand.
High boned face, blue-eyed, faded permed lock of fair hair flopping over her eyes.
She pushed it back, and wiped the same hand on the Beatrix Potter apron Harriet had made her for her birthday.
‘Did I ever tell you about when Daddy and I went to Greece on our honeymoon.
I was so pleased,’ she looked at me shyly or was it a little slyly, ‘I could understand from knowing my Classics what the old peasants were saying.
They talked so beautifully to us, they had names like Agamemnon or Thetis.
I could understand them but Daddy couldn't.
I couldn't help feeling pleased though I was ashamed of myself…
Go to sleep now, darling.’
Why did she belong to Harriet then?
Why?
Why does Harriet get everything?
Trees, home…
Her tears are wetting the treetrunk.
She pats it apologetically.
Perhaps it will tell her why.
Birds of a feather flock together — Her head is rustling minutely, the back of her skull.
She turns round and a white sheet flaps, a white sail sails, a white wraith passes silently in front of her eyes.
Then it's gone into the dark, into the wood further.
DTs?
No, she's not that far gone.
From the insides of the wood comes a piercing screech.
Her neck prickles, this must be her hair going up on end.
She flounders and leaps towards the kindly light, towards her Princess Harriet asleep on her lawn.
Suddenly it's all thorns, she comes to a full stop, caught and blind in a thicket of thorns like Abraham's sacrificial ram.
‘Jen?
I've got a torch.’
Harriet, hiccuping, stands with the beam shining at her feet, waving it unsteadily up into her eyes.
‘Stop cursing.
You're nearly out.’
The edge of the lawn, it seems, is two feet further.
‘Now, now, good feminists don't use words like that.’
Harriet's doubled up laughing, the beam is shaking on seas of brambles.
‘When you lot seize the land back again make sure you know about ban owls first,’ she's choking, ‘you're so keen on wild life.
Ha ha.
Teach you to take Maggie's  name in vain.
Oh.
Oh!’
Harriet's sobbing and she herself is st ill cursing and her head's spinning and spinning and they lurch into each other, and Harriet isn't Princess H any more, cool and cocky, she's sad too, mysteriously, unglamorously, and she hugs her and feels how slight she is and it seems she's luckier than Harriet, well, just now.
Inside the cottage the telephone is ringing.
‘Come on, Harriet, it's Jeff.
Hey, you're gonna have a brother.
How about that!
C'mon.’
Dancing and swaying and sniffing past jasmine and roses, out of the moonlight, and Jeff says, at last, ‘Hi, honey, is that my beautiful English princess?’
And Harriet, clasping the receiver, says nothing and, pale and fragile, hands it over.
And she says, ‘Come off it, my man, who d'you think you're talking to, a mere jumped up commoner princess.’
So Harriet gives a half giggle half sob.
And Jeff says: ‘Honey, I've got an urgent message from my mother.
She says to tell you she's seen Princess Di's wedding dress in a Coney Island store front and should she check it out for you?’
And she says, ‘Piss off, you great hairy Yank, d'you know, actually I love you ever so much.’
Harriet puts her head on Jen's shoulder, her long straight strange hair fanning across Jen's breast as if it were her own hair, and her own short, coppery/gingery hair stops standing on end at the ghost in the wood and begins to flow loose.
And Jen thinks: I'll never go back home, never.
A KIND OF DESIRED VISION
Kate Pullinger
Starting with the Belgian chocolates, desire seemed a potent and dynamic force, like a nuclear engine, high-powered and probably lethal.
The chocolates made her melt, sticky, gooey, and desire made her harden, glass blown by fire.
She flexed her muscles and felt strong and American, like an airforce base in a foreign country.
Strength, however, was not part of the problem-He, of course, was a married man, a married Englishman, like Trevor Howard or James Mason in an early role.
Beneath his pale and archetypally reserved exterior something burned and melted, hardened then softened.
She could tell this by looking at his back as he stood at the bar ordering more drinks.
His long neck was tinged a bright pink as though reflecting some internal glow.
He had just given her the chocolates and she had kissed him.
After their lips parted, he sank into the tatty, beer-stained seat, then suddenly stood, knocking his knees on the edge of the table.
She felt she had shocked him and his response was to wing slightly out of control.
The colour of his neck faded as he returned to the table with the drinks.
They were colleagues at the university.
She was not married.
She was new to the country and did not have many friends.
It was not like her to flirt  with married Englishmen.
Her sexual habits had changed with the times and, besides, in England all the signifiers seemed different.
Here the semiotics of sexuality were not her own.
Like celibacy, chocolates seemed an old-fashioned gesture, from another time although perfectly appropriate now.
Perhaps romance had snuck back into vogue, she thought, along with the new sexual caution.
Chocolates, especially European ones, were decadent and luxurious, like love-letters and long kisses: something one's parents had before they married.
Soft-centred milk chocolates that came as one bit them seemed almost as exciting as dancing with someone you knew you were about to sleep with used to be.
His marriage to another woman, an immutable fact, posed even greater restrictions on their fledgling nuclear romance.
Infidelity had become freshly dangerous, potentially much more lethal to a marriage than adultery had been previously.
Restraint carried with it nobility, safety, a new kind of self-respect.
‘Would you like another chocolate?’ she said leaning against his shoulder.
His leather jacket smelt raw, his jeans felt soft and worn.
He was dressed like an American, it was she who looked English in her patched tweed jacket and jodhpurs.
She looked horsey as well as strong, like a kind of repellent Country Living housewife.
But her clothes were not literal, as clothes rarely are; she was as much a bloodsportswoman as he was a baseball fan.
Still, he was married, even if he didn't look it.
What do married people look like?
‘Let's go away for the weekend,’ he said.
‘What about your wife?’
‘She can stay home.
I'll say it's work.’
‘She won't believe you.
It's such a cliché.’
They paused and poured alcohol into their systems.
‘Anyway, what would we do?
Play chess?’
‘No.
We'd go for long walks and eat hot meals and watch the sunset.
We'd kiss with the wind in our faces.
I'd hold you close and feel your heartbeat.’
He placed a chocolate under his tongue and waited for it to melt down.
She looked at him longingly, Wondering if he really did want to have an affair with her.
She had a theory that English men enjoyed sex even less than her male compatriots.
She was still allowed to like it, wasn't she?
Maybe this new restraint appealed to most people, perhaps everyone felt more comfortable with prudishness.
‘I want to look at you without any clothes on,’ she said suddenly as she watched him suck his chocolate.
His neck began to glow again.
He moaned softly.
‘I want to see you naked.’
The people at the next table moved their chairs forward imperceptibly.
He closed his eyes and leaned back.
‘I want to run my hands down the length of your legs.
Both of them.
One at a time.’
He moaned more loudly and the people at the next table held their drinks in mid-air.
She leaned back against the seat, her hands pressed between her own legs.
The lights in the pub flickered like a fluttering heart, a clenching and rumbling nervous gut.
After a while he stopped shaking and bit into another chocolate.
Its softness covered his teeth, coating his tongue.
In a voice thick with sugar and lust he said, ‘You are driving me wild.
I don't understand you.’
‘What?’ she said.
‘You are so foreign and yet so familiar.
Like sex itself, I guess, a kind of desired invasion.’
They fucked like chickens, their feathers ruffled, pecking and scratching at nothing, everything.
She grappled with him as he pressed against her, pushing him away and urging him on.
He tried to be controlled, even a bit leisurely, but as he pulled back he could not help but rush forward again.
He felt the condom tear inside her.
It was all he could do to stop.
‘It broke,’ he said.
‘Shit.’
‘Is there another?’
‘Over here somewhere.’
She crawled away and scrabbled over the junk on the bedside table, returning with the foil-wrapped encumbrance.
‘Let's try again.’
They had been fucking like this for a few months, slyly, without letting on to the outside world.
They would meet in her flat — the weekend away was still talked about although not realized.
He would arrive at her door and they would begin right away, sometimes before he took his coat off.
They did not talk much, what was there to say?
She saw more than enough in the guilt and pleasure on his face to make questions redundant.
It would not go anywhere; there was nowhere for it to go.
She could not take him back to America with her, he could not take her home.
They had sex protected from each other, the little slip of rubber a true barrier made of caution and sensibility.
Because of it they simply could not plunder on ahead without thinking.
They always had to pause and reflect.
‘In my country,’ she began like a student from abroad, ‘the English are often thought of as fey.’
‘Hmph.
In my country,’ he mocked her slightly, ‘Americans are often thought of as vulgar.’
‘How fey.’
He pushed harder today, knowing he would not hurt her.
She wrapped herself around him like a clam in formation, her body one big muscle, straining.
When he came he had to pull away quickly so as not to spill a drop of his bodily fluids, like the instructions on the box of condoms said.
She reminded him of somebody from a movie, maybe it was Kathleen Turner in Body Heat , sometimes Kim Basinger in 9½ Weeks .
Not an old movie star but someone new and less defined, whose character melted into a dozen different actresses.
Like her, he relied on clichés for guidance, for cross-cultural understanding.
He thought he would like to be more like her; when she  spoke people listened.
It was the twang in her vowels that commanded attention, people thought to themselves ‘here's someone from a Woody Allen movie.’
And she capitalized on this, she saw where it could be to her advantage to be perceived as a celluloid creation.
Some afternoons they talked at cross purposes; it was not just their vocabulary that differed.
He would appear cold and withdrawn, tormented with guilt over his wife.
She would become overly effusive in response, feeling hopelessly alone.
‘Are you mad?’ she would ask, meaning ‘Are you angry?’
‘No,’ he would reply shortly, thinking she was implying he was mad — insane — with desire for her (which, in a way, he was).
Then they would thrash out their anxieties in bed, moaning and coming to false understandings.
Two cultures rarely understand each other, especially when one is waxing dominant.
The weaker often needs to copy the stronger — for every one of her foreign bombing campaigns conducted with supreme arrogance and ruthless certainty he had his own dirty little war on distant barren islands, his own vicious murders on the Rock.
Were they playing out these scenarios in sex?
Did he want to be dominated?
One night he put a Belgian chocolate inside her and as it melted he licked away the cream.
‘Do they have Marmite in America yet?’ he asked.
She broke off mid-moan to reply.
‘We'll never have Marmite over there.
It's you who will get peanut butter over here.
That's the way Imperialism works.’
She was coated with chocolate as he pushed inside her.
His marriage seemed like the Atlantic Ocean to her, something vast and unknowable which she could not attempt to bridge but only fly over at a terrible speed.
It kept them apart, kept them foreign to each other, him unhaveable, her unhad.
After a year his wife still appeared not to have noticed  the smell of another woman on her husband's face.
He was always careful to wash his chiselled visage, of course, but in a year of passion one would think some small scent would have escaped, a tracking odour that would put her senses on alert.
It was time for the Other Woman to go back to America.
Her academic job had run its course.
She had found England a cold place.
The rooms where she lived were damp, even while the brief summer had passed.
Her career beckoned, the Atlantic Ocean dimmed and became crossable.
Still, there was the problem of her married Englishman.
Would she simply leave him behind?
Would she just move away and forget?
One afternoon in bed in her flat she said, ‘I will be leaving soon, you know.’
He sat up, surprised.
‘I thought you had the afternoon free.’
‘I do.
It's the rest of the time I'm talking about.
I have to go home.’
‘I thought you liked it here, I thought you thought it was fun living in England and sleeping with me.’
‘I do.
But I can't be a tourist forever.’
They argued about it for the rest of the afternoon, he becoming sullen and sorry, she remaining dispassionate, untouched-She was impressed by his sudden remorse.
She had always felt insulated from pain with him, as if the condoms served to forever prevent them from getting unhealthily close.
Now he was filling their relationship with a seriousness she had always assumed it could not possibly contain.
‘Don't you think,’ he began to plead, ‘that sleeping together automatically provides us with a kind of contract?’
‘A legal document?
Fucking gives us certain rights over each other?
I fuck you therefore I owe you?’
‘You can be so crude sometimes,’ he said as though wounded.
‘It's in my blood,’ she replied.
‘I think your blood runs a bit cold,’ he said, helping himself to a bit of cruelty.
‘You are the one who is married,’ she said, ‘not me.
I know what that means.
I know what married people look like.’
‘Huh?’ he said, like an American.
‘What do married people look like?’
She paused and then smiled and said, ‘They wear rings around their fingers and have ties around their hearts.’
AWAY GAMES
Moya Roddy
Olive parked badly and swore.
slamming the car door she trotted rather than walked — towards the flat-roofed building dominating the quiet cul-de-sac.
As she rounded the gates of the school she saw him sitting on a low wall, his little legs dangling, swinging backwards and forwards.
‘Colm!’ she yelled.
His head jerked up in her direction then went back to studying the ground.
Something was wrong — she sensed it.
He kept his face averted while she drew nearer but when she was nearly beside him he turned it to her almost defiantly.
She gasped at the sight of the blood beginning to cake under his nose.
‘Darling!’
Quickly she folded her arms round him then just as quickly pulled back to inspect his swollen nose and mouth.
‘What happened?
Were ye in a fight?’
Colm didn't answer.
He began to swing his legs again, vigorously.
He studied them, blocking her out.
‘Will ye not tell me what it was ye were fighting over?’
Olive stroked his arm gently, coaxing.
He didn't exactly push her away.
Instead he stuck his chin in his hand, so removing his arm from her touch.
Olive gave up.
‘It's all right, you can tell mammy when we get home.
There's a good boy.’
But Colm wouldn't budge.
The grim look on his young face as she washed off the dried blood frightened her.
When she'd finished he sat at the kitchen table, watching her getting his tea ready, brooding.
Thank God it's Friday, she thought, Steve and her could have a relaxing evening, open a bottle…
As she cleared the table the headline of the Evening Standard caught her eye: ENGLAND MUST WIN!
Fuck, she'd forgotten the World Cup was on.
He'd want to watch it.
When she put the fish fingers and oven chips in front of Colm — his favourites, he almost smiled at her.
‘Will ye not tell mammy?’ she ran a hand through his soft hair.
Slowly he finished what was in his mouth, his eyes roaming the plate.
Then he raised them and met hers.
‘Mammy am I Irish?’
Olive had been expecting so many horrors that hearing the question she almost laughed with relief.
‘Well of course you're Irish.
Haven't we been home loads to times to where Granny and all your cousins…
’ A thought suddenly struck her and she stopped.
‘Why, has someone been saying you're not?’
Olive felt her temper rise.
The school he went to had a fair number of second and third generation Irish — these days even first generation — and she was glad of that.
She wanted him to have contact with other Irish kids and families, as a sort of bulwark against the swamp of English culture.
Was some bastard getting at Colm because his father was English?
‘Is that what ye were fighting over?
My poor baby…’
She put her arm round him but he pushed her away.
‘But I was born in England wasn't I?’
‘That doesn't matter.
It's not important where you're born.’
She stopped.
Even she didn't believe that.
How could she?
Quickly she sorted out her thoughts and began again.
‘I mean it's important but it's not the only important thing.
I'm Irish and you're my child, so you're Irish.
You'd have been born in Ireland if things, history and all had been different.’
She was on firmer ground again.
She hurried on.
‘It's like a feeling, you know you're Irish even if you're born here.’
She stopped again.
Could a seven-year-old understand that?
‘But daddy's English and I was born here.
That's two things, that makes me English.’
‘That's what I'm trying to explain.
It doesn't.
You mustn't mind what kids say.
You're Irish and you're proud of it.’
He shoved the half-empty plate away and jumped up from the table.
At the door he turned, his face ashen.
‘I'm not, I'm not.
That's what they were saying and I fought them.’
His eyes blazed.
‘I'm English.’
‘Thanks.’
Olive took the glass of wine, sniffed at it and downed half in one go.
She settled back on the pillow.
‘I needed that.’
Steve pulled the duvet over the two of them and began fiddling with the remote control.
‘D'you know because so many people switch off their TVs by remote control instead of pulling out the plug, they go on using electricity, the same in one night that would power Leicester for one day.
Or is it Hull?’
‘Is that what you learned at school today?’
Steve teased her.
‘Well teacher’— he stopped and upped the volume.
‘It's starting.
This is the life.
Are you sure you want to watch it?’
‘Have I any choice?’
‘You could wash the dishes.’
He put his arm round her.
‘Maybe seeing England getting thrashed will cheer you up.’
He paused.
‘The kick-off isn't for ten minutes.
Would you like me to speak to Colm?’
‘Not unless he brings it up.
D'ye know Steve, I've been thinking.
Remember I thought of having him in Ireland -I wish I had.
But I suppose I thought it was, like I was trying to tell him today, a gut feeling, being Irish.
It's probably a phase he's going through…’
‘Thanks very much.
Some of us are stuck with it.’
Sorry was on the tip of her tongue when a thought struck her with such force she lay back to fathom its meaning.
She stared hard at the black curly hairs on the neck of the man she'd married nine years before.
She followed the contours of his hairline to the almost kiss curl that hung over one of his eyes, the eye she could see now staring intelligently at a group of men — Englishmen like himself — discussing the prospects of the English team.
She heard the various accents and identified them without thinking, Cockney, West Country, and a thick nasal Mancunian.
Then she blurted the thought out: ‘D'you know I've never thought of you as really English.
I know you are but…’
‘That's probably a compliment.’
He looked her straight in the face.
‘Colm has a point.
He's half and half, in fact a little bit more English if you weigh it up.’
Not quite quickly enough Olive tried to shut out a second thought: that she would never, could never, have married an Englishman.
Jesus what did that mean?
Whatever it meant she wasn't going to think about it.
Not now.
Besides it was Colm they were talking about.
‘That's not true, I've brought him up Irish.’
‘It's all right, I'm only pulling your leg.’
‘You can afford to.’
‘I have my own problems.
You mightn't think it but it would be nice to feel proud of where you come from.
That's something you have.
Anyway if you're feeling like this maybe we shouldn't watch the match — you might start attacking me.’
But Olive needed to watch the match, needed a diversion from the thoughts spinning round her head.
She punched him playfully.
‘We'll watch it, I want to see England beaten by Morocco.
I bet they think they can waltz home.’
He squeezed her.
‘I didn't know you were a secret football fan.
Here, it's starting.’
‘It would be hard not to be.
Tim and Richard talk about nothing else in the staff room.
I could give you a blow-by-blow account of how England lost to Portugal the other night.
Sorry, how Portugal ‘stole’ the match.
England never loses…’
Steve held up a hand interrupting her.
‘I hope you're not going to talk all the way through it.’
‘Fuck off.’
But she shut up and lay back forcing her eyes to focus on the two groups of men in their different coloured shirts battling for the ball.
She tried joining her mind to the millions of people everywhere glued to screens for this all important match but all she could see was Colm's pudgy little legs swinging backwards and forwards and the grim look on his face as she washed away the crusted blood.
It was strange — hard — to think about something she took for granted.
Being Irish for her was synonymous with being.
Mind you when she went home she noticed her accent was getting worse and worse and she was picking up a sort of English reticence or so they enjoyed telling her.
Here she was ‘so Irish’, a kind of veiled racism or compliment: it depended on her mood or the person saying it how she took it.
And now Colm…
She laughed to herself.
Maybe there should be a rule if Irish and English people had children they should be brought up Irish — the way the Catholic Church used to insist on the children of Catholics and Protestants being brought up Catholic.
But just as quickly she remembered herself, barely thirteen, standing up in class and saying she didn't think the Catholic Church was fair and the nun, red in the face, asking who did she think she was to question the Pope's teaching.
Steve's roar filled the room.
‘A goal?’
Steve sighed despondently.
‘The English are playing so they won't lose.
No one 's taking any chances.
Look!’
He glared at the screen scornfully.
‘That crossball was pathetic.
They should sack the bloody manager.
Y'know when England had men like Bobby Charlton, they knew what to do if they got the ball.
This shower just do what they're told.’
Olive loved it when Steve got excited like this, somehow it always reminded her of her father.
‘Look there's Hoddle — he's good when he's playing for Tottenham but look at him now.’
Names like Danny Blanchflower and Christy Ring, shouts of ‘Up Down’ and ‘C'mon the Dube’crowded into her mind from the dinner tables of her childhood.
The voice of Michael O'Heiner on the radio…
‘Daddy who's playing?’
‘Ssshh — go and play, there's a good girl.’
Steve slumped deflated.
‘It's a real example of Thatcher's Britain.
Do what the boss says even if it means annihilating yourself.’
‘I'm glad.
I want them to lose.
C'mon Morocco!’ she cheered but it was half-hearted.
She snuggled closer into Steve's body searching assurance.
‘I thought you wanted them to lose too.’
‘Well at least Morocco are trying to score,’ was all he replied.
‘If you've just joined us,’ the commentator's voice droned, ‘there's no score in this all important match but England can be admired for holding their own, down to ten men and against a Moroccan team that's used to the sort of heat…’
‘Did you hear that Steve, they wouldn't say the opposite if it was raining.’
She stuck her tongue out at the television.
As she did one of the English players danced across the screen and up the sideline, outwitting several of the Moroccan side who tackled him from all directions.
Olive grabbed Steve's arm.
‘That's Hoddle isn't it?
C'mon Hoddle, waddle, dawdle, kick it!’
‘You're getting very excited.’
‘I can't bear them being such idiots…eigits,’ she corrected herself quickly using the Irish word.
‘Cheer Morocco then.’
Olive wasn't going to admit it but she was finding it hard to identify with the Moroccans.
‘Oh no,’ Steve groaned, ‘they're bringing on Steven.
They should put Barnes in.’
‘Who's he?’
‘He's brilliant.
Got the best goal ever scored against Brazil.
Steven is a bloody midfielder.’
‘What does…’
‘Sshh…
Hoddle's got it…he's going to try.’
Steve's voice was at breaking point.
‘C'mon.
C'mon…’
‘Score England, score’ Olive screamed.
She grabbed Steve's sleeve, their eyes in unison watched the ball sail through the air and high over the net.
They both sagged.
After a moment Steve looked at her.
‘You cheered England.’
Olive stared back at him.
She felt flushed and drained, angry and ashamed all at the same time.
‘I can't bear seeing them throwing it away, that's all.
You were cheering them to.’
But Steve had gone back to the match, his face rigid with anticipation.
‘There's only a few minutes left, they'll never…wait wait, Steven has it, he's come from nowhere and yes, he's going for a shot!…’
Olive closed her eyes.
‘I'm not watching.
I hope they lose.’
It was ridiculous getting so excited over a game.
How would she explain that sort of behaviour to Colm?
Oh, she knew well enough there were thousands of Irish who followed English clubs but there were thousands who would choke before they'd cheer an English team and she was one of them.
She'd got carried away on Steve's excitement, that was all.
That's not true, she  told herself.
Admit it, you wanted England to win.
She stiffened.
C'mon, secretly just between you and me the voice persisted in her head, it would be hard not to.
They're your team really.
You're half English now anyway, you live in England, you're married to an Englishman, Colm…
The commentator shrieked into her reverie.
She opened her eyes and not trusting her tongue any longer simply looked at Steve.
‘It's over.
No score.’
She turned over and buried her head in the pillow.
She felt sick.
She wished she hadn't watched the match.
She wished she could turn back the clock.
But to when? a voice asked.
To earlier when they'd turned on the TV?
To when she collected Colm from school?
Or right back to the day she married Steve, or took the boat to England?
Or maybe even further than that: to those warm sunny days when she sat watching her Daddy and asking him questions and he told her like he always did -‘Go and play, there's a good girl.’
THE CROSS IS GONE
Ben Okri
It was a day of fairs
Yellow music on the wind, feathers
Of dead birds whirling beyond
The green trees.
We walked up into the Heath
Passed a man riding a baby's bicycle
And the paths confused us.
It had rained, the earth was soggy
Beneath the deceptive grass.
We strayed past trees that bore
The features of dying men.
All around us the trees were heaving.
Their comrades had fallen
The great spirits trapped in their monstrous
Trunks sang in the cold air
Songs of white mermaids
Corrupted beyond their time.
Their comrades had fallen
They who had witnessed the sordidness
And the miracles of three hundred years
Felled in an instant of nightspace
By the karmic hurricanes
Of an unconfronted history.
Like old elephants, their trunks inscrutable,
Breathing lamentations on the unforgiving earth
Into which they will not be reborn,
The trees sang to us of a darkening age
With mysteries dying
And yellow spirits in the wind.
We passed their hulks
On the graveyard of the Heath
We said nothing about them
We talked about a single voice
From oppressed spaces
That could bring down thunder on corrupt lands
And about tyranny unleashing wounds on itself
That bleeds through us, the innocent journeyers
Into forbidden zones of dying gods.
We passed them quickly
Noting the character and psychology
Of each surviving tree —
Then, from the valley, we looked up high
And saw three kites,
One red, another of blue,
The third of gold, invisibly attached
To a black cross,
Bold against the sky.
We climbed Parliament H ill
Our spirits heaving, our breaths
Quickening, the earth slipping beneath our feet.
The sky quivered with silent birds.
With our ascent we noticed a gathered crowd,
An old woman with a yellow scarf
A black man with a red beret on his bald head
Children playing with strings
A nun with frozen hands
An Irish priest wearing metal-framed glasses
An enormous bible under his arm
A wand in one hand, the string of the red
Kite in the other.
We approached them, holding
Fast to our invisible trail, breathing
Heavily the rarified air:
And when we gained the hill top
The Cross shivered
A strong wind, smelling of incense and radiation,
And disease and French perfume and hidden wars,
Blew over from the distant Thames.
We saw all the world laid out
Before us in the air
A city perceived in a moment's enchantment
Whose history, weighed down with guilt and machines,
Laughed all around us like ghosts
Who do not believe the existence
Of men.
We saw the city and marvelled.
We dream the city better
Than it dreams itself.
The air and distance weave such burning
Miracles from the houses and church spires
The towers and glass offices of multinationals.
We dream the housing estates, built on  marshes;
The woods, sad and defiant;
The chaos of buildings, the threaded streets,
Where madmen wander alone,
Where men dream of impossible women,
And women of non-existent men,
With each pursuing instant fulfilment
Orgasm without end
Love without responsibility
Miracle without pain
Transformation without knowledge
Difficult dreams, doomed to abortions
And sick births
Blind births, one-eyed births.
In the phantasm of the city
Glacial vision prevails
While voices from the marshes vainly cried out
That they are the victims and hostages
Of the history their parents accepted
In silence.
The world lay before us
And the wind stayed still.
We wandered round the Irish priest
Not daring to approach
How would we be received?
And then a bitter wind blew the kites
And one got stuck, blue on green, against
The branches of a fallen tree —
We wandered round the crowd
And gazed at the cross
Upon which was written, on that wintry day,
Summery with the blessedness of its naming —
For it was Easter Sunday —
The words, clear as glass:
Christ is dead 
Christ is risen
Christ will come again —
And our spirits soared, mixing with the clouds
Of deep colour —
A child's cry of delight
Sent the golden kite upwards.
The priest's cassock lifted and was whipped
By the winds of four directions.
Voices became sweet on the air.
In the distance below, the three lakes
Shimmered — the wind carved its many names
On the face of the waters.
We went down and dwelled
In the solitude of swans.
We talked of painting, love, and adventures.
My friend's face was reddened by her red coat.
We heard the fair and followed the jangling music
Through the wet trails
And came upon cacophony.
We dwelled in the fair, listened to the conflicting
Noises, watched the faces of ticket sellers,
And the machines like windmills sending
The children into the air
Of artificial stimulation
And the gadgets and games and bumper cars
That once filled our adolescence with longing
But which left us hungry and empty now.
We left the fair followed by the smell
Of mass-cooked sausages, by dogs 
Dragging hamburgers between their teeth —
We left the day behind us, with the view
From Parliament Hill
Forever bright in our vision.
We went back to our lives of ordinary miracles
With the joy of that day lost in us
Till three days later when she returned
From a long walk —
She didn't look sad, or disappointed:
But in that tone of voice we reserve
For events that should be underlined
Except we don't know why, or how, or with what accentuation
To underline them
Make them speak
Make them significant —
And with a disturbed, imperceptible tossing
Of her head
A movement of her shoulders
A hand launching itself into the air
But holding back
She said, simply, without mystery:
‘The cross — That cross — is gone.’
I SWEEP THE SUN OFF ROOFTOPS
Hanan Al-Shayakh
Like a thirsty horse making for water, I lunged.
But I wasn't thirsty.
I was on fire.
I threw the water over the English boy and his friend, and the fire blazed in my head and heart and between my legs.
Images kept on coming at me which, like a crazy horse, I tried to resist, defiantly tossing my head high, but each new picture flashing into my mind enraged me more and more and I shook my head frantically from side to side.
Seeing Saad laid out on the floor, dumb and silent.
Saad, whose mighty voice had welled up from his entrails.
Now his wife seemed to have snatched his voice to lament for him, joined by her daughters, by his aunts and sisters, all beating their faces and rubbing ash and black soot on to their cheeks.
The English pigeon devouring the remains of the couscous, without a pause, immersing its whole beak and head in the grains while I smiled at it, saying: ‘You seem to like couscous from a packet.
I suppose it's because you're an English pigeon.
You're used to things out of packets.’
Aisha's insistent words in the grain store, as she shook her gold earrings and the bangles on her wrist, urging me to stay at home, but I could only gaze at her  shoes and marvel at how exactly they matched her handbag.
Then I am standing in Aisha's house with its Moroccan furniture and Moroccan smell, hardly able to believe that I'm in London, having braved the customs official who turned my passport over and over in his hands.
The letter with my name in English on the envelope, a Moroccan stamp, and a list of requests from my family for a white bridal veil to go with my sister's wedding dress, surgical stockings for my brother and a china dish for my mother.
Offering the blond English boy — the one I was throwing water at now — half my lunch, and sitting there full of gratitude because he smiled, because he liked the taste of the piece of chicken dipped in cumin and saffron and he had smiled at me for the first time.
I wanted his approval because he was English.
I wanted the approval of everyone from the bus conductor to the Pakistani shopkeeper, because he owned a shop and spoke English.
Being lost in the underground, tears running down my cheeks.
Learning to decipher the names of the stations.
Learning them by heart as if they were magic signs.
I was throwing water at the English boy and his friend and they were yelling, ‘She's crazy.
Jesus Christ, she's completely crazy!’
I was transformed into a raging bull, and everything turned red.
He started up at my scream and I saw the dark blood on him and on me.
Then he'd jumped to his feet as if he'd been bitten by a snake, shouting, ‘You're a virgin!
You're still a virgin!
I don't understand you.’
I didn't chew my nails with regret at giving him my virginity, furious at my weakness in lying down for him, and taking this boy in my arms just because he was English, a citizen of that great nation which had once ruled half the globe: nor did I blame myself for clinging on to an idea even though it meant severing my  links with my country, and travelling to London alone without any member of my family.
Instead of striking my face and grieving aloud because my hymen was no longer intact, I wondered, ‘Is it because he's an Englishman that he doesn't feel proud he's taken my virginity, or is he frightened that now I'll try to force him to marry me?’
I tried to tell him that I didn't blame him for deflowering me but he wasn't listening.
He just went on saying in a shocked way, as if he had lost his mind, ‘You're twenty-five, thirty years old?
And you're still a virgin?
Jesus Christ, I don't understand you.
I just don't understand at all.’
He didn't go to the bathroom to wash, he stayed in the room.
Out of the corner of my eye I watched him wipe himself with Kleenex tissues and drop them on the floor, indifferent to the smears of blood on them.
He pulled on his trousers and went quickly over to turn up the music, moving his head from side to side in time to the beat.
He lay face down beside me, not knowing that I was now painfully aware that the threads which bound me to home and the inevitable marriage had snapped once and for all.
I could see myself on the roof of our house, as, for the last time, I spread the couscous out to dry on a sheet in the sun before my journey to London: I could see the village below me: the tops of the trees, the minaret, the ancient wall which ran round my village.
I could think of nothing except going to London and finding my way among its tall buildings studded with lights.
I remembered the friend of Aisha's who'd helped me escape from her house in London, carrying one of Aisha's children, while I took my suitcase and dragged the other child along with me.
I could see her English neighbour shutting her front door in our faces, and yet all the same we left the two children there, rushing away after I'd pinched their cheeks to make them cry so that she'd have to come out to them.
I walked in the cold of London without tights, without an overcoat, without a jumper.
In Marks and Spencer's there were hundreds of dresses and jumpers and beautiful nightdresses.
I paid the woman at the cash desk and smiled at her.
She smiled back and said the coat I'd chosen was really pretty.
I was overjoyed.
She approved of my taste and I'd given her the right amount of money for the red coat which I st ill haven't worn.
Eagerly I was bending over the vacuum cleaner.
It was a magic broom to transport me to another world, from poverty to riches.
The implements available here for cleaning were as many and as varied in colour and smell as the places which I had to clean.
Aisha's gold chain which I'd carried away from her house hidden among my clothes was in my hands one moment and the next on the counter in the Oxford Street goldsmith's.
The red of my anger bubbled up like the rosy orange juice squeezed by the vendors' machines in the main street in our village.
It ran down between my eyes and made me see everything blood-red, even though seconds before my mind had conjured up a pleasing vision: the English boy's sister.
She was polite, she gave me a small box of chocolates with a thank-you card and kissed me and shook my hand when she came for a meal on Sunday.
She had been different from her brother and from his friends who used to visit, make themselves at home in my clean room, on the clean bed, delighted to find a video and a cassette recorder and cassettes, who ate my nice food and listened to loud music and swallowed the drink they brought with them.
They all said they wanted to visit my country and I nodded my head, promising it wouldn't cost them a penny, thinking how the people in the village would crowd around them, look at their coloured hair, some of it short and some long.
I smiled at them, heaped more food on to their plates, poured more mint tea or coffee into their cups.
I wanted their approval, even if they did smell so terrible, the reek of their hair in its stiff, bright tufts mixing with the fumes of alcohol.
I began to alter my standards of hospitality, offering them my pale, cold face when their music grew louder, when they began laughing among themselves and didn't take the trouble to explain their jokes to me as they had before, or repeat their words until I understood what they were saying.
The English boy showed the others all the implements and products I had collected for cleaning and disinfecting, telling them I had a mania for cleanliness, and I'd once decided to wash all his clothes and he'd had to stay indoors the whole day.
I felt revolted by them and began to sleep in the hall, dragging a pillow and a wool blanket off the bed and leaving the room to them, in the hope that they would understand my anger, that they would no longer stay till the early hours of the morning, stepping over me as I lay asleep, leaving overflowing ashtrays and empty glasses and cans and bottles strewn about the floor.
Sometimes they were so drunk they fell asleep where they were and lay without pillows or covers until I returned from work, and then I would rage at them in Arabic, telling them that thanks to them my room was no better than the Italian's pigsty at home; we used to spit on the ground whenever we went near it, children and grownups alike, shouting exclamations of disgust, even though all we could see of it was the outer fence.
Why was I doing this?
Pouring water over them while they yelled back at me?
Perhaps this is what happened in the neighbouring rooms, which were occupied by all different people.
Their noise had stopped me sleeping: shouting, shattering glass, the word ‘police’ echoing here and there.
How glad I'd been in those first nights with him.
I'd believed the English boy would protect me from these sounds.
Now they were happening right inside my own room.
I tried to shout like the two of them, but my cry came out strangled and distorted; I just couldn't express  my anger in English.
So I reverted to the role of crazy horse, raging bull: wheeling, rearing, plunging, now attacking, now drawing back.
Were they shouting?
No, they were laughing.
Actually laughing.
It was the music that had brought me in from the hall where I had been lying.
A single note repeated over and over again, throbbing in my head, making my chest tighten.
I had to be rid of them, I decided.
I had to be rid of the English boy.
I'd give him a choice: he could either stay on his own or leave.
I knew he had no home, but that wasn't my problem.
I had to go in there immediately.
I had to pull the tape out of the machine, interrupt the music right in the middle of the song.
It had been on loud all evening, and now it was the early hours of the morning.
They had no sensitivity, no conscience.
I charged in like a bull.
When I saw no one in the middle of the room, which had been full of music and smoke and pungent with the smell of hashish, I thought he might have forgotten to turn off the music before he went to sleep.
I found myself thinking affectionately that I ought to be straightforward with him; the English liked that.
Perhaps he didn't understand why I'd become so angry and distant.
Suddenly I stopped and stood still, staring in amazement.
A man was lying by his side.
They were both naked.
They were lying in each other 's arms.
I saw their uncircumcised members as clear as day and shuddered.
That was the first time I'd seen a man's penis so clearly and my mouth and throat went dry.
I went dry between my legs for several seconds, then I charged again.
Shocked, they started up, but they made no attempt to cover their nakedness.
Then, as if they'd recovered from the surprise, they began to laugh, snorting and giggling in delight at the water being thrown at them, like two children playing a game.
I had to be dreaming.
What I was seeing was surely the opposite of what was actually happening.
In reality  they should have been dumbfounded and embarrassed, wishing the floor would open up and swallow them.
Or hiding themselves from me, resorting to a whole range of lies and excuses.
How could the English boy go on living now that he'd been found out?
They continued to call on Jesus Christ, trying to dry themselves off, then laughing again.
The English boy pointed to my face, unable to control his mirth.
I must have looked like the mad ape that wandered the streets of our village with its gypsy owner.
Their laughter so infuriated me that I began to have thoughts of revenge.
But how, when he had nothing that I could take by force, steal, hide, break in front of him, tear up or trample underfoot, to vent my rage and spite?
All he owned were the clothes on his back and a few cassettes which I'd partly paid for anyway.
I looked wildly about me a hundred times, unable to think what to do; then I threw my coat on over my nightdress, pulled woollen socks over the wool trousers I wore to protect me from the cold, and ran to the door, without listening to what his friend was trying to say to me.
I went out and slammed the door behind me, turning the key in the lock as if I wanted to safeguard the proof of the crime and its only witnesses, repeating the same English phrase, over and over again, ‘Just you wait and see.’
Then I went on in Arabic: ‘You'll be sorry.
Everybody's going to know.
I should have noticed.
You've been with me for a whole week now and you might just as well have been a girl, or a boy without balls.
What was I doing admiring you for being so well-behaved, sitting there for hours content to have your arm round me?
I even said to myself, ‘He's English and yet he understands.’’
St ill I wanted you to go all the way with me.
London's very far…and I'll never go back home.
I'll always live here now.
I should have been on my guard.
How was I to know?
If you'd had a big fat bottom I might have guessed.
But you're all scrawny.
Your bum's hardly bigger than a fist.
I'm crazy.
I let your  white flesh and your skinny body and your blond hair blot out things that would have made me shudder at home.
I rang his sister from a public phone box.
When she heard my voice, she asked drily, ‘What do you want?’
‘Your brother…
’ I began.
She cut in.
‘Are you getting me out of bed at this hour to talk to me about my brother?’ she demanded.
‘It's urgent,’ I replied.
At this she changed her tone, and asked quickly, ‘Is he all right?’
Why did I bother to tell her, only to have her shout at me, accuse me of being crazy to wake her up for that and tell me to keep my nose out of her brother's business, especially since it was nothing to do with me.
As her parting shot she told me never to phone her at this time of the night again.
but then her anger seemed to have woken her and she continued, ‘I know you went to a lot of trouble over the meal, but my brother's sexual proclivities aren't any of your business, or mine either.’
‘Bitch,’ I screamed down the phone at her then, remembering how much they like dogs here, I shouted in English, ‘Whore!
Whore!’
I walked along, trembling with anger and misery, not through the London of beautiful houses and clean streets that I'd dreamed of, where people wore only elegant, expensive clothes, nor between buildings that soared into the clouds, but in the darkness past trees planted at infrequent intervals and council houses with their unlit windows, all alike; I passed people asleep, protected from the cold in cardboard boxes, and rubbish in untidy heaps or neatly tied up in black plastic bags and empty milk bottles with traces of sour milk lingering in them, and I marvelled once again that the dairies were trusting enough to leave them lying about.
A voice rose from a heap of clothes on the pavement, accompanied by the stench of alcohol-laden breath, a voice begging for a drink or money to buy a drink.
I used  to smile at the people who stopped me in the street, not knowing what they wanted at first, until I discovered that there were actually beggars in London.
I gave them money, full of pride that I was richer than at least one English person, even if he was a beggar.
I walked along with something boring a hole between my legs.
Now I was conscious of Aisha's words when we stood together in the storeroom and she tried to dissuade me from going to London: ‘Go alone to London without an aunt or a husband or your mother and they'll say you've sold your soul.
You'll be known as a bad girl even if you're as pure as the Prophet's daughter.’
‘What are you talking about?’
I'd said to her nervously.
‘I'll be staying with you!’
Aisha's annual visits home had sown the seed of travel in my spirit and this seed had grown and opened out and reached my eyes and tongue.
On her last visit I'd been unable to take my eyes off her gold earrings and her bangles.
I'd dragged her into the storeroom and begged her to take me to London, saying my family wouldn't allow me to go without her.
It was not only her matching handbag and high-heeled shoes which fired my enthusiasm.
The smell of couscous and other grain which filled the air constantly reminded me of my own situation.
All I wanted to smell from now on was the fragrance of England which Aisha exuded.
I urged her to listen to me and to feel what I was feeling.
Then I took off my little gold earrings and felt in the folds of my dress for all the money I'd saved or stolen from my brother's pockets over the years, and placed both the money and earrings in the palm of her hand, forcing her fingers shut around them.
As I gave her an exaggerated account of my clashes with different members of my family, she continued to discourage me, saying that the work in London was hard and that exile was no easy way of life.
I thought she must not like the idea of my going on the plane with her, then coming home every year laden with presents.
How could she compare the  task of dusting and polishing the magnificent English furniture to the drudgery of cleaning our house, where there were only tom rags, a broom and a pail of water, and you had to go down on your knees to scrub the floor and do the endless piles of washing by hand?
The man at the British customs was much sterner than the magistrate who came from the capital to investigate crimes committed in our village.
This man would forget the purpose of his visit, at least for a brief spell, and the fact that he was on official business, and drink tea and eat a good meal in the prosecutor's house, crack jokes and make amiable conversation, and sleep through the heat of the day.
The British official behind his high desk asked me numerous questions which I didn't understand.
When all I could reply were the two forlorn words, ‘No English,’ he asked me if I knew French.
I nodded my head to find I had opened Ali Baba's cave merely by answering all his questions with the one French word, ‘oui’.
His features relaxed and he stamped my passport.
Without realizing it he had let me know that using French words, however few and halting, has a bewitching effect upon everything in London, animate and inanimate alike.
I'd woken up the next morning at Aisha's place, not convinced that I was really in London: her flat was like any flat at home with the same smell, the same coloured ottomans and rugs, the same pictures on the walls, the brass tray in the middle of the room, and the loud shrieks and wails of her two children puncturing the air.
However, this sensation evaporated as soon as I looked out of the window, when I realized how imprisoned I was by my ignorance, which Aisha seized upon, exploiting the fact that I didn't know how to flush the toilet, work the shower, turn on the oven or boil the electric kettle to make tea, and that I couldn't understand what her older child or her next-door neighbour said.
I couldn't even answer the phone.
Inventing farfetched excuses, she left me trapped in her flat and  made no attempt to help me look for work.
From the window I saw the flats opposite, their even lines making them look like children's drawings.
Noisy voices floated through their windows.
I let my gaze wander to the open grassy strip at the side of the block, which was almost completely empty of life, and then on to the red buses and cars hurrying along the main road.
Fixing my eyes on them, I couldn't help cursing Aisha, wishing she was dead, swearing by the Prophet Muhammad that I would have my revenge because it was she who was stopping me walking those streets and riding in those red buses to find work and a flat or a room of my own.
When Aisha returned from work, coming through the door weighed down with plastic carrier bags, her coat smelling of perfume mixed with cigarette smoke, I gave a shiver of anger: I wanted to carry shopping bags like that and wear a coat like hers!
Since everything seemed out of my reach I was reduced to making friends with the pigeons who were everywhere, and whose gentle murmurings I'd grown accustomed to hearing.
I put the remains of our dinner on the window ledge to attract them, and when one of them alighted near me I called to it, ‘Taste this couscous, steamed and mixed with oil, English pigeon, and tell me if it's nice.’
I'd been amazed that in London you could buy ready-made couscous in packets, and that the English used it in their cooking.
I'd imagined that they would eat food fit for pigs, and look upon our food with distaste.
I left Aisha's prison in the following way: one day a woman from the same village as Aisha and I came to pick up her sewing machine.
She asked me if I was happy here and I sighed.
She responded with an even deeper sigh.
I found myself lying to her, although my lies seemed to me to represent the truth as soon as I was out of Aisha's house.
I told her how Aisha kept a close watch on what I ate and drank and how I had to take care of the house and children to pay for my board and  lodging.
The woman nodded her head in agreement and remarked, ‘Yes.
Everybody says Aisha's become like an Englishwoman.
She must have saved herself about thirty pounds a week having you there, because she used to pay her neighbour to look after the two children for her while she was out at work.’
Immediately we joined forces against Aisha, criticizing her and insulting her.
The visitor told me things about her which I didn't believe, but still I nodded my head as if to confirm what she had said.
For my part, I told her that I was sure Aisha had a lover and we began searching for proof.
We broke into the single, locked cupboard, and although we only found some new clothes and shoes with jewellery stuffed up inside the toes we assured each other that Aisha received money from her lover and liked leaving me in the house with the children because it made it easier to cheat on her husband.
Only the walls heard this delirious talk, but I was suddenly seized by a guilty fear, and became convinced that the two children were taking it in and that it was ringing in Aisha's ears at work, and I rushed to pack my suitcase before she came back.
The visitor left, forgetting to take her sewing machine, and I left with her, knowing full well that I would never see Aisha again and that news of my forcing the lock on her cupboard would reach my family and the whole village well amplified, so that I'd end up accused of stealing all of Aisha's possessions.
I took the woman's advice and looked for work paid by the hour.
I discovered that time was money and threw myself into cleaning offices, restaurants and hospitals.
Picturing the pounds mounting up in my handbag, I pushed myself harder, indifferent to the veins aching with fatigue and the bits of my body which cried out with exhaustion and craved for sleep.
I only stopped working frenziedly hour after hour after I met the English boy I'd just thrown water over moments before.
I left the woman's house as soon as I found work and a room to rent.
When I was told that I'd have to share a kitchen and bathroom with strangers I couldn't help thinking how this would astound the people at home, how they would snort with laughter at the idea that this could really happen in England, mother of civilization.
The English boy used to work in the hospital for a day at a time, and then be off for several days.
At tea breaks and lunchtime I never saw him eat more than a bar of chocolate or a biscuit.
I never saw him talk to anybody.
He would just put headphones on and close his eyes.
He had blond hair, light eyes and a thin face.
I suppose I fancied him although I told myself that it was just that I felt sorry for him.
I decided to offer him some food.
When I approached and held a piece of chicken out to him he opened his eyes in surprise and at first refused to take it.
I insisted and he put out his hand, asking me if I was sure.
I smiled.
I no longer took what the English said seriously.
‘Are you sure?’ they ask without fail, regardless of whether you are offering help or an invitation to lunch, giving them a cup of tea or paying their bus fare.
After eating the piece of chicken dipped in cumin and saffron which he must have liked, he asked me where I came from.
I told him and it was as if I'd opened Heaven's door.
His face softened, his pupils grew bigger, and his irises went deep green like olive oil.
Enthusiastically he told me that he'd always wanted to visit Morocco, live there even, and that our hashish was the best of all.
Was it true, he inquired anxiously, was it really cheap there?
I answered him with lies, happy that he was so interested after I'd been certain that he'd never say a word to me: I told him that I grew it myself, my family grew it, and it was everywhere like green grass and empty milk bottles in London; it was really amazing hashish. wherever I threw its seeds it sprang up like flames leaping into the air.
Dreaming of the hashish and the sunshine he said, ‘You left all that sun for the sake of these grey clouds and this miserable country?’
‘What can I do with the sun?’
I answered.
‘Sweep it off the rooftops?’
In my imagination I could feel the monotony of the days in my country, the poverty and the nothingness.
I remembered the threatening looks of the men of the family, the attentive stares from the ones in the street, my mother's harsh way of talking: and I repeated it to myself.
‘What can I do with the sun?
Sweep it off the rooftops?’
I was happy in London, free, mistress of my self and my pocket.
Here it was impossible not to be happy.
At home I was thought ugly.
In one week I listened to the English boy singing the praises of my dark colouring and frizzy hair, felt him kiss me on the cheek with obvious pleasure whenever I cooked a meal and when I came in from work, or when we sat watching television together, and found him waiting for me at the end of the road when I was late back for some reason.
I encouraged the English boy to move in one evening after he had taken me to a pub, and I felt this urge to have a hold on all the different sides there were to London.
Even though I didn't say a word in the uproar and drank only water, I was standing there like them in the crowds and smoke, proud and glad and sure of myself.
As soon as he entered my room that night, he declared provocatively that I must be rich to have such a bed and quilt, as well as cassettes and a television and a video.
He'd expected it, he added, since he noticed that I had my own plate and cup at work, and bought tea for whoever was sitting with me.
I smiled, nodding my head, not unhappy that he'd jumped to the wrong conclusions, but surprised that he didn't know the secret of paying by instalments.
He flung himself down on my bed, trying it out in different positions.
‘How clean it is!’ he exclaimed.
‘How comfortable!
I've never  slept in a bed like this before.’
Was I hearing him right or had I missed the point as so often happened?
When we talked it was like two people playing with a ball: sometimes it went into the goal, sometimes it grazed the post, but most of the time it went high in the air and missed completely.
He hadn't slept in a bed like that before, yet there were all those advertisements for them on television, and they were on display in shop windows and in almost all the big stores in London so that I'd imagined them in all the houses I could see from the bus.
Quite at home in my bed, he fell fast asleep until dawn.
In the little streets and neighbourhoods where I wandered, London did not sleep.
And when it did, the hoardings stayed wide awake.
Hoardings about films, pop concerts, milk, drugs and AIDS…
AIDS?
My thoughts suddenly became alert: he was going to die of AIDS.
I should tell him, extending my finger in a threatening manner: ‘You'll die of AIDS.’
Then I found myself shouting, inside my head, ‘I'll die of AIDS.
O, my God !’
Then partly reassured, I thought, ‘He entered me twice, but he came outside me.’
Then again I cried out in terror, wordlessly, ‘Who knows?
Maybe a germ slipped out of his prick and landed on me.
’
And with an involuntary movement I raised my eyes to the sky — where God was — beseeching Him, wanting Him to see my fear and my contrition.
But I couldn't see the moon or the stars, only the gloomy sky.
I lowered my head quickly, as if to acknowledge the truth spoken by the old woman Khadija when she heard of my decision to travel to London.
‘Foreigners have no God,’ she claimed, as if she wanted to weaken my resolve and then, correcting herself and asking God's pardon, she changed this to ‘Our God, the God of Islam, is different from theirs in the West.’
Then, again asking God's forgiveness, she said that  there was no God but God, and the trouble was that Westerners didn't fellow His instructions or live by His law.
At this she rose, washed her mouth ten times to make amends and performed twenty prostrations for her scepticism.
I had to go back to the room, as if I needed to tell the place where I lived of my feeling.
As I accelerated my pace I asked myself what I was doing here, and I didn't know the answer.
Why didn't I go home to my own country taking with me the sheet which bore the stains of my virginity.
I had purposely left it unwashed, stuffing it in a suitcase because I might need to spread it out on my bridegroom's bed in the dark of night.
Bridegroom?
I would save some money and then I would find a man to marry me, especially if I promised to bring him to London.
But why was I here?
Was it because I was out of reach of the prying eyes of the men in my family and their questions about my comings and goings, and far from my mother's interrogations about why I slept on my stomach, or why I took so long in the bathroom?
The God of my far-off country must remember that I used to pray four times a day and still love me.
Now I had to be on my guard against AIDS and the Devil.
I opened the front door and heard the voice of Warda Al-Jazairiyya flooding through the door of my room.
Pushing the door open, I was confronted by a tall, blonde, green-eyed version of myself, the Englishman's friend dressed up in my clothes, with my kohl on his eyes, wearing a pair of my earrings.
He was swaying his head in time to the Arab song.
I stood before my blonde other self, wondering at my calmness, contemplating my clothes on the English boy's friend.
After the long conversation with my brown self out in the street and being confronted now by a blond self, the haze lifted and all the images became clear.
I no longer had to push away the picture of Saad laid out on the floor, or banish from my imagination the  sound of his huge voice, louder than the roaring of the wind, dumb for ever.
The women of the family struck their faces and smeared them with soot.
Saad had taken his own life the night the news had gone round that he'd been caught sleeping with a travelling shepherd.
He could speak no longer: he'd swallowed his voice, choking on the words, while his wife's voice, which had always been weak and incoherent before, rose high into the air, followed by those of his daughters and his sisters.
When Saad's note proclaiming his innocence was discovered there was an outcry in the village.
Saad's family rushed to try and have their revenge on the witness who had announced the news like someone possessed, and who cared less about Saad's death than about convincing the whole community of what he had seen in the hut that burning noonday.
The village was divided between those who wanted Saad's name cleared and those who wanted the accusation against him proven even after his death.
His soul would have no repose and would hover over the place, flying through the night.
As I remembered I laughed.
My blonde self laughed at the people of my village.
I imagined Saad lying down with the English boy and the two of them flirting and giggling together.
The boy came over and put his arm round me, as if he could not quite believe my laughter and my lack of agitation.
I smiled at both of them and told his friend my clothes suited him.
He asked if I had a caftan he could borrow.
I shook my head regretfully — I hadn't brought it with me, thinking the English would look down on my caftan with its silver belt — although I saw garments like it selling here at huge prices.
I was st ill laughing.
I imagined the beggar from the London streets sitting with the old woman Khadija in my village.
I had a mental picture of the conductor on the red London bus talking to Hammouda the village postman, of the English boy's friends playing with Khadija's grandson, especially Margaret, whose hair reminded me of the coloured feather duster Khadija's  grandson had pleaded for everytime he saw it in the market, thinking that it was a toy or a bird.
I saw Margaret talking to Saniyya, the daughter of the woman who ran the bathhouse.
I saw people springing up from the ground and letting down ropes out of the sky, boarding red buses, jabbering in English.
Englishmen climbing the ancient village wall with their bowler hats and black umbrellas.
Englishwomen, some pushing their pushchairs along the winding muddy roads, other older ones fanning their faces with trembling hands and still wearing their coloured woolly hats.
The television blared, and then I noticed the electricity advertisements: an electric stove, an electric heater, an electric boiler.
I'd have to buy an electric boiler to replace the gas one which had been leaking for a week now.
The gasman had told us it would blow up and had stuck on a waning sign to remind us.
I tuned, intending to ask the English boy why he lived with me, why he liked my company.
Once he had said I showed him a concern which he had never met with before, even from his parents, and that he would love to visit my country one day.
At the time I didn't believe him because I wasn't used to hearing the truth from people's lips, preferring to believe what I thought rather than what I heard.
Instead I found myself thinking ‘AIDS’.
I looked at the two of them, ‘You ought to go and have yourselves examined.’
I was thinking I would boil the sheets that evening and ask the chemist for a powerful disinfectant and give myself a vinegar douche to get rid of all the germs inside me.
They went into the kitchen and I started to tidy the room, gathering the plates from here and there and scattering the remains of the food on the window ledge.
The pigeons flocked around it immediately, though dawn was only just breaking.
I knew the neighbours  complained that the pigeons grew used to coming close to the windows, but I didn't care.
‘Eat up,’ I told the nearest bird.
‘You're lucky I'm feeding you, not eating you.
Where I come from, if we see a pigeon we throw a stone at it.
If it falls we accept our good fortune, kill it and eat it.
If it carries on flying we shrug our shoulders and say, ‘it's the angels' turn today’.
You're not beautiful, you're not white, or even a nice light brown.
You're grey and black like a big rat, but I love you because you're English and you wait for me every day.’
Translated by Catherine Cobham
PLACING OURSELVES
Deborah Levy
On the tragedy and the hilarity of being in an uncomfortable place: Yasser Arafat jokes that he lives in an aeroplane because being made homeless, he might as well live in the air.
In Salman Rushdie's The Satanic Verses , two Indian men, Farishta and Chamcha, fall out of an aeroplane and hang suspended in the air before landing on the shore of Britain, where they begin to reconstruct their identities.
I am nine and-a-half years old and sit in front of the television in England with my brother, watching characters like Meg and Sandy argue in the Cross roads motel, while fat Benny, the tele West Country moron in woolly hat, eats lots of pies.
And somewhere through the hotel muzak lurks the sensation that things used to be different, that we (my brother and I) hadn't always been wrapped in jumpers, silent, staring at the screen, that the days used to be hot and long.
That we used to walk home from school at one p.m. in the burning sun and play barefoot in grass that was dry and scratched our calves.
That we would wait for our mother to come home from work with ‘Lucky Packets’ full of sherbet, that most of our childhood had been outdoors and here  we were inside, with our dad home again, our dad who we hadn't seen for four years, here we were having crossed the equator with nine suitcases, where flying fish leapt from the sea, to be in this place.
Wembley Park, London, no money, no furniture, no nothing, short winter days and starless nights.
Here we were on swings in small parks, our hair that had been blonded by the African sun now turning dark, as if another person was emerging, slowly, day by day, and with it our accents changed too, so that we spoke in multiple mangled voices as we moved endlessly, six times, seven times, eight, nine times through different versions of Englishness.
Here where class and its rituals, football teams, chips, queues for everything, council estates, three storey houses, pebble dashed suburbia, languages we'd never heard, the tube, children who'd grown up with TV programmes we'd never seen, pubs and warm beer (when we saw COURAGE written on pub hoardings we thought they were left over from the war to give people morale), tea and gasfires and pets, having to make appointments to see people in advance rather than just arriving, suspicious politeness, all of these began to reveal themselves, intricately and ambiguously.
We arrived in England in 1968.
Tee shirts had the black power fist, Angela Davis and Che Guevara printed on them.
I was born in Johannesburg, South Africa in 1959.
When I was fourteen months old my mother was arrested.
There was a knock on the door in the early hours of the morning, she had curlers in her hair, and my father, thinking it was for him, told her not to panic.
But they took her away instead and she was in gaol for a day and a night; they released her because the State of Emergency (1960) which allowed the government to detain political prisoners without charge, had not  yet been legally declared.
When I was five years old, my father was arrested.
Another knock on the door, he packed a small suitcase while the police dug up the garden for ‘subversive’ literature.
The charge was membership of, and working for, the banned African National Congress.
I am six years old and eat pickled herring with my father's mother Miriam Leah, who has changed her name to Mary.
She tells me that when she came to South Africa from Lithuania in 1910 and met her husband Abe Moses, she could only speak Yiddish.
Together they owned a fish shop called Levy's Provisions and Fisheries.
Abe Moses, who was also a poet when he was not gutting fish, died while the children were st ill young, and Miriam Leah, who stunk of fish, decided to go into something more glamorous.
‘Chinese Lingerie,’ she says, staring at the silver belly of her herring.
We all wave goodbye to my father on the stoop as he is taken off in a little red car.
I will not see him again until I am nine years old.
I am nineteen years old and at college in rural Devon, away from friends and family and the city where I spent ten years of my life.
I really feel a foreigner and walk up the drive cursing the mud that has ruined my gold stilettos.
I look like a refugee from a Verdi opera, stranded in the damp gentle valleys of South West England, where no one has yet introduced me to wellington boots or the useful strategy of invisibility.
But I make three best friends.
One is a Nigerian man, one is an Indian woman and the other a Kurdish man.
What I have in common with the Kurd is green eyes, the fact that he came to England at the same time as I did — and that he too looks like a refugee from a Verdi opera.
The Nigerian who is six feet four inches tall, tells me about his audition to get into this college.
He turned up at the dance studio in a pair of very skimpy tight shorts and observing that everyone else was very white and  wore towelling track suits, and seeing that he was very tall and very naked, got nervous so went for a walk and smoked a joint.
Then he came back and did the class.
‘How did it go?’
‘I danced like Nijinsky.’
There is a sort of joy in persuading the English you are the right person for them by dancing like a stoned Russian.
The Indian woman was born in Kerala, Southern India, and came to this country when she was six.
She tells me how her mum and dad know everything there is to know about fish, and tried to teach her.
But as an Indian woman, and the only daughter among seven brothers, she resisted all attempts to teach her how to cook and clean fish and how to prepare spices for sauces.
Her brothers could lean for themselves.
Now, here in Devon, she suddenly wants to know all about why a fish is oily near the spine and how you cut and salt it.
She wants to catch up on everything they can teach her about themselves, because then she can learn about herself.
She feels she needs this information to defend herself.
The drama students at this college are discussing theatre very seriously and sociologically when the Nigerian comes in late, long and loose limbed.
He has pinned a little square of material onto both his knees so that when he drives, the fabric of his best trousers will not rub against the steering wheel.
‘Hello wankers.’
The very blond student from Birmingham we have nicknamed Madam Mosely goes red with the terrible burden of always being right.
‘Why are you late?’
‘Extra curricular activities.’
Every time one of us dares contribute to the debate, she tells us with thriftiness of spirit and consonants of flint that we have no common sense.
And she is absolutely right.
We have no sense in common.
She feels  imperialized, that everything familiar to her is being disturbed, the peace is being disturbed, and that our ways of telling (form) and what we have to tell (content) are simply not something that should be on an agenda of any kind.
Which is interesting because here the three of us are, thinking about what it means to belong somewhere, what it might mean to belong to this idea called ‘theatre’.
And we are discovering that we are not interested in exploring the finer points of alienation with tea cuppery, but that the theatre can be a bridge of bone between sickness and health — that our language will somehow always be on the edge of poetry and that image and metaphor are our natural tools — they best express whole worlds and histories in collision with each other.
‘Why don't you just talk straight-’ Madam Mosely sucks a mint with vigour.
When the Kurd talks to his mother in Teheran from the telephone in the common room, he can hear bullets being shot just outside her front door, and we hear him tell her to take the phone away from the window.
This is happening while students play pool and pinball machines, and right next to him, Madam Mosley knits a scarf and talks about making good sensible entertaining shows.
Had she known it, there was no peace to be disturbed.
A martyr of tolerance, I think she would like not to just purse her thin prim lips.
I think she would like to burn our houses down.
I am thirteen years old and go to a girls' school, predominantly working class, at the Elephant and Castle, London.
I don't know any of the Beatles songs and the girls sing them on top of their desks.
A lot of their boyfriends were skinheads who go ‘paki bashing’.
We all wear mutated versions of the school uniform and platform shoes.
Everyone supports Millwall.
I am at the bus stop and have dropped my busfare.
As I search for it  on the pavement, one of the girls says, ‘Look at the yid licking the gutters for pennies.’
And then she says, ‘You're from South Africa aren't you?
My mum and dad go there every year.’
‘The English molest their children and love their dogs.’
This is the sort of cheap bitter jibe we love to say to each other when we feel wronged by life and attribute it to the lukewarm stew of Englishness.
That they're cold and formal and anal.
That the principle of pleasure is sacrificed to the principle of endurance and eroticism and sensuality replaced by sudden repressed explosions of rage and abandon.
But who are they?
My English friend Annie was more or less brought up by her nan in a back-to-back in Manchester.
Her nan had lost her hearing working in the textile m ills.
Because she had no garden, she improvised a sandpit for the children to play in.
She took an old carpet, filled it with soil and put it in the front room, where Annie and her brother spent the day.
When it was time for them to go, she rolled up the carpet full of soil and put it in her bedroom.
Later on she taught her grand-daughter how to sew, how to make tripe, and she taught her politics.
Annie, now in her thirties, talks about what being working class means in terms of self-image and worth.
Of how there are no accurate contemporary representations of her life, only this heritage stuff about happy agricultural labourers with straws in their mouths, or chirpy cockneys eating winkles.
She says she needs to gather up, in her post-modern skirt, all the creative, affirmative, intellectual parts of her childhood; she needs to know how her folk survived, and when she looks for them in England, on TV, at the theatre, in art galleries, in advertising, they're invisible.
Whether it's fish in Southern India or tripe in Northern England, the need to place ourselves is the same.
That put him in his place .
The phrase has always interested me.
It means something has been said or something has happened that has put the subject of the remark in an uncomfortable place .
Is ‘Englishness’ a comfortable place?
If as Marx said, the working class have no country, what does it mean to have a place in a culture anyway?
And what language do we use to name that place, or rather whose language?
What if your place has been described for you as being a so-called ‘minority’, or an ‘emerging voice’?
What are the multiple repertoires of identity buried in this word Englishness?
What does it mean to be ‘English’ when so many people are disenfranchised in this country?
Here where the streets are not paved with gold, but with garbage.
Garbage and the people who sleep amongst it.
Violet next door to me, who I help sometimes rake over her allotment, is eighty-five years old, and if one was to draw a graph of her life from 0–85, it would be one of unremitting poverty.
She tells me that when she was a nippy (of course I say what's a nippy and she tells me it's a waitress) the worst sin the girls could commit, sackable instantly, was to whirl the pencils which were attached by string to their aprons.
‘It was the first thing you wanted to do,’ she says.
Putting sticks into the ground for her beans, she says, ‘Oh the kids will take these.
Y'know, kids love a stick.’
The kids on the estate have nowhere to play.
Similarly, when she catches me watering my plants on the balcony we share, she says, ‘Shame you haven't got a patch to muck about in.’
Violet has mostly dug up her patch and planted vegetables in it, but she has left a little strip of grass, about three foot long, which she mows with a lawn mower she bought at a jumble sale for two pounds.
Annie has a little rug in her bedroom the same size, and every day she hoovers it.
I think the real English gardens are not the manicured  lawns of the home counties (usually nurtured by someone ‘who comes to do the garden’) but precisely these little pocket handkerchief gardens and allotments; places of little rugs and doormats and tiny bits of land for which rain is prayed, cultivated with beans and tomatoes and cabbages and roses, a respite from the rest of life, where people are autonomous, in control of something they are making.
Places to think in, mull things over, escape to.
They are full of cats and tools, improvised sheds and extraordinary devices to keep out birds.
When the temperature rises to 59°F Violet says there's a heatwave.
The man next door has spent the last year making a kennel for his dog.
This plywood structure has grown bigger and bigger, and he has even carved gothic spires on its top.
The neighbours complained and when he asked if I minded, I said I loved the kennel and hated the dog.
He hasn't talked to me since, but Violet tells me she has explained to him that ‘some people are funny about dogs’.
She has also warned me that the little porcelain giggling buddha I've put in the tomato plant pot outside my front door ‘will probably be nicked by the Arab boy who delivers the newspapers.’
Apparently, the milkman will not be tempted.
I am sixteen years old.
I have lived in this country for seven years.
People ask, ‘Are you English?’
And I don't really know what to say.
People ask, ‘Are you South African?’
And I don't really know what to say.
I love it in the summer when London is full of tourists.
An Englishman with Eton accent and broken NH8 glasses stands unsteadily in a pub in the East End of London.
He begins to read, beautifully, lyrically, with heartfelt empathy, a poem by Wole Soyinka in which the poet tried to rent a room in London in the 1950s, and the landladies on the telephone ask him just precisely how black he is.
For some reason this inspires the  barman to tell me there were a lot of good boxers in the 1980s because they were hungry.
A group of Turkish workers in South London buy lamb and bread and take it on a coach to the striking miners in Wales (1984).
The roads are full of snow and the coach is delayed.
The Turks are worried that the meat they so painstakingly prepared will not be as tasty as it should be.
The Welsh miners and their families and the Turkish workers and their families eat well together, exchange song, dance and poetry, while around them hang banners of solidarity with Chile, the African National Congress, and the women of Greenham Common.
The children secretly throw away the rings of raw onions in their kebabs.
As peoples shift from one part of the globe to another, from one self to another, in various states of exile, dispossession and displacement, the dominant feature of the late-twentieth century has to be the search for place .
It is these people who are uniquely placed to observe the culture and comment on it.
They had been hurt by it and have had to seriously think about how to make themselves better.
A pinstriped youth in his early twenties, fingernails bitten into a raw and livid mess, drinks a cup of fake cappuccino in a Eurobar.
The theatres around the bar play out all the trifles of TV soap life, larger, its little pains domesticated, microwaved and packaged into a popular night out.
He stares at the streets near him and hopes the grief he sees there is something that happens to other people.
He is standing on his own two feet — on the face of someone else.
In 1989 the tee shirts have ZAP, INSTANT, WOW, HELLO and PALM BEACH written on them.
In the last months of 1989 the people of Central and Eastern Europe take it upon themselves to address the future and make it a different place to be in.
I am thirty years old and have lived in this country for twenty-one years.
Rain pours down the window panes of my London flat and I am reading the letters of black political prisoners in the country I was born in.
One man describes reading the biographies of Maya Angelou, popstars on the radio, vegetables they have been allowed to plant and harvest.
He talks about news of the education cuts in England, and is aghast when there is such a thirst for education all around him.
But most of all he is anxious about the children of friends and comrades.
He wants photographs of them, information, he wants them to be well.
He wants to know where they are living and what they are thinking.
I am eleven-and-a-half years old and have lived in this country for two years.
I am on a swing in a small park with my brother.
We push ourselves higher and higher into the air and our shoes fall from our feet on to the concrete below us.
We watch the train shuffle and rattle across the tracks where we collect blackberries and know, soon, when it gets dark, we will have to come down to collect our shoes.
This is dedicated to Simon Levy
GOODBYE DUNCAN
David Barnes
All evening they sat in silence until Catherine brought Duncan his supper.
— Duncan, I want to talk about something, she said.
— Not again, replied Duncan irritably, looking up from the News.
— I want to move to London and get a job.
— I've told you you'll hate it down there.
— I want a job Duncan.
— What d'you need a job for anyway?— You know I want one.
— It's no' as easy as they say to find work these days, even down there.
— But Sheila moved down to London with Bob and she got a job no bother.
Catherine was staring earnestly down at Duncan over her coffee.
Duncan buried himself in the paper and with an air of finality he said,— Well I've got my job here and I'm happy with it.
— But I just hang around the flat all day getting bored.
Duncan put down the paper.
There was rancour in his eyes.
— In a month you'll be bored with your job.
— Sheila's not bored.
There's things to do in London.
— It's all a big con.
Look I'm tellin' you…— Duncan, I want to go.
— What am I meant to do with my job then, eh?— Duncan, I'm leavin'.
I'm going to London.
There was a pause.
Then she added,— Sheila can put me up until I find a place.
Another pause.
Duncan looked up and protested.
— But we're just married a couple of months.
— We've been living in this flat over a year Duncan.
I wanted a new start.
— You've got to give it a chance.
— How long Duncan?— It's different now we're married.
— I've always wanted to go to London, I told you before.
— It's crazy.
We've just got settled in this place.
What the bloody hell did you go an' marry me for if you wanted to go to London?
You don't know what the hell you're on about, you've no idea at all.
— I'm sittin' here waitin' for nothing.
I'm still young, Duncan, I want the life.
Sheila's havin' a good time and she's getting a bit of money too.
— Well bloody go then, but you're mad Catherine, bloody crazy.
Catherine moved to Sheila and Bob's, and Duncan was left alone.
One Saturday night he'd been drinking in front of the telly when he decided to phone Sheila's place.
— Hullo, is that you Sheila? he asked.
— Aye, came the answer.
— It's Duncan here, is Catherine there?— Um, no, she's no' in at the moment.
— Will she be in later on d'you know?— Um, she could be, aye.
— Right, I'll probably call back later then.
Y'all keepin' well down there?— Aye.
— I won't keep you then Sheila, cheerio.
Duncan went back to Hill Street Blues and the scotch.
At a quarter to twelve he phoned back.
And after a while it was answered.
— Hi…
It's me again, is Catherine there yet?— This is Catherine, Duncan, she answered coldly.
— Oh…em, Catherine, how are you?— Fine, Duncan.
— Did you have a good time tonight then?— Yes.
— You got a job yet?— Yes.
— Oh…— Duncan, it's five to twelve.
There was a space of silence.
— Yes…well, I'd better be off, hadn't I?— Yes.
— Well, goodbye then.
— Goodbye Duncan.
LEICESTER SQUARE
Adam Zameenzad
I was sure I was not being followed.
I looked behind me just the same.
I was being followed by a crowd.
A crowd of pink white brown and black people; all blue with unnatural cold, grey from lack of oxygen, and yellow with pent-up bile.
All climbing up the stairs in one mad rush trying to get out of the hell-pit of the London Underground tunnels, after having escaped from the claustrophobic strangulating suffocating hold of the London Underground Tubes, marginally cleaner but less picturesque than those of New York.
They couldn't all be following me, of course not.
Even I knew that.
But was there one among them…?
I hesitated for a moment on the stairs, turned round and tried to look at some of them, to see if there was a familiar face, a suspicious or suspecting face, a face I could place, a face that could…
I was nearly knocked down the steps then nearly carried up the steps then nearly trampled upon then nearly asphyxiated then completely ambushed engulfed surrounded then wholly abandoned.
All in a flash.
Soon all who were following me were leading me so the chances were that they were not following me  though they could still be following me by leading me and then waiting around to ambush etcetera etcetera; but of course not.
No, there was no one following me.
Another crowd was following me.
Another train had arrived.
Yes, I was not being followed.
Any more.
The feeling had gone.
But a feeling remained.
I tried to shudder it away.
But it remained.
I was out on Shaftesbury Avenue, facing Eros, the heart of Piccadilly, in the guts of Soho, the cunt of London.
Or so I had been told.
It was rather a loveless heart, the guts were dagging, and the cunt was the driest coldest and most shrivelled of cunts, if indeed cunt it was and not an asshole in disguise.
It certainly made an asshole of visitors.
A real let down, especially after all I had heard about it, not to mention all that nudge nudge wink wink from the son of the house in East Ham where I had found a room, and so much eyebrow raising and snorting from the father.
I had been quite looking forward to sampling its unsavoury delights.
Unsavoury, yes; delights…you must be joking, to quote a famous British phrase.
All promise and no delivery.
ft was about as frustrating as trying to masturbate with your hands tied behind your back.
Nothing was what it claimed to be.
There was none of the so-called obscenity — real sex shops and real sex films or honest free-trading prostitutes of either sex, or any allied pleasurable activities: the scourge of the righteous.
Instead there was true obscenity, the obscenity of deceitfulness and come-on lies.
And to cap it all, the bland sleazy boredom of it all.
Quite a contrast to equivalent places in European cities, even New York.
I rambled aimlessly for about an hour, in and out of dirty narrow streets, their only saving grace being their brevity, in and out of a variety of shops, bought some oranges from the market stalls, the most interesting feature of the wretched place, then went in to see an ‘explicit sex’ film and was presented with a badly  mutilated and heavily censored version of some third-rate continental film which I left within the first fifteen minutes.
By that time I was hopelessly lost and hopelessly bored.
Perhaps because this was the first time I was all alone in a big city in a new country.
I had always had someone to go round with, while in Europe, or in America; and good company, any company, can make an enormous difference to one's perception of whatever one happens to be perceiving.
And London was different.
I had got so used to the straight criss-crossing North-South, East-West roads of most American cities that I would have to acquire a taste for the more complex and possibly much more fascinating spread of London lanes.
Perhaps I was in the wrong place, the wrong part of the town.
Perhaps I was going about it the wrong way.
Going to the wrong places.
Had the wrong attitude.
I could have gone to one of the libraries or museums, art galleries…
Perhaps I had the wrong expectations.
Too high.
London was, or should have been, the most exciting place in the world.
After all, Great-Grandmother swore by the British, or the English,angrez , as she called them.
And though she would never admit to it, I was sure there were moments, however fleeting and however infrequent, when she wished she'd been with the Church of England, rather than the Roman Church.
For Americans she had scant respect and considered them to be nouveau riche upstarts, not good enough to hold a candle to the real thing.
the true English gentry, the real ladies and the real gentlemen.
Even Father had all but stood to attention at the very mention of the pucca angrez saab .
Loyalty to crown and ‘country’ sometimes exceeded in the colonies that in the core of the Empire itself, especially among the poor and the powerless.
Glory by association was one explanation  for the phenomenon, gullibility and impressionability were two more.
and despite my inbuilt irreverence for all sacred stones of all establishment temples, I too had grown up with an aura of awe for the British and all things British, and London was meant to encompass represent and symbolize the best of the best of it all.
I came back to my earlier proposition.
I was in the wrong place.
The wrong part of the town.
I picked up the Evening News from one of the street sellers and looked through its entertainment pages.
In times of disorientation, intellectual or otherwise, it is sometimes best to stick to the familiar, cling to the known.
I decided to go and see one of the Bond films which was on in a cinema at Leicester Square.
I didn't know exactly where Leicester Square was, but 1 did know it wasn't far from Piccadilly, I had seen it in one of those tourist maps I had in my hand a short while ago, didn't know where it went, probably left it in the cinema showing the explicit sex film which wasn't.
Even if I might have wandered away from Piccadilly, I couldn't have gone far, and anyway I didn't mind walking.
Provided no one was following me.
All I had to do was ask for directions.
I saw this good-looking redhead with a bust to challenge Shakti's — a sight which was getting rarer and rarer as women were made to get thinner and thinner for the convenience of the multi-billion dress designing industry, much easier and hence more economical and hence more profitable to clothe a bean pole than an hour glass — walking my way.
Could you please tell me the way to Leicester square, I said, speaking softly, in my best voice and with my toothiest smile.
Perhaps I was showing too many teeth which could make me appear roguish and untrustworthy.
She sort of froze for a moment, tried to smile and not smile at the same time, looked uncomprehendingly at me, turned ever so slightly towards the farther side of the road from  me and walked away with quick nervous steps.
I tried the next time with a very dapper man, all pinstripes and umbrella.
He didn't even stop or turn his head to look at me. i don't think he heard me.
Perhaps I spoke too softly.
Perhaps I was not saying the name of the place correctly.
I wasn't.
I was uttering three distinct syllables: Lei-ces-ter Square.
Not merely that, I was putting my strongest accent on the syllable that wasn't!
I ought to have known.
After all I did know through my discussions with Pasha regarding the plausibility of King Lear's plot that the Earl of Gloucester was really the Earl of Gloster .
But I failed to make the connection.
Anyway, since the English language, not unlike its speakers, and the climate in which it was reared, did not necessarily adhere to the principles of predictability, even had the thought of the good Earl occurred to me, I may st ill not have surmised that it gave proof positive one way or the other re the acceptable pronunciation of the Square's Christian name.
What's more, were I sure I was mispronouncing, I might not have worried that much.
After all, in Paris and Rome, Copenhagen and Amsterdam, I had frequently made a complete mess of whole sentences, much less place names, and had generally been set in the right direction, after a little bit of repetition and a lot of hand waving.
Another perhaps occurred to me.
Perhaps I had spoken to two of the many tourists that must be coming over to pay their respects to this capital of capitals.
At the time it appeared to be the most plausible perhaps.
The answer, ask someone who had to be a true native.
The man selling the evening papers by the bend of that road yonder.
I hastened there without delay or ado.
Could you please tell me how to get to Lei-cee-ter Square? please, I asked wide-eyed, eager and hopeful.
The man, with a blotchy red skin and wavy brown hair generously mixed with wavy grey hair, looked up  momentarily then looked down again and said, there is no such place, face and voice both utterly expressionless.
The faces and voices of the two young men, one about my age, the other hardly fourteen, one standing right behind the newspaper man the other nestling next to him, were by no means devoid of expression.
I heard them no sooner I turned to walk away which I did after a brief moment's hesitation when I wrestled with the foolish notion of somehow eliciting a confession out of the florid man that he was lying and that Leicester Square did indeed exist; not realizing then that he was right, and that there really was no such place as Lei-cester Square.
The older of the young ones let out a sniggering laugh which developed into a hiccoughy laugh, the younger one hissed out, fuckin' bloody Paki; a third voice, I couldn't tell whose, said something which I did not quite understand but sounded like, and indeed was, National Front.
I felt my face go red, as red as it was physically possible for it to go red, and a surge of hate and rage and fear swept through me from nerve ending to brain cell to nerve ending.
But only for one passing second.
The hate and rage went almost instantly.
A little bit of the redness and a lot of the fear remained.
Once the initial involuntary reactions had settled down, the overall feeling was a strange mixture of sensations, memories and impressions, not altogether unpleasant.
After all, rejection was nothing new to me.
I was born a reject, in the gutter; was bred in the gutter; and had learnt, very early on in life, to walk close to the gutter.
And that was in my own country, the land of my birth, and the birth of my father and my mother, and their fathers and their mothers.
This was a foreign land, peopled not only by my superiors, for that applied to everyone I'd ever known, from the hole in Mother woman through which I was expelled to the hole in the Mother earth by which I'd be swallowed; but by those  who were superior to my early superiors; probably the most superior peoples in the entire world.
At least so Great-Grandmother declared, with the exception of the Jews.
Her utterly unquestioning faith in the Bible led her to believe that none could possibly be luckier or greater than those whom the love of God chooses, and if the love of God had chosen to choose the Jews, then their superiority over the rest of mankind could not possibly be doubted.
Salvation is through the Jews, she often quoted Father Franklin who baptized her, for through the Jews came the Law, through the Jews came Christ, the Son of God was born a Jew, and the Holy Mother of God was a Jew and married a Jew.
If all that was not the ultimate in human proximity to God, way above all ordinary mortals, she couldn't imagine what else could be.
I was neither Jew nor English nor white, or even a proper Indian or a proper Pakistani; but my travels through Europe and stay in the USA and my near acceptance there as a living entity capable of suffering pain and enjoying pleasure had temporarily given me a sort of quasi-human status, further aggravated by those willing to be my sexual partners; I had become spoilt and pampered.
Obviously I would have to start re-learning my past and re-discovering my appointed place in the world.
I almost felt at home, secure.
The redness in my face was no longer of anger, but embarrassment, and even warmth.
I was back where I belonged.
However the feeling was not entirely pleasant either.
The fear, though not new, was greater than I remembered, and stronger than it need have been.
The determined practical side of my nature soon took over from the lazy brooding one.
I had to get to Leicester Square.
I had to find where it was.
I no longer cared about seeing the film, though it was to be the last with my great hero Sean Connery.
I just wanted to get to Leicester Square.
The answer came from heaven.
In a manner of  speaking.
I looked up to the skies for no reason I can now remember, probably a spot of rain or a ray of sunshine.
On their way down my eyes spied a policeman on the horizon.
Now why hadn't I thought of it before!
Could you please tell me how to get to Lei-ces-ter Square? please, I said once again, in my best voice once again .
For a flicker of a moment as the policeman looked up at me I thought I had struck a wall again, but then the door opened.
The policeman smiled showing large flashy teeth.
He was young and fresh with large blue eyes and his skin shone.
I would have enjoyed taking his uniform off.
He began explaining, straight on, then first right, on to the second set of lights…etcetera…etcetera…it's rather a long walk, sir, he concluded.
He called me sir!
I was thrilled.
An English policeman actually called me sir.
Great-Grandmother would have been so proud of me.
Mother would have given me a cuddle, and she wasn't given to cuddles.
Not where I was concerned.
Father's eyes would have lit up.
And it takes a lot to light up the eyes of a man dying of tuberculosis.
He could tell my mind had wandered off.
I'll tell you what, sir, he said.
He said ‘sir’ again.
I'll tell you what sir, he said, I'll write it down for…here his eyes narrowed a bit, he hesitated, you can…
Oh yes, I assured him, answering the unasked question, I can read.
he relaxed.
Taking out a note pad from his pocket he drew a map, writing down the names of the roads and the turnings to take.
I must have wandered off course more than I had thought.
But then the streets had led one into another and twisted and turned and escaped into strange territories…
There you will see the sign, a big board…that's where…he smiled his big smile again as he tore off the piece of paper and handed it over to me.
I started getting confused halfway through, but I was  determined not to ask anyone else I didn't want another negative response to spoil the childlike happiness that the policeman's courtesy had brought to my otherwise unrewarding day.
I finally managed to get to where the directions led me.
I still wasn't quite sure if I had got it quite right.
Looked different from what I had imagined, but then places in real life often are different from what you imagine them to be.
There was a large park spreading in front of me.
Couldn't see any cinemas around.
It was only when I looked up to my right and saw the board that I realized I had come to the right place.
The sign read, LONDON ZOO.
The reputation of the famous British sense of humour was well deserved after all.
If a policeman could be so well endowed with it, despite the obvious difficulties and frustrations of his profession, the ordinary man or woman would surely be brimming over with a joke or two no matter what the occasion.
I could hear the young man's hiccoughy laughter all over again, this time with more telling effect.
I couldn't help but joining in.
The devil riding my back dug his hard pointy heels into my flesh, but I stayed my ground.
I had nowhere I could go.
But to Leicester Square.
This time I decided I would try a child.
For unto such belongs the Kingdom of Heaven.
Leicester Square shouldn't be much of a problem.
He ran to his mother half way through my sentence.
My fault.
I hadn't seen her sitting on a bench not far from the spot.
I tried an Indian-looking middle-aged man with a pouchy face hidden beneath a large brimmed hat, and a paunchy stomach that seemed to run a perfect little circle round his navel hidden beneath a scruffy fair-isle sweater hidden beneath a wrinkly brown jacket hidden  beneath an overcoat which brushed the homeless autumn leaves strewn despairingly across the lawns.
His tie was muddy green with flowers which once must have been yellow.
Sorry, no know, new…sorry…sorry…new, no know…
I decided to make one last attempt after which I would start looking for a place from where I could obtain a map of the city.
I tried a pink old lady with the future of the universe mapped on her face with linear symbols just waiting to be decoded by anyone who had the wisdom and the patience to want to do so.
It took her a while to understand what I wanted and where I wanted to go.
Then she walked with me to a bus stop — I had to take one step every two minutes, and that in slow motion — waited with me, put me on the right bus and reminded the conductor where to let me out.
I was in Leicester Square.
What's more.
I had learnt that it was really Lester Square.
That was not all I learnt that day.
I hadn't even begun.
ENGLISH TEA
Margo Glantz
‘Constable?
No, I'm not too keen on Constable.
Or rather I am, but my favourite English painters are Stanley Spencer and Turner.
And Hogarth.’
I take a sip of beer, of lager.
His is a pint of bitter, mine's a half.
He has bought me a drink .
How I loathe that expression.
At home we say: ‘Would you like a beer?’ or ‘do you fancy a drink?’
‘Okay, I'm lying,’ I admit.
‘There are lots of English painters I really do like.’
In any case, it's weird that whenever I say that to Keith, he looks at me with the unmistakably quizzical air of the tall thin intellectual he is, his hair on the blond side of chestnut (now heavily greying); his fair skin with his rosy cheeks reminding one of Victorian youths with perfect complexions (or so the novels of Wilkie Collins and the paintings of the Pre-Raphaelites would have us believe); his eyebrows bushy and deliberately unkempt; his classic tweed suit of the old school, worn with a shamefully Byronic air somewhere between hippy and academic; his accent public school, as befits his education, although he also speaks a passable Spanish, so we can keep switching languages whenever linguistic difficulties develop.
Last but not least, Keith is an historian who has frequently visited Mexico and it doesn't faze him that I, as a Mexican, should come to his country to write about its artists.
He's in favour of it, perhaps even likes it, and approves of the Third World rather as some of the English also evince my approval, Malcolm Lowry and Graham Greene among them.
And Keith is one of the few Englishmen I know who really likes Spencer, the rest dismiss him as representative of an imperial, conservative, rural English idyll.
‘Not so,’ I insist, and Keith agrees: ‘But I like Spencer too.’
He then continues: ‘There are only three great English painters this century: Stanley Spencer, Wyndham Lewis and Francis Bacon.’
I add Burra.
We've just emerged from an exhibition at the Royal Academy, ‘British Art of the Twentieth Century.’
‘Yes, I like Hogarth, but Spencer intrigues me.
Did you notice they both concerned themselves with the everyday?
Spencer has his characters busy washing sheets, making beds, tidying cupboards, and Christ and his apostles appear in Cookham as though attending a summer regatta-’‘Fine,’ he says, rising from his chair, ‘I couldn't ask for more proof of realism, of everyday life…
’‘But,’ I interrupt, ‘for English snobs of the upper classes…
’‘Members of the aspiring middle class hankering after nobility,’ he continues, ‘these paintings offer what they most of all dislike: a celebration of the people.’
‘They'll be better off when they're part of Europe,’ I rejoin, now in the pub doorway.
Keith says goodbye, impatient to be off.
I carry on talking with the same chattiness and speed that got Jane Austen's heroines into trouble.
He is not to walk out on me before I run out of steam.
‘England is an island without sea, or else an island that used to be sea-bound, only so long ago that the sea's now evaporated.’
He impatiently plants a swift kiss on my cheek and…and is already gone.
I like — I'd like — to smoothe his eyebrows with my tongue and maybe more besides.
But it's too late now, I've frittered away the time, as usual.
Sunday and it's very cold.
I'm waiting at Charing Cross station and I'm wrongly dressed in a black hat and coat, whereas I should have come in jeans and a heavy Shetland jumper.
I'm off to Boulogne-sur-Mer with Rosita, Keith, Brian and Sue.
Not by plane, we'll catch the train and then the ferry like before, almost nostalgically since when the tunnel is open, there'll be no more frontiers to cross: the sea, I think again, has already ceased to exist for England.
Where are those boats beloved of Conrad?
Nowadays it's the regular ferries that capsize ‘D'you remember last year's Zeebrugge catastrophe?’
We're sitting in the train, knocking back gin, and I'm continuing the same line of thought, aloud.
‘England has an archaic style; that's why I like Spencer.’
I take another slug, and ignore the amused smile of those around me.
I talk and talk, they drink and drink.
‘And what with the tunnel and the European Market, what'll be left of England?
Will the pound sterling be done away with, the last relic of that ancient monetary system of shillings, pennies and guineas?’
We carry on with the gin, nobody paying any attention to my sentimental reminiscences, contradictory and literary as they are and unable to express my conflicting desire that England be an island in a timewarp and that the English behaved like Continentals.
Nobody listens but instead they stare out at the countryside, the classic English landscape.
Then suddenly the white cliffs, a salty tang in the air, a few sheep and a funereal sky.
We've arrived in Folkestone, to leave the train and board the ferry.
We continue drinking, gazing out at a sea now almost as redundant as five o'clock tea or straw boaters, both commonplace back in the 1950s when the children in Lord of the Flies became violent in the midst of their paradisical island, at precisely this magical hour of five o'clock, and in the living room, that sweetly British interior, flowering the semi-darkness into a  plethora of chair covers and curtains, sprigged bone china and mums in Liberty-print dresses…
‘The tea itself,’ I reflect aloud, ‘is transformed by bleaching it with milk, so it no way resembles the complexions of those swarthy people , least of all the inhabitants of a tea-producing Indian subcontinent.
’
(What of novels of Somerset Maugham, Forster and Conrad?
No, consider first and foremost Emily Brontë's Wuthering Heights , for who was Heathcliff other than a swarthy bastard who spoke gibberish in preference to the Queen's English.)
‘Such people,’ I continue aloud, ‘who are rendered suspect of nothing more than their swarthiness , are repulsive in their manifestation of a sinister attraction.
All the more important, then, to stand protected from the like and ensure that all things — not excluding alcohol — conspire to bear visible witness to that ruddy hue sported by the English living in the Tropics.’
For some time it seems I've been talking to myself.
Nobody's listening but I insist: ‘This fairness of skin obliges them to shield themselves so that if they do catch the sun they avoid the obvious danger of peeling.
Shedding their skin puts them in the same position as Jane Austen's heroes, prematurely aged by the treacherous sun of the West Indies.’
The wind off the Channel is brisk and fierce and icy.
We're now at Boulogne, totally drunk.
The others are dozing while I chatter, attempting to cure their somnambulism with my words.
A jolt, and a voice booming through loudspeakers to announce our arrival in France.
I wake them up and we shamble along towards the Customs.
We reach the station at the same moment as an elegant train loaded with ladies preening themselves in their furs and hats, the men all wearing dark suits.
The compartments have little curtains in the windows; the lamps are lit; it's eleven a.m. but still winter.
Am I dreaming or is this the Orient Express of the inter-war years?
Irresistible memories of Agatha  Christie and Hercule Poirot.
The customs officer checks our passports, notes the absence of a visa in both the Mexicans'.
Having failed to obtain one means I've forgotten my status as a foreigner in Europe, Latin American, undesirable.
I need a visa and have failed to obtain one, Rosita likewise, and so they put us behind bars like prisoners.
Keith, Sue and Brian have British passports and enter Boulogne without visas.
Rosita and I are to be punished, stuck there with long faces, alongside our fellow wrong-doers, representations of swarthy people , black as tea taken without milk.
But with a sliver of lemon?
‘You should see the care and tenderness Burra bestowed on his portraits of Blacks and Mexicans.’
I'm advising Rosita, by the way reminding her of Malcolm Lowry, of whom we're all fans.
Rosita glances at me impatiently.
‘And so,’ I continue, ‘the suntan becomes fashionable and it's no longer as necessary as it was — taking Robinson Crusoe by way of example — to hide from it under a parasol in order to conserve that fairness of skin threatened by the desert island climate.
So that when he returns to Mother England he's still sporting that delicate shade of complexion so beloved of English males, and above all English females.’
‘Do you understand the precise meaning of swarthiness ?
It's quite difficult to translate: would ‘negritude’ be the correct term?’
Rosita looks at me indignantly, with a furious gleam in her eyes, a look of hatred that exactly transmits the colour of my question.
The customs officers run their eyes over us as if we weren't there.
Keith, Sue and Brian reappear weighed down with shopping bags, flashing their teeth in wide grins which set off their milky skins.
They show us an exquisite quantity of French cured meats, smoked crayfish, mayonnaise, salads, champagne, pâté, patisserie and chocolates.
We retrace our steps to the station, wait a while for the ferry to take us back to Folkestone.
We settle ourselves down in a First Class cabin, lay our delicacies out on the table, open some wine and champagne, set the crayfish on to plates that don't look paper, and eat, drink and devour vast quantities of pâté, hors d'oeuvre and champagne.
We talk, laugh, guffaw, sing in English and Spanish and suddenly, just before we dock I demand: ‘And now, all of you, who do you prefer, Spencer or Constable?’
translated by Amanda Hopkinson
IF ENGLAND WAS WHAT ENGLAND SEEMS
Naomi Mitchison
Yes, we get some lovely views from the railway, just as you say, but — oh dear!— the industrial side and the back streets and the mess!
Yes, that was Birmingham.
If England was what England seems
And not the England of our dreams
But only putty, brass and paint,
How quick we'd chuck her —
That's what Kipling wrote.
He decided that after all England wasn't what she seemed.
But now?
It looks sadly as though only too much of England — or shall we say the English populace — is what it seems.
And should be chucked by those who still have some idea of what a good society should be.
What is Englishness, then?
I remember well, during the air-raids of the forties when I was in London and we waited as darkness came for the first sirens and the deep breath to get one's courage up, that we felt we were part of the will of the capital of England.
Knowing that if they break our will, they win.
So it must not be.
But this was different from Englishness.
So what can that be?
Looked at from Scotland, it is sadly tied up with Thatcherism, which, we hope, is something that will pass, since it goes against a better, more basic feeling  which is still there.
People of my generation were brought up to admire the sacrifice of life and happiness for others, the hope that we can live up to what this means in ordinary, dull practice.
We wanted, on the whole, to be good, not just through fear of punishment, but perhaps with an element of pride.
You may remember E. Nesbit, the great children's writer and inventer of the family of Wouldbegoods, who were very English, trying to do the right thing but often falling over themselves — or others — when it came to practice.
This surely is the basic English policy of helping and solidarity, which took us through the last war and into the first Labour Government and the welfare state.
Much of it still remains.
But the present doctrine of competition is destroying it, and with it the picture of our Englishness.
Children are mostly friendly, only accidentally cruel.
But soon enough they learn competition, useful at first, but dangerous when it becomes, as it easily does, the only atmosphere.
Not ‘His need is greater than mine.’
Not Grace Darling.
You teachers realize well enough what is happening, but teachers have to play the competition game, assessing pupils, pushing them on.
One of their problems, of course, is Englishing children from other cultures.
Which England should they hold up as a pattern, a reasonably true pattern?
Whichever it is, the more it is rubbed in, the more it will fail to click.
Yet, haven't we tried to teach and think in non-racial history?
That isn't easy.
There is so much of it!
I would be surprised if it wasn't still possible to go through ten years of education with only the faintest idea of what has been happening in the world, even your own country.
In my day and at a good school, it was easy, as you moved up from class to class, to miss out totally on some period of English history — the only history that was taught.
It ended grandly with Queen Victoria's jubilee, having skipped over the Crimea and the Indian Mutiny.
But at least we knew a lot of Shakespeare by  heart, especially Agincourt.
But you are a teacher yourself!
Well now: this decision that all children must learn two languages, forgetting the thousands in many English cities who already have a home language, with a literature of its own.
Nowadays it may well be world history, deeply simplified.
Does it mean anything to most children?
What do they think Englishness is?
I suspect that most of them identify it with being white.
And because white, superior.
So Englishness is corrupted from the beginning.
If they think of history, it may be hard not to see it in dressing-up terms from telly watching.
Teachers may try to tip the balance about this Englishness.
Radio and telly make great efforts — at least sometimes.
But it is a struggle.
Good Englishness doesn't dress up, indeed it tends to hide itself.
There are parts of Asia and Africa where there are good memories of English people who devoted themselves, sometimes gave their lives, to the practical good of the indigenous population.
They were just and merciful.
Most of them, perhaps, were doctors, government servants of one degree or another; a few were farmers (I can think of one, still remembered) and some were just friends, as I myself have been for the Bakgatia and, I hope, for the whole new country of Botswana.
Up until recently the English have had certain virtues assigned: honesty, loyalty, fair dealing, kindness to animals (and women).
But how much is true now?
From Scotland we are apt to look at and condemn Thatcher's England, south of Birmingham, the greenbelt-eaters, the yuppies, the Sloanes.
That is no doubt wrong and covers our blindness to our own Scottish variety of unpleasantness, but easy to see how it happens.
Again, most women have at some time come across specimens of English anti-feminism, though the geography of this unpleasant addiction does not follow national boundaries or even religious ones although  both have their own special effects.
In some ways people in London (flower of cities all, as a Scots poet put it long ago), both men and women, have more freedom to live as they want than they have in most other cities.
But is that Englishness?
So, does dream England always disappear at dawn?
Well, there are strange little bits of old-fashioned good Englishness about, dating perhaps from the late forties, when city streets were safe and when people of good will in England were happy and even proud to see the end of Empire.
I think that Englishness, for all that we pull it to bits, had a certain important moral structure, which has been eaten away by unchecked competition, an underground civil war breaking our roots.
Can it ever come to life again, not as a bait and hook for politicians to use, not as a shouting for soccer fans?
The true dyed-in-the-wool, deep down Conservatives may feel uncomfortably that the sacred word has come into the hands of unsuitable people; including the Americans.
We, the people of good will, feel this even more strongly.
Can Englishness ever become clean again?
If so, it must change.
BEING ENGLISH
Fleur Adcock
You can't be it at home: they won't notice;
there are too many kinds of it around.
But abroad it's what you've suddenly become;
and it's cute, if you're in the United States,
or threatening, if you're somewhere else, or just
puzzling, if you're the only English-speaker
they've ever met who's not American.
You have to tell them, shyly naming the place
you never name at home, where ‘in this country’
serves to avoid a tricky semantic choice.
At least with real ‘abroad’, where they're all foreign,
you're braced behind passport, phrase-book and
hopeful smile.
What's more unsettling is when you're in a country
where they all speak English, and you understand
them,
and you ask for something simple — a return ticket,
say, or a pint of milk, or a bag of crisps —
and just for a moment they don't understand you .
(They know about Englishness, but you don't fit
into any of its three varieties:
EastEnders, Coronation Street, and posh.)
You have to repeat your question, mouthing the words
like a goldfish: ‘No, not two, I said a return.’
Or: ‘Milk — you know?’
(You could try pronouncing it
‘moowk’.)
Or: ‘What I want is paper with narrow lines,
not no lines.’
(An, they've got it — the phrase, that is:
you'll have to go elsewhere for the actual paper.)
And suddenly you've become the thing you are:
no longer a Commonwealth citizen, one with them.
‘Crisps?
Aw, chippies, you mean.’
The eyes narrow.
‘Whaddarya, mate?’ they ask.
‘Some kind of Pom?’
FISHWANDA
Susan Daitch
Playing on the third floor of Loew's Thirty-fourth Street Multiplex, in Cineplex 3:Fishwanda .
The abbreviation as it travelled around the dot board, sounded as if someone were reading a map accordion-folded between Africa and India.
I went on to the next level to see Midnight Run .
Robert de Niro chased a mafia accountant from Brooklyn to Las Vegas, and afterwards as we walked down Second Avenue we repeated lines from the movie.
Do I know you?
Wait a minute, I don't think I know you .
We instinctively understood that de Niro was referring to Taxi Driver , even in this much later movie and it's funny.
We know the language.
We get the joke.
Fishwanda , seen briefly in a preview, disappeared, forgotten.
On lower Second Avenue we passed the Telephone Bar and Grill whose front was constructed from a series of British telephone boxes.
They could be copies, but they look real enough.
One red box is actually the entrance to the bar.
I continue to be surprised all those little panes of glass haven't been smashed in, but a metal door comes down at night and the neighbourhood is full of tourists anyway.
Money was supposed to be wired to her soon from somewhere.
As she walked from the post office empty handed, she pretended to be an American tourist, one who could leave in a few days, one for whom the trip would soon be nothing more than a few travel stories and postcards.
She wasn't sure she wanted to return, but seemed not to have much choice anymore, and so she stayed.
Dedham from Langham , long blues, long brown shore, brush strokes in the clouds;Rockets and Blue Lights (Close at Hand) to Warn Steamboats of Shoal Water , painted light rippled the sand and waves into a vortex and what were those people doing on the shore?
Who were they waiting for?
Smugglers, escaped convicts, drenched fishermen, or they might have been just watching the storm, voyeuristically curious to see a boat break up in choppy water.
Some of the paintings almost reminded her of the Hudson Valley, but she hadn't seen the Hudson River in nearly a year.
She stood before Constables and Turners and imagined Algonquin Indians on a western embankment.
She imagined tiny villages far to the north of England which had no electricity or telegraphs, which believed in lake monsters and King Arthur, and were not so different from northern towns near Canada.
The northern English towns might not know or care that Wall Street had crashed.
What does it mean that a market has crashed?
Boom, a couple of awnings tumble, a horse runs away, apples roll into the gutter.
Tiny American villages might by now have read about Black October and stockbrokers jumping from windows, fortunes utterly lost, but the crash mightn't mean all that much to them either, in northern American towns with names like Chateaugay, Champlain, Swanton, and Saddleback.
She hadn't quite determined what it was going to mean to her.
Perhaps nothing, but as she waited for money which didn't seem to be coming, it was  fairly certain the crash was going to mean something.
American travellers became stranded in Europe and turned into expatriates or exiles in Henry James's novels, shadowy amalgamation of foreign manners with shreds of familiar accents that were up to the narrator to decipher, but it couldn't happen to her, not in 1928, even with a crash.
The money to return home would have to come.
Mercurial changes in painted light were due to fog, not smoke signals.
She tried to remember the Hudson River as she had travelled down it by train, and the weather seemed constant although she knew it wasn't.
In memory, when the sun shone over Reinbeck, it would be bright in Reincliff as well and all the way down to New York.
In London she lost umbrella after umbrella, as if with each accidental leaving behind lay the idea that she might not need that particular umbrella again.
She left the museum and walked to her rooms to save money.
When she had arrived from France she was supposed to contact friends of her family, but the bag which had contained their address had been lost or stolen.
Weeks passed, but still she didn't bother to try to find them.
After travelling around the continent to a constellation of cities linked by who her father knew, it was a relief to cross the Channel alone and to arrive at a place where it was not generally such a struggle to make herself understood.
She liked to take walks alone, and occasionally pretended she completely belonged in St James's Park or Kensington and always had.
She invented a new history for herself, one of privilege, with distant relatives living in colonies who would send her ivory totems from Nairobi, tea from Ceylon, a three-eyed, many-armed brass Devi with a moon on her head.
The reality of a painted postcard of a log cabin and box of arrowheads disappeared.
As long as her money held out and she didn't open her mouth, she could almost make the artificial history stick.
She rented rooms from a woman whose husband died  in Suez and had left her a small income and a house in Whitcher Place.
The widow claimed to be particular about who she let to and told her a great deal about the other lodgers; a musician and a German student, both women, and one man, a writer.
His room was closest to hers and she often saw him coming and going.
He was simultaneously working on two projects: a glossary of regional expressions and slang terminology, so far mostly from London; and a Gothic novel.
He was often broke and was gradually forced to sell off his library.
On odd days he would work on the novel.
On even days it was the glossary.
She could hear him repeating phrases to himself through the thin wall between her room and his.
The landlady told her he would drive them all round the twist, he was born to chase a bob without success, and he left queer books lying around.
The landlady repeated that she was being very lenient with him but generosity on her part was not without limits,my girl .
She pretended to agree, suspecting that her time for trying the landlady's leniency would be next.
On even days he whispered about the five different meanings of how's your father and the etymology of knackered, Bob's your uncles , and taking the piss out of X or Y .
On odd days, a young woman who had gone to work as a governess at a remote Scottish house wrote to an employer she never saw about portraits which moved in the middle of the night and which, the governess wrote, appeared to speak monosyllabic expressions of agony.
None of her letters were answered.
When he stopped his work for tea, the prying landlady being out at the shops, he would try to arrange to meet her, either in the house or at the British Museum if she were going near the West End that day.
He could justifiably be at the British Museum if asked.
There was always research to be done.
They met in the Egyptian wing, at the same place each time, near a fragment of papyrus which was labelled,The Opening of the Mouth  Ceremony.
This ritual restored to the mummy all his faculties so that he might enjoy the afterlife to the full.
She read all the labels as she waited.
He was often ten minutes late, as if the minutes had been timed exactly.
She didn't know what to think of these solicitations.
He rarely actually touched her, apart from taking her arm.
They began to meet in pubs, sometimes in the evening, near the centre of London where it was unlikely they would be noticed.
‘Tell me about the funny Dutch houses and Red Indians,’ he would ask.
‘Describe the historic fort, the table with a colonial's dried blood on it that's never been cleaned.
Whose blood do you think it is really?
Maybe it's a recent murder after all.’
It was a stupid idea but nothing she said seemed to make any difference.
She wanted to say screw the colonialist blood but didn't.
She kept waiting for him to do something, but he hesitated, as if he were waiting for her.
She enjoyed hearing about the governess's letters which would never be received and translations of East End rhyming slang, but didn't think he actually listened to her, he often asked her the same questions.
It was as if he were memorizing her life so he could sail to New York, adopt a different accent, and claim to be a long lost relative due a piece of her fortune which hadn't been considerable and might all be gone now.
Sometimes she caught him looking at her, but he never really kissed her and the vagueness of his attentions made her anxious and say bitter things she didn't mean.
She didn't know what he wanted from her.
She thought she might have to move to a cheaper place anyway.
At breakfast he grew nervous and left in a hurry.
She was disappointed that he hadn't arranged to meet her during the afternoon or even later on.
She knew that his Gothic romance and glossary were being turned down by publisher after publisher and he grew despondent as he rewrote and rewrote again.
She caught him in the hall as he put on his hat.
Later, my dear , and he kissed  her quickly, when the landlady's back was turned.
Upstairs, alone, feeling left out of something she couldn't define, she looked through a pile of books left by his door.
She picked up London Labour and the London Poor , Henry Mayhew, and began to read.
I continued walking the streets for three years, sometimes making a good deal of money, sometimes none, feasting one day and starving the next.
the bigger girls could persuade me a do anything they liked with my money.
I was never happy all the time, but i could get no character and could not get out of the life.
I lodged all this time at a lodging-house in Kent Street.
They were all thieves and bad girls.
I have known between three and four dozen boys and girls sleep in one room.
The beds were horrid filthy and full of vermin.
There was very wicked carryings on.
I can't go into the particulars but whatever could take place between boys and girls squeedged into one bed, did take place and in the midst of the others.
She shut the book and walked out, down Camden High Street, Hampstead Road, past knots of schoolchildren in uniforms, prams, and grocers with horse-drawn carts.
She walked and walked, up Shaftesbury Avenue, Holborn Viaduct, she gave nothing to buskers, veterans of the Great War, gassed blind, missing limbs, clinking cups, Cheapside, Threadneedle, Bishopsgate to Spitalfields.
She circled back, stopping at Cleopatra's Needle, leaning over, looking at the river.
It was growing dark, and she thought of sleeping on a bench or under a tree in a remote part of Regent's Park, but she was afraid that, having spent the night out and returning in a dishevelled state, her landlady might assume the worst and not let her in again.
She could make up a story, say she suffered temporary amnesia, or that she was knocked unconscious by thieves and all her money was gone, but she doubted she could make it sound believable.
By the time she returned to Whitcher Place it was night.
On the first floor, a radio had been left on.
Trio Snotta in F , an announcer's voice said.
The room was empty.
She reached into a cabinet and turned the radio off.
The pretence fell apart.
As long as she had money, she could pretend she had always been here, but the prospect of destitution tested her false history in a way which made her feel it wasn't her fault.
She didn't know the language.
On the second stairwell she could see the landlady peering from the doorway of the writer's room, pink with anger.
Look, she said, he's left, bolted, owing three months' back rent.
She looked in.
The room indeed was nearly bare.
His books and clothes, all his things were gone, he had even stolen bits of china and a lamp.
He had give his name as E. Thomas Reardon and it turned out to be a pseudonym, so cheques left on the mantel were useless, and he must have known that they would be.
She had gone right to the bank with them when she'd discovered he'd gone.
Why ever did he bother to write them out? the landlady asked, gravely vexed and insulted.
She was hungry and sorry she'd turned off the radio.
The landlady stared at her in an uncomfortable silence.
She felt tired and cold from all her walking, her shoes badly worn, and without thinking she asked the landlady if he had left a note for her.
Only afterwards did she realize how foolish her request sounded.
Foolish in that it gave a great deal away to the other woman, and she could tell the woman looked at her as someone who could be aggressive and perhaps a bit vulgar, someone who said things which ought never even to have been thought.
The landlady looked at her with suspicion as she backed into her room and she resolved again that as long as she stayed in London she wouldn't speak to anyone.
She would be as if mute.
Eleanor Marx left Liverpool for New York on 31 August 1886.
She was thirty-one years old.
The first Americans she observed were on the boat and she wrote, ‘they  laughed at the poor immigrants lying on the deck in their wretched clothes…without the least sign of sympathy.’
She was seen with a man in a loud checked suit who favoured bright ties.
Edward Aveling's interests in the signs of class were not the same as Eleanor's.
Nobody is as bad as Aveling looks .
Her friends, with the exception of Engels, loathed him.
He was the great love of her life.
In photographs his face looks pasty and his expression petulant; it would contradict his reputation as a seducer, and of his alluring voice there is no record.
Besides women he was pursued by financial scandals.
All that remains of his seductiveness are the historical traces of a bad lot.
Infamy Disrepute Scheming
In a letter posted shortly before departure, Aveling wrote, half ironically, but perhaps also partly believing the possibility existed, that he might make millions of dollars in America.
He was to see the beginnings of the great urban slums of New York and Chicago, and he must have had some sense of this if they were going to speak to American working people, but still, there was the mythology, the possibility of millions of dollars waiting to be made.
Though not an out-and-out cheapskate, he was thought the kind of man who would try to squeeze a shilling into a pound by whatever means.
On board ship he invariably tried to hoodwink other people, even a cabin boy, into paying for his sherry.
He was to have one heroic moment in America although the mythological fortune eluded him.
He looked over the women in the ship's dining room, just checking, a few glanced his way.
There were opportunities to flirt with other passengers, moments when young American women returning from a long  tour left mothers and aunts below deck, and, standing a few feet away from Edward, they stared out at the Atlantic.
He could do little more than watch porpoises and gulls with them.
He might have listened to complaints of how stifling an aunt could be when one wanted to wander around London alone, or how one got sick in Venice or Paris, but he could only touch an elbow with mock sympathy or pat a sea-sprayed hand.
Ten days on the ocean gave him a few chances to visit the cabins of single women, but until they arrived in New York, there were no places to escape once the liaison ended, however passionately, half-heartedly, or ephemerally it had begun.
If he needed to give the object of his desire the slip, he would have to hide in steerage or the boiler room.
(Even in the cause of evasion, Aveling was not known to have spoken to any workers during the course of his tour.)
A boat was not the best place for the kind of romance Aveling preferred.
As rumour circulated within its confines, Eleanor would surely discover his infidelities.
He leaned over the rail and watched porpoises and gulls.
Except for the burial at sea of a woman travelling to meet her husband, it was a dull voyage.
Once in New York he couldn't disappear into the city either.
If he could have, if he had no responsibilities, he would rent hotel rooms, write plays, and go to auditions.
He would meet American women of all kinds whose faces he imagined would reflect mixed nationalities, and he would tell them he was an actor who had performed before the Queen.
The American women wouldn't have seen his picture.
They wouldn't know that his trip had been sponsored by the Socialist Labor Party of North America and his time, if he stuck to his commitments, was to be all booked up.
The Statue of Liberty had just arrived from Paris and was being assembled so it was not in New York harbour when they arrived.
Lower Manhattan must have looked confusing to them as several different neighbourhoods met at the end of the island, at Coenties Slip.
Already  the new world was not easily reduced to one thing.
These contradictory elements drew Eleanor's first image of New York: smokestacks, horse-drawn carts, the steeple of Trinity church, shipchandlers offices, and English spoken in unfamiliar accents.
The black metallic S curve of the elevated train shadowed the squalor of the lower east side which had begun to grow under it.
They were taken deeper into that neighbourhood and Eleanor wrote to her sister Laura in Paris that she considered New York a ‘very dirty, shoddy town’.
She stayed in the apartment of Wilhelm Rosenberg at 261 East Tenth Street between First Avenue and Avenue A. It is a street of tenements and railroad apartments and Rosenberg's apartment was one of these.
She didn't think to compare the German-speaking neighbourhood to Spitalflelds or the East End.
It was dirty and shoddy in a way that was very symbolic of New York: square blocks, square buildings, several storeys higher than English ones, packed full of people, no yards, no gardens, not even mingy ones with soot covered plants.
Eleanor and Aveling spoke to 25,000 people at Cooper Union, a school for artists, architects, and engineers.
The building is large, brown, a series of Romanesque arches in tiers that span Astor Place and Cooper Square.
There is a small triangular park behind it and the crowd may have spilled out from the Great Hall.
That night there was one Buddeke present, a Pinkerton agent.
Originally the Pinkertons were detectives but they became known for spying on union organizers and breaking strikes by violent means.
Buddeke, probably a German immigrant, was actually hired to tail Wilhelm Liebknecht, but on their American tours Liebknecht's and Eleanor's paths intersected.
(In a sense they must have worked in tandem since Liebknecht, whose English wasn't very good, addressed primarily German-speaking crowds.
Eleanor and Aveling were able to reach non-German-speaking Americans.)
When  Eleanor spoke at Cooper Union police entered the crowd and tried to disrupt the meeting.
As she saw movement near the doors Eleanor said, ‘I have been told that you in America enjoy such freedom that socialism is not needed.
Well, all you seem to enjoy is being shot by Pinkertons.
I speak not only of what I have seen, but of what I have read in your labour statistics.
You have no more freedom than us.’
Buddeke wrote bits of her speech into a notebook as he examined those around him and made note of the enthusiastic individuals who happened to be standing nearby, describing dress, attitude, or making little sketches.
At the same time he tried to determine the identities of the Americans on the podium.
He was kept very busy.
When he saw the blue uniforms of the New York police, did Buddeke show them some sort of identification or did he just leave?
To flash a badge was to risk someone in the crowd remembering his face and in the future, on another job, he could fingered as the stoolie he truly was.
His cover would have been blown.
On the other hand, by refraining from identifying himself he risked being bludgeoned or arrested.
Photographs of Eleanor Marx survive but Buddeke's image has vanished.
His bill for spying on the English Marxists was $712.10.
The attempt of the police to cause a riot was called ‘a disgrace for New York’ by one paper.
Eleanor, Aveling and Liebknecht wrote to another,We have never seen in Europe such wanton interference on the part of the police with the liberty of the subject as we saw today in a country proverbially known as ‘the land of the free’.
There was no quiet retreat, no time to rest between speeches and meetings.
Tenth Street provided no refuge.
Rosenberg's railroad apartment, one room following the next, offered little privacy.
Tenements were noisy and smelly, and then they left for New England.
If a movie were to be made of her American tour, one would see pages fly from calendars, clock  hands spin and headlines slapped one on top of the next.
The headlines of the New York Herald , for example, read ‘Socialist Pleadings.
Cooper Union Crowded.
Spurred on by a Woman.’
‘In European countries, it took the working class years and years before they fully realized the fact that they formed a distinct and, under existing conditions, a permanent class of modern society; and it took years again until this class-consciousness led them to form themselves into a distinct political party, independent of, and opposed to, all the old political parties formed by the various sections of the ruling classes.
On the more favoured soil of America, where no medieval ruins bar the way, where history begins with the elements of modern bourgeois society as evolved in the seventeenth century, the working class passed through these two stages of development within ten months.’
Engels also believed in the myth of a new society which could be moulded in a sensible modern way, without ‘feudal traditions or appendages.’
The Buddekes, however, were to win.
Eleanor made notes on the differences between English and American workplaces and unions.
Corporations, banks and trusts controlled a great deal and, although machines replaced workers more frequently in America, certain trades, Eleanor wrote, were 50 per cent more labour intensive than in England.
American labour politics were complicated and deemed a ‘slippery business’ by Engels.
Workplace observations notwithstanding, for Rosenberg, one judgement echoed: New York, shoddy and dirty.
Did she fault the landlords or tenants for shoddiness and dirt?
It seems obvious she must have known it was the fermer but he wished she had said so, after all this remained his city.
Rosenberg worked hard to raise the money to have them give the American lecture tour, and he was beginning to be  suspicious of Aveling, but Eleanor was devoted to him and deaf to all his antics.
In her loneliness Eleanor found no comfort in the geography of New York's lower east side.
The nearby Tompkins Square Park was dangerous, and walks by herself, Rosenberg told her, were out of the question.
Moments alone were limited to climbing his tenement stairs, smelling different cooking smells on each landing.
When she reached the apartment she tried to write, but sounds of crying children and raised voices came through the ceiling and walls.
She chain-smoked and stopped eating.
Eleanor used to say that she inherited her father's nose and she would one day sue him for damages.
She must have seen many similar noses in Rosenberg's neighbourhood, but how she felt about the similarity has not been recorded.
They travelled to Chicago by train.
Aveling eyeing hats and legs in the dining car, both fascinated and repelled by mid-western accents.
He was collecting notes for a book of random observations, a Thackeray-like Sketchbook, called An American Journey .
He observed that American women spoke and chewed gum simultaneously and took copious amounts of snuff.
Under the pretext of research he spent hours trying to observe a woman ‘hiding’ snuff.
He also observed that Americans wiped their noses on their sleeves, employed spittoons and had poor aim.
Coarse, money-grubbing provincials .
One of the myths Eleanor would speak against was the idea that socialists wanted to have women in common, and the men who made these accusations, she said, were the owners of the means of production anyway.
Chicago was in a state of siege in the aftermath of the Haymarket trial.
The Chicago Eight, anarchists unfairly tried and convicted had been sentenced to hang.
The Chicago press warned of ‘Dr  Aveling and his vitriolic spouse’, in the language of a carnival sideshow.
The anarchist paper Freiheit , in opposition to the Marxists, thought Eleanor should have been shot on sight upon arriving.
Yet they drew huge crowds and all their meetings seemed a success.
Aveling preferred actresses, but they were more difficult to locate once he left New York, and he rather looked down on what passed as theatre in America, although he admired Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show .
He made no secret of what he thought of as the poverty of American culture.
His disdain was a source of embarrassment to his sponsors, but a greater embarrassment developed as they prepared to return to London.
He developed an aphorism,New York is over-eager to get rich .
He repeated it constantly, goading Rosenberg.
Rosenberg's suspicions of Aveling multiplied as piles of receipts were tuned in.
He had demanded exorbitant fees for his speaking engagements and billed the Socialist Labor Party for theatre tickets and corsages which he claimed were for Eleanor.
The irony of excessive expenses incurred for Karl Marx's daughter wasn't lost on Rosenberg, but Aveling called his accusations ridiculous, and he was defended from England by Engels who brushed off Aveling's embezzlements as the pranks of a boyish ‘noodle’.
Rosenberg could sense the counter-accusations ringing across the Atlantic, the worst of them perhaps unspoken: Americans had idealist and somewhat puritan expectations of how Dr Aveling should have behaved, Americans are a simple people, literal-minded and dependent on secondary sources of information.
London papers in fact ate up the scandal, writing that the New York socialists would ‘nevermore import a professional agitator from the effete monarchies of Europe.
The luxury is too expensive.’
When questioned about the contradictions between his enormous lecture fees and his supposed interest in the disenfranchised, Aveling replied,Well, it's English you know, quite English .
When Eleanor left, the Statue of Liberty had just been unveiled in New York harbour.
Icon for future paperweights, imitation foam tiaras, and torches covered with foam flames, an image to be printed on bumper stickers, T-shirts and sweatpants, some of which, through donations, will find themselves passed out by evangelical missionaries in Central America one hundred years after the unveiling.
But in 1886, when Eleanor Marx sailed back to England, the statue was a symbol in its infancy, a giant thing, a gift from France, constructed in parts and shipped across the Atlantic.
If you walk east from the Telephone Bar and Grill, you arrive at the block where Eleanor Marx stayed when she came to New York.
The buildings are the same as they were one hundred years ago; there has been no development on this block.
Crack dealers operate on the west end of the street, near the Good Medicine and Co storefront theatre.
The Russian-Turkish baths are directly opposite 261 East Tenth Street and were probably there when Eleanor Marx spoke in New York.
They reserve one day for women, and in 1886 there may have been no day reserved for women at all.
261 is between a Reggae music store which has T-shirts and records in its window, and the Osgood Fulfillment House, a halfway house for runaway children.
Cooper Union is a few blocks west.
In front of the building people sell junk either stolen or scavenged from the garbage.
They have bundles and shopping carts full of things, old magazines, books, used clothing, shoes.
When it rains they huddle against the building, leave the objects on blankets or broken up cardboard boxes, only to return to selling when the rain stops.
The park behind the school is fell of homelsss people who have set out their blankets and mattresses near the  statue of Peter Cooper.
There is a methadone clinic nearby and on Saturday morning, if it's raining, junkies, too, meet under the Romanesque arches.
Lately none of these groups have been present in the park, but as it gets warmer they will return.
On a London bus she had heard a driver announce Stoke-Jewington when driving through Islington.
She had heard rhyming slang, she knew what four by twos meant, and she'd once been asked if she could speak with a Jewish accent.
The man had come up to her at the entrance to the library where she worked and just asked her.
Can you speak with a Jewish accent ?
She thought he might have meant a New York accent, but she was from Los Angeles and wouldn't have tried anyway.
She'd also been addressed near Notting Hill Gate in Arabic.
When she couldn't answer, the man turned to his friend and said in English,she's not one of ours .
At work everyone was talking about the television dramatization of the Jack the Ripper story.
Michael Caine played a highly emotional, fairly hard-drinking detective who finally uncovered the Queen's physician as the Ripper.
— Did you know he was Jewish, someone asked?— The Queen's physician?— No, Michael Caine.
The head librarian expressed incredulity.
Judy Holliday, Piper Laurie, Laurence Harvey, Cary Grant (half), a woman in the cataloguing department who claimed to be Polish, those he knew about, but Michael Caine?
He said he was going to start a Secret Jew of the Week Club.
A different one every week but they had to be believable.
The Prince of Wales was out, and so on.
It was funny for awhile but the novelty soon wore off.
It was hard to top Michael Caine, and later the woman confessed she wasn't even sure about that one.
In New York in 1882 I met Oscar Wilde.
After lectures, theatre openings, at private parties, I would infiltrate his circle, usually posing as a reporter or a photographer, and while he tried to snub me, I pretended to ignore his ignoring me.
It was difficult to see him alone, but I did manage a few times.
I knew that my presence annoyed him, and if I'd stop to nurse hurt feelings, I'd travel home each night on the el, lonely and defeated, in the way one can be on a train.
So I just barged on.
I made my way home each night with at least some notion of hope and plans for a new assault on Wilde.
With what little money I had I would try to wear unusual suits or hats, learning a combination of subtlety and the unexpected in order to gain attention.
After leaving me outside a restaurant in the theatre district while he and his friends dined inside with Oliver Wendell Holmes or P.T. Barnum, I realized it was stupid to pander to his interest in aesthetics.
I was neither aspiring poet nor actor and had never been further east than Brooklyn.
I wanted to offer him something no one else would.
One night as he waited for a young man to find him a cab, I saw my chance.
He was alone for just a few minutes and I made my offer.
Oscar , I said,let me take you to Coney Island, it's like Brighton, I think, the Brighton of the New World .
I really had no idea if this was true.
He wasn't interested.
Oscar, I tried again,after engaging in a critique of American culture in speech after speech, will you fail to visit the spot where Walt Whitman had been known to read Homer after Shakespeare to the waves ?
He became mildly interested.
I nearly told him Coney Island was also known as Sodom by the Sea, but thought better of it.
Some subjects, I'd learned during the weeks I followed Oscar Wilde, were better left only as implications.
We arranged to take the train out on a Saturday.
I  knew Oscar would have preferred a quieter, less raucous venture, on a weekday perhaps, but I had to work on certain days and those days came up during his visit.
On the train as we rode past the spines of Manhattan to the flat rooftops of Brooklyn, he told me something of his travels in north America, indeed, he had been much further west than Jersey City, even beyond Chicago.
He told me how he had been deceived by a young man who claimed to be the son of a banker, and he had lost money in a gambling casino because he believed the con artist.
It had been a narrow escape and I was impressed.
He had next invested in Kelly's Perpetual Motion Company and lost more money.
In one city he had been impersonated by a woman named Helen Potter, and in another a boy of sixteen managed to get into his hotel room.
He'd left school and wanted his advice on becoming a writer.
I just gave him a piece of fruit , Oscar said,and told him to learn French .
Yeah, I'll bet, I thought.
I was curious about Kelly's P.M.Company.
Was it to do with zoetropes or physical fitness?
Afraid to ask seemingly stupid questions, I kept my mouth shut.
At about high noon we arrived at Coney Island and approached the boardwalk.
People pushed and shoved, stared at his madder lake suit, trousers cut off at the knee.
He looked faintly uncomfortable and began to sweat.
I pointed to the bathing lockers where we could leave our things and go for a swim.
No, he shuddered.
Wrong again, I realized, of course Oscar Wilde wouldn't swim with the immigrant masses.
I had the sinking feeling of failure.
Look, I pointed to the site of the former Coney Island house.
Do you know who used to stay there?
Melville and Edgar Allan Poe.
Together ? he asked.
The day, though hot, turned more promising.
We took a long walk down the Iron Pier.
Oscar took his jacket off and I offered to carry it for him.
It would have been easy to nick his wallet at that point.
The crowd was full of  pickpockets, as I pointed out to him, and I could have easily said, well, I am sorry Oscar, but you know it is one of the risks here.
I bought him a red hot, a sort of sausage on a roll with mustard.
He wouldn't eat it, so I did.
Later when he was hungry, he ate three of them in a row, washed down with bottles of beer which he said he didn't much care for.
American beer, pooh.
The Atlantic Ocean splashed against the pier, and he stared out to sea and began quoting Homer.
A few people stared.
Coney Island is about staring and he seemed to enjoy being a spectacle even for dirty children with candysmeared mouths.
He was invisible here, just a man in a strange suit and a funny accent.
Some mimed dances and twirled around him, humming popular songs.
Little did they know this was the fellow for whom The Flippity Flop Young Man was written, and I wasn't about to tell them.
Would it have made any difference if I had?
Did he enjoy being a temporarily anonymous spectacle, or did he believe these seamstresses and pipe fitters knew who he was?
I couldn't quite tell, and as a sort of curator of the afternoon, it made me nervous.
One woman pointed to his madder lake trousers, said she wouldn't mind a pair like those.
Oscar didn't pay any attention to her.
By late afternoon we'd stopped in at a number of bars along the pier.
I managed to keep boys away from him, but in one alley he disappeared.
It was the worst of all Coney Island's dark corners, and I ventured down it, calling his name and looking in dirty windows.
It occurred to me that he might well have heard me and decided not to answer.
I still had his jacket, but he had taken his wallet out at one of the bars and had that with him.
It was growing dark as I walked down the pier alone, his jacket draped over my shoulders, and I wondered if I should really look for Wilde at all.
He could find his way back to New York somehow.
He could speak English.
He could ask directions.
I sat on the shore and stared at  all the junk left on the beach: beer bottles, paper wrappers, bits of clothing, shreds of cigarettes.
I thought I saw something purple floating in the tide, a pair of trousers, or a skirt, an upsidedown umbrella even.
In the twilight and without my glasses, I couldn't really tell.
Would I one day show people this jacket and say that it had been a lovely afternoon in Central Park when he gave it to me and, in closing, would I say that as he disappeared into the trees, I never saw Oscar Wilde again?
The purplish thing drifted on to the beach, but I felt too lazy to walk over and examine it.
The stars were clouded over, the gas lights were dim then grew a bit brighter, and I could hear a tinkly organ out of tune, the sound came from the direction of the Iron Pier.
Perhaps he thought I was the impersonator, dressed as a man, hoping to win his confidence and thus learn the kind of mannerisms and opinions he might reveal only in private.
Perhaps he thought that, and he'd given me the slip.
I brushed sand from my suit and strolled towards the pier, stepping on a rotten orange.
I nearly slipped on the convex peel as it made a squishing sound underfoot, doing small damage to my shoe.
The Bowery looked ominous but I wasn't afraid.
It was time to make some attempt to look for him.
Finally we give in and rent the movie we ignored a few months ago when we went to see Midnight Run .
As we listen to Kevin Kline run through every possible cliché about the English, the people who live upstairs begin to fight.
The noise gets louder and louder and we wonder if they are beating their children.
You think you have balls?
Well my balls are bigger than your balls .
Father to eleven-year-old son.
Sound of slaps.
John Cleese tells Jamie Lee Curtis he doesn't like being English all that much.
It's a pain being so repressed, he more or less says.
I call the police and describe the sounds of the fighting going on above my head.
It's Saturday night  and they may not come.
Sometimes they do, sometimes not.
We could turn up the movie but it doesn't help.
Before the end of it, we rewind and just wait.
A braindamaged man who lives with his mother near the top of the tenement comes in at eleven o'clock, after sweeping out Seventh Street Pizza.
He always repeats certain phrases over and over.
Sometimes it's No news is good news.
No news is good news.
I always say, no news is good news .
Tonight it's the story of his uncle and as he stands around in the hall, he talks about his Uncle Rocco who was stationed in Ipswich.
His uncle was fend of French fries and he tells the empty corridor for the hundredth time that they are called chips over there and they are eaten with vinegar.
Normandy Beach , he repeats as he climbs the stairs.
Normandy Beach.
Normandy Beach .
