Win £100,000 with Wilson 
Federation Cup 1991  A Royal Occasion
SUPPORTERS OF BRITISH TENNIS.
MIDLAND The Listening Bank 
Contents
MAIN POINT
Final countdown by Alastair McIver
SPEAKING MY MIND
David Wynne-Morgan
AROUND THE WORLD
What Price the Future by John Parsons (Daily Telegraph)
TOURNAMENTS
Stella Artois Grass Court Championships
Alastair McIver at Queen's
Direct Line Grass Court Championships
Barry Wood reports from Beckenham
Pilkington Glass Ladies' Championships
Alastair McIver reports from Eastbourne on a 10th title for Navratilova
French Open
Peter Blackman (Evening Standard) sees Courier and Seles triumph in Paris
Midland Bank Students Tennis — Sue McCarthy reports from Bristol
FEATURES
Insight — the world's best coaches on the game's greatest players.
This month, Pancho Segura on Jimmy Connors, by Lailee van Dillen
File America — Jim Martz (Miami Herald), looks at the Florida coaching academies
Coaching Commentary — Olga Morozova on the importance of fitness
NEW
Tennis workshop Alan Jones with Barry Wood
COMPETITIONS
WIN — £100,000 with Wilson: Spot the Ball
WIN — Head Rackets
WIN — Ellesse ‘limited edition’ framed print
PLUS — 
Readers Letters, Positively Pilkington, Junior Tennis World, Junior Set by Lotto, Rankings, Results, Off Court
Final Countdown
Royalty, Read and the Radio One Roadshow…
by Alastair McIver
Fed Cup fever will hit Nottingham during the week of 21st July, when HRH, The Princess of Wales attends the Opening Ceremony for the 28th staging of this great women's event.
Apart from the large numbers of tennis fans expected on day one of the 1991 Federation Cup, millions more around the country will be witness to the day's proceedings, courtesy of the BBC's Radio I Roadshow.
D J Mike Read and guest Cliff Richard will be on hand to capture the excitement of the first day and hopefully set the mood for a week of high quality tennis — and not a little fun!
The Festival Court has a different activity taking place each day, while the Centre and surrounding ‘competition’ courts will see the best women players from 56 nations competing for what is the premier team prize in women's tennis.
As well as world No. 1, Monica Seles, fans will have the opportunity to see the top players, including Steffi Graf, Zina Garrison, Jennifer Capriati, Sanchez-Vicario, not to mention the British contingent of Jo Durie, Monique Javer, Clare Wood and Sam Smith.
From Seles down, the list of competitors reads like a who's who of international tennis players.
The telephone hotline for remaining tickets is 071–793 1234.
If you haven't got your ticket to the 1991 Federation Cup by NEC, presented by Midland Bank, then call now.
Nottingham beckons…
Countdown
Ah yes I remember it well…
10 things you didn't know about the Federation Cup
•
Billie Jean King played in the first five Federation Cup finals.
Representing the United States, she played between 1963 and 1967.
•
Martina Navratilova is the only player, to date, to have represented two countries in Federation Cup competition.
She played for her native Czechoslovakia in 3–0 defeat of Austria in 1975, and then played for the United States in 1982 and 1986.
•
Prior to the establishment of the Federation Cup by the ILTF (now the ITF) in 1962, the former US player, Margaret du Pont, together with former Australian pro, Thelma Coyne Long and supported by the USTA, had drawn up plans for their own women's international team competition and had even offered to donate a cup for the event.
It was all too late for the ILTF, however, which, in 1962, announced that the first Federation Cup would take place at Queen's Club in June 1963.
•
In 1977, the Federation Cup was contested at Eastbourne and replaced the traditional pre-Wimbledon ladies grass court tournament that year.
•
Brazil was the first South American country to host the Federation Cup in 1984, some 21 years after the event was founded.
•
The Federation Cup itself was purchased in 1982 for £300 and it is inscribed in two languages, English and French.
•
Prizemoney was awarded for the first time to competing teams in 1976.
Colgate Palmolive sponsored the event's prizemoney to the tune of £130,000.
•
Virginia Wade has the best win/loss, singles/doubles record of any player, in Federation Cup competition, either British or foreign.
She represented Great Britain for 16 consecutive years, between 1967 and 1983.
She won 67 of her 99 singles and doubles matches.
•
This year's total of 56 participating nations is a record for the Federation Cup.
It beats last year's record of 47 (in Atlanta) by 9.
•
When this year's competition in Nottingham is completed, Great Britain, like Japan, will have hosted it on 3 occasions.
The United States and Australia have both hosted it 4 times each, while a total of 10 other countries have hosted the Federation Cup either once or twice.
How to get there
Nottingham is easily accessible by road, rail and air
Weekday departures every hour from St Pancras.
Journey time about 100 minutes Phone 071–387 7070 or contact your local station for details.
The City of Nottingham Tennis Centre is situated 3 miles south west of the city centre and a regular bus service stops outside the Centre: Service numbers 13 and 14 from Friar Lane, next to Market Square.
Park and Ride facilities will be available from the Victoria Embankment to the Tennis Centre.
Look out for signs to Federation Cup Park and Ride at city approaches.
Sunday 21st July 10am
Preliminary Matches
5pm Opening Ceremony (in the presence of HRH, The Princess of Wales)
Monday 22nd July 1pm
1st round main draw matches
International Day — the first day that local schools begin their support of their adopted nation in the ‘Welcome to the World’ project.
Tuesday 23rd July 1pm
1st round main draw matches (cont.)
Cliff Richard ‘Search for a Star’
Children's Day — all activities on the Festival Court will be geared towards children, tennis and fun.
Wednesday 24th July 1pm
2nd round main draw matches
Year of Sport — Great Britain is this year celebrating a ‘Year of Sport’.
Therefore, all activities in the Festival areas will be connected with various sports — not just tennis.
All sports' enthusiasts are invited to take part.
Thursday 25th July 1pm
Quarter-final matches
Ladies Day — All activities in the Festival area are aimed at encouraging more ladies to take up tennis.
Friday 26th July 1pm
Quarter-final matches (cont.)
Club Players' Day — All activities in the Festival area are geared to those club players who play tennis on a regular basis.
Saturday 27th July 1pm
Semi-final matches
Family Day — Families will be encouraged to play tennis together amidst related activities on the Festival Court.
Sunday 28th July 1pm
Final
Closing Ceremony
Virginia Wade — Fed Cup record holder
Hana Mandikova — representing Czechoslovakia in Tokyo
Speaking my Mind
David Wynne-Morgan
Player power is once more causing concern amongst those responsible for administering tennis throughout the world.
Even the players themselves are getting concerned although they put it in slightly different terms.
Boris Becker recently expressed the view that there was too much money in tennis and that it was ruining the game — a view of course that it is much easier to make objectively once you have £5m in the bank.
It is, of course, money that causes almost all the trouble.
It is at the root of almost all the player power problems.
One man who would sacrifice all his prize money for the year just to win the Wimbledon Singles Crown that has eluded him is Ivan Lendl, and the tension clearly showed when he lost to the Canadian Grant Connell in windy, dark, and damp conditions in the Stella Artois Championship at Queen's Club.
It was no way for the holder to go out.
Ivan Lendl has been a great credit to the game which he has played with distinction for so long.
His discipline, his dedication, and his pursuit of excellence may not have made him the most charismatic of world class players, but it has made him one of the most respected.
He had an uncharacteristic fall from grace in his match against Connell.
Clearly, out of sorts with himself in the wet and windy conditions which he hated, he smashed his racquet on the ground on no less than eight occasions.
The umpire never said a word.
There was no rebuke or caution of any kind.
This is the kind of inconsistency that encourages players to take advantage.
I wonder whether the umpire's attitude would have been the same if the offender had been his opponent, the comparatively unknown Grant Connell.
I am afraid I believe a caution would have come a great deal more quickly.
As we go to press, there has been no satisfactory explanation as to the withdrawal of the number one seed Monica Seles from the Wimbledon Women's Singles at the last moment.
A fine of £4,000 is certainly not going to act as any kind of deterrent to her future behaviour.
Monica has had a very hard year.
The stress and strain on muscles and joints is considerable, but why has she not sent the doctor's certificate as a matter of courtesy to the tournament authorities?
Monica's number one ranking would have been at stake at Wimbledon.
Grass is not her favourite surface and there were many who thought she would have great difficulty holding off the challenges of Steffi Graf, Martina Navratilova or Gabriela Sabatini.
I am sure that had nothing to do with her withdrawal but the way she did it raised more questions than it answered.
I suspect that the rejection of the £7m offer by the All England Club for the land of the Wimbledon Sports Club opposite is not by any means the end of the story.
The Club is almost entirely financed by the proceeds it gets from turning a large part of the Club into a giant car park throughout The Championships.
I do not entirely believe the member who said that their traditions were more important than the money.
I equally do not believe that the All England Club is going to sign a contract to create a completely new club in Basingstoke tomorrow morning.
So tennis fans can, for the moment, pout away their railway timetables.
I am afraid I am cynical enough to believe this is just another round of a giant game of poker, where the only thing that will matter in the end will be the size of the cheque.
Negotiations have not finished; I am sure they are just beginning.
Watch this space…
Tennis World Club — Prize Draw
WIN a Casio Mini TV
It's true.
We have a Casio TV 470 colour pocket television to give away this month.
The TV 470 is the first pocket television in the range to incorporate a new auto tuning system.
It features a 2.2″ screen with built in aerial, weighs as little as 8oz and comes complete with a protective soft case and batteries.
The Casio TV 470 has a retail value of £99.99, which makes it a great prize for our readers.
All that you have to do to be included in the draw for this super prize, is to take out a subscription for yourself — or a friend or relative — by 25th August, on which day the draw will take place.
The winner will be notified immediately and his or her prize will follow within 21 days.
If you want to go into the draw, then just complete the form below and send it, with your remittance, to arrive at the editorial offices by 25th August.
Tennis World Magazine — you know it makes sense.
Around the World
WHAT PRICE THE FUTURE?
by John Parsons (Daily Telegraph)
Seldom has Philippe Chatrier, a man renowned for his forthright views, especially whenever he has felt the advancement or the image of tennis was at risk, been quite so outspokenly blunt, as in his final Presidential newsletter he issued before ending his 14 year reign in charge (which &referred to in last month's column) at The International Tennis Federation.
The focus of what could be seen as a heartfelt cry for commercial sanity to be restored to the sport centred upon one simple but now all-consuming issue — money!
‘Make no mistake,’ he warns, ‘money is now a cancer in the game.
Our game really is in danger of dying from too much of it.’
No doubt there will be some who dismiss such utterances as hypocritical, asking how such views can be reconciled with the way Mr Chatrier, as President of the French Tennis Federation, worked so hard to provide Paris, in what was already a crowded autumn calendar, with what at the time was the richest official indoor tournament, other than The Masters, in terms of prize money.
The will point to his agreement, however reluctantly, to the introduction of the Compaq Grand Slam Cup last year — the ITF's official end of the season competition — which offered $2m to the winner and $6m overall, more than double the amount on offer at the ATP Championships and which even some of the players, including Boris Becker and John McEnroe, described as exorbitant.
Mr Chatrier's response would be direct and unashamed.
In his view, there are times when you have to fight fire with fire, or, as he put it rather more eloquently during his defence of the Grand Slam Cup decision, ‘It was a sad reality that we were left with no real option but to protect tradition with the modern deterrent — money.’
Anyone who believes that Mr Chatrier's remarks can be dismissed either as those of someone who has lost touch with reality, are also way off the mark.
Few have done more over the years to encourage and inspire the growth and development of tennis by putting it on as professional footing as possible.
The rise in the quality of French tennis over the last 20 years, culminating in the emergence of players such as Yannick Noah, Henri Leconte and now Guy Forget, coupled with the transformation of the French Open at Roland Garros into what the majority of players regard as the best organised of the four Grand Slams (even though Wimbledon remains favourite as to the one they most want to win) are due very largely to the leadership he has shown.
What clearly frustrates him is that so much of the money now sloshing around in professional tennis, is being spent in damaging — or at least potentially damaging ways — rather than for the good of the game, as well as for the good of the individuals who are benefitting.
I make no excuse for quoting at some length from the Chatrier newsletter ‘I have always said that the biggest problem we face in tennis is that there is too much money around.
The main reason is quite simple.
Tennis is such a perfect sport for exposure in television.’
Cancer
Then, after dealing with the Grand Slam Cup and explaining how he only went along with the idea after insisting that the event would also produce $2m for the development of the game in ‘third world tennis countries, he went on:
‘Make no mistake, money is now a cancer in the game.
Our game really is in danger of dying from too much of it.
You cannot blame a brilliant young player who takes, say, the $200,000 he or she is offered, to play just for one night but it inevitably gives them a  totally false impression of life and what their tennis priorities ought to be.
But when you have a situation where youngsters of 12 or 13 — and in some cases even younger — who may only have won a couple of matches, are being offered $500,000 guarantees to sign up with one of the management companies before they are snapped up by one of the rival agents, the potential for long term damage is enormous.’
This year, in prize money alone, there is well over $100m available for professional players round the world, including team events such as The David Cup and The Federation Cup.
And that is before you start taking into consideration commercial endorsements and appearance money which, at a conservative guess must add at least another $30–40m.
Yet all we seem to have heard, either from a few of the more militant leading players or their representatives in recent months, has been the cry ‘We want more.’
If it is not the Women's Tennis Association, spurred on by the vocal support of Martina Navratilova and Monica Seles demanding equal prize money at Wimbledon and the French, then it is the voices on the men's side who want prize money for the top tier of their tournaments doubled to $2m.
Despair
It is not wonder that Mr Chatrier seems ready to throw up his hands in despair.
He has only expressed what a lot of other people have been starting to fear for a long time, that unless the commercial manipulators in tennis are careful, they could cook the golden goose.
Players need to be aware too.
An increasing number of directors of sponsoring companies are beginning to ask ‘What did we get for our money?’ when they so often see players to whom considerable appearance fees have been paid, losing limply in their first or second round matches and, even worse, then turning round and implying that the only tournaments they really take seriously are the Grand Slams.
Real Dangers
It's the market place economy, a case of supply and demand.
There's nothing you can do about it,’ I can hear some of you thinking.
May be, but it is also surely the duty of someone like Mr Chatrier, as a leading official of an organisation responsible for the continuing prosperity of tennis worldwide and at all levels, to draw everyone's attention to such dangers.
Make no mistake, they are real.
As Mr Chatrier put it: ‘All I would ask of any successor is that he will always try to put the best interests of the sport before money.
If it was not for the Grand Slam tournaments and the unique place they hold in the game, I am sure we would be losing this vital battle.’
In his 14 years as president, both tennis in general and the ITF in particular have undergone enormous development and Mr Chatrier can take much of the credit for the changes which have taken place.
His foresight has been especially important in transforming the ITF from a largely amateur, mainly non-international organisation, with a staff of just four plus a part-time accountant, into an all-embracing tennis authority, with a staff of 40, capable of coping with increasing demands and responsibilities.
Olympics
Perhaps, though, his greatest achievement, was in leading tennis back into the Olympic Games for the first time since 1924.
As he now wistfully recalls, there were relatively few other supporters for the idea when he and the late David Gray, the ex-correspondent of The Guardian, who became ITF General Secretary, launched their Olympic campaign almost ten years before gold medals were again being presented to tennis players in Seoul in 1988.
‘It took us quite a while to persuade other people just how much tennis in general could benefit, especially in those countries where Government grants are dependent on Olympic membership, if tennis was once again a member of the Olympic family.
‘Although tennis was formally reinstated as an Olympic sport in 1981, it wasn't until 1987, some four years after David had died, that we finally persuaded the IOC to allow all tennis players, including the professionals, to be eligible to compete,’ he recalls.
‘I had insisted all along that we could not return until that was the case and that having waited so long, waiting a little longer would not matter.
The only proviso, of course, was that in keeping with the Olympic charter, there would be no appearance money or prize money.’
The success of the tennis in Seoul was the perfect answer to all those who had doubted either the need or even the efficacy of tennis once more becoming an Olympic sport.
It has also contributed greatly to the funding for grass roots tennis in many parts of the world.
This was also another issue always close to Mr Chatrier's heart.
That was why he promoted the idea of the Grand Slam Trust Fund, an opportunity for the four Grand Slam tournaments, as the pinnacles of the game, to make a major contribution to the grass roots on a global basis, over and above the enormous funding they provide for tennis in their own countries.
Wimbledon as usual, led the way, with the first substantial grant.
The others soon followed.
Integrity
Over the years, Mr Chatrier has had his enemies and critics.
There must have been many an occasion when agents, in particular, must have wished to see the back of him.
Yet no-one could ever have doubted either his sincerity or integrity in fighting for what he always felt was right for the game.
In recognition of his enormous contribution to world tennis, fellow ITF members presented him during the World Champions Dinner in the elegant Pavilion Gabriel in Paris, during the French Open, with a specially commissioned bust, complete with that pugnacious chin which perfectly reflects the determined response he has always presented to any potentially damaging challenge.
Future
Mr Chatrier's involvement, and influence, in tennis is far from finished.
As a member of the International Olympic Committee, the sport which has been his life, both before and since his professional career as a journalist, will have a permanent voice in the world's most important sporting forum.
Providing his French colleagues agree, which is akin to the BBC agreeing to retain Dan Maskell, he will stand for another four year term as President of the French Federation, which will take him through to early 1997.
And as Life Honourary President of the ITF, he will continue his experience, knowledge and opinions, through the corridors of Barons Court…
Men only
The women will not, after all, take part in this year's Compaq Grand Slam Cup.
‘We've simply run out of time in trying to reach an agreement with all concerned’ said tournament director, Alex Meyer-Wolden, who nevertheless remains hopeful that he will be able to stage a mixed event in 1992.
Any disappointment he may feel over the delay has been more than compensated for by the news that tickets for this year's event are already selling  fast.
The two German players, Boris Becker and Michael Stich (an unseeded semi-finalist at the French Open) have already qualified to take part…and, even more important, both have indicated that they will play.
‘Michael Stich has definitely told us he will play and all the indications are that Boris will do so this time as well’ said Mr Meyer-Wolden, who spent several hours on a flight back from Australia earlier in the year, putting Becker in the picture of a wide range of his views, ideas and objectives.
Whatever was said, Becker clearly seems to have changed his mind about the credibility and validity of the Grand Slam Cup, judging by a recent interview he gave to Suddeutsche Zeitung, one of Germany's most influential newspapers.
Apart from re-iterating his belief, which is gaining support, that there probably should be a completely new major circuit of not more than a dozen tournaments, based round the Grand Slams and culminating in one end-of-season event, Becker said ‘We're not machines.
For the top five in the ranking list, only the Grand Slams count.’
More directly, on the issue of the Grand Slam Cup, he added ‘I think it will replace The Masters (the ATP Championships finals).
I believe the two events will join together.
Both can't survive like this.
The ITF has more power than the ATP but the ITF needs the ATP.’
Explaining why he now supports the Grand Slam Cup, after refusing to compete a year ago, he said ‘I have my word to the ATP that I would do everything I signed to do in my contract with them.
I think I am the only one who hasn't had to pay any fines for not missing a tournament.
And this of course, included not playing in the Grand Slam Cup because I was defending the idea of the ATP Tour.
Afterwards I realised that this idea was wrong.
That's why I am now relatively open-minded about the Grand Slam Cup.
‘It is also an unbelievable chance for Germany to have the fifth most important tennis tournament in the world…a certainty also that tennis will continue there when Steffi Graf or I are no longer around.’
Super Super Series!
Although no formal proposals have yet been announced by anyone, there is no doubt that the idea for a ‘Super Super Series’, as I suppose it should be called, is gaining momentum.
The problem, of course, would be reaching agreement with all parties concerned, as to which events, other than the four Grand Slams, would be included.
One theory is there should be Sydney, a week earlier than at present, leading into the Australian Open, the Stella Artois Championships as the traditional prelude to Wimbledon, plus Cincinnati and Indianapolis on the way into the U.S. Open.
Rather more controversial would be deciding which tournament should take pride of place in the European clay court season leading into Paris.
Tradition suggests Rome, especially now that it is once more a major tournament in every way, despite suffering from so many lack lustre performances from some of the leading players this year.
Somehow, I cannot see either Monte Carlo or Hamburg allowing their status to be lowered without a fight.
Also in an ideal calendar, the Grand Slam Cup should be brought forward to the end of October, 4–5 weeks after the US Open, which would not only give the players a brief chance to relax but then to prepare for the ‘tour finale’ on an indoor surface.
As for the build-up venues for the Grand Slam Cup, providing the surface was the same, the geographical choice need not matter.
It could even vary from year to year.
The Stockholm Open would have a strong claim, but so too would Tokyo, not least for the enormous amount of Japanese funding there is these days for tennis.
Somehow I just knew in the end we would get back to the subject of money!
Protection Racket
Having realised, I suspect, at least for the time being, that they are not going to get anywhere in their fight for equal prize money at Wimbledon or the French, the Women's Tennis Association have come up with another proposal which I know has support in some areas but which I certainly hope will also bite the dust.
What they want in future is 32 seeds in all the Grand Slam tournaments instead of the 16 they have at present.
Their argument is that it is good for the tournament, a s well as the players concerned, if as many as possible of the higher ranked competitors survive the early rounds.
They also claim that the players have ‘earned’ this protection by the performances in the rest of the year which have brought about their rankings.
In my view, to have 32 seeds, even in the men's singles where there is far greater depth of talent than among the women, cannot possibly be justified.
To have 32 seeds in a 128 women's singles draw, would be nothing less than a protection racket.
It is difficult enough now to find any first or second round matches of any consequence in the women's singles at almost any tournament, especially the Grand Slams.
While the quality of play, and competition, at the top end of the women's game has increased superbly in the last few years, the drop off after the first half dozen or so, is still equally evident.
If you do not believe me, then listen to how Steffi Graf and Monica Seles let the cat out of the bag in Paris.
First, Steffi admitted ‘The women's event doesn't really start before the second week’ after most of the top seeds had advanced for no more than the loss of a few games.
Then Monica, in apparently wanting the ITF to change the Olympic eligibility rules to suit top players who did not want to qualify by playing in the Federation Cup, said ‘without Gabriela, Martina or I in the Olympics, they wouldn't really be the Olympics and Steffi could win the gold medal playing left-handed.’
Ouch!
(Editor's note: We would be interested to hear readers views on the WTA proposal to increase the numbers of seeds in Grand Slam tournaments)
Chatrier's passionate pronouncement ‘money is ruining the game’
Becker — Exorbitant prize money
Stich — Cup Qualifier
Tournament report
156 and Counting
Martina Money Machine Rolls on
by Alastair McIver
Another week, another win.
Another day, another dollar…well, another $70,000 to be precise.
The Martina money machine marches on but at 34, and with career prize money of $16million plus to her name, the dollars aren't so important these days.
It's the titles that matter, and Martina, with 156, has her fair share of them.
In fact, by winning the Pilkington Glass Ladies' title in June for the 10th time, she came to within one of Chris Evert's record of 157 career titles.
This latest victory at the sunswept and showery Eastbourne was probably one of her most satisfying, not least because she defeated a player in the final who herself, did everything but win.
Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario positively demolished her opponents with a ruthlessness reminiscent of Navratilova's great rival of the 1980's, Chris Evert.
The 19 year old Spaniard has always had the weapons but, so often in the past, has used them sparingly in her pursuit of greatness.
Now, there is an added urgency to her shots and she remains an unlikely threat to both grass court opponents and,(following her victory in the 1990 French Open and her re-appearance in the final again this year), clay court specialists.
Sanchez-Vicario gambled on power, played for the lines and left her opponents, particularly the vastly experienced but hopelessly out of sorts Pam Shriver and the Puerto Rican, Gigi Fernandez, floundering.
Shriver's recent long term absence from the tour, following shoulder surgery, and her lack of match practice were shown up by an opponent who was playing the women's game of today, powerful and merciless.
Shriver, good humoured as she was in her quarter final defeat, played ‘yesterday's’ tennis.
Despite the humour, which was lapped up by an appreciative crowd, it was a sad spectacle and one that must have left her regretting her comments, when asked about her chances at Wimbledon.
She said, ‘…
I think I would be top of any seed's list of players they would prefer not to have in their section.’
As expected, Martina, fresh from victory in the Dow Classic in Birmingham, proceeded unharmed to the final, defeating Amanda Coetzer and Brenda Schulz for the second time in a week, Mary Joe Fernandez, and Heather Ludloff, all in straight sets.
She was held up briefly in the final when the in-form Sanchez-Vicario swept to a 4–1 lead (and deservedly so) and yet Martina, the grass court player supreme, merely drew on her experience, stepped up a gear, kept her nerve and won 5 games in a row to deflate the Spanish challenge.
It was all over in 60 minutes, thus confirming what everyone knew anyway — that Navratilova, at 34, is still probably the best grass court player in the world.
Special feature
This is live from Eastbourne…
by Alastair McIver
It wasn't one of the major soccer matches of the day, indeed, national media attention rarely focused on the fortunes of Bradford City Football Club.
And yet, when disaster strikes, it doesn't matter where it is, or what sport is taking place, the spotlight swivels to capture the emotion, the excitement, the sadness of the moment.
Such a moment came to pass on one fateful Saturday back in 1985.
Local radio sports editor, Tony Delahunty, microphone in hand, was working in the commentary box, which was located in the main stand, offering live reports to regional stations, servicing the needs of local radio.
Little did he know that, for the saddest of reasons, he was going to be thrust into the national, even international spotlight.
His reports from Bradford were no longer of the sporting kind.
This was tragedy.
The fire that engulfed the main stand, devouring some 56 lives in the process, was both fast and furious.
Delahunty's reports from the burning stand that afternoon won him worldwide acclaim and a number of top international radio and journalistic awards.
For Delahunty, though, although it was an horrific afternoon, it was also just another day's reporting.
Such is the life of the radio reporter.
And so to 1991.
Whatever local radio you were listening to during the 3rd week of June, it is likely that you would have heard Delahunty's editorial director, Paul Mace, on the hour, every hour, bringing you those live reports from the Pilkington Glass Ladies' Championships at Eastbourne.
The operation is a simple one but an effective one.
Based in the international press room along with some 60 or so other reporters from around the world, Mace watches, records and listens, aware that any time, his imminent live report could easily be overtaken by events.
For example, a 30 second live report which is due to take place at the same time as Martina Navratilova is about to serve for the match can be both a reporter's dream and a producer's nightmare.
Whatever, it keeps Mace on his toes.
‘There's a fair amount of to-ing and fro-ing from the courts’, explains Mace, ‘and I like to maintain my contact with the live action on court, as well as the monitored information in the press room.
It pays to keep in touch with the atmosphere of the match.’
Nottinghamshire based Delahunty Associates has always provided a diverse service of sports reporting but now sees its role in tennis, in particular, developing.
‘We are established in many other sports, including the Johnnie Walker Ryder Cup, the RAC Rally, the Silk Cut Derby at Hickstead, the Benson and Hedges Snooker Masters at Wembley, the Volvo European PGA Tour and the British Grand Prix’, explains Delahunty, ‘and although we have been in tennis since 1985 when Stella Artois first commissioned us, I still look at tennis as a growth area.
We maximise sponsor benefits in all media so that they can get their name all over the country.
We feel that, by using experienced broadcast and newspaper trained personnel, we know what both the public — and sponsor — requires’.
It helps, of course, that tennis people in general be they spectators, administrators, media or players, all seem to be accommodating and welcoming of the increased media opportunities which are now available to broadcasters.
It's something which Delahunty finds particularly helpful.
‘Tennis is one of my favourite sports now because tennis people, in general, are perfect gentlemen and ladies.’
Who am I to disagree?
(Tony Delahunty Associates can be contacted on 0949 836090)
Exclusive competition
WIN An Ellesse limited edition ‘Couples’ print
Tennis World has teamed up exclusively with Ellesse UK to offer our readers a fabulous 30 by 40 inches signed and limited edition print.
The print, named ‘Couples’, was photographed and styled exclusively for Ellesse.
The dual colour technique has resulted in a renowned piece of photography which has been translated into quality national press advertising.
The print is framed black and gold.
To have a chance of winning this superb prize, just answer the three questions below and send your answers in to arrive not later than 28th August.
1
From which country does the Ellesse brand originate?
2
Name the American, a former Wimbledon Champion, new retired from competitive play and expecting her first child, who is one of the company's longest serving contract players?
3
What are the two colours used in the Ellesse half tennis ball logo on its clothes and shoes?
Positively Pilkington
Nelson Has One Eye on Seniors
Pam Nelson may not yet be a household name but if this young American progresses in the same manner as previous Pilkington Glass U.21 Champions Steffi Graf, Arantxa Sanchez, Jana Novotna and Manuela Maleeva, then it will not be long before her name appears in the latter stages of the world's leading tournaments.
Pam emerged from a strong field headed by twenty-fifth ranked Sabine Appelmans from Belgium and two of the world's most successful juniors in recent years, Maggie Maleeva and Cristina Tessi.
On route to the final, Pam defeated Appelmans 6–3, 6–3 and Tessi 6–2 6–3.
In the final, Pam's aggressive game produced a 6–4 7–5 victory over another young American prospect Clare Rubin.
Once again, the U.21 event provided invaluable experience for young British players.
Mandy Wainwright played exceptionally well in taking the middle set 6–3 from 142 ranked Nana Miyagi from Japan; whilst Joanne Ward typically made the most of her opportunity by extending Cristina Tessi to 7–5 6–1.
Indeed Joanne was unlucky not to claim the first set, having served for it at 5–3.
(See Junior Set by Lotto, where Joanne is featured)
The supporters at Devonshire Park are looking forward to seeing how Pam handles the transfer from the U.21 event to the senior event.
The 1900 U.21 Champion, Arantxa Sanchez certainly made a successful switch this year by reaching the final of the Ladies singles!
Anthony Mule, the winner of the Pilkington Glass Save the Children Longest Rally, was presented with two tickets for a tennis coaching holiday at La Manga Club in Spain and flights courtesy of Falcon travel.
Pictured with Anthony, ‘the 1066 Man’, are Joe Durie, Rose Saliba from La Manga, David Crook — Marketing Communications Manager at Pilkington Glass, and Anne Noakes — the coach who actually rallied with Anthony.
File America
Florida's Dream Machines…
Where today's talent is turned into tomorrow's champion
By Jim Martz (Miami Herald)
In light of the heat and humidity that permeate Florida much of the year, you could call the tennis academies that dot the state ‘Sweat Shops for the Sneaker Set’.
But these facilities are much more than that.
Some are veritable campuses where students can learn about logarithms as well as lobs, fine arts as well a s fitness training.
They attract would-be Boris Beckers and Monica Seleses from Anchorage to Zurich, from London to Lakeland, Fla.
And they strain the bank accounts of the students' parents, some academies costing more than $2,000 per month.
Are they worth it?
If your goal is a college scholarship, the odds are very high that attending one for a few years will lead to a number of scholarship offers from top-notch college tennis programmes in the United States.
If your goal is the professional tour, your  chances can be enhanced because of the superb coaching, training facilities and opportunity to practice with and compete against leading junior players daily.
The most publicized US tennis camp is the Nick Bollettieri Tennis Academy at Bradenton, where Andre Agassi, Jim Courier and Seles honed their games.
But Florida has two other prominent international junior training centres — the Rick Macci International Tennis Academy at Grenelefe Resort a few miles from Orlando and Disney World; and Harry Hopman/Saddlebrook Resort in the town of Wesley Chapel near Tampa.
Jennifer Capriati, who stormed onto the women's pro tour at the age of 14 last year, is a product of both the Macci and Saddlebrook academies.
Capriati spent two and a half years under the tutelage.
When she was 13, she moved to Saddlebrook, where the United States Tennis Association operates one of its Player Development Centres.
An honour roll student, Capriati attended eighth and ninth grade classes at the Palmer Academy at Saddlebrook.
It is a college preparatory school headed by Dr Norman A Palmer.
His son, Jared, attended the academy and is now a student at Stanford University in California, where he won the National Australian Collegiate Athletic Association men's singles championship this spring.
The tennis camp was started in the 1970s by Hopman, the renowned Australian Davis Cup coach who died in 1985.
Dr Jack Groppel, an international recognised expert on fitness training, is director of player development at Harry Hopman/Saddlebrook International Tennis.
There were 79 students at Saddlebrook during the 1990–91 school year, including James Prendiville, Julian Shamsa and Hesham Busefi who is from London.
The graduating seniors were accepted to such colleges as UCLA, Stanford, Harvard, Princeton, Yale, Michigan and Florida.
There is plenty of individual instruction available at both the Palmer school (25 pros) and at the Hopman tennis academy (30 pros).
The cost for room, board, tuition and tennis instruction is $5,885 per quarter.
At Macci's academy, enrolment during the school year is limited to about 40 students ‘for control factors and because we want to maximize everybody playing supervised matches on Tuesdays and Thursdays,’ Macci said.
‘We drill on Monday, Wednesday and Friday.’
Former Macci pupils include Tommy Ho, who turned pro three years ago at the age of 15, and Will Bull, the National Boys 18 runner-up in 1990 who is a rookie on the tour.
Macci's students include 11 from foreign countries, among them Gerrard Quinland from London.
They all attend  nearby public schools.
‘We feel it is a healthy situation,’ Macci said of students going to public schools.
‘They are around kids who don't play tennis.
It's as close to normal as it can be.’
About 75 percent of the students are nationally ranked in tennis.
A year ago, 11 of his students earned scholarships to four-year colleges.
On a typical day, Macci's students go to classes from 7.30 am to 1.15 pm (they substitute their physical education classes with tennis).
Back at the academy, they eat lunch at 2 and are on the court from 2.30–6.30.
Matches are videotaped and charted to keep track of errors and winners.
Macci employs a staff of 11 full-time tennis pros during the school year.
There are 18–20 on the staff in summer when up to 60 boys and girls are at the academy.
Cost during the school year (September to June) is $2,200 per month; in summer it's $625 per week.
‘The summer program is intense tennis,’ Macci said.
‘It's geared to the more serious player.
It's usually 95 degrees and humid, so it's not for the lighthearted.’
Macci Training — It's Tough
New Men's Squads
cellnet  Cellnet &LBA Initiative
A unique joint venture between Cellnet and the Lawn Tennis Association has resulted in the formation of three men's tennis squads, guaranteeing financial support to fourteen of the UK's most promising players.
The three new squads will be formed in addition to the Davis Cup squad, and represent the most tangible development of the Cellnet's sponsorship since the country's leading cellular phone network operator announced its six-figure commitment to British men's tennis last autumn.
The principal objective of the scheme is to provide each of the fourteen candidates with a 12-month commitment to his appropriate squad.
Each player has been set an individual achievement target, and has the security of a year-long period in which to prove himself.
As well as appropriate financial support, two of the squads will benefit from the services of a full-time travelling coach.
The three Cellnet squads, and their members, are:
‘This is a major step forward in British men's tennis — truly a first,’ commented the LTA's Director of National Training, Richard Lewis.
‘We have never before been able to run more than one senior men's squad, yet now, thanks to Cellnet's backing, we will have three to back the elite Davis Cup squad.
Each offers slightly different and more appropriate benefits to the players, so that the individuals have a secure platform from which we hope they will make serious bids for international success.
‘A good example of the sort of player who should be a great beneficiary of this scheme is James Lenton — a tremendously hard worker who has struggled financially and once even had to quit to resort to coaching,’ Lewis added.
‘He has been crying out for support for ages, and I am sure that this new opportunity is just what he is looking for.’
Nigel Sears will be taking up the role as permanent coach to the Cellnet Challenger Squad, whilst John Paish will be working with the Achiever Squad.
‘Cellnet is a business whose success is based on innovation and quality,’ stated Marketing Support Manager Paul Leonard.
‘It is therefore highly appropriate that we should support this innovative scheme to enhance the quality of British men's tennis.’
Bailey Back to fitness with the challenger squad
Readers'letters
Winning Letter
This month's winning letter comes from Donna Davidson who, amidst a big postbag on the subject of Steffi Graf's popularity, offers her support to the German in an honest and fair way.
Donna wins for herself a Head Electra Master racket of stiff graphite construction in the head with slightly softer flex in the shaft.
The Elektra is designed for the intermediate player and comes complete with racket bag.
Genuine Graf
I am writing in reply to all the letters you have printed over the past few months about Steffi Graf.
Being one of her biggest fans I would like to say I am sick and tired of all the criticism that she receives.
There have been people writing in asking for her fans to stop making excuses for her.
Everything that has happened to her over the past year has been genuine, from breaking her thumb to the operation, not to mention all the hassle she has had from standing by her father.
That alone would make anyone else want to hide away but not Steffi.
She fought her way through like a true champion.
May be she did not do as well in the major championships as in previous years but in 1990 she still managed to win one Australian, get in to the final of the French and the US Opens, and the semi final of Wimbledon.
Now who else managed a record like that?
No other person, female or male, managed to do that well in the major tournaments of 1990.
So how dare anyone criticise a true champion who has proved herself over and over again.
She is to me and many others, the best tennis player in the world today, even if she is No 2 it won't be long before she is back on top where she belongs.
Keep up the good work of entertaining your fans on court Steffi; we know you can do it; your fans are behind you all the way.
(Steffi's No 1 fan) Donna Davidson N. Ireland 
Tribute to Graf
I am writing to express my views about the Graf/Seles situation.
On the whole, your readers seemed very supportive of Steffi Graf but I would like to reply to one letter in particular, that in defence of Seles.
It asserted that Steffi Graf made excuses for her losses.
This is probably the most untrue statement I have heard in some time.
Steffi Graf never makes excuses, never — its her most famous trademark after her forehand!
It would appear otherwise, at times, due to wording of newspaper articles.
The press apparently had expected Steffi's invincible reign to last for several years — when last year Graf had a bad year (by her standards) the men and women of the press understandably searched for reasons for it — and voiced them.
They were mostly sympathising with her loss of form and her problems.
This is not to be confused with her own personal feelings.
Graf never blamed her upsets on family problems, flu, food poisoning, sinus trouble and a variety of other problems.
I challenge any reader to prove otherwise.
Steffi Graf is human.
I cannot believe so many people have attacked her for petty reasons, like here lack of smiling.
Many great players never smiled on court but were great people off the court — as Steffi is.
Monica Seles is an excellent player.
She has the best groundstrokes in the women's game and she is still only 17.
She has a great future ahead of her and will undoubtedly improve as here serve and volleys do.
I am a great fan of Monica Seles but I cannot believe all the letters about these two players.
The women's game is much more open today and Gabriela Sabatini has been the best player on the women's tour this year.
It has been a long time since the women's game has been so open; hopefully it will continue.
Shane McGlynn C. Galway 
P.S. I am Gabby's biggest fan so I consider myself neutral on the Graf/Seles controversy.
In Defence of Steffi
In your June 91 issue of Tennis World, was a letter from a reader, unsigned, by a Seles fan, titled ‘In defence of Seles’.
This made me and I bet a few more Steffi fans very angry indeed.
So for all you Seles fans, let's just get this sorted out once and for all.
Steffi Graf is the best woman player of all time.
Always will be.
Never mind what Chrissy or Martina have done, I wouldn't dare take that away from them.
But were they World No. 1 for nearly 4 years like Steffi?
Well I rest my case on that one.
To be No. 1 you have to be the best; fast pace on court, quick thinker, footwork spot on, lob the ball, serve well.
All these, Seles cannot do.
Yet at 17, Steffi could.
Seles admits she can't lob or serve very well to save her life.
Yet Monica said —(quote in a recent interview)‘Nobody is scared to play Steffi anymore, because youngsters are coming through’.
Well Miss Seles and the reader who wrote in defence of you, I would like to say this.
Steffi has lost at least four times this year to Sabatini.
I must admit the matches I have videoed from Sky were brilliant.
Gabby played brilliantly.
She's a different player now, goes to the net more and so on.
I would say that she is more dangerous  than Monica.
Anyway, Steffi has beaten Seles twice this year, very comfortably indeed — no messing.
So for Tennis World reader from Glamorgan, leave my Steffi alone; yes she's had problems, what with nasal problems, private ones and a bad 1990.
But Steffi fans will like to express their thanks and wish her well.
We don't make excuses for her, she's too tough for that, anyway if Seles watched Steffi a bit more she might just be able to learn how to lob a ball and hold a racket properly.
Because champions do!
One Angry Steffi Fan 
(name and address not supplied)
P.S. I know Steffi reads Tennis World so please make sure this is published.
Graf Verdict — She is Popular!
Flicking through your magazine as one is apt to do, I was rather startled by ‘Tennis World reader, Glamorgan’ who inferred in his letter published in your June edition that you were biased.
He claimed that he was sick of this ‘Steffi is Great’ attitude and he accused you of showing favour towards Steffi.
I was surprised because you showed no defence to his letter.
So I decided to do some investigating of my own.
Lo and behold, in the same issue at T.W.R's moaning, I found 3 letters all in praise of Steffi.
Going back over previous months' editions, I found the following:
Readers' letters praising:
Whatever could this mean I wondered?
Are the editorial staff sitting around at empty desks saying ‘Tut!
I'm bored.
I know, I'll write some nice letters praising Steffi?’
Or is there some Steffi-crazy fan out there inundating the Tennis World office with letters cunningly disguised in a variety of handwriting just to confuse us?
Or could it be that, by the merest possible chance, Steffi is in fact…
GASP!…
POPULAR!!!
A quick scan of the above mentioned issues shows that Tennis World can be vindicated from all blame.
Previous issues from November 1990 to the last edition show that the major features have been on Gabby and Steffi, Zvereva and Martina and Monica, Capriati and Monica, Anke, Jana Novotna and Arantxa respectively, evidence of a fair and even representation of all women players by Tennis World.
Dismissing the crazy fan with ‘I love Steffi’ emblazoned on a fluorescent t-shirt as an outside possibility, my conclusions on this phenomenon rested on one word.
This word is ‘Readers’, which seems to indicate by my reckoning that 5 out of every 6 letters written on women players are sent to readers who are Steffi Graf fans.
So you see, it's the opinion of the majority (and including the crazy fan) that Steffi is great!
So there!
I suggest to T.W.R. from Glamorgan that if he is sick of hearing about Steffi, he should move to the moon.
I hear Steffi hasn't got media coverage there…yet!
A crazy fan who owns a rather fetching ‘I love Steffi’ fluorescent T-shirt.
(Name and address not supplied)
Schools not Neglected
I was interested to read the prize winning letter from Catherine Haslam in your last edition.
Her view that we should encourage schools to take up tennis is one that is very much at the heart of our philosophy.
It is, however, easy to say; much more difficult to put into practice.
Let me outline a few of the obstacles:
1
All major sports would like to be the centre of a school's curriculum.
It may be obvious to tennis nuts why tennis should be the chosen one, but to the objective outsider, other games have better claims to priority.
2
In many cases teachers have been indoctrinated with the view that it is not their job to encourage competitive sports.
3
Teachers without a coaching background feel insecure in attempting what they consider to be a difficult game to learn and so play safe with rounders or athletics.
4
School courts are crumbling and repair is a very low priority in a head teacher's budget.
There are many others.
But problems exist to be overcome and the British Schools LTA has made considerable progress in attempting to solve them.
There are tangible signs of this.
Membership, for example, has doubled in the last five years.
In 1990, over 5,000 school teams competed in the various Midland Bank sponsored national schools competitions and figures received so far suggest even more in 1991.
The development of a Tennis Teachers Course offers help to the non-coach teacher, and the inauguration of County Schools Tennis Associations (there are now 39) has enabled locally based courses to be set up.
We have prepared a wide-ranging study kit for GCSE, which will be available next term, and preparations are in hand for a scheme to construct solid links between schools and their local tennis club.
Perhaps most significant of all is the launch of the National Schools Coaching Programme.
This is being run as a pilot scheme in three counties this year, and will go nationwide as soon as a sponsor can be found.
A number of schools in each county are selected annually, partly by the County Schools Association and partly by the Local Education Authority.
They are given equipment and free visits by carefully selected coaches, who give a series of lessons in the school with the class teacher being gradually trained to take a more and more active part.
A starter pack of course material and a three-year development programme are part of the package.
With limited space, it is unavoidable that I can provide only a summary of the work of a very active Association, but I thought your readers would be interested to know that schools are not being neglected.
Jim Coates Executive Director The British Schools LTA 
The conflicts within British tennis
As Wimbledon again approaches, the arguments about why British tennis is so poor still rage on, and are getting even more heated.
The June issue of Tennis World was no exception, with letters and articles giving both sides of the picture being published; the only problem is that, in their own way, they are probably both right.
The LTA are spending more and more money and whilst the rest of the world gets stronger, our players get lower in the rankings.
In fact it could be said that our position in the rankings is declining in direct proportion to the increase in the money spent.
The only people who can change the situation are the players themselves.
They always have some excuse, but Russia has far worse facilities than we have and how many players have they got in the top fifty; three men and three women?
One wonders how often our players play in tournaments for if one looks at the tennis results in the daily newspapers one seldom sees the letters G.B. behind the player's name, and if we do, seldom does it appear past the first round.
Perhaps the tennis circuit as we know it today does not suit the British temperament.
What about a feature on ‘Where are they now’ with comments on why they did not continue on the circuit.
It may give us some answers.
Many a player who had been highly thought of has disappeared from the tennis scene.
There were one or two comments made in the June issue which may give an insight to the British problem.
Firstly Olga Morozova makes a point about taking the ball early.
She finds our girls take the ball about 5 metres behind the baseline.
They do this because they are not as quick as the opposition and want to give themselves as much time as possible to play the ball, no matter that they also give the other player more time.
Our players are out not to lose, relying on others to make mistakes; very few of our players have winning shots.
The other was in the article by Alexandra McAdam Clark, in which she mentioned the number of courts available in France.
There are many courts available in England which are not used, schools, private and club.
Perhaps there are not enough players available to play on them; perhaps there is no one to unlock them except at peak periods; then there are courts taken out during the winter and one of the major reasons in this country is damage by vandals.
No doubt, if you went to France or America, public and club courts would be available from 7 o'clock in the morning until late evening.
Undoubtedly, the public interested in tennis has declined.
They would rather watch American football on television; at least we import success.
Let us hope that the choice of Manchester for the next Davis Cup tie will provide more interest than the last match against France.
This begs the question, what happened to the British Tennis Supporters Club?
R.S. Barber Dorset 
Let's hear it for the fans
For years now there have been thousands of letters written about tennis players.
So for a change I thought someone should write in for the fans.
Has there ever been a tennis player that has written in to say ‘thank you’ to their fans who have stood by them through all their traumas and their losses, who have stood for hours in the rain or slept out in the streets to get a look at their idols?
Do they give them a second thought?
When they are so wrapped up in themselves and their problems, and, they are so hard done by?
Now the women want equal pay.
What is this?
Will they never be satisfied?
On the other hand  they are telling us we are not playing for the money but the love of the sport.
This was maybe true years ago, not now.
They are paid vast amounts of cash, to wear a little sticky label on their shirts; even getting a hair cut is big money.
When they are asked to sign a piece of paper they moan and groan, and get paranoid about people trying to peep at them in their luxury.
I saw one player push fans out of the way at the Australian Open this year.
Now I know not all players are like this.
Steffi Graf, for instance, signs more autographs than any player I have seen and does care for them.
She always mentions them in her winner's speech but maybe the players taking part should take a moment to think what makes it possible for them to perform, and maybe say ‘thank you’ for all the years of loyalty from these people, instead of getting away from them as fast as they can.
Maybe one will write in one day.
Who knows?
Anyway I hope Steffi Graf wins Wimbledon.
I think she has a genuine feeling for the fans and for all that's been written about her.
She is the most gifted player to ever grace the Centre Court and also best wishes to Chris Evert.
I hope she feels better soon.
She also cared in the last years of her career.
Name Illegible Shrewsbury 
P.S. I love Tennis World
Role Model
There are many excellent players in women's tennis, but for me, Miss Sanchez-Vicario is the best.
As a young player I look for subtlety and skill, not big top spin shots all the time.
Miss Sanchez plays her game with such enthusiasm she is always so entertaining to watch.
She is a good role model for young players with her excellent attitude and obvious love of the game.
Ann Fitzpatrick Dublin 
Coaching Commentary
Fitness — an option?
by Olga Morozova
Today, kids are watching TV, listening to headphones or playing with computers.
There is less movement.
They are losing the habit.
All the body is losing its structure.
If you're not using your mind, then finally you're stupid.
If you don't read, then eventually you will forget how to read.
It's the same with exercise.
If you can't exercise then you will lose all your ability to be a healthy person.
Our young British players are lacking in fitness, I think.
They are less fit than they need to be if they are to become international juniors.
I've just come back from France.
Youngsters from Yugoslavia, Hungary, Germany and France…they're huge, big guys because they were doing everything property from 5 years old.
Ours now have to catch up.
So all the players that I teach have to be very strong.
They will have to do a lot of physical fitness training.
The players will have to do this work.
When they do it, their life on the court becomes much easier.
Power-packs
Chang and Sanchez-Vicario are great athletes and so fit.
Chang is very strong.
He has a normal baseline game but he uses his head, and he uses his opportunities to attack every short ball.
It is very difficult to produce this type of game but I am asking my players to do it.
Sanchez-Vicario also, of course is equally tough and she attacks every ball so well.
She has very strong legs.
She can stay on court for 6 or 7 hours.
She was built strong.
She is a little short but she has these other advantages.
Her strength i s so important to her game.
All Players must have this strength if they are to succeed at the top level.
Insight — The World's Best Coaches on the Game's Greatest Players
CONNORS The Ultimate Survivor
Jimmy Connors has won many a tight match in his time.
Last month, at the age of 38, he won two more before bowing out to Michael Chang in the fifth set of their third round match.
What are the secrets of Connors' survival on the circuit?
Pancho Segura, one of Jimmy's earliest and longest serving coaches, reveals them to Lailee van Dillen.
First of all,’ asserts Pancho Segura, ‘Jimmy was number one in his mobility on the tennis court.
Jimmy could hit both the running shot and the ball on the rise better than anyone.
Beyond these two technical talents, it was Jimmy's desire and his innate feeling for the game that helped to achieve his greatness.
he never gave up on the court and was respected as a fantastic competitor.
‘Winning close matches on a regular basis is a signal that you're watching a champion.’
Jimmy Connors' career holds a record of one hundred and nine singles titles and over eight millions dollars won in prize money alone.
Connors was a finalist in six Wimbledon's, winning two in his two decade career.
‘It was incredible the way Jimmy played at key points in his matches’, recalls Segura.
‘At those instances, he threw a hundred percent of effort into his game every time.
Although Jimmy did not have the height and size of a Stan Smith, who was a top player at the same time, I saw other strengths in Jimmy's game which I liked as I coached him.
Even though his game was not perfect, the look of his game was terrific.
Jimmy could have had a better serve.
It was his return of serve that was unbelievable.
He has great hands.’
Mother
While Connors became a protege of Segura's at sixteen years old, Jimmy also had had the benefit of coming from a strong tennis family.
‘Jimmy Connors inherited a lot to begin with,’ Pancho says.
‘Jimmy's mother, Gloria, loved tennis.
She played the game very well herself.
Jimmy credits, rightly, much of his success to her.’
Pancho has witnessed players he believed were thwarted in achieving their apogee on the tennis court.
Not all parents were as informative as Mrs Connors.
‘Parents are okay to an extent in coaching a junior player's developing game.
The problem is, some won't let the whole personality of the child blossom.
There are juniors who won't even speak without nodding and asking the parents permission.
To become a winner, you want a player to have personality, character and private convictions.
If parents are too emotionally involved, it's not good.
A player should be a man or a woman, make decisions, think.
If you allow a player to broaden themselves, it helps.
A few players don't even know what is the capital of France when they're in Paris playing the French Open.
Yes, they go through school, but don't learn enough.
Suddenly, a domineering parent knows everything, also about tennis strategy.
How can they compare themselves to a former professional player who has played in front of ten or twenty thousand people?’
Pancho is convinced that, ‘once the parents and the player have selected a coach, they should believe in him.
Permit the coach to handle the growing game.
If they want all the glory, it's trouble for the coach.’
Destiny
In the case of Jimmy Connors, Segura acknowledges the Connors' clan helped Jimmy immensely.
‘Jimmy was born to be a tennis player,’ Pancho says.
‘Yes,’ he adds, ‘it was his destiny.’
The tennis shots Segura esteemed in Connors related to balance on the court.
‘Jimmy was able to shift his weight from left to right.
He moved diagonally on the tennis court like a ballet dancer might on the stage.
Connors hit a shot on the run, then recovered immediately.
He had mobility, balance, plus heart.
With his great hands, Jimmy returned the fast serve better than anyone in the history of the game.
Strategy
After the fundamentals, Segura was eager to focus on strategy with Jimmy.
‘We expected players would serve to Jimmy's forehand’, explains Segura ‘not his strong two fisted backhand.
To compensate, I told him to move to his left on the return of the serve.
Allow more time to play that forehand shot.’
Time, even a fraction of it, possessed value in producing a better return.
More than coaching fundamentals, which Pancho Segura considers a different type of coach than himself, he was a coach for the championship performances.
‘I taught Jimmy the sensation of where to expect the serve of an opponent, plus where to plan to return that shot.
I saw two shots ahead of the opponent's first shot.
Where could that particular player he was about to confront, volley the ball?
Where couldn't he volley because of his own weaknesses or patterns.
You need to play competitive tennis one shot ahead,’ says Pancho.
‘Any coach can instruct you to hit the ball waist high.
If you want to be a great player, it takes extra effort.’
Loyal
‘Jimbo took enormous pride in his tennis game,’ Pancho says.
‘He listened very carefully, believed what I said, and he was loyal to me.’
Segura believes that players must have enough pride when they lose to find out why they lost.
Did they play the key 30–30 point correctly?
Was concentration lacking?
Were they hitting the ball in front in relation to the centre of the court?
Did they try to go for passing shots as they stood two feet behind the baseline?
So how should a player analyze the game?
‘A player should force their opponent to earn the points,’ Segura says.
‘Play offensively only when you are inside the service line.
Tennis is like chess.
Hit four or five balls, waiting for that short ball.
Then, be at the net.
How many points might you hit before then?’
Segura asks.
‘It could be two hundred shots, if necessary.
Hit the ball deep into the court.
Like Jimmy did.
Establish the reaction for the short ball.
Once Jimmy got that short ball, the opponent's ball was dead.’
Probably the hardest task to master during match play is concentration.
‘Michael Chang has a similar concentration to what Jimmy had.
Jimmy was intense under fire.
At four or five-all in games, other players lapse their concentration.
Quite a few champions lose ten or fifteen points in a row.’
Pancho played on the pro circuit and repeatedly saw this trend over the decades.
‘Tennis is a cycle of momentum,’ Segura says.
‘You hit three fantastic shots, then six or seven bad ones in a row.
Seldom, do you see two players play well at the same time.
You must hustle and struggle on the court.
It's not always the stronger player, with the big serve who wins.
It's the player with purpose, whose return is going to be where he wants it.
The winner is alert as to what to expect next.
Generally, when you played Jimmy Connors you understood you were going to stay out on the court for four or five hours, at least.’
Connors' best match as Segura recalls, was played against Rod Laver in Las Vegas.
‘Jimmy won on competitive ability.
Nobody fought harder than Jimmy.
Borg was outstanding as a competitor, too.
Lendl and Chang have the same competitive attitudes.’
Professional
The elements of success Connors owned were his pride, his desire to train, working hard on good tennis habits.
‘If you stay out late, and think you're going to play the professional game of tennis forever, you're wrong,’ Pancho says.
‘No one has all the shots to begin with.
Champions learn them.
That's a real professional, a player who plays all surfaces: grass, clay, hard courts.
The ingredient that champions have is that they practice what they need to learn.’
If Segura could pick one gift of tennis talent to be born with, he'd choose mobility.
‘The ability to move quickly on the court is a great asset.
Jimmy had it.’
New Instruction Series
Practice — The Neglected Essential
by Alan Jones with Barry Wood
In this first in a series of extracts from the Tennis Workshop (Crowood Press), Alan Jones, with Barry Wood explain the often neglected area of practice once the lesson is over.
A very important factor in the teaching of tennis is the value of practice once the lesson is over.
Many players are guilty of having a lesson and almost expecting a magical remedy to their problems.
Over the years, most of the players I have taught at all levels have benefitted from sensible practice, that is, well-organised drilling.
You will discover, especially with the better players, that particular drills are valuable in ironing out their weaknesses.
The best way to go about proper practice is to find yourself a partner of similar standard, who is equally keen to improve, and spend hours sweating and toiling on the practice court.
There are many sensible ways for players of all levels to work on their game with a series of drills and exercises.
The great thing about drilling is that it can be fun, but remember not to spend too much time on one particular drill, since boredom can easily set in and have a disruptive influence.
Quality of practice, rather than quantity, is what really matters.
A maximum of 15 minutes on any one drill is therefore ideal, unless, of course, it is being played for points, in which case you should play to the end of that particular session.
Rallying
Let us start.
You are two players who have just started to develop your game, and the simplest of drills is learning to rally.
You should think in terms of setting yourselves goals.
If you are capable of directing the ball over the net ten times, then, realistically, you should set yourselves a target of twenty.
That is the first aim of learning to drill a twenty-stroke rally, chasing and returning the ball on one bounce each time.
If you find it difficult to keep a rally going within the confines of the court, chase the ball wherever it goes so that you become accustomed to the habit of pursuing the ball.
When the 20-stroke rally has been attained, increase the target to 30, then to 40 and so on, but keep it realistic.
Each time you go onto the court to play sets or points, you should first attempt a longer rally.
By the time you are achieving 50 and 100-shot rallies, you are at the stage where you can develop your play.
(At this time, I would strongly recommend trying to maintain a high quality of shot during the rally.)
Targets
As you progress, the next facet of rallying is to give yourselves higher-level objectives, which include seeking to hit the ball in a more confined area.
For example, you can put down hoops or ball cans in certain areas of the court and use them as targets.
The most common drill — and this is even practised by the better players who may be struggling with their groundstrokes — is to put targets within 60–90cm (2–3ft) of the baseline and inside tramline and think in terms of rallying while aiming at the targeted areas.
It is important here to stress that it is not just hitting to the target that is foremost, but at all times moving the feet to take the ball in one bounce.
It is also important to keep the rally going.
As your playing standard improves and you develop the feeling of the rally, the rally should cease when the ball is out of play (ie, when it has bounced twice, or outside the lines).
Obviously, you can try hitting down the lines or cross-court, but keep up the quality of the rallies by maintaining speed and weight of shot.
Make sure at all times the boredom does not creep in and that there is a feeling of concentration and application to the task.
Playing to a Length
As you begin to improve, you will become aware of the importance of being able to direct the ball deep, close to the baseline.
An excellent drill is to think in terms of rallying, with targets of 30, 50, 100 or whatever you think you are capable of doing — and making sure the ball lands between the service line and the baseline.
If the ball is short of the service line or over the baseline, then the rally ceases.
It is a great exercise to improve your ability to play to length.
I have seen some fine players who compete at a high level bring in another line, between the service line and the baseline.
They are aware of the need to improve their length so much that they put in the extra line so they are looking at a 1 or 1.5m (4 or 5ft) area.
So, you can experiment, adding an extra lane at each end.
It is of paramount importance to realise and appreciate the value of deep groundstrokes.
Playing to a consistent length is one of the basic requirements to perform to a high level.
As we are discussing groundstroke skills, I think it is important to stress that at the beginning, according to the shape of shot that you have — whether it be topspin, slice or flat — you can insist on slice only, topspin only, or on hitting your favoured shot.
This helps to improve your repertoire of shots and development and understanding of spin.
(The Tennis Workshop, Crowood Press, available through our book service, £19.95)
Tournament report
SMALL TOWN — BIG HEART
Barry Wood reports from Beckenham
Something very interesting and very clever had been happening to the Direct Line Insurance tournament at Beckenham lately.
Some of the biggest names in tennis have descended, with Stefan Edberg, John McEnroe, Pat Cash, Pam Shriver, as well as two-time champion Ivan Lendl all being recent visitors.
The players' marquee has grown larger and more grand, with chandeliers installed this year.
The space-age has arrived too, in the shape of ultra-modern satellite TV coverage, and electronic net-cord judges.
And yet the changes have taken place without disturbing in the slightest the unique atmosphere that makes the event so special, a credit to the care, attention and financial assistance that Direct Line have devoted to making Beckenham one of the most pleasant stops on the tennis calendar.
It truly is a most remarkable week.
The field of players, and the facilities they enjoy, are far superior to some tournaments on the world tour offering much more prize money.
The atmosphere remains that of a small-town challenger event, relaxed, friendly and informal, the perfect place to escape to after the tension and crowds of the French Open.
Jokes pour forth from the PA system, and so do hits from the 50's and 60's.
It just isn't like that anywhere else.
The tournament has charm, and the evenings especially are a piece of old England, relaxed and comfortable.
As the shadows lengthen, the men can be seen standing around with a pint of beer in hand, while mothers keep watchful eyes on the kids and catch up on the latest gossip.
There is also a rare chance to watch some of the lesser known British players trying their luck against more famous visitors from overseas, or even challenging their more experienced compatriots.
And they can spring some surprises.
This year, for instance, Jonathan Haycock, defeated Jeremy Bates, and Sara Gomer was beaten by Virginia Humphreys-Davies in the 1st round.
The tournament though, in giving some of our hopefuls the opportunity to assess themselves against quality foreign opposition, delivers some harsh truths.
For even at the generally modest level of competition that Beckenham offers, the British are shown to be dismal failures.
One example is Shirli-Ann Siddall, who has drawn much praise recently.
Last year she won 7 national junior titles, and she won a $10,000 event at Bracknell in May.
But when she came up against Australia's Michelle Jaggard, a more experienced player but by no means a world-beater, she struggled even to get a game.
Perhaps the trauma of changing coaches, moving from the Bradnam methods to those at Bisham, have affected her.
Whatever the realities of Shirli-Ann's situation, the broader truth is that she is not alone.
A total of 39 British players started the week this year, and not a single one got past the 3rd round.
That demonstrates just how far behind we have slipped in world terms.
It is a little sad to see the innocent eagerness and enthusiasm from so many who have stars in their eyes and really believe they are quite good players.
It is soon replaced though, by tears or a brave smile after yet another setback, with family and friends offering support and comforting words of ‘Bad luck.
You played well.’
As rain threatened throughout the week, but failed to actually materialise most of the time, there were fewer disruptions than usual, and another delightful aspect of Beckenham week was able to take place.
The mixed doubles is another throwback to a different age, with the men and women now spending most of their careers following separate paths around the world.
Grand Slams are virtually the only tournaments to offer the light-hearted social event, but it fits perfectly into the scheme of things at Beckenham.
Not surprisingly, some of the best matches of the week were those involving the top players.
Cash greatly impressed in defeating 25th ranked David Wheaton, and then by taking Lendl to 7–6 in the 3rd set in the final.
And Shriver's match against the two-time Wimbledon Junior Champion, Andrea Strnadova was also of a very high standard.
Strnadova went on to take the title by beating Australia's Rennae Stubbs in the final.
Lendl — winning warm-up
Strnadova success
Students Pass With Distinction
by Sue McCarthy
A few surprise upsets occurred during the Midland Bank/LTA Trust British Students Tennis Championships, held at a Bristol University at the end of June.
This tournament accepted the top 16 University players, top eight Polytechnic players and the top 4 College players from qualifying tournaments held at Easter.
There was an added incentive this year for the students as it was their last opportunity to catch the eye of Sue Rich, captain and selector of the British Team for the World Student Games which take place later this year.
Jeff Hunter, currently studying Latin and French at Oxford, and Edinburgh University's Heather Lockhart, emerged as the new singles champions.
Despite the absence of two players, Alex Niepel and Ross Matheson, a high standard of tennis was displayed in the windy conditions.
In the men's singles, Hunter proceeded to the final without conceding a set and ended wildcard entry.
Robert Antoun's good run to the semi-finals after Antoun had disposed of No. 6 seed Andrew Carswell.
Foreign students studying in Britain were eligible to compete here, and this year, Midland Bank's tournament attracted Frenchman Pierre Pourquery, currently studying at Exeter University.
He not only added a greater dimension through his excellent, exciting tennis, but also through his personality.
The flamboyant Frenchman from Bordeaux, who seemed particularly comfortable on a hard court, disposed of No. 2 seed and defending champion Neale Pashley in a close semi-final encounter.
Pourquery displayed a variety of touch shots and moved with great athleticism about the court, to defeat his net rushing opponent 6–4 6–7 6–2 and earn himself an intriguing place in the final against Hunter.
Unfortunately, the Heavens opened on finals day, ending the good weather and causing disruptions.
The men's final began in truly exciting style with an abundance of winning shots on both sides and looked to be a most promising match until play had to be suspended at 3–2.
After the resumption Hunter's sharp service returns, and chip and charge tactics proved effective against the ‘hit and miss’ style of the Frenchman, with Hunter claiming the title 6–3 6–3 with a winning forehand volley.
Seeds continued to be upset in the Ladies event and the quarter-finals proved to be the downfall of both the top seed and defending champion Isabelle Wild, and the No. 4 seed Alison Fleming — both girls who had recently completed their final examinations were beaten by Lockhart and Nina Topper respectively.
In the semi-finals Miss Lockhart, very much a hard hitting baseline player, went on to defeat No. 3 seed Lindsay Nimmo in a very close battle, while Nina Topper defeated Maggie Laughton 7–5 6–2.
The ladies final, somewhat overshadowed by the men's final, was resumed in the evening because of rain.
The Edinburgh student appeared too consistent and resilient for Miss Topper who seemed to be struggling with the slippery court, and she triumphed 3–6 6–1 6–3 an impressive achievement for a No. 7 seed.
Unfortunately, the ladies doubles final had to be cancelled, but the men's title was taken by Pashley and Carswell.
This tournament has filled an important gap in Higher Education tennis thanks to Midland Bank's financial support (which stretches from sponsoring schools tennis right through to the World circuit).
As well as the obvious competition this tournament offered, it reunited many former national junior players and was enjoyed by all.
Hunter — passed with distinction
Edberg Carries his Bat
Alastair McIver reports from Queen's Club
They don't play cricket in Sweden.
If they did, however, then Stefan Edberg, the world's leading tennis player, would surely be a candidate for opening batsman for the test team.
Edberg sees the ball so early, hits it so sweetly and executes his shots so effectively, that one suspects that he could easily defy any West Indian or Australian pace attack.
That he got into his stride so quickly at the pre-Wimbledon Queen's Club tournament was evidence of his timing ability, an ability that holds good for both sports.
Edberg moves gracefully and speedily over the grass in a way that would surely be the envy of a Torville and Dean.
At the Stella Artois Grass Court Championships, he showed once again, that give him grass, a ‘bat’, and he is surely the best striker of a ball in the world.
Unfortunately for the Frenchman, Arnold Boetsch, the Australians, Jason Stoltenberg and Pat Cash and the Americans Malivai Washington and David Wheaton, Edberg is not a cricketer and amply demonstrated his tennis talents by winning his first Stella title for the loss of just one set.
Edberg's performance was near perfection as the famous Queen's Club pavilion court has seen.
It didn't matter that there was an uncomfortable breeze throughout the week, an overcast and threatening sky and a lively court.
Edberg was in charge.
Tony Pickard, Great Britain's Davis Cup captain and coach to the Swede, predictably understated the performance of his charge when he said ‘Let's not get carried away.
He hasn't played a Becker yet…’
In fact, the opportunity for Edberg to play (up to the final) one of the 7 other players entered with a top fifty ranking, was denied him when first, Lendl slumped to defeat against Grant Connell in three sets, then Chang and Jarryd lost to Wheaton, while, in the Swede's half of the draw, Rotsagno lost to John Fitzgerald and Woodbridge fell to the unseeded Pat Cash.
Edberg defeated Cash in a quality final which many, I suspect, would have preferred to see as the final itself.
The surprise package of the tournament was the 224th ranked qualifier, Mark Keil, another young American who defeated US Open Champion, Pete Sampras in straight sets.
Another American, Malivai Washington, overcame Keil's resistance in the third round and the stubborn efforts of Fitzgerald in the quarters before bowing out in just 73 minutes in the semi-final to Edberg.
That victory set the Swede up for a seemingly difficult task against the 6th seed Wheaton, who had beaten Edberg's former doubles partner Anders Jarryd, in the other semi-final, 6–3, 6–4.
Difficult, it was not to be, however.
Edberg stamped his world class authority on the match, dominating the 90 minute final and setting himself up for the defence of his Wimbledon title.
‘This is the best I have played so close to Wimbledon,’ confirmed Edberg, and no one was disputing the fact.
His bank account benefitted by £38,382, but the benefit to his confidence was surely of greater value.
Edberg True to form
Cash ‘would-be’ finalist
Mats Wilander — dumped out in the first round
Competition
VENTORIS — INTO THE FUTURE
WIN Head products in this easy to enter, free competition
Head and Tennis World have teamed up to bring you a competition to win tennis competition used by some of the world's top tennis players.
The lucky winners will receive a Ventoris wide bodied racquet, a pair of Ventora tennis shoes and a deluxe tennis thermo holdall, all from the Head 1991 tennis range.
The 1991 Head racquet range has been developed from Head's wide bodied racquet, Genesis.
The Ventoris features all of the technical systems which made the Genesis such a successful racquet.
The Head Nodal technology reduces shock to the arm helping to prevent injury, whilst the double power wedge strengthens the tip of the racquet, increasing power without losing control.
The Ventrola tennis shoe is designed for comfort and performance.
It supports and stabilizes the foot preventing rollover, whilst absorbing shock from impact.
All this specialist equipment needs protection in transit therefore Head have introduced a range of luggage for racquet sports, including holdalls and racquet bags.
The deluxe tennis thermo features two lightly padded racquet compartments and a water bottle in a separate pocket.
1st prize
Head are offering three fantastic first prizes, consisting of a Ventoris tennis racquet, a pair of Ventora tennis shoes and a Head deluxe tennis thermo bag.
2nd prize
The five second places will each receive a deluxe tennis thermo holdall.
Runners up
The next ten names out of the hat will each receive a Head t-shirt.
To win one of these terrific prizes answer the following three questions and send your answers on a postcard to:
1
Which of the following two Head players reached the finals of the Italian Open in May this year?
2
Which two features, first used on Genesis, are part of the winning Head technology incorporated in Ventoris?
a
tighter strings and new graphics
a
wooden frame and towel grip
c
Head Nodal and Head Double Power Wedge systems
3
In one set of a match, Mr Smith wins by 6–3.
His opponent, Mr Jones wins each of his three games off the first advantage from deuce.
Mr Smith wins each of his sex games losing only two points in each to Mr Jones.
How many points are played in the entire set?
Closing date for entries 29th August
Prizes cannot be exchanged for cash.
Head's Fair Lady court shoe is an alternative prize for female winners.
Off court
Tournaments
The Nomura Inter Company Tennis Challenge expands to three city event
A good response to last year's competition has caused the organisers to expand the 1991 Nomura Inter-Company Tennis Challenge into a three city event.
The 1990 winners, Credit Suisse First Boston (Men) and Bank of England (Ladies), both seeded one this year, are joined by new entrants, Sainsburys and Midland Bank, in what is proving to be an even keener contest than last year.
Of the 150 companies entered in this singles and doubles company tennis competition, twenty are from Edinburgh and Glasgow.
The event began in June, with a Scottish Regional Finals day to be held on September 14th at the Stirling University Indoor Centre, from which one Ladies' and one Men's team will be invited to the National Finals at the Vanderbilt Club, London, on October 5th.
In addition to winning the Nomura Challenge Trophies, the Men's and Ladies' champions will win a luxurious weekend break, with guest, at the exclusive Chewton Glen Hotel in the New Forest.
Runners-up will win a one night stay at the Chewton Glen or an equivalent Scottish hotel, with additional prizes of rackets, sportswear and accessories for all National finalists.
Sanctioned by the Lawn Tennis Association and the Scottish Lawn Tennis Association, the event, now in its second year, is sponsored by Nomura International, one of the world's leading investment banks.
Other teams competing in this year's event include Saatchi &Saatchi, Barclays Bank, Prudential Corporation, British Airways, Abbey National, Mercury Communications, ICI and Nikki Securities.
Mr Keith Clarke, Executive Director of Nomura, said: ‘Now in our second year, we are very pleased to support this event.
The idea of mixing social and competitive tennis seems again to have attracted many of the UK's top companies.’
For further information and copies of the draw, please contact Pal Hutchins Tennis &Leisure on: 081 946 9374.
Coaching
Visual Tennis Video-new release
T John Yandell, one of America's top coaches, has produced a new 60 minutes teaching video for beginners and those wishing to improve their games.
It's called ‘Visual Tennis’ and offers the viewer a comprehensive approach to learning the game based on visualisation and mental imagery.
The video retails for just £14.99 (plus £1.50 p) and is available through our video service elsewhere in this magazine.
Pros and Celebrities
Bueno heads information network
Tennis legend Maria Esther Bueno takes on a new challenge as Chairman of Tennis Interlink Limited, a new venture launched to create a unique, membership base, international network for tennis-related information and services.
Ms Bueno, who won 20 Grand Slam titles in an on-court career abruptly curtailed through injury in the late sixties, commented today: ‘Tennis Interlink is an exciting new concept which will enhance our sport at many levels.
I am delighted to be associated with such a far-reaching project that will act as a clearing house for many people's activities across the world through a service dedicated to the needs of an unrestricted membership.
Although she lives in Brazil, Ms Bueno remains active in tennis through regular personal appearances in several countries.
She has acted as a consultant to both the International Tennis Federation and the South American Tennis Confederation and was instrumental in helping to develop women's tennis throughout Latin America before taking on the role of spokesperson for Tennis Interlink.
‘The game's growing popularity increases the need for easily accessible information and services,’ explains Ms Bueno.
‘Established organisations are often stretched in satisfying these varied needs which Tennis Interlink can help resolve through its London based operation.
We will be expanding opportunities by promoting existing tennis resources around the world and improving communications between members so an extensive and thriving network is created.’
Tennis Interlink is run on a day to day basis by Barbara Wancke, former ITS Director of Women's Tennis, and Isolda Montero, who serve as Managing Director and Company Secretary respectively.
The wealth of experience that these three individuals bring to the operation is extremely broad-based and, combined with further expertise available through an international team of consultants, members' requirements are resolved quickly and effectively.
For further details contact 081–947–1607.
Trade
Lacoste look ahead
The year was 1927.
It all started with a bet…
The stakes were a crocodile briefcase…
The winner was Rene Lacoste + two time winner of Wimbledon —‘the crocodile’— the sporting legend was born.
Five years later, he created the original cotton pique shirt embroidered with the famous crocodile.
Now, the shirt comes in a choice of 30 colours, and is made from 12 miles of pure cotton.
Today, the legend lives on throughout the supreme range of sports and leisurewear, available throughout the UK.
At this year's Wimbledon, Henri Leconte and Gut Forget gave us a sneak preview of the Autumn ‘Roland Garros’ ensemble — a matching tracksuit, short, shirt and jersey in dominant white with a green double stripe running through.
Clean and classic with a stylish twist.
From their current Spring/Summer range, tracksuits in fashionable shellsuit fabric for men and ladies are popular, worn with shorts and pleated skirts and new cotton/lycra leggings in coordinating colours.
The range is accompanied by the choice of accessories — towels, socks, hats, etc plus something to carry them inn — multi-size bags in tough, durable fabric, in black, blue, green, white and now in dashing red.
High tech ladies
Though the trend in tennis today is towards the high-tech, powerful, graphite rackets, often with larger heads, many women find them a little heavy and sometimes even a bit too large.
Now Slazenger, which has been linked with the sport for more than 100 years, has produced a new racket design with women, and teenagers in mind.
Slightly shorter in length, and with a 90sq in headsize rather than the 95 and 105 which are currently the norm, the Challenge 26 is also lighter and specially balanced to suit female and junior players.
It features a highly aerodynamic wide-body graphite frame for easy manoeuvrability and greater power and includes Slazenger's Optimum Mass System at the 3 and 9 o'clock positions on the frame to extend the ‘sweet spot’ and so improve playability and ball control.
Available at most good sports shops, the Challenge 26 retails at around £45.00.
Styled to win
The first Slazenger clothing collection designed by Coats Viyella is action packed — both in terms of styling and colour.
There is a very clear, clean cut approach to the whole collection with the accent on strong graphics and sports oriented motifs to create renewed interest in the ‘contemporary classic’ shapes of the shirts, shorts, tops, sweaters, track suits, joggers and shell suits which make up the whole range.
The colour combinations are very fresh and new: cornflower blue, guava and lime;; azure, emerald and purple; and navy, mid blue and gold which complement the ‘core’ shades of white, black, grey and ecru.
Racquet sports, and tennis, in particular, are catered for extensively with sporty prints, including a series of graphic figures in action.
For the extremely serious tennis player there is even a tennis ball print on a short which teams with a short and a skirt featuring a matching embroidered ball.
As well as the traditional cotton pique polo style shirt (which comes in 10 colours), there are cap sleeve blouses for the women; and alongside the classic short, there are culottes, wide box pleated and wrap over skirts.
The range also includes good quality fleece jogging suits, shell suits in both matt and shiny fabrics, with attention to details such as zipped pockets, and zips on the legs.
All shell suits are cotton lined, except from the knee down where the nylon replaces the cotton for ease when slipping over shoes.
On the right track
Track suits — as distinct from shell suits — will come into their own again from spring '92, according to leading suppliers Slazenger Sportswear.
The demand for shell suits in shiny crinkle and trilobal fabrics is waning and there will certainly be less of these versions around by next spring as far as the more fashion conscious wearer is concerned.
Designs in French terry jersey and heavy pique with textured finishes will become the best sellers for the sportswear trade in 1992, predicts Slazenger Sportswear.
The ubiquitous shellsuit will, however, retain its popularity as a leisure garment, although buyers will be opting for designs in fabrics with a softer handle, such as that achieved by special finishes such as acid, stone or garment washing, which can be applied to both woven and knitted cloths.
While bold designs will be in demand, sportswear styles will become more casual and tonal in terms of silhouette and colouration, to tempt customers.
Extra small to extra large
By popular demand, Mizuno Sports have produced several of their ladies and youngsters shoe ranges in smaller sizes.
The award winning Cross Court range now features a Girls Ultra Lo TP and Girls Ultra Cross ¾ TP in size 1½, 2 and 2½ — priced at £37.60 and £33.84 respectively.
In trainers, a new Controller Boys is available in sizes 1½ and 2½ priced £40.89.
Uni-k-Swiss
K-Swiss have launched a ladies version of their Si-18 top of the range tennis shoe.
A new colourway for men — white/burgundy/navy — has also been introduced.
The ladies shoe, like its male counterpart, is specifically designed for the serious club tennis player.
All the Si-18 range models feature the exclusive K-Swiss cushion board construction which provides a polyurethane cradle of Silicone Formula 18 shock pad along the midsole.
This absorbs shock form impact with the ground, enhancing comfort and helping to prevent injury.
The Aosta rubber outsole on the Si-18 is hardwearing and durable.
Special flex bars along the ball of the foot allow ease of movement, and abrasive traction zones have been strategically placed to ensure maximum grip.
The full grain leather upper moulds to the foot for a good fit, whilst resisting wear and tear.
During a tennis match, the movements of the foot can gradually loosen laces.
K-Swiss use their five strip lacing system for constant lateral support, combined with a D-ring cinch system to hold the laces firmly in place and so stabilise the foot.
The family of Si-18 shoes also features a removable, washable sockliner for extra cushioning and protection.
The padded ankle collar and tongue provide an overall comfortable fit.
Sponsorship
Coca-Cola sign up until 1995
The Coca-Cola Company, manufacturer of the world's most popular soft drink, has renewed its backing for the three most important team events in tennis — the Davis Cup by NEC, the Federation Cup by NEC and the NEC World Youth Cup.
The new arrangements for Coca-Cola to be the official soft drink at all three events will cover the years 1993, 1994 and 1995.
Coca-Cola has been associated with the Davis Cup since 1982, and with the Federation Cup and World Youth Cup since the mid-1980s.
Mike Davies, General Manager of the International Tennis Federation, said: ‘There are not many events in the world that can claim to have continuous sponsorship for 14 years as will be the case of Coca-Cola.
It is a reflection on the ITF competitions, the television exposure, the prestige of these events, and also on the Marketing Department's commitment to excellence in servicing the needs of our sponsors.
We are very proud of our long-term association with Coca-Cola.’
A record 86 nations entered the 1991 Davis Cup by NEC.
The Federation Cup by NEC, which is to be played in Nottingham, England, from July 21 to 28, has attracted entries from 56 countries, while the NEC World Youth Cup will be contested by 32 national teams at the new Olympic Stadium in Barcelona in September.
Sweet Caroline
Inter is a name synonymous with functional, practical footwear for the leisure sports market.
Their present tennis range is led by Caroline, a lightweight, durable shoe for the casual lady player.
The upper is made of leather with a perforated vamp.
To support the foot during play there is a lateral support strap which also ensures that the shoe has a close fit.
Caroline has a full length EVA midsole to absorb shock during the game.
Further cushioning is provided by the padded insole and tongue.
It is important to support the heel and for this Inter have constructed Caroline with a stiff leather heel counter.
The hardwearing rubber outsole has been designed for hard court play.
The protected toe area is designed to reduce wear from toe drag.
Caroline is available from branches of Olivers and Freeman Hardy Willis, nationwide.
Wilson Hammer competition winners
The prize of five Wilson Hammer rackets to be won in the April issue of Tennis World understandably produced a large, imaginative entry.
The answers to the questions were:
The five lucky winners were:
Veteran'tennis
British successes in Perth
The small party of British players competing in the Veteran's World Championships in Perth at the end of April achieved greater successes overall than in previous years.
The Ladies 60 age group brought home the highest honours: both Rita Lauder (Hampshire &Isle of Wight)— and Ruth Illingworth (Essex) reached the singles'' semi-finals, each losing to top-ranked American players, while Ruth, in a new partnership with Ann Williams (Somerset), beat the numbers 1 and 2 seeded pairs to take the title at their first attempt.
Rita was on target to capture the singles title when a recurring leg injury regrettably ended her bid.
Don Shears (Avon) moved up to the 55 age group where, seeded number 4 following his unbeaten run in the Dubler Cup, he reached the semi-final to give the ultimate runner-up, Gordon Davis (USA) a tough fight after battling through three exhausting rounds.
Then, partnered by Brian Storr (Staffordshire), he went through to the doubles final, to be outdone again by Davis and his partner Ahlers, both from the USA.
A new combination of Mike Hayes (Herts) and Derek Howorth (Surrey) defeated the Men's 45 top seeds John Cooper, brother of former Wimbledon champion Ashley, and partners from Australia to proceed also to the semi-final where they lost in straight sets to the new champions, Burns and Weaver, also from Australia.
Tony Starling partnered A Swetka of the USA to reach the semi-final of the Men's 70 doubles.
In the consolation events, Brigitte Newbury won the Ladies' 50 singles, while Harri Gibbon was runner-up in the Men's 70 singles.
Junior Tennis World
Brothers Triumph at Doncaster
The fifth event on this year's Reebok Grand Prix Circuit at Doncaster turned into a personal triumph for the Ingham family from Heywood, Lancs.
Michael, the second of three tennis playing brothers, took the 21 and under title with a powerful 6–3 6–3 victory over Graham Hobbs (Dorset): whilst younger brother Craig, fought back from one set down against James Lake (Lincs) to win the 12 and under title 4–6 6–2 6–1.
Beating the Ingham family monopoly was Michael Calvert (Yorks) who won the 16's title 7–6 4–6 7–5 against a tiring Richard Stamp (Lincs).
In the girls' event, Catherine Wittenberg (Kent), consolidated her position as leader of the Reebok 12 and under Grand Prix table by reaching the final, but missed out on maximum points when she lost to Claire Sewell (York) 6–4 6–1.
The 16's final was an all Derby affair, in which Tina Crosen defeated Helen Frankland 6–2 6–3, whilst the 21 and under title went to Lizzie Jelfs (Oxon) who outfought one of our top student players, Maggie Loughton (Yorks) 7–6 4–6 7–5 with an excellent performance.
Tennis World INSTRUCTION
HITTING WITH TWO HANDS
There are probably three good reasons for playing a stroke with two hands on the racket:
1
You are just learning and have a very weak wrist.
2
You are a natural athlete, the stroke feels right to you and you find you can achieve far greater power this way.
3
You are a natural athlete and find you can disguise your shots easily this way.
Notice the emphasis on natural athleticism.
This is because, played correctly, the stroke is a demanding one and is not for everybody to use.
If you think the stroke is for you, the keys to success are:
1
Keep both hands close together on the grip throughout the stroke.
2
Twist your upper body fully through the stroke.
Using the arms alone is simply not enough as the swing is now restricted by the additional hand.
3.
Work on your speed around the court as your reach is restricted by two hands.
4
Work on your ability to handle low, short balls, together with those struck directly at you, as these can be a problem.
You may even find it simpler to revert to a one handed shot on these occasions.
Finally, copy good exponents of the shot.
It is not easy to find fault with Jimmy Connors' version of the backhand, is it?
Reproduced from Tennis by Jeremy Woods (Crowood Press) available from Tennis World Book Service 
Two handed play
Junior set by Lotto
The Chemistry is Right
The Joanne Ward story by Alastair McIver
I spoke with Joanne on the eve of her chemistry GCSE.
She wasn't looking forward to it, which is a little surprising for a 16 year old who, just 3 years ago, combined all the elements of her talent to produce the compound which exploded her on to the junior tennis scene!
This was no experiment, however.
Athletic and committed, Joanne, who once stood on the fringes of junior county badminton, now has a goal to realise.
Discovered at one of the LTA's 3 Star Clubs at King George's Comprehensive school, by the father of local professional coach Harvey Slater (who now coaches the youngster), Joanne, who is about to leave school for a year of full time playing, is one of the few British juniors who has the ability to ‘kick’ and break from the pack.
Joanne doesn't come from a wealthy background and yet, by hard work and determination and not a little goodwill from Slater himself (who coaches her free of charge), she is making things happen in her tennis life.
‘I wouldn't do it if she wasn't committed’ explains Slater.
‘I coach her for up to 15 hours per week, usually early in the mornings, before breakfast, and lunchtimes.
She's so keen…so committed.’
So how does she compare with her contemporaries?
Slater has no doubts.
‘She has ‘a million miles’ better commitment’he says forcefully.
‘Other juniors aren't on the same planet as Joanne, when it comes to commitment.
She is more like a European or an American youngster.’
Perhaps one of the best examples of that, could be found at a recent tournament, where, after suffering considerable pain during a match, she declined the soothing comforts of an ice pack in the clubhouse.
Instead, she chose to visit the bleak northeast coastline, where she used the restoring — but freezing — waters of the sea to ease her pain!
It's all part of the drive that she believes, will take her to the top of her forthcoming profession and to that end, she is not prepared to put a time limit on her arrival.
‘I want to be the best’ she explains proudly, ‘it doesn't matter how long it takes.’
Having come so far in just 3 years, the suggestion is that success might come sooner rather than later.
That is not to say, of course, that it won't take longer for her to fulfil her potential.
A win over British No. 17, Katie Ricket in a ratings tournament at Alfreton in May, confirmed her rapid progress.
That victory followed on from success in the Dewhurst International in March, where she came through from being a reserve qualifier to reach the semi-finals.
Between the Dewhurst and the Ratings tournament, Joanne won the 16 and under Seat finals.
‘She is strong and athletic’ says Slater ‘and she has a big serve.
She can volley, too, which means she is developing into a fine all-court player.’
Her exceptional strength and movement are a result of regular fitness work with renowned expert Len Heppel.
It was his support which perhaps influenced both Wilson rackets and View From clothing to sponsor her.
Joanne's commitment to the next 12 months will leave her little time for the hobbies that she enjoyed before tennis came along.
She doesn't play badminton anymore.
‘I like swimming,’ she confirmed ‘which is obviously good for my fitness.
I don't like football.
My dad took me to watch Newcastle when I was about 10 but I couldn't see because of all the people standing in front of me.
My biggest comment on football is that I don't like Sunderland…or Gazza (Gascoigne).
I don't like it when he sings!’
Who does, I ask myself?
Does she have a favourite singer?
‘Prince’.
And television?
‘Roseanne.’
And food?
‘Salads.’
When it came to revealing her personal likes and dislikes, Joanne was not a girl of many words.
One had the feeling that she was happy enough just to let her racket do her talking for her…
Geordie Joanne
Joanne with her coach Harvey Slater
Tournament report
Character Victories
Seles and Courier star on the Paris stage
by Peter Blackman  Evening Standard
When Jim Courier and Andre Agassi roomed together at Nick Bolletieri's tennis academy in Florida, one of them just had to leave the door ajar.
First it looked as though Agassi would bolt through as he reached for stardom; then Courier did it.
Winning the French Open took him through the door, down the passage, into the street and out into the sunshine Fame.
At 20 years old he is a Grand Slam winner and he achieved it against Agassi in a slugging final that in the end had the 17.000 crowd at Roland Garros on their feet.
The match was in Paris, but chic it wasn't.
This is Courier: a red haired lad from Dade City, Florida.
He once called it Hicksville, a small town in which his father works in the orange juice factory.
In contrast, Agassi is from Las Vegas, the booming gambling town in the desert.
We all know about Agassi and his paintshop clothes, his tinted hair and gold around his neck.
Last year Andres Gomez beat him the final; this time it was Courier and everyone remembers things about him.
He used to play baseball and he wears a white baseball cap that one day may become as famous as Pat Cash's chequered headbands.
He smiles a lot, talks to himself and  uses a tennis court like an officer patrolling it, owning it and thumping around it as if he hasn't a care in the world.
But in his 3–6 6–4 2–6 6–1 6–4 victory, one had to admit that Courier has character and a burning conviction that he can beat anyone.
And no one doubts that he has earned his place among the sport's leading players.
When the French began he was ninth in the world.
When it was over he was fourth.
This was poor old Agassi's third defeat in his third consecutive Grand Slam Final.
Yet he should not weep too long because old stone face himself, Ivan Lendl, made five attempts to land a major title.
Once he started he could not stop!
That could now apply to Monica Seles.
The 17 year old Yugoslav retained her French Open title and her world No 1 ranking.
To do that she worked through a minefield for two weeks, finally beating the tiny Spanish girl Arantxa Sanchez-Vicario 6–3 6–4.
Having won the Australian Open and now the French it means that Seles is on a Grand Slam roll, though she swiftly pointed out that Wimbledon's grass might be her downfall.
But was she trying to confuse the plot by saying: ‘I know that it is impossible for me to win four Grand Slam tournaments this year.’
Some burning sun, black clouds, rain and wind were the backdrop to another highly agreeable fortnight in Paris at just about the perfect time of year.
But tennis players don't seem to know where they are or what the weather is like.
Memories?
The men first.
John McEnroe's limp first round exit to the Russian Andrei Cherkasov; Ivanisevic's tepid performance that brought deserved defeat against Paul Haarhuis.
Then US Open champion Pete Sampras fell at the same hurdle to Thierry Champion.
But it was the 38 year old veteran, Jimmy Connors, who made the blood come to the boil.
First he downed Todd Witsken, then Ronald Agenor.
And then he withdrew after four sets against the former champion Michael Chang.
It was a glimpse of the old Connors, fighting and refusing to walk down memory lane.
It was superb theatre; Meanwhile, the star turns danced on.
Wimbledon champion Edberg lasted until Courier beat him in the quarter finals.
Michael Stich romped past Franco Davin at the same stage before falling to Courier who was now well into his war dance.
The other end of the draw saw Agassi topple the surprise packet Jakob Hlasek and Boris Becker beat Chang.
Then Agassi moved past Becker, the three times Wimbledon champion.
That win made Agassi's pulse race, but in the end Courier was his master.
Seles was tremendous value for her win.
The Brits — Jo Durie, Sarah Loosemore, Monique Javer, Sara Gomer, Clare Wood and Sam Smith — predictably vanished after the first round.
It was a disastrous collective slump that left British Tennis supremo Richard Lewis scratching his head.
Zina Garrison, the beaten Wimbledon finalist last summer, lost in the first round, but not much of consequence occurred until Sanchez-Vicario toppled Mary Joe Fernandez in the quarter finals — and then came the heavy matches.
Seles had no trouble beating Conchita Martinez and Gabriela Sabatini, who was let off the hook in the quarters by Jana Novotna.
Steffi Graf sailed through until Sanchez-Vicario whipped the rug from under her feet in the last four.
So Seles triumphed alongside Courier.
Two young athletes winning on the big stage and managing to enjoy every minute of the experience.
No one can deny that professional tennis is going through one of those periods when a sure thing in the betting sense is a short cut to bankruptcy.
Big Jim does it
Monica — half way to Grand Slam
Sanchez-Vicario — crushed Graf
Connors — pumped up
Agassi — question marks
Tennis World INSTRUCTION
SUPPLENESS
Suppleness or flexibility is vital to the tennis player who needs the ability to move the various parts of his body through a full range of movements, often at full stretch.
Injury is more likely when a joint has become stiff either with age or disuse.
Often people realise this almost unconsciously, and immediately on walking onto the court, commence a vigorous bouncing/stretching routine.
This is WRONG!
All stretches should be gradual and held for a period of 30 seconds before release.
The small, bouncing stretch routine is likely to introduce minute tears in muscle fibres and so should be avoided.
Also, remember to stretch when you come off court as well.
This will reduce soreness and ease the risk of a restiffening up of the joints.
Also, remember to stretch when you come off court as well.
This will reduce soreness and ease the risk of a re-stiffening up of the joints.
1
Be aware of your own strengths and weaknesses and maximise your strengths.
2
Actively seek to minimise your weaknesses and maximise your strengths.
3
Use the warm-up time to analyse your opponent's strengths and weaknesses.
4
Be prepared to take time out between competitions in order to work on improving your game.
5
Practise regularly.
Reproduced from Tennis by Jeremy Woods (Crowood Press) available from Tennis World Book Service 
BALANCE
Good balance is the effective control over your centre of gravity, relative to the direction in which you are delivering the ball.
If your balance is correct, dramatic passing shots hit on the run become possible, followed by quick recovery while still in a balanced position.
It begins with the ready position.
Knees should be flexed comfortably, the racquet pointing towards your opponent, weight on the balls of the feet, and the body bent slightly forwards at the waist.
You should feel your centre of gravity to be located down through the hips.
In the same way, when running for a shot, try to keep your centre of gravity under control.
Run in an upright (or, at most, a slightly leaning) position, so that your balance point stays in the hips.
Many players make the mistake of leaning from the waist, which limits the stroke you can make, and puts too much strain on your upper body and lower back muscles.
Instead, take an extra step nearer the ball if necessary and get down low by using the legs and knees rather than the waist.
Reproduced from Tennis by Jeremy Woods (Crowood Press) available from Tennis World Book Service
