An Argus specialist publication August 1991 £1.60 Founded in 1901
Carving special Edward Hopkins' Gothic Revival
Carving Plans Carving Productions Carving People
National Marquetry Exhibition Reviewed 
Contents August 1991 Vol. 95 No. 8 Woodworker
Features
798 Electric carving
Test of power carving systems
802 Mastering marquetry
Review of the National Marquetry Exhibition.
Nick Gibbs 
816 Carving through the confusion
Market review of carving tools.
Nick Bell 
822 Testing the Cogelow angles
Ray Gonzalez tests the new Henry Taylor tools.
826 Workshop creations
Results of our Workshop Carving Competition.
830 Board games
The craft of Cabinetmaking continued.
David Savage 
842 Carving out of his shell
Profile of carver, David Morgan.
Bertie Somme 
850 Gibbons' blazing glories
Hampton Court Palace restored.
Trevor Barnes 
Projects
795 Prize tribute
Lee Dickenson's carved Chindit.
806 Guidelines in wood
More marquetry advice.
Gerald James 
832 Three dimensions of chair design
The opening part of Steve Goulden's series on chair construction.
834 Gothic traces
A project for the church.
Edward Hopkins 
854 Sun seeking seats
Building a seat around a tree.
Dan Solman 
Regulars
778 Face and Edge
News and new products
736 Letters
Correspondence, comment and competitions
793 Turning the Page
Regular feature for turners
846 Bob Wearing's Workshop
Making Perspex squares
849 Question Box
Timber, handles and linseed
856 Hands On
Eight tips from readers
876 Profile
The Cheltenham Art Gallery and Museum
On this page: George Brownlee's Teddy (p.818) and workshop carving (p.826)
On the cover: Gothic table (p.834), David Esterley carving (p.850) and Newman and Redford (p.802)
Face &Edge News
Woodland competition
A new competition, sponsored by John Makepeace, and a display of craft products has been dedicated to wood at an annual agricultural show in the South West.
The Melpash Agricultural Show will this year include a marquee for Woodlands and Woodcraft, and will offer woodworkers the opportunity to display their skills on 29 August.
The Parnham Trophy will be awarded to the ‘best article made from wood’.
In sponsoring the competition John Makepiece is hoping to ‘encourage and to recognise excellence in design and individual craftsmanship in wood’.
The trophy will reflect this objective.
The woodland marquee will house exhibitions of tools and timber species, with expert advice for farmers or landowners wanting to plant and manage woodland.
There will be a pole lathe on the go, and the Adams Axeman making walking sticks and baskets.
The Parnham Trophy is open to both amateurs and professionals: as John Makepeace has said himself, ‘the amateur can so often teach the professionals a thing or two!’
The competition will be judged by Alan Amey, who was an apprentice at the John Makepeace Workshops in 1976, and then head craftsman until he left last year.
Alan will also be making the Parnham Trophy.
Entry forms and details are now available from Mrs E. Gale, 23 South Street, Bridport, Dorset,(0308) 23337.
Somerset subjects
The latest one-day courses at the Somerset Rural Life Museum have been announced, offering another mix of subjects for woodworkers.
The first two are demonstrations on pole-lathe bodging with Dick Apps on 10 August, and 17–18 August.
Then Alan Wakefield will be demonstrating walking stick making over that latter weekend, with Les Davis turning on 25–26 August and John Adams caning seats on 22 September.
For more details of these demonstrations contact Mary Gryspeerdt on (0458) 31197.
Turning contests
Pollards Woodworking Machinery are sponsoring a new turning competition on 3 August, with classes for novices and experienced turners in a selection of categories.
The competition will be held at the Old Stores Turnery, Nantwich, Cheshire, with sections for turned boxes, lamps and bowls, and general category for pieces that must include a Goodwoods accessory.
For more details of the contest contact Bruce Pollard, 1 Canons Road, Old Wolverton, Milton Keynes (0908) 222272.
Annual Conference of tools in docks
The annual summer conference of the Tools and Trades History Society will this year feature a visit to Chatham Docks.
The weekend event will be centred around Wye College in Ashford, Kent, but the outing to the docks — including the Historical Society Museum, Joiners Shop and Ropewalk — should be the highlight.
An important part of the weekend will be the auction of tools, books and other objects.
It is vital that all members being something along, with proceeds going to the society's special fund.
There will also be visits to Wye College's Agricultural Museum and the Museum of Kent Rural Life at Sandling.
For details contact The Administrator, 60 Swanley Lane, Swanley, Kent BR8 7JG.
One in the eye for maple scientists
If you want to know how the bird's eye in maple is formed ask a logger.
That is the advice of the Timber Trades Journal , which discovered, from a lumber man in the USA, that the figuring is created by sap pockets exploding in the spring.
That logger even believes you can hear it popping as the pockets burst.
However, the TTJ also report that if you want the real cause of bird's eye features, don't ask a scientist.
When they put it to an expert they received the bewildering reply: ‘Bird's eye figure is formed as a result of local suppressions in divisions of cambial tissue that cause indentation to develop.
This retardation effect continues for several growing seasons and produces an indented conical depression.’
Toying with the BTG
A major restructuring of the British Toymakers Guild has been recommended at their Annual General Meeting.
Unfortunately insufficient members turned up to achieve a quorum, but ex-chairman, Robin Brookes, took the opportunity to state that the guild could not continue to be run on a rotation of volunteers.
Clive Green has now taken Robin's place in the chair.
The aim is now to change the constitution to elect four associate members onto a management committee.
The meeting also resulted in a recommendation to allow toy designers to join the BTG.
‘The only thing I really want is for Alonzo Kettless to carve me an East Suffolk Policeman's helmet,’ said Chief Superintendent Rom Rumsby on his retirement.
Alonzo chose mahogany, with the braid separating the bulk of the helmet from the peak.
It took him about 150 hours to complete, and won him a City and Guilds senior award for excellence.
Spoonerisms: Bertie Somme is planning spooncarving classes in September, teaching techniques for making functional spoons.
Cost for the class, on 14 September will be £7.
Details from Stella Bellem, Cobtree Museum of Kent Life, Lock Lane, Cobtree Manor Park, Sandling, Maidstone, Kent,(0622) 763936.
Gothic twist: just one of the many exhibits at the annual Buckinghamshire College Design Degree Show, which featured craft and manufactured furniture.
However students were finding that the normal demand for High Wycombe graduates is waning this year due to the economy.
Charity begins at the home bookshelf
We all collect books in vast numbers, often leaving them unread for year.
Now those unused tomes of practical or technical information can be donated to a worthy cause, offering others the opportunity to gain from our over-filled bookshelves.
The Ranfurly Library Service is a charity which helps combat the critical shortage of books in developing countries, by providing carefully selected consignments of books in response to urgent requests from schools, colleges, hospitals and other institutions.
They do this by tapping the vast resource of surplus old and new books in the UK.
Many of the requests are for practical, technical and vocational literature for all levels, from secondary schooling upwards.
Sadly these books are in shortest supply in Britain.
If anyone has any unrequired books — the Ranfurly Library Service particularly needs carpentry books — they can be contacted at 2 Coldharbour Place, 39/41 Coldharbour Lane, Camberwell, London SE5 9NR,(071) 733 3577.
Dust survey shows lack of control
Woodworking businesses still have some way to go before they can show that they are controlling the hardwood dust emissions from machinery.
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) are saying that the situation is depressing, with a lack of effective control.
These are the results of the HSE's latest survey, which charted the exposure to hardwood dust among employees of 41 companies.
In only five of those factories were the levels on all machines below the maximum exposure level (MEL), stipulated by the Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) laws.
Such was the ineffectiveness of controls that only 13 factories fell within a limit twice that of the MEL.
Although 60 per cent of the 363 samples taken were below the MEL, there were plenty of examples of poor control, with nearly two-thirds of all planers producing dust levels above the MEL.
The HSE's Woodworking National Interest Group have concluded that lack of control is not the preserve of specific machines, and dust levels are high within factories as a whole.
They are urging better ‘housekeeping’, and a better understanding of when and how to use respiratory protective equipment (RES).
That some factories and many machines showed effective control shows that the MEL standards can be achieved.
The group is demanding more effort from those in charge of factories.
The latest information sheet (No.11) can be obtained from HSE Woodworking National Interest Group, 14 Cardiff Road, Luton LU1 1PP,(0582) 34121.
They have also recently published a catalogue of all the safety standards and levels for woodworkers.
This includes sources for information on noise and fire, as well as advice on the law and occupational health.
Conserving Matters
Steps are at last being taken to create a formal structure for checking the sources of sustainably managed tropical timber.
If all the claims of timber merchants and suppliers are to be believed, most tropical timber sold in Britain is already produced on a sustainable basis.
However the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) has said that less than one per cent of all tropical timber brought into Britain is managed sustainably.
Of course, disparity between the timber industry and environmental groups centres on the definition of sustainability.
It is the development of ‘clear and practical standards for forest management’ that will be the first aim of the new Forest Stewardship Council (FSC).
The council sill be an ‘umbrella organisation’ to provide an infrastructure for other groups to monitor forest management, and the FSC will be promoting the standards through a Forest Stewardship Charter.
The FSC is currently in the draft stage, with proposals being presented to conservationists in Britain and the USA.
In America the Rainforest Alliance and Green Cross are attempting to monitor sustainable sources but the two organisations have complimentary skills, and will benefit from a coordinating body which will hopefully be able to make more efficient use of the many diverse groups working on rainforest practices.
The draft proposals for the FSC are open to further discussions and suggestions of aims and objectives are welcomed through the pages of Woodworker .
Workshop manual
For anyone setting up a workshop, or in the midst of that eternal task, a new publication may offer some assistance.
Woodworkers' Workshop includes all the information needed to source machines and tools for a workshop, with further advice on insurance, floors, timber storage, and the best way to purchase tools.
Expert woodworkers, like Luke Hughes, Ian Norbury and Lucinda Leech provide samples of their experience of organising a workshop, and the magazine includes a pictorial view of some of these idyllic work areas.
Woodworkers' Workshop costs £2.95, from newsagents, or from Argus Specialist Publications, Argus House, Boundary Way, Hemel Hempstead HP2 7ST,(0442) 66551.
Ray Gonzalez — whose Gorilla featured in Woodworker and the BWA ‘Wildlife in Danger’ exhibition last year — is now opening his workshops to students.
Ray specialises in ornamental carving, but his range of skills and teaching ability cover figurative work, and other aspects of carving.
He already trains apprentices, and now welcomes any potential carving students.
Contact Ray at Chardleigh House, Chardleigh Green, Wadeford, Somerset,(0460) 65611.
Face &Edge Products
Turning accessories
Woodturning Supplies are a new company who are producing a range of lathe accessories at competitive prices.
Woodturning Supplies have one or two interesting changes from standard thinking.
Their pin chucks fit directly on to the headstock spindle, bringing the work closer to the bearings so putting less strain on them.
The 5in faceplate is turned rather than cast, so is more accurate.
The 3in faceplate and screwchuck, has a central position for use as an ordinary screwchuck with small workpieces, and three holes in the flange for use as a faceplate on larger work.
Their outboard turning stand, like all their products, is a robust piece of kit.
Originally designed for use with the popular five speed Taiwanese lathes, which are imported by a variety of companies, they can be used with other lathes to increase the capacity for bowl turning.
The stand is a machined steel column with telescopic height adjustment, the top is threaded to accept the banjo assembly, and tool rest from the lathe.
They make a bowl turning tool rest, and two straight tools rests.
The prices are very reasonable, for example, the straight 5in and 10in tool rests are priced £6.00+VAT and £8.50+VAT respectively, the bowl turning rest £8.25+VAT.
The outboard turning stand costs £33.00+VAT.
Woodturning Supplies are also able to make special sizes of tool rests and faceplate to order.
At the moment they are only selling by mail order and at Woodturning Supplies, 7 Parker Close, Elson, Gosport, Hampshire,(0705) 522032.
Solvent Free Varnish
Sterling Roncraft have launched what they call Ronseal Solvent Free Varnish.
All they are giving away about the composition is that it is a water based polymer.
The benefits of this finish quoted by the makers are, that it doesn't smell strongly during application and drying, and brushes are cleaned are cleaned up with water when the job is finished.
Perhaps a more important advantage of Solvent Free Varnish is that it is touch dry in 20 minutes, and ready for a further coat in two hours.
A considerable time advantage over polyurethane finishes, against which it is match.
Roncraft are producing a range of clear and coloured versions, but I suspect that the clear gloss and satin finishes will be of most interest.
Details from Ronseal Woodcare Advisory Bureau, 15 Churchfield Court, Churchfield, Barnsley S70 2LJ.
Wirbel keeping the workshop air clean
Wirbel (UK) supply industrial cleaning machines, and have launched two workshop vacuum cleaners which can be used either as ordinary cleaners, or as remotely switched dust extractors.
Remote switching means that the extractor is switched on and off by operating the power tool it is connected to.
Both new machines can operate two power tools simultaneously.
The filters are of non stick nylon and singed polyester, filtering out particles down to 0.4 microns.
To help maintain this level of filtration and extend the life of the motors.
the exhaust air is not used to cool the motor; a separate stream of air is used for this.
The 430E is powered by a 1000 watt motor and has a 20 litre waste capacity, the 820E has a 1500 watt motor, 45 litre waste capacity and is trolley mounted.
Both are supplied with full tool kits.
Prices are £239.00+VAT for the 430E, and £403.00+VAT for the 820E.
Wirbel (UK) Ltd, Millers Close, Fakenham Industrial estate, Fakenham, Norfolk NR21 8NW,(0328) 863333.
AEG's new dust extractor, the WV2000, combines two 100watt motors and sub-micron filtration from their familiar WV dust extractors, with the polythene waste bag from the bag filler.
This wall mounted unit can also be mounted on a trolley (above), and can be fitted with a remote switching unit.
AEG, 217 Bath Road, Slough, Berkshire SL1 4AW,(0753) 872101.
The Staysharp, from Markek is a combination sharpening unit, for drills 3–10mm in diameter.
Chisels and plane blades can be sharpened and honed, held at the correct angles by ingenious jigs.
Powered by a power drill, knives, scissors, shears and rotary mower blades can also be sharpened.
Four grinding stones are provided.
Martek Ltd, PO Box 20, Redruth, Cornwall TR15 2UF,(0209) 219911.
Albert Purcell (above) at the drop hammer, is producing a range of hand forged and finished turning and carving tools, using methods most of the industry has discarded.
Because of these methods of production he is also able to make special tools to order, one such recent order was for hooked turning tools.
Endeavour Tools, Unit 1, Derbyshire S41 9BQ (0246) 208962.
Letters
Manufacturing Resource
You may remember that in the December issue of Woodworker last year I wrote about John Makepeace's new venture, Hooke Park College.
At the time the college was specifically teaching and developing the practical skills needed to use thinnings, green and coppice timber in the design and construction of buildings and wooden products.
John Makepeace's aim then was to bring the courses a step further with the potential for product manufacture on site.
His hope has been that better use of woodlands will give the trees greater value, and so farmers and landowners will have an economic reason for managing their woods.
John admitted recently that the economic climate has rarely been worse, and woodland owners have no financial rationale for management of this resource.
He is, however, frequently contacted by landowners who want to know how they can make better use of their trees.
Now, as a step away from the craftsman entrepreneur that has been John Makepeace's hallmark he has introduced a new course to Hooke Park College for manufacturing businesses that want to make better use of wood.
He is attempting to provide training for people who want to create businesses that produce quality products from indigenous timber at source.
Like his other courses this one-year programme will comprise a mix of practical and business studies, though the practical side is more likely to look at machining, timber technology and forestry.
It is hoped that the first year's crop of students will stay on at Hooke Park to help initiate a production plant there.
With the funding John Makepeace has attracted he should have no difficulty finding the students.
Again it will be they who will become the cutting edge when it comes to the readiness of woodland owners to offer the use of their woods and premises for other business.
The principle will also be dependent on the development of technology to allow people to once again work in the forests, near the resource.
Soon the pole-lathe bodgers will be replaced by bodgers powered by compressed air.
Doubtless local authorities will want to have their say in the matter, but let's hope that soon we will be finding woodworking workshops and factories in amongst our trees, and making best use of our most readily renewable resource.
Nick Gibbs.
Hold on, hold-down
Regarding the winning Hands On feature in March Woodworker , despite the well-intended editorial footnote, I do feel it was a mistake to include Bill Wiseman's fascinating but appallingly dangerous hold-down device, and to then endorse it in a recommendatory way by awarding it special recognition.
At risk of seeming a killjoy, I would urge readers to think through the implications of all home-made safety devices which set out to resolve some well-acknowledged safety problem only to create others of a less obvious by more hazardous nature.
Remembering that anything that bodes to threaten concentration in wood-machining is a prime risk, let us consider a router cutter revolving at anything up to 24,000rpm sitting midway between 12 highly unstably-sprung devices whose proper purpose in life is the support of wet laundry on a clothes line.
It takes little imagination to foretell the likely consequences of just one peg disintegrating and flinging its spring or its free arm into the cutter gap during a pass; or the possible knock-on effect(s) on the rest of the makeshift assembly and the astonished operator if this should happen.
There have been better hold-down devices of a home-made nature in Woodworker in the past — the best of them doubtless designed after some careful thoughts about an acceptable specification.
Mr Wiseman doesn't only have the safety of his hands to consider: in this case he might stand to lose his sight or sustain laceration from bits of flying clothespegs, blocks and cramps into the bargain.
So might those who choose to take up his well-meaning idea.
John Bull, Norfolk
Woodworking Types
Kevin Bevel Edge
Matching methods
I would like to suggest that John Adler looks to his own laurels before criticising rough carpenters.
and the ability of amateur woodworkers to cut an accurate tenon (WW/May 91/p.456).
Take for example his statement that the position of every groove, cut, and hole is relative to the dimension of the timber.
What nonsense — they are relative to the face side/edge, or the reference plane as the author calls it.
Later on in the article he repeats this; ie. ‘not only does the tenon need to be pretty much where it needs to be relative to the thickness of the wood.’
However, a little later he says ‘set the tenon gauge the same distance in from the reference plane.’
Presumably he means ‘mortise’ gauge.
When talking about edge jointing he advises scribing a line with a knife or gauge.
I would suggest that if a gauge was used then any curvature of the edge would be repeated at the line produced.
Perhaps he would have been better off with a pencil!
On the same subject I would advise the author that hot glue is not a necessity to make a joint without cramps — it can be made equally as well with a cold glue.
When talking about marking off the stretchers he seems to place more importance on the length of the tenon than the distance between the shoulders.
At this stage there would be no harm in leaving the tenons slightly long.
He advocates marking the stretchers off one at a time instead of squaring cross all four at once.
He talks about the accuracy of rulers.
If he uses the ruler to transfer a measurement from one piece of his work to another then they are going to be identical; accuracy of the ruler doesn't come into it.
The author should also be reminded that ‘rulers’ are used by children in schools; woodworkers use ‘rules’.
He cuts the tenon shoulders one at a time, and then lines them up to make a final pass if necessary.
Why not cut all four at one go?
He then goes on to fit the tenons to the mortise saying ‘fit the stretchers to the posts and repeat the exercise on the mullions.’
Seems reasonable, except for the fact that he hasn't cut the mortises for the mullions.
He did this after he had cut the grooves for the second time in the stretchers.
the lid: why cut a rebate the full length of the frame pieces when simple notches would have sufficed?
Indeed it would have improved the appearance of the underside of the lid.
With regards to the finish.
I think the choice of white french (or white shellac as the author calls it) was ill advised on a timber like teak which has a greasy nature.
Whilst I stand to be corrected, it may well have been this greasy property which made the finish dry out with a khaki tone.
It makes me shudder to read of a timber like teak being stained.
In conclusion I should like to ask the author if the chest had a bottom.
I also believe that the editorial staff of the magazine are open to criticism in allowing the article to printed as it was.
It should have been returned to the author for him to re-write in a clear and concise manner.
P. Maynard, Wilts
Cutter request
Now that I am retired, I find I am spending more and more time on voluntary charity work, for which I am very happy to take part, and I am hoping to make a start on making small wooden articles including picture and plate frames.
Recently, I obtained a saw rabbeter (sic)for my Bridges drill but, unfortunately, was unable to find any of the moulding cutters (STD825-829).
May I ask of any of your readers have any of these cutters they do not need and would wish to sell them?
James A. Bailey, Lancs
Screwdriver to hand
I would refer to the winner of ‘Hands On’(WW/April 91/p.398)does this now mean that screwdrivers can now be used for opening tins of paint with raising of eyebrows?
T. Ellold, Kent
Any old tools?
HELP!
Dedicated but poor woodworker starting in business will give any old or unwanted tools a kind, loving home.
Please contact me through Woodworker .
Thanks.
Jane Gubb, Bristol 
On the bleach
I would like to correct a serious error made by Noel Johnson Leach in his article ‘On the bleach’(WW/May 91/p.466).
He states that it is not necessary to use vinegar or mild acetic acid to neutralise the reaction, as it is a waste of time to apply a mild acid on top of a stronger acid.
This comment is correct if the bleaching has been done with oxalic acid.
However, most two pack systems, similar to our own Wood Bleach, do not contain any acid and as Mr Leach himself points out the ‘A’ solution is usually a strong alkaline.
The ‘A’ solution is usually a strong alkaline.
The ‘A’ solution is not applied to act as a de-greaser on the wood, but to make sure that the surface of the wood is alkaline.
The second solution, which contains hydrogen peroxide, is stabilised so that it will not liberate oxygen until it comes into contact with an alkali.
It is for this reason that any unused ‘B’ solution must never be returned to the original container, as it would then destabilise the contents which, in a sealed container without a vented cap, could cause the container to burst, and with a vented cap the solution would eventually become ineffective.
In Mr Leach's reply to J. Wigg of Halifax (WW/June 91/p.557)he referred to commercial acrylic water borne lacquers.
The caution he gave regarding their use implied that, despite being water based, there could be hazard in their application.
We would like to point out that we manufacture a range of acrylic varnishes and acrylic floor coating for domestic and industrial use, which are completely safe to use and are non-hazardous.
The varnishes are available in gloss, satin and matt and the floor coating in gloss and satin.
Mr Leach also states that ‘to date there is no full mirror-gloss available.’
Our gloss acrylic coating can be burnished to a mirror-like gloss surpassing that which can be obtained with polyurethane varnishes.
Ronald Rustin, Rusins
Wrong end of the stick
May I, through the medium of Letters page, reply firstly to Jack Hill (WW/April 91/p.352).
If he read what I wrote, I did not imply that the Nortec tools were inferior and needed adjustment.
Neither I, nor my friends who borrow them, have any cause for complaint.
I merely included the note about adjustment for interest, whoever the maker might be.
I know that Jack is a master chairmaker and I admire what he does.
He may regard me as an amateur but the fact is that, due to physical difficulties, I cannot pull and twist in a horizontal mode and so I invoked gravity to assist.
The derogatory remark that the rounder handles might strike the bench leg is uncalled for.
Secondly, to Paul Clarke (WW/May 91/p.452); do, please, read Barry Jackson's book.
It is an excellent book, as I took care to point out, except for my few niggles.
Without tools, when the original Shakers landed, they would have been hard put to it to manage.
The Ejner Handberg books are available from Stobart Davis, Priory House, Priory Street, Hertford SG14 1RN — and they could probably obtain other books on demand.
The known facts about Shakers are carefully set out by June Sprigg and I do not believe her work is a romantic history.
Why speculate what Mother Anne might have thought about modern glues — they had none and she spoke to the brothers and sisters in their instant present.
Len Dennis, Barnet
Handcrafted
I would like to follow up your article on the Letters page of April's Woodworker by asking you to put the following question to your experts or readers.
Not all of us like using woodworking machines, and do not mind spending the extra time achieving results which may be less perfect and mechanical-looking.
Can you tell me if any woodworking and design courses — part-time, full-time, short or long — are available in which the emphasis is largely or completely using hand-tools?
Simon Barley, Sheffield
Pit your wits
Richard Elderton's latest challenge is to work out the layout for a solitaire board he is designing.
The winner of this challenge will receive a selection of Trend router cutters courtesy of Trend Machinery and Cutting Tools, Unit N, Penfold Works, Imperial Way, Watford, Herts.
WD2 4YF,(0923) 249911.
Answers must be sent to Woodworker at Argus House, Boundary Way, Hemel Hempstead HP2 7ST by 1 September at the latest.
Please mark your envelope ‘Pit your wits’.
Good luck.
Solving solitaire centres
I have always envied John and Barbara's solitaire board.
Last Christmas, having loads of time on my hands over the holidays, I decided to take the plunge and make one at least as nice theirs.
I found a piece of quarter-sawn oak in my wood store, which would do perfectly for the job.
Solitaire boards are normally circular and have 33 circular depressions or sockets for the playing pieces (marbles) arranged on six lines in a cross configuration.
On mine, I cut a groove near the periphery of the board to collect used marbles.
My piece of oak allowed a blank of 270mm diameter.
Measuring radially from the centre of the board, the annular groove is 8mm from the edge and is 16mm wide.
The sockets are 16mm diameter, and the eight outer ones are 8mm from the groove.
Each socket is equidistant from its neighbours.
The problem
Calculate (accurate to two decimal places) the correct centre distanced of each socket from its neighbour so that the specifications given above are satisfied.
All working must be shown.
While you ponder this month's challenge, I must admit that the first competition, about the Teddy box, has proved a cathartic experience for me.
I had worked out three ways of making the box; the volumes different for each.
Unfortunately the solution published in the July issue of Woodworker is not correct.
Thank you Christopher Andreae of Bembridge for pointing out my error.
To any readers who feel hard done by or annoyed please accept my sincere apologies.
Looking on the bright side, I think this corner of the magazine could turn into a piece of gladiatorial entertainment!
Even with my mistake, only one person answered all three questions correctly: Alan Hezzlewood of Endon.
Congratulations.
The correct volume for question one was 0.31026m3, and yes three different volumes were possible for question two, though the answer, 0.34047m3 stands for question three.
I hope we can all remain partners, friends and challengers in puzzle working.
Ploughing small
The June issue of Woodworker published a letter entitled ‘Ploughing small’ which was answered by Bob Grant.
I had a similar problem when I wanted to rout a decorative edge around small components.
I couldn't hold the component in a sash cramp, itself held in the vice, because the bearing at the base of the router fouled the sash cramp.
I eventually solved the problem by two small blobs of hot stick glue which temporarily glued the component to a scrap piece of wood, dimensioned so that the component overhung the scrap all around.
The scrap was then clamped in the vice, and the routing was easy.
The final procedure was to split off the component from the scrap and clean up.
It wouldn't work if the component was made from very fibrous wood which might lift with the glue but it works in a lot of circumstances which defy the ‘sash cramp’ solution.
J. Smart, Powys
Heat treated copan from the Congo
Further to the query by Mr P. Ridgley of Oldham regarding copal varnish (WW/June 91/p.557), we would inform you that copal varnishes were manufactured from fossilised resins, mainly obtained from the Congo.
The copal was heat treated to make it soluble in oils and solvents.
A varnish made from copal was known as short, medium or long oil length, depending upon the proportions of copal to oil.
The mixture of oil and copal was thinned, usually with white spirit.
If Mr Ridgley's varnish is slow drying, he can add a little paint driers.
If too thick for easy brushing, then the varnish can be thinned with white spirit.
Copal varnishes have now mainly been replaced by polyurethane and alkyd varnishes.
Rustins
Screwdriver slip for punching head
I was surprised to seen that in April's Hands On that you had awarded Zwi Rotem of Israel the winner's prize for his tip on extracting nails with screwdrivers and a washer.
What he didn't say and you didn't pick up was how do you get the screwdrivers underneath the nail head without damaging the wood, seeing as nails are usually driven in flush with the face of the timber.
I would suggest if anybody has this problem, they drill the heads off as you would a rivet, punch the nail in a little and fill in then with the appropriate filler.
G. Wilcox, Liverpool
More exchange rates
During more than 20 years in the food machinery business, I was a frequent traveller to the USA, and one of the fringe benefits for me was to go along to the tool department of the local Sears Roebuck store.
For me it was like an Aladdin's Cave, and one could not help but notice the often ridiculously low prices being asked.
Much of this was ‘own label’ merchandise of course, but occasionally one would come across a familiar branded item, at about half the price of those at home.
The difference was compounded even further with the consideration that American pay-rates were two or three times ours.
If we cannot beat the system, how can we get it to work for us?
I have had some modest success in this regard, and pass on here some tips I have used.
Never, ever be tempted to buy mechanical items from overseas, unless you are absolutely sure that the power requirements are available here.
Even if all is well in this regard, you may find that the manufacturer's agents in the UK will not honour the guarantee.
However, small, non-mechanical parts are fair game and might show considerable savings.
These days a credit card has universal application.
If you are lucky enough to obtain a Sear's catalogue, or one offered by any number of American suppliers, you can give your card number and order what is required on the order form usually enclosed.
Many state that overseas custom is welcomed.
One of my best buys was a dovetailer jig costing a little over £100. which represented a saving of £200.00 over the price here.
The friendly dispatch clerk had written a personal note with the invoice attached.
There was a saucy additional note from British Customs and Excise, who had opened the package upon arrival, to determine any duties payable.
The note complimented me on my friend's honesty!
I do not know how the customs people work these things out, but I have never paid import duties on these overseas postal purchases.
As they have always been properly declared, I have assumed that goods below a certain value must be duty free.
Bill Watts, Glos
Admiring lathes
I have nothing but admiration for those hardy woodturners who have put the clock back a few hundred years and are making furniture with their pole lathes, but it has made me more than ever aware that the wood lathe has changed very little over the years.
I have often wondered why it should be such a primitive machine in spite of all its modern gadgets.
The turner still has to hold a great juddering chisel in his hands and relies on a good eye and a steady hand to ensure a true cut.
I have no doubt that dedicated woodturners everywhere would scoff at the idea of engineers' lathes being used for woodturners, but when I think of the various moulds and patterns I have made over the years with comparative ease but which due to their intricacies could only have been made with extreme difficulty on a wood lathe — if at all.
I then wonder why some enterprising manufacturer hasn't made a cheap engineer's lathe as an alternative to the old-fashioned wood lathe.
Is there a masochistic streak in all woodturners that sends them back to the pole lathe?
T. Burton, Herts
Appalachian dulcimer
Having read your article (WW/May 91/p.484)on the Appalachian dulcimer, I would draw your readers' attention to the following points, which might aid them in producing an effective musical instrument.
The original articles (Dec. 1970 and Jan. 1971) included helpful photographs showing stages in the instrument's construction.
Anyone unskilled in wood bending would find it helpful to read a more detailed description of the process, which can be found in most books on guitar or violin construction.
The thickness would suit a guitar but are unnecessarily heavy for a dulcimer less than half its width.
Soundposts are an important feature of bowed instruments but are unsuitable for plucked instruments and will deaden the sound of a dulcimer.
Try comparing a plucked note on a violin and on a mandolin and you will certainly notice the difference.
If the posts are only intended to curve the back, this can be better achieved by planing a curve on to the struts before they are glued to the back.
It is possible to make dulcimers of different sizes and shapes but this does affect the sound produced.
The instrument described is traditional in shape, size and stringing.
A modern dulcimer is more like the lower one in the photograph, with a double first string.
A common modern technique is similar to guitar finger style using a CC-G-C or a similar fifth and octave tuning which gives greater versatility without re-tuning and can be further extended by the introduction of an extra fret between the 6th and 7th.
A good tutor book will explain this.
If the ribs (sides) are thinner, as suggested (about 1.5mm) hot bending will not be necessary and a better shape can be achieved by the use of a simple jig to hold the ribs while the glue dries.
The use of small glue blocks along the inside of the joint is also a good idea.
If the instrument is to be resonant the apparently solid finger board needs to be hollowed out from underneath, leaving about 6mm of wood top and sides and openings cut through the soundboard (face) to link this space to the interior of the instrument.
If you are using guitar machine heads (far more easily adjusted than pegs, which also require special tools to fit them accurately) it is more convenient to modify the shape of the head and fit them only on the left (if you are right-handed) in the manner of Fender guitars.
If you want symmetry make sure you get the right number of left or right-handed machines.
A machine fitted on the wrong side will be inefficient and wear out quickly.
Alan Margerison, Lancs 
Moisture meters in wood
In the June issue of Woodworker we invited suggestions for moisture meters, following Colin Mill's article on the subject.
We have already received two ideas, which might prove useful in the workshop.
A widely used method of temperature control, writes Peter Rowe of Reading, employs two strips of metal of differing coefficient of thermal expansion, which are welded together lengthways.
Differential expansion with increasing temperature causes the compound rod to bend and make or break electrical contact.
The same principle can be used to make a moisture meter from wooded strips.
Glue together lengthways two strips of regular grained hardwood, one with grain running along the length as normal, and the other, cut from the end of a wide board, with grain running across.
Dimensions are not critical but strips 6x3/4x1/4in glued on the wider face are suitable.
Fix it to a convenient base to stand vertical and attach a pointer at the top to measure deflection.
Sensitivity is increased by reducing the sandwich thickness which can be adjusted to suit after gluing, but not too thin or the short grain will crack.
Leave the instrument in a greenhouse containing well-watered plants on a sunny day for a few hours to get an idea of maximum deflection.
Boring bits in wood
May I ask a question of the majority of manufacturers of wood boring bits?
Auger bits for use in a brace are made with a screw nose so that they are self feeding.
Physical effort is required only for turning and guiding and, as the feed speed is slow, precise depth control is easy.
Auger bits for use in power-tools used to have brad points, but they are now very hard to find.
As a woodwork teacher for many years I consider this design to be dangerous because power drills run at a much higher speed than a brace and consequently the feed is too fast for accurate control.
The user has to judge the exact moment to stop.
When used in pillar drill, it is often very difficult to reach the on-off switch with one hand on the lever.
The workpiece may even be snatched up.
On many occasions I seen students surprised by the unpredictability of these bits, and are unwilling to use them again.
Even when used properly, the bit has to be reversed to release the nose screw; mot all machines have this facility.
My remedy is, of course, to file off the thread.
Why is this not done by the manufacturer?
I'd love to know.
D. Mann, Essex
Router Crafter lathe
I am desperately seeking to obtain a Router Crafter lathe.
They are used for fluting, reeding and other features on the lathe.
Does anyone know of a supplier or second-hand dealer who might have one?
I know there was one called a Woodmaster, and Sears made another.
G. Russell, Keighley
Tilting turners
At the most recent target for the Antipodian Don Quixote, who tilts not at windmills but at woodturners, and not wishing to turn a non-existent battle into a war of attrition, I can only wonder who Mike Darlow will focus his attentions on next!
Jack Hill, Sussex
Rates of exchange
At a recent Hugh O'Neill turning demonstration he mentioned in passing how much cheaper woodworking equipment is in the USA.
This confirms many readers' views and, since woodworkers keep tool and machinery suppliers in business, it seems to me that somebody on the supply side should justify what appears to be gross profiteering.
At a recent show a motorised respirator was retailing at between £280 and £300.
In an American publication it was offered at $279.
At the current exchange rates that amounts to a mere £159.
It seems daft to have to send to America to buy a British product, but that is what I have done, because I am tired of being ripped off by every Tom, Dick and Harry.
Goods even arrive more quickly sometimes.
N. Bex, Bournemouth
Hezzlewood meter
My design of moisture meter, writes A. Hezzlewood of Endon, has been made, tried and tested and works very well.
The strip of mahogany has the grain running lengthwise.
Since expansion takes place laterally on exposure to moisture, there must be a resulting contraction longitudinally, which manifests itself by rotation of the coil to unwind, with of course, expansion on drying.
Coiling the strip was achieved by heating a 3/4in diameter aluminium tube with a blowtorch, and dry heat bending the strip around the tube.
I used mahogany, but other woods may be preferable.
The knob at the rear is for setting the pointer to any desired position for calibration.
Simple planning
When planning if the problem is that the vice jaws foul the plane fence, the answer is simple.
I don't know about the Stanley No. 45, but I just put my Record Multi-plane upside down in the vice and pass the wood over the ‘sharp end’.
Some might like a push stick for safety but I've never bothered.
At first it might help to retract the iron a little.
Certainly liberal use of candle grease is in order.
Don't cramp the plane in the vice too tightly.
Owners of small block planes or even smoothing planes can make these planes almost as jointers or try-planes.
True up a piece of hardwood (one surface/two sides) the same width as the regular plane and put both in the vice, truing up plane case and hardwood with a straight edge.
Set the iron plane well down in the vice so as not to obtain the plane cheeks, or else…!
Quite long pieces can be trued this way.
Any push-stick could have sandpaper glued on for additional grip.
J. Mather, Bedlington
Steaming away
I am writing to you to ask if it is possible to obtain drawings, designs and or working instructions for making what is known as a Steamer Chair.
I have recently started reading Woodworker magazine and find it most interesting and informative; thank you for an excellent publication.
Rex Brier, Rotherham
Musical issue
I was gratified to see the coverage in May's issue on musical instruments.
However, it was a pity that Greg Lewin was interviewed by somebody only knowledgeable about corncrakes; it would have been interesting to know whether Greg has done anything about the diabolical fingering needed on the ancient form of the racket.
The one in the photograph seems to lack the bits of tube I have seen in others.
The problem of having more holes than fingers is bad enough, but the serpentine bore means that the fingering in unlike that of any other instrument.
Probably having keys would bee greeted with horror by some, but it ought to be possible to rationalise the finger holes.
Has anyone made a user/friendly racket?
If so, could they share the knowledge with us?
George Swallow, Dorking 
Turning the page
Many readers wrote in explaining that Terry Porter's mystery object is a hat for Madonna, royalty or even aliens.
Its real purpose though — which the editor guessed (oh yes?)— is for strengthening ankles, and it is called a wobble board.
J. Smart of Powys lived up to his name, and was the only entrant to get it right.
Well done.
We welcome more mystery objects.
This month we are introducing a new competition category to the Woodworker Show competitions.
Sponsored by Turn-a-Round of Norwich, we are inviting turners to submit turned toys.
The only conditions of this contest are that the piece must be largely turned and must be a toy.
Indeed the more imaginative and fun the better.
The judges will of course be looking for turning ability, but the most important factor is that children — or adults — will find the toy a joy.
The winner will be awarded £100 by Turn-a-Round, who offer a full woodturning service from their base at Rockland St Mary, Norwich.
The bulk of their business is production turning of the furniture and joinery industries.
Turn-a-Round will doubtless take some interest therefore in our continuing production turning competition, which was such a success last year.
George Hatfield, who runs the production turning course at Sydney Technical College in Australia, will again be setting the competition, and again we will be asking entrants to submit two pieces.
The aim is to achieve two identical representations of George's drawing (available with entry forms), with the judges looking for consistency, finish and use of timber.
Last year the judges debated at length how to mark entries that did not follow the drawings to the letter, but showed evidence of good economical production turning techniques.
It was finally decided that the drawings must be the guide.
The most obvious area of doubt was in the chucking marks, and in this area the drawings must again be followed.
There was also some debate about timber choice, with some people questioning the use of some timbers for production turning.
The choice of timber is up to the entrant; the only proviso being that the two pieces must be consistent.
We are fortunate to announce that this year George Hatfield will be demonstrating on the Woodworker stand, at the Woodworker Show for the Saturday and Sunday (19–20 October).
He will be available for advice and tips about production turning, and will have his selection of home-made tools on display, and is use.
Well worth a visit.
For details about the show, and entry forms for the competitions, contact Argus Specialist Exhibitions, Argus House, Boundary Way, Hemel Hempstead, HP2 7ST,(0442) 66551.
We hope to see you at the show.
The Pedigree of Holtzapffel
By Warren Greene Ogden Jr.
Book review by Jon Sauer, ornamental turner This book is primarily the history and provenance of Holtzapffel lathes.
It has taken Warren Ogden nearly 30 years to compile the information on these machines which began in the mid 1950s.
With the help of Frederick Barnes, Warren obtained the Register of Lathes from Guildhall Library of London.
The first portion of lists this complete register — all 2557 lathes manufactured between 1795 and 1928, when the last one was sold.
This register lists them by serial number, price, type of lathe, date sold and to whom.
Part Two comprises the notes on the history of the Holtzapffel lathes.
This is a most comprehensive work which lists the original owners of the lathes and their biography.
Subsequent owners are also reviewed up to their current owners.
The lathes and the special apparatus are also reviewed, i.e. common lathes, screw mandrel, rose engine lathe, elliptic-eccentric chucks, dome chucks, geometric chuck and various cutting frames which were supplied with these lathes.
At the time of publication (1987) it listed almost 300 Holtzapffel lathes still in existence in the world with 20 per cent of them in the United States.
Warren Ogden Jr.
has done a tremendous amount of meticulous research on these valuable records.
The Pedigree of Holtzapffel Lathes is a valuable reference tool for the ornamental turner with an inclination towards the Holtzapffel lathe.
It is not for everyone; I can only recommend this book to those who are serious about the history of turning lathes and ornamental turning.
•This review was first published in Turning Points , and the book is available from the Wood Turning Centre, PO Box 25706, Philadelphia, PA 19144, USA; cost $45.
Finger in the wind
I was interested to read Hugh O'Neill's article (The Price is Right) in the Turning supplement to the June issue of Woodworker writes Geoffrey Heath, which gave a clear account of how the price of a finished article might be established.
However, I believe that the vast majority of woodturners in the UK are amateurs like myself, and it is the contrast between our approach to pricing and that of the professional which I wish to discuss.
We amateurs find various outlets for our products.
At one end of the scale, some of use make things solely for our own use, or to give away to our friends and relations.
Then there are those who sell their wares for charity at zero gain to themselves.
As we progress up the scale of profit-taking, we find others who sell at small craft fairs and those who find an outlet through local shops, until we come at last to the favoured few who sell at the prestigious crafts fairs which Hugh prefers.
But no matter how we dispose of our goods, we are not in woodturning to make a living.
Hugh chides us for selling at what he regards as low prices, but he forgets that our hobby not our source of income; it is a way of relaxing during evenings and weekends when the serious business of earning a living is over.
We might even feel that any financial loss is a small price to pay for the satisfaction which woodturning brings.
This is where we differ from the professionals — they turn in order to earn; we earn in order to turn.
We are striving for perfection in our products, not for making money out of them.
However, we do want to get rid of they (otherwise the house soon gets full of unsold turnery!), so we price them by our own standards — which may well include a look at what the competition is charging and the ‘finger in the wind’ which Hugh decries.
He says that if the wages element is higher than 15 per cent of the selling costs, then he has ‘to work out ways of working faster’!
But what will happen to the quality of the product?
I, for one, couldn't make a 10in bowl in 45 minutes — at least, not one with which I would be satisfied.
Once a craft becomes a business, half the pleasure goes out of the window if one has to worry about making enough money to maintain a reasonable standard of living.
How much more enjoyable is turning as a pure hobby!
Free from such cares, the craftsman can concentrate on quality rather than quantity.
Despite Hugh's remarks about downgrading our skills and devaluing wood, we are as concerned as the professional (possible more so) about ‘promoting wood…as something with its own intrinsic beauty’, since we can put our heart into the work without worrying about whether or not it will sell, let alone whether it will sell at an ‘economic’ price.
And if it ends up in the scrap bin, we simply write it off to experience, and start again.
It seems to me that the successful professionals make their money not be selling their wares, but by selling their skills — by writing books, running courses, making videos, holding seminars and giving demonstrations — in short, by teaching others how to do it.
Nothing wrong with that, of course, but let's not pretend that one can really make a decent living just by turning wood.
They being agreed, one may as well go back to the ‘finger in the wind’!
Prize tribute
Lee Dickenson explains how he came to carve the massive ‘Chindit’ sculpture, which won the Arbortech Woodcarver competition at the 1990 Woodworker Show.
Lee used nothing but this disc to carve the piece with an angle grinder, and he describes some of the effects the tool can achieve.
The burn marks are most easily achieved when the Woodcarver has lost its edge
Every piece of carving on the Chindit, which stands about 3ft high, was done with the Woodcarver
As a professional carver I thought it only natural to get my hands on one of those new Arbortech Woodcarvers to add to my compendium of tools last year.
I had no specific use at the time, but I thought it would prove a handy addition to the workshop, and was delighted when my grandfather elected to purchase the tool for me.
Sadly he died shortly afterwards and for many reasons it was some months before I used the disc.
The advent of the Arbortech Carving Competition at the 1990 Woodworker Show gave me the idea of putting the tool to some good use.
My grandfather had always taken a keen interest in my work, and I had an equal admiration of the stories of his time spent in Burma during the Second World War.
Therefore it seemed fitting that as a tribute to him and his comrades I produce a sculpture with this tool.
The strongest image I got from his stories and subsequent research was of the oppressive jungle and heat in which the soldiers fought.
They given the colloquial name of ‘Chindit’.
Particular units who operated for long periods at a time in the jungle became so adept in their surroundings they became known as ‘Green Ghosts’.
This description gave me the idea of a soldier slipping silently through the jungle.
I thought this a viable way to use the Woodcarver, with its circular cutting motion giving a good effect for the hanging, clinging jungle.
If the foliage was closely arranged around the figure this would allow for the cutter's inability to carve deeper than the distance between its projecting edge and the body of the angle grinder that powers it.
In planning details, I was fortunate that  my family had certain items of grandfather's equipment; a bush hat and a bush knife known as kukri.
I still needed extra information on clothing etc…
This was obtained with kind assistance from the Burma Star Association and the National Army Museum.
I produced sketches and a clay model for ideas, but these were eventually only used for reference when working on the sculpture.
I chose a large irregular lump of spalted walnut and directly drafted my idea on to the timber with a paint brush and some white paint.
This was the only medium that showed up well enough against the various colours and patterns of the spalted timber.
At later stages a thick crayon and a large felt tip suited particular areas of marking.
I set about the lump with the Woodcarver and soon discovered what it could and could not do.
Certainly it is essential to use some form of eye protection.
Work was carried on around the lump in a fairly ordered pattern helping to keep everything in proportion.
It was easy to stand back and view what had been accomplished, decide what had to be done and move straight in again with the view fresh in memory.
It became self evident when it was time to stop as the depth of cut ran out, though this was not a problem as I wanted the effect of closely surrounding foliage.
The foliage was achieved by allowing the cutter to run up and down in the timber.
Being mainly softwood around the outside, with no pressure applied, I allowed the cutter to dictate where I wanted to go.
This left any harder wood in place.
Where possible I allowed the cutter to go through to meet a similar cut.
I found the Woodcarver to be an ideal tool for fast removal of waste as well as useful, with care, as a modelling tool.
In the softer areas it worked like a hot knife through butter and large areas could be removed, shaped or modelled in an  astonishingly short time, in comparison with traditional mallet and gouges.
I felt that on this particular piece it did struggle through the heartwood at times, especially on the figure's right-hand side as this was extremely hard in places, with dense interlocking grain where a branch or branches had formed.
It soon became obvious that I was probably pushing the cutter and grinder too hard and had to adjust my force.
Although this slowed progress down and was, it must be admitted, somewhat disappointing, I only had to remind myself what effort would have been needed if using a mallet.
The harder parts gave a much more satisfactory finish with clean shiny cutter marks even in the interlocking grain.
But it did blunt the tool quite easily and sharpening was needed more often that I had thought likely, though this walnut was extremely hard.
However, sharpening is no problem.
I found the metal of the cutter easy to work as it seems quite soft in comparison to the tool steel of my gouges.
I presume this was a design compromise as an extremely hard and brittle edge could easily shatter on a hard piece of timber, so a softer tempering of the metal is necessary.
Even with the edge dulled, the finish on the harder parts was still quite clean but the softer wood tore up quite badly and in places just fell away.
It needed a really sharp edge and just a light brushing with the cutter to form some of these parts.
On such a large piece it was possible to achieve the facial features and details of the clothing by gentle removal of material by holding the grinder and cutter to the work at many different angles carefully and in a safe manner.
Do not hold the grinder back to front, and never remove the guard.
To complete, the whole piece was dressed down with as many and as fine cuts as possible again using different angles of attack, all the time experimenting.
For more definition in certain areas I allowed the cutter to stay in one place long enough to burn the surface of the timber.
This gives lines of shadow under belts, etc…
It was a slight problem though when the cutter was sharp as it would just keep eating away material, never leaving enough time to generate heat through friction, especially on the softer wood.
But when the edge had dulled it was no problem and on the harder wood a burn mark could be left in a few seconds if very little pressure was applied with the cutter just spinning on the surface.
The applied finish — several liberal coats of linseed oil — was allowed to dry, then finally waxed.
The burn marks are most easily achieved when the Woodcarver has lost its edge
Every piece of carving on the Chindit, which stands about 3ft high, was done with the Woodcarver
Fig. 1 An early sketch of a Chindit
Lee used the natural lines of the walnut lump to portray the soldier moving in the jungle
The Chindit went on to win the Arbortech Carving Award at last year's Woodworker Show, sponsored by MDistributors of Bexhill-on-Sea
Fig. 2 Special jungle effects with the Woodcarver
Tool Test Electric Carving
To give more power to the carver's elbow there are now a wide range of electric carving systems, and here we test a selection of machines and tools that may offer more than a saving in time
SuperCut carving disc
Price: £18-£24 Luna Tools and Machinery Presley Way Crownhill Milton Keynes MK8 0HB (0908) 262262
There is an interesting story behind the SuperCut woodcarving disc for angle grinders.
It has been launched by Toolbox of Sweden in direct competition to the Arbortech Woodcarver; the principle of both tools being to imitate the action of chainsaw teeth, but in a safer, more versatile manner.
Arbortech did so by developing a stamped disc with a tooth shape that differs from the chainsaw, to make sweeping cuts possible.
Its inventor Kevin Inkster started with a loose chain on a disc, and it is this formation that Toolbox have chosen.
This move has been promoted as a safety measure, permitting slip when the tool bites, but the legalities of patent law were doubtless considered when Toolbox decided to manufacture their version.
Kevin Inkster discarded the loose chain when he was dissatisfied with the cut it gave, but it made him realise that he was certainly on the right lines.
To that extent the SuperCut is also on the right lines, and has some benefits, but for the serious woodcutter it is limiting.
Such is the waste removal power of this sort of tool, that safety for the operator and workpiece must be considered.
On a superficial level then, the SuperCut is the safer tool, slipping whenever problems arise, though there is concern about the chain breaking.
However, I found that in many instances this slipping action makes the disc useless, as it is unable to cut to any depth before it stops rotating.
I had expected it to be best for trenching and shaping in the vertical position, but on all but the softest of timbers it failed to supply a substantial cut.
Conversely I discovered that it could cut with the disc flat, or at a slight angle, and I can see it having benefits for very fine work.
On the fruitwood I was working it left an interesting rippled effect.
However the moment it slips you have to wait for the chain to gain momentum before cutting can recommence, otherwise it bites again.
Waiting is a bore, and it is worth noting that the chain continues to rotate after the disc has stopped, so beware fingers.
In all, this seems a product created more by necessity than design.
I believe that the original Arbortech Woodcarver was one of the most dynamic inventions for woodworkers of recent time, offering fast cutting with a good finish and potential for fine detailing.
It was only a matter of time before a competitor sprang on the market.
I see that someone terrified of using any woodworking tool involving the slightest of danger may be attracted by the SuperCut, and it might have potential for novices, but then what tool offers complete security?
To date I have found both tools perfectly safe, used with care, and though there are rare occasions when I might choose the SuperCut, for the moment I'll be sticking with the real thing, which remains in a class of its own.
Easy-Carve Power Chisel
MAC659 Price: £92.50 MAC750 Price: £82.50 Pintail Decoy Supplies 20 Sheppenhall Grove Aston Nantwich Cheshire CW5 8DF (0270) 780056
When is a chisel not a chisel?
When, I suppose, it is a power chisel.
The idea is simple, with an electric drill powering a reciprocating blade, via a flexible drive shaft and cam mechanism.
Though the drill rotates continuously, the blade only moves when pressed against the workpiece.
There are obvious advantages to this method, especially for those inclined to use  no more effort with a mallet than is absolutely necessary, The downside to this is that rhythmic tapping is replaced with the screaming of a drill and the rattle of the reciprocating mechanism.
The Easy-Carve is in fact not as noisy as one might imagine, but it is not necessarily a tool I'd want to use for long stretches.
It is, however, a lovely feeling to be cutting through timber with the slightest of pressure.
With a sharp edge this method of power carving offers a degree of control more difficult to achieve with conventional carving techniques.
I used it for areas hard to reach with chisel and mallet, and expect that when carving delicate work it has the advantage of not disturbing the workpiece with sudden strikes.
The MAC750 is a smaller unit than the 650 I tested, and is recommended for that more delicate carving.
As a novice carver I found the MAC650 very useful for controlled shaping of curved pieces with flowing lines.
By raising and lowering the handle it is possible to follow the contours of the shape, and though this can also be said of a normal chisel, I enjoyed being able to concentrate solely on the chisel edge, as if whittling.
Changing blades is a simple process, using C-spanners supplied with the tool.
A set of fine carving bits is also supplied, including a 3/8in gouge, 3/8in bent gouge, 3/8in V-tool, 5/8in gouge and 1/2in chisel.
Of course even the best power carving system is only as good as its edge.
These bits are a forged lamination of soft, low carbon steel and high, hard carbon steel, made, seemingly, in Japan.
As they are only small they appear to be quite light, but seem to hold an edge and time can only tell how quickly they wear out.
There is also a line gouge available, costing £15, for larger stock removal.
All round, an interesting tool, that sits comfortably in the hand, is kind to the elbow, and doesn't cost an arm and a leg.
Pfingst Power Carver
Price: £239 Pintail Decoy Supplies 20 Sheppenhall Grove Aston Heath Nantwich Cheshire CW5 8DF (0270) 780056
Now this really is the business.
I have recently been making sculpted furniture, using a variety of power carving methods for fast timber removal.
I had got to the stage with one particular chair when even a mallet and chisel was being limited by the design.
Then along comes this Pfingst Power Carver and my problems were solved.
The system incorporated the motor and flexible drive of the sort made famous by Dremel and dentists.
Two handpieces are supplied in this package.
The 44 has a 1/4in shank, and I found it perfect for the aggressive work I was attempting.
It is quiet and vibration free.
For finer work the 88 handpiece is available in two versions; the more expensive using a spring connector to hinge it mid-way from the main connector.
This gives it the feel of a heavy craft knife or pencil, making fine texturing easier on the elbow.
Most of Pintail's customers are carvers of wildfowl, and so this smaller handpiece must be very popular.
Both handpieces have a simple snap-on connector to the power driveshaft.
When fitting the headpieces it is important to ensure the shaft is fully connected by rotating the collet manually, prior to switching on.
The motor is 1/8hp, with a 39in shaft, rotating at 14,000rpm.
I found it to be quiet, even when under pressure, and the hooked power pack means that it can be hung conveniently out of the way.
The torque is certainly necessary when using some of the really meaty burrs.
These come in a variety of shapes and grades, but the silver Karbide Kutzalls are the most powerful, with gold ones offering a finer finish.
For what I was doing, on furniture, the silver burrs were extremely effective, retaining their edge.
Though the gold ones are good for finishing, they do tend to clog, although that probably depends on the choice of timber and level of finish.
The silver cylinder and cone worked wonders, and I'd be interested to try some of the other shapes.
Amongst the alternatives are tungsten, diamond and ruby carvers offering a range of benefits from longer life to precise detailing, which is vital for wildfowl carving.
There is also a drum sander, nylon brush and a steel mandrel for unmounted discs or defuzzing pads.
All these bits are changed quite simply in the 44 with a spanner and locking pin, while the smaller 88 uses a C-spanner and fingers.
I found this a little fiddly, with the C-spanner light weight, but the sliding finger guard, which covers the collet on the 88 is excellent for ensuring digits don't get near burrs.
As with any form of power carving, safety raises its cautious head, especially when using the silver burrs.
It is possible for these to ‘run away from you’, and they can do more damage than you'd imagine.
This tendency to catch and pull happens most often when approaching the workpiece, but with experience I found this can be avoided easily by working against the rotation.
There is also the potential for catching then in jerseys and sleeves, so Pintail Supplies recommend a leather apron — which they conveniently supply — and care.
David Clews, of Pintail, says that about the only request for spares was due to a shaft breaking when a burr caught in clothing.
The risk is minimal, but such is the attraction of this form of carving that it is easy to get carried away, and its effectiveness does make eye and respiratory protection essential.
Dupli-Carver T110 and F200
Price: from about £340 Rod Naylor 208 Devizes Road Hilperton Trowbridge Wilts.
BA14 7QP (0225) 754497
The carving machine was first developed in 1845 by T. Jordan.
Modern high-speed routers and precision bearing have allowed considerable improvements in speed, accuracy and versatility.
They work on the principle of a pantograph which can operate in three dimensions to carve a variety of materials such as marble, plastic and wood.
Dupli-Carvers are not suitable for high volume production; for this the German or Italian automatic or semi-automatic machines with pneumatic loading are more efficient.
The advantage of the Dupli-Carver is its low cost and efficiency for one off's and medium quantities in simple or very complex shapes.
The cutting head is a router with a variable speed control (0–30,000rpm) which is attached to the same shaft as a stylus.
As the stylus is moved over a pattern, the router duplicates the original.
Movement can be in any one, or a combination of five different ways, so allowing intricate shaping and undercutting with very little experience.
A pattern can be almost any material, even plaster which has had a layer of sealer on it.
It is also possible to modify the original by adding or omitting parts, or even combining different patterns into one carving.
There are two basic models of Dupli-Carver.
The smaller T110, which stands on the workbench and carves pieces up to 18in tall by 10in diameter; low relief panels 10in wide and limitless length; and spindles 36in long by 8in diameter.
The larger floor-standing F200 carves up to 40in high by 14in diameter; panels up to 14in wide in lengths restricted only by material lengths or workshop walls; and spindles up to 66in long by 8in diameter.
Perhaps the most serious problem with the machines is that during use some of the parts can loosen.
Router movement can be solved by changing the holding bolts for longer ones with a fine thread and fitting very thick washers, so enabling the nuts to be fully tightened without the router getting in the way of the spanner.
Movement in the stylus was even easier, putting a very thin leather strip between each of the two adjustable parts.
Small panels of bold, simple very low relief are perhaps most easily carved by hand, but on other work time savings of over 90 per cent can be achieved; 75 per cent is a reasonable average.
A further advantage is that the amateur can also save 20 years practice.
Copy carving machines are also available from Micom, 7 Industrial Estate, The Street, Heybridge, Maldon, Essex CM9 7XP,(0621) 856324.
Mastering Marquetry
In June the National Marquetry Exhibition culminated in the award of prizes to the best marquetarians in the land.
Nick Gibbs reviews the exhibition and competitions, and wonders how such masterpieces are achieved on wood    
Perhaps of all the marquetry skills, the three veneer class brought out the most consistent high levels of artistic interpretation.
I found these pictures, Like ‘Shadow of War’ by B. Freestone from Harrow (left), to be the most vibrant, and the most attractive to view.
This piece is a fine example of the use of timber grain and colour to illustrate the depth of movement and texture in the sky and air around the figure
R.L. Soale's ‘Peace Perfect Peace’(above), is a more typical entry to the marquetry classes, and won the Jack Fletcher Trophy for the best piece in the Secondary category, for marquetarians who have never won an award.
There seems to be an attraction amongst marquetarians for depicting Dickensian scenes of cobbled streets populated by pseudo-Dickensian characters.
This picture has a more contemporary scenario, and successfully portrays a village at sleep
One piece that uses more veneer than most — in a variety of flavours — is ‘Orpheus’, by P.R.O.
Stephens, who won the Jim Jelley prize for the best applied marquetry by a beginner.
It is in fact a table, with hinging top, of about 36in diameter.
That it was made by a ‘beginner’ is a statement of the quality of entries at the National Marquetry Exhibition.
However the applied section was of a lower standard than other categories, and the winners stood out above the rest
The Artistic Merit Cup is annually awarded to the piece of marquetry that, presumably, stands best as a piece of interpretive art.
P. Davies' ‘Storytime’(below) certainly conveys the moment of its content.
The picture forces the viewer to wonder at the subject of the crowd's attention.
It failed to strike me immediately, and I questioned the judges' decision — replacing it with one of the entries to the three veneers class.
The piece has grown on me, though I do wonder if there is any prejudice towards marquetry made of many pieces of veneer
My favourite piece at the exhibition was E.G. Neale's ‘Happy Eater’, which won a second prize in the three veneer category.
The cartoon brings to life the humour of these famous characters.
The exhibition itself was brilliantly organised by the Harrow branch of the Marquetry Society, with one awe-inspiring collection of competition entries, and those on display only.
It is a measure of the current popularity of marquetry that there were 404 entries to the competitions, of which 93 came from the Harrow chapter
The miniature class shows a spread of subject matter and techniques.
D.R. Walker's stark caricature of the Prime Minister exemplifies those pieces that make use of line rather than grain.
‘Polpero’(middle above) by D. Carman, won the advanced class for miniatures and is of the scenic type, while the third miniature is symptomatic of the popular depressed urban portraits
The most startling of the three veneer section, to my mind, was ‘Caught on the turn’ by A. Smith.
Fortunately the judges agreed, and awarded it the first prize.
A. Smith was the only entrant to win two sections, with his beautiful parquetry box in the advanced, applied class
Though many pieces caught my eye at Harrow, space limits my personal choice.
Possibly due to my lack of marquetry expertise I was drawn towards the three veneer section, and E.J. Higgs ‘Light Music’(left) won third prize in the class.
Perhaps it's because you get to see more of the timber.
However I was amazed by the quality of the exhibition as a whole, and can see that marquetarians are continuing to produce work of the highest standard.
In the long term, I'd only like to see more effort aimed at subject matter, and perhaps, in some cases, less concern with veneer quality
E.H.
Thorne's ‘Sports Page’, which was highly commended at last year's Woodworker Show, uses more line than grain for the cartoon effect.
Other effects start with Fig. 1 (top, left-hand column) leaf design with silhouette shapes in the right-hand column
Marquetry Guide Lines in wood
Gerald James' concluding feature on marquetry methods looks at the use of line to create wooden decoration, and offers advice on choice of veneers, composition, the use of line and grain, and mirror images
Perhaps the most important factors in choosing veneers are those of tone and colour; and of these, tone is the more over-riding.
For tone and colour are not synonymous, though the two terms are often wrongly interchanged.
Tone is the amount of light a surface reflects and so determines how ‘light’ or ‘dark’that surface appears to the viewer.
Colour refers to the actual wavelengths of the light rays concerned and determines the ‘hue’(redness, blueness, etc…), which can be bright or dull, muted or full.
Most timber colours are of somewhat muted hues and generally very subtle (though not often dull), but can vary enormously from one another in tone value.
Much of the judgement used in choosing your veneers is instinctive, based on comparing different samples; it comes from familiarity with woods and an innate colour sense.
I suggest two points to bear in mind.
The first is to try to achieve a combination in which the tones of the different parts of the design are sufficiently distinct to read clearly one from another but do not display too violent tonal contrasts, unless a particularly dramatic effect is part of your aim!
Secondly, in designs where a 3D effect is required, it may in general be more effective to select the higher-toned timbers for background elements (eg distant hills) and keep dark-toned veneers for foreground work.
Concerning arrangement there are also, perhaps, two basics to bear in mind.
These are the practical considerations of the nature and limitations of wood as a material, on the one hand, and the visual effect one is trying to achieve on the other: the two are sometimes difficult to satisfy simultaneously.
In some cases the former dictates the direction in which the grain must run in individual pieces of the pattern (as well as often influencing the actual shapes of parts).
If, for instance, a certain portion of a design includes a number of long, narrow, shapes (eg tree branches) then the grain in those components should be arranged to run along, rather than across, the strips; just commonsense, but keep an eye on it.
At the same time due consideration must always be given to the visual effect of the grain markings.
The illusion of perspective can be enhanced by arranging the grain of one piece to run slightly obliquely to the horizon (fig. 1).
Composition
Looking back to the opening statement of the first article last month, we must remember that in the main we are thinking  about these designs as decoration rather than as pure picture-making.
It follows, then, that in their composition one must pay attention to the actual shape and purpose of the surface they cover.
Some designs fit neatly into circles and would be suitable for, say, small turned boxes, coasters or shallow platters.
Opportunities sometimes arise, however, for decorating objects with square or rectangular faces, or where certain considerations of function restrict the extent of possible ornament.
If decoration is to remain valid it must be subordinate to the over-riding proportions and the requirements of use of the object in question; yet still look good.
Using the grain
In some types of wood the grain markings are indistinct, while in others they are well-defined.
Amongst the former — plain sycamore, box and horse chestnut, for example— you can find good variations of tone and hue, but very little marking.
In the well-defined types, such as yew, zebrano and walnut, grain is the dominant visual feature and it is in this group that some of the effects most characteristic of good marquetry can be achieved.
But you have to develop an eye for spotting possibilities; a kind of ‘picture eye’ which sees a winter sky in the grain marking on one particular piece of veneer or a rock formation in the figure on another.
It is this aspect of the craft that I want to look at first this month.
Some wood samples have strong markings; either regular, random or quite wild.
Each one, in its way, might suggest some piece of a natural form which could be used in the creation of a marquetry design.
Take for instance the example of yew wood.
Its very strong and linear grain marking makes excellent leaf veining.
If this feature is exploited it makes a very nice leaf spray, and the 3D effect is enhanced if the yew is combined with a darker-toned wood such as sapele.
To make up these leaf forms, each motif is prepared by first cutting out two rectangles of suitable size having the grain running obliquely at about 45° which are then edge-jointed and taped together.
The leaf tracing is then pasted on to the assembly so that the centre vein coincides with the join.
A more complicated type of leaf, such as in an ivy design (fig.3), can be prepared by assembling the parts in stages.
Castello is a wood in which the markings are usually very distinct, consisting of stripes of light and dark wood, varying in width and of a wavy character.
It can give very good sky or water effects especially when combined with a moon/sun or a cloud formation.
Don't forget that the sun will always appear behind the stripy cloud, never in front of it; clouds can do either but probably look best with the stripes as a background.
Certain samples of walnut can be similarly used giving a rather more dramatic and somewhat stormy appearance to a design.
There are many stripy veneers available which can be employed to give various effects exploiting the characteristics of stripyness.
Olive ash, for instance, makes a good ploughed field, as does yew, especially if you can find a piece with a nice ‘crook’ grain; zebrano is useful for both water and sky; walnut often yields a rock formation; some of the ‘burr’types (eg. walnut, ash and elm) make excellent tree foliage, if the scale is right.
One other quality of timber which bears on marquetry, and of which you should always be aware, is that of texture.
In this context, texture is the visual equivalent of the ‘feel’ of a given surface.
In wood this is produced by flecking (oak), ripple (mahogany), sheen (satinwood), dappling (lacewood), and even insect attack (masur birch)!
The main point, then, about realising an idea, is that of transformation.
You should always be on the lookout for the markings which can be transformed to suit your own ends.
For this you need to keep an open mind; don't just admire, also seek.
If you can spot a possibility and make it work the result can be exciting, and don't be afraid to use your sense of form, colour and originality.
Intuition is the name of the game.
In another context, Picasso once turned a bicycle saddle and some handlebars into a bull's head; transformation through the eye of a genius!
Use of line
Designs composed of small masses of veneer forming a readable ‘picture’, correspond roughly in looks, if not in colour, to subjects as they actually appear to the eye; they seem to be in 3D even though they are flat, and to a degree they are naturalistic.
There is another branch of graphics, however, in which an image is produced by the use of line rather than mass.
In its most basic form the technique involves merely an outline, or when it is filled in, a silhouette; but of course it can be much more elaborate than that.
Linear representation of solid form has always been a valid artistic technique, especially in drawing (as distinct from painting), and it can be used in marquetry work also provided the nature of the material (ie. wood) is not ignored.
You have to remember that wood is really quite a coarse material (compared to fine metals, for instance) and it is also stronger along the grain than across it.
This means that with wood veneer you cannot achieve very fine lines in a design but with care and good planning some quite delicate effects can be obtained (fig. 3).
To make this design you will need three veneers of quite distinct tonal contrast; call them dark (A), medium (B) and light (C).
First, paste a tracing of the complete outline on to‘A’ and tape this piece on top of ‘C’, then cut out the centre of the motif and edge-glue the portion obtained from ‘C’into place.
Next, tape ‘A’ into position on top of‘B’and cut round the profile.
The resulting shape is finally inserted into its background and the design mounted and finished as required.
A more emphatic outline can be achieved by making a second cut round the outside of the first outline.
This involves choosing a further veneer (D), and when you do, keep an eye on maintaining a good contrast between the two linear shapes produced.
For making up you will have to first paste the motif on to‘A’, as before, then cut in ‘C’.
Proceed by taping this assembly on top of‘D’ and cutting round the original outline.
Finally, after taping ‘D’, together with its insert, on to‘C’, saw round a new outline, keeping the cut a millimetre or two outside the original shape.
Before we leave this topic, may I repeat the caution with regard to grain direction.
When pasting your template on the piece of veneer selected for the outline — usually a dark wood — try to arrange for the thinnest parts of the design to run along the grain.
The line and infill technique imparts to the work a certain quality not unlike that of a woodcut or sometimes even stained glass and the effect can be most attractive.
It can often be enhanced by introducing some of the techniques discussed under ‘grain markings’ above.
Flat patterns
In the past, some purists have said that all surface decoration applied to designed objects — all ornament, in other words — must be based on motifs which look flat, ie. they must not be drawn with a third dimension: you are allowed to make a pattern out of squares, so to speak, but not cubes.
They also insisted that design must be formalised, that is, made symmetrical and rigid rather than natural.
Neither of these extreme dogma is applied rigorously today, but it is certainly still accepted that 2-D form makes good pattern.
Historically, highly formalised patterns in wood, especially those of a purely geometric kind, fall into the category of parquetry which, though allied to marquetry, is not quite an identical craft, often requiring different techniques.
Nevertheless, some flat pattern work can be fairly treated as marquetry, most often based on natural forms.
It can vary from single units to repeats and form borders to all-over effects.
Though it does not, in general, exemplify, the uniqueness of marquetry (achieved by using the wood grain as the source of the visual effects) it can be intriguing in spite of what I implied earlier about the limitations of the silhouette as a design form.
Where problems do arise over cutting out narrow strips — which we have met before — it is sometimes best to cut in the background piecemeal, gluing in each subsection of background separately as you go along.
For the roundel pattern (fig. 2), a cutting sequence is suggested.
First cut in all ‘A's’, then edge-glue them in place.
Next, tape a further background piece to the back of the assembly and cut out all the ‘B's’.
Glue them into place also, and so on.
It is best to select a fairly dark, fine-grain veneer for the background since it is then less likely overall to read as a number of different pieces.
Counter-change patterns — essentially 2-D in nature — can be most effective (fig. 2).
They can be cut in two separate operations or, if three alternating veneers are taped together, the top one bearing the pattern, both halves of the design can be cut in one operation.
The figure produced from ‘A’ fits into the ground ‘B’; the figure from ‘B’fits into ground ‘C’.
One half has then to be turned over before the two halves are trimmed and married up.
Roundel and counter-change patterns (fig. 2 left) and line patterns (fig. 3 below)
Signed by its maker inside (right), its twin was in the Woodworker Show last year
Clockmaking
The fortunes of time
Bill Watts, whose clocks achieve the highest levels of craftsmanship, was recently commissioned to produce a clock to replace one built in the 1760s.
He is now critical of the British clockmaking industry, but hopes that with the help of a German movement, his new clock will survive longer than the original.
It was in September 1990 that The Royal London Hospital, Whitechapel, celebrated its 250th anniversary of continuous service to the community.
The highlight of the anniversary ceremonies was the visit of H.M. The Queen to bestow the Royal Charter.
An early governor of the newly founded hospital was John Ellicott, who became  chairman of the House Committee (the governing body of the hospital), in 1757.
The records show that he presented a clock of his own making to the hospital circa 1760, which was in continuous use until the night of 10–11 January 1978, when it was stolen.
Despite a substantial reward being offered, it was never recovered.
John Ellicott was born in 1706, the son of a clockmaker, in the parish of All Hallows, London Wall.
At the age of 22 he set up shop in Sweeting's Alley, which was near the Royal Exchange.
He had a distinguished career as a clockmaker with several original inventions to his credit.
one of these was  the compensation pendulum, in which brass and steel are used to move freely and compensate for different co-efficients of expansion.
Alas, it was said to have been of not much practical value.
He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1738, having been proposed by Sir Hans Sloane and other eminent scientists of the day.
He read several papers before the society and his published works include observations on the laws of electricity, the height to which rockets can be fired and the influence which two pendulum clocks, in close proximity, were seen to have on each other.
His intellect and range of interests were wide and profound.
He died in 1772.
The Anniversary Organising Committee had felt that a clock should be commissioned to replace the one which had been stolen, and perhaps because I have for some years specialised in the reproduction of historic clocks, my name was one of those considered.
There were some practical considerations to be taken into account before the work could actually commence however.
Although several quite good photographs of the original clock existed these were in plan elevation only and there was no indication of the dimensions, particularly the depth.
The photographs also indicated that the original had two trains (going and striking) and indeed there were some interesting notes prepared by a Dr Byrom who was an enthusiastic amateur clock repairer, and who overhauled the clock in 1970, but these were couched in very general terms.
At about the time the new clock was commissioned, I became seriously ill with a heart condition, and it proved not possible to undertake the extensive research required to faithfully replicate the old clock.
Also there were doubts as to whether the panelling in the proposed new location was strong enough to take the weight of the new clock and its ‘sculptured’ bracket.
Accordingly it was agreed that the free-standing clock should be built very similar to the one John Ellicott made in 1740, and featured on p. 288 in the standard reference work by Cescinsky &Webster,English Domestic Clocks .
The choice of movement proved a problem.
My longcase clocks are entirely handcrafted, with brass and dial work, engraving, silvering, hand piercing and bluing, etc.…undertaken in association with Steve Kelly, the renowned Exeter clockmaker — who has been practising for more than 65 years — and other craft specialists.
My bracket clocks however usually incorporate movements from Kieninger of Germany.
It was felt that the new clock should have a British movement for the sake of authenticity and because of its historic associations.
I can speak with feeling about the frustrations I experienced trying to obtain a suitable movement here.
I came to the conclusion that there was quite a bit of room in the psyche of the British clockmaking establishment for a little humility.
One manufacturer declined absolutely to supply other than his own complete clocks and another quoted £3000.00 plus extras and VAT, which was about twice the budget for the entire project!
It is worth spending a little time to ponder the significance of this.
There was a time when British clocks were supreme throughout the world.
The motion-work was at the very apogee of clockmaking technology and the case-work enjoyed a world wide reputation for quality of design and good taste, all at very competitive pricing.
We really were world leaders in all respects.
How things have altered!
Thank goodness neither Keininger nor The Londsdale Clock Co. of Swaffham, their agents, were guilty of the luxury of being rude to their customer.
The movement cost less than 10 per cent of the price quoted by the British firm and this included all import duties and delivery charges, and VAT.
Just in case the specification might considered inferior at this price, it includes as standard an eight day, three train movement with triple chimes,(St Michael, Westminster and Whittington) all on a peal of perfectly-tuned bells.
These are automatically silenced at night and may be silenced manually at any time by operating levers which are neatly and unobtrusively located on the hand-crafted dial.
I might mention that I have been using these movements since the commencement of my business in 1983, with outstanding performance both as to accuracy and reliability.
It is sad to reflect that this arguably more comprehensive specification is simply not available from any UK manufacturer at anywhere remotely near the price, yet there are several rival firms in Germany with this capability.
The cherub spandrels are similar to the Cescinsky &Webster classification No.4 and are hand cast by the lost wax process, fettled and polished.
The engraving is also by hand on brass, filled with black wax, silvered and shellaced.
All the other brass fittings, supplied by Chas.
Greville at Farnham Surrey, are to the highest standard.
The case is of highly figured solid English walnut, and Macassar ebony.
Finish is by french polish applied with a hand rubber and then covered with a protective coating of carnauba wax polish.
All the small mouldings were shaped by an overhead router either against a fence or with a pin (for the so-called great arch).
Total construction time was about 200 hours including installation of the movement and assembly of the various parts.
The clock has been timed to a consistent gain of less than half a minute per week during several months of sustained testing.
Special attention has been paid to security.
The clock is attached to the table on which it will stand by means of a padlock and plastic covered cable, which is located with the clock and out of sight.
Whilst a prospective burglar might fumbling with the clock and wondering why it won't lift, his movement will have activated the pressure pad which controls an audible alarm giving out 85dbs.
This alarm may only be de-activated by a key holder, and the noise alone is such that the prospective thief will hopefully abandon his anti-social ideas.
It is an interesting thought that had John Ellicott not donated one of his magnificent clocks to mark his benefaction, the greed of a contract thief nearly 250 years later would have never taken place — and my humble tribute to this great gentleman, philanthropist and scientist, would never have been built.
Happily, the work of these ‘old timers’ still inspires and encourages us to this very day.
With our vastly improved materials, adhesives and security technology, perhaps the new clock has an even greater chance of survival?
I do hope so.
The Woodworker Show this coming October,(17–20) includes a clock-making competition, and Bill Watts, along with Martin Bulger, will be judging entries.
Details of this and all the other competitions at the Woodworker Show, from Argus Specialist Exhibitions, Argus House, Boundary Way, Hemel Hempstead HP2 7ST.
•Clock kits, without movements, plans, and mouldings are available from Park Clocks, 13 Oakfield Court, Damory Street, Blandford Forum, Dorset DT11 7HF.
•The plans of the bracker clock accompany this article, are reproduced by the kind permission of Charles Greville &Co.
Ltd, Willey Mill House, Alton Road, Farnham, Surrey GU10 5EL, from whom plans and movements are available, cost £3.50.
Market Review Carving through the confusion
Over the centuries carving has built up a range of chisels and gouges, the names of which are as esoteric as the craft itself
The full range of carving tools on display at The Woodworks
A Cogelow tool (above) and the sweep of shapes to be found in the Ashley Iles catalogue
There are over a thousand different shapes of carving chisels and gouges.
It is hardly surprising that there is confusion over the names and numbers which describe the shapes.
Not only does the cutting edge vary in shape, there are a variety of patterns of shanks; the metal behind the blade.
Just to add to the confusion there are also different types of handles.
However it is not necessary to own all the available shapes, some have very specific uses which may only needed on rare occasions.
When a special tool has been developed, it is usually because nothing else will do the job as well.
During the nineteenth century a numbering system was standardised in Britain.
The last two digits of a maker's reference number describe the shape of the shank and the cross section, the width is always given separately.
The cross section curve of a gouge is known as its sweep.
Gouges and chisels can be straight, curved, bent or back bent along the length of the tool shank.
Different lengths of tools are made: full length tools for professionals, shorter medium length tools for hobby carving.
Lino and block cutting tools, are the smallest style of carving chisels, V-tools and gouges, developed for cutting printing blocks.
The blades are about 2in long, the small rounded handles designed to be held in palm of hand.
At the other end of the scale are the alongee gouges; large heavy gouges, for removing large amounts of wood on big items such as sculptures.
Alongees are now only made by a few manufacturers.
There is some controversy over the finish on carving chisels and gouges.
The is no doubt that polished tools look better, but some say that the extra expense is unnecessary.
The only areas which must be polished being the areas in contact with the wood; the bevels.
A smooth surface moves more easily through the fibres.
Some manufacturers like to leave the tempering colour on the tools, as an indication that this operation has been carried out properly.
The body of the tool being black, the ground areas, the bevels, and gouge channels should be a light straw colour in this case.
Carving chisels
Carving chisels are similar to ordinary carpentry chisels, in that the edge of the blade is flat and square across the shank.
Carvers' chisels differ from carpentry  chisels in the way they are sharpened.
Carvers put a bevel on both sides of the edge.
Some carvers also like to put curved bevels on their tools.
Skew or corner chisels have the edge angled out of square to the shank.
Fishtail carving tools, chisels, skew chisels, and gouges, taper from the cutting edge down to a thin shank.
They are useful for getting into awkward spaces, avoiding damage to the work around them.
Carving gouges
Gouges vary in the amount of curve or sweep on the cutting edge and the form of the shank of the tool.
The sweep of the cutting edge and the shape is usually defined by a number, which was standardised in Britain in the nineteenth century.
Tools from the rest of Europe do not follow the same numbering system.
Straight gouges are numbered 3 to 11, a 3 sweep is a very shallow curve, an 11 has a very deep flute.
Curved or bent gouges are numbered 12 to 20.
The sweep of the straight number 3, is the same as on the curved number 12, the spoon bit number 24, and the back bent spoon bit number 33.
Cogelow gouges don't conform to any of the standard shapes or numbering systems.
Parting and V-tools
V-tools or parting tools are usually available in three angles 45°, 60° and 90°.
In sizes between 1.5mm and 15mm.
All measurements are taken inside the angle.
Suppliers of carving tools
An Architectural Woodworkers carver (below) and a host of tools (above right) from R.A. Salman's Dictionary of Woodworking Tools published by Unwin Hyman
Carving Bearing up to reality
Teddy Bears may not be the most active models, but their nuances of age make reproduction in wood a challenge, as George Brownlee discovered when he carved this award-winning piece.
Eva Schweitzer reports
The original Teddy, with the lime and mahogany taking shape
Almost every child, I imagine, has at some time owned a much-loved Teddy Bear.
Some of these cuddly toys, like the one featured in this project, had arrived in someone's childhood as a gift from Grandma, and been loved to bits by its owner.
By the time the owner had children of her own, it had become all too clear that Teddy was not likely to survive the rigours of another nursery.
Luckily, her husband found George Brownlee to immortalize the middle-aged bear in wood.
This was not the first time that George had attempted a figurative animal sculpture.
Once again, his work radiates a sense of fun and natural affinity with the subject and the medium; in this case creamy, beige lime for the Teddy Bear and rich, dark mahogany for the cushion.
George carefully positioned the old bear crossed and in a delightfully laid-back, almost human repose.
The chose pose proved interesting, and suited the size of the timber, yielding very little waste.
George's favourite model, his daughter Samantha, had turned model-maker for this project and fashioned a velvet beanbag to help him achieve a realistic finish and to portray the Teddy as an ‘old bear with modern leanings.’
Calculations were taken from the original bear to produce drawings, reducing it from three to two dimensions.
At the same time, George measured the beanbag model.
From the drawings, he sketched various elevations, then cut them out and transferred them on to the blocks of wood to be bandsawn.
The beauty of it is that you can easily move them around on the wood.
Generally, the grain runs the length of a carving, but in some cases, it may be necessary to slightly alter the angle of the drawing to get the best effect by using the end-grain.
Medium-sized gouges were used to start the basic roughing out of the shape, with references made to the life model to get the proportions absolutely right.
Any form of measurement to obtain these calculations is helpful; ie. caliphers taken from the original.
Even at this early stage, the basic shape began to emerge.
Try and resist the temptation to concentrate on one area.
You do not want to get trapped by detail.
Start general rounding off, and at this stage, some form of modelling could be tackled; working on deep folds, light creases and facial features.
Carefully observing the model, George concentrated on the tiny creases in the ears, on arms and legs.
the paws; simulating the stitching and seams, merely suggesting the heavy black braid that defines the nose of the original bear.
All the details that help breathe life into the little fellow can be marked with a pencil or Biro.
Beware of marker pens, as their ink tends to seep deeply into the wood.
A tip from George: for darker wood like mahogany and walnut, it pays to use a white Conté pencil.
Features, like seams and folds, should be marked for visual effects before taking up the chisel, as inaccuracies cannot be corrected once a deep gouge or V-tool has been used.
At this particular point, when marking details, it is sometimes a good idea to use a very small U-gouge.
That way, the same effect can be achieved without taking it to the full depth.
The teddy, judging by the state of one foot, had obviously been excessively loved: his cloth fur had been hugged and stroked away in many places.
Therefore, there was no need to apply a tooled finish all over.
Instead, George concentrated his efforts on the few remaining furry areas on an otherwise bare bear.
He used small gouges to carve little tufts of fur with long, controlled strokes, following the marked lines.
George used a small V-tool when it was safe.
However, V-tools are very useful for creating the ins and out of a body.
The sparseness of fur did have one advantage — no mass of hairs to obscure the charming pose.
The client did not want the teddy to have glass eyes.
Therefore, George carved them into the wood in relief.
It was possible with only a small selection of gouges to find the appropriate one to fit the circumference of the eyeball, using the gouge on both sides.
Remember, eyes are marble-shaped, not flat discs!
Aim for a dome shape.
Once the width between the eyes had been  determined and marked out, George worked on both eyes; that way, neither eye ends up larger than the other.
The completed bear, pressed into the beanbag model, gave a clue to the depth required to be cut from the block of timber for the beanbag.
To shape the generous indentation, the wood was taken out gradually with a deep oval gouge.
References were frequently made to the original model to faithfully simulate the soft effect of the creases.
It is an essential part of the composition and, as George put it: ‘You don't want to end up with a cushion that resembles a lump of putty.’
For sanding George uses cloth-backed sandpaper, because it is so much stronger.
He worked through various grades, finishing with a very fine flour paper.
Only the beanbag was stained.
One good, strong application of a spirit-based mahogany strain was sufficient.
To bring out the natural colour of the teddy and the richness of the mahogany cushion, he heavily burnished boiled linseed oil into the wood with a cloth in combination with a button polish.
This achieves a delicate sheen rather than a strong lustre.
A day later, a second coat was applied.
Such is the wear of a Teddy that a textured finish is unnecessary, and most of it is sanded to look warn
Notice how the grain goes up the body of Teddy, and his elbow nestles in the cushion
Testing the Cogelow Angle
Ray Gonzalez tests the new range of Cogelow carving tools from Henry Taylor, and offers some advice on bevel grinding
Though they can be used with a mallet, the Cogelow tools invite slicing and paring, and are especially useful for ornamental work
The opportunity to review the Cogelow tools was welcomed for several reasons.
Firstly, I have a love off good tools of all types, and a passion for innovations.
In addition, I have a particular axe to grind, as I have been a professional woodcarver for 25 years in both ornamental and sculptural disciplines so woodcarving tools hold a special interest.
The choice of brands of woodcarving tools is hardly wanting, both in the home market or abroad, but the range offered by each manufacturer tends to be same-ish, though prices and quality vary.
I therefore warmly welcome any attempt to expand the scope of existing tools and/or present entirely new concepts.
The question is, is the Cogelow skew a new concept?
Not entirely.
The skew chisel is well known, and though not manufactured in recent times, the skew gouge has been utilised as a modification.
The baroque carvers in Germany and France made extensive use of this type of gouge in the drapery of their ecclesiastical figures, enabling them to make difficult pipes and folds against the grain, whilst keeping a smooth flow.
Gothic carvers also ground normal gouges to skew shapes in order that they may execute mitres where two deeply curved sections meet.
Woodcarvers through the ages have adapted, and even mutilated standard tools to suit their needs.
Even the bullnose chisel of the stonecarver found its reflection in the woodcarver's kit, though no manufacturer to my knowledge has ever marketed this variation.
An exploration of an old craftman's tool-roll would reveal some strangely shaped tools, probably made for some one-off job.
Though many adaptations have obvious applications, there are those only their creators could accurately explain.
Sometimes a tool was ground after a breakage or similar accident, and the resulting shape would allow a usage not previously possible, and may even have become a treasured ‘special’.
In this way I have encountered skews of various angles.
The Cogelow kit is a range of 17 skews.
Sixteen gouges and one bent skew chisel.
The kit comes complete in its cardboard case, which is given a fabric texture and embellished with gold lettering.
The tools are kept separate with a card tool rack which is integral to the base.
The set that I am working with has the standard black finish, but the all-bright is available.
The largest tools are 200mm long, and the smallest are 120mm long.
All the handles are turned and are 45mm long, and fitted with brass ferrules.
Some manufacturers supply larger handles with larger tools, but I have not found any discomfort with this aspect of the design.
According to the manufacturer, the bevels on the Cogelow tools need only honing to be perfect.
In my experience, there is only one manufacturer (not British) that produces tools ready for use for professional ornamental carving.
Even in this case, some work needs doing to the back of the bevel to bring them to optimum usefulness.
The most pointed criticism is that the angle of the bevel is not rounded off or taken back far enough, so producing an elbow that hinders the smooth entry and flow of cut.
This is especially pronounced in the front bent versions where this elbow acts as a lever, ‘kicking’ the cutting edge off the surface, and forcing a more awkward cutting position.
Sometimes the bevel elbow is so crucial, it makes certain cuts impossible.
With the Cogelow tools, I found it necessary to grind new bevels completely for these tools to be useful for intricate ornament.
The primary bevels were ground back and feathered away on the grindstone, taking care not to overheat and destroy the temper.
Then the secondary bevel was carefully cut with a fine silicone coated felt wheel.
This can also be done on a medium grit oilstone.
The final honing was carried out in the usual fashion, using slipstones and strop.
The temper of the tools seems good, just soft enough to give a razor-edge, but not too soft that they bend against hard grain.
So, no problem with temper.
Some carvers prefer the thicker bevels for mallet work, but as these tools lend themselves more to  paring and slicing, the finer edges appear imperative.
As for the curves in this selection, the C13 and C14 were not the same, and therefore the work that was possible with one tool could not be repeated on its mirror image with its counterpart.
This particular tool I would find little use for.
The more open back bends have limited use, but this could be improved.
All the front bends have varying uses, and the smaller tools C1, C2, C5, C6, C7 &C8 have good versatility.
The bent skew was a pleasant little tool, with wide applications, and a usefulness beyond its humble appearance.
It can be used as an incisor; a grounder; skew chisel; it can do some modelling, cleaning corners, curved ‘V’ cuts that twist and turn, has the tight size and bend to enable good control regardless of grain, and gets the blue ribbon.
The biggest advantage of this type of tool lies paradoxically in its strength.
Because of the skew, the cuts are certainly more fluent.
However, this means that every curve requires two tools, a left and a right, therefore doubling the number of tools necessary.
This is why the idea of grinding a good gouge to a skew shape was never very popular.
The conventional design, though not as fluent is more versatile.
For ornamental carving and small sculpture, there could be a wider range of smaller tools 10mm and under.
The back bends could be more versatile if they had flatter carvers, with more radius in the stem.
At £211.20 + VAT for the full kit of 17 tools, each tool averages £12.42, and can be purchased individually.
Smaller sets of seven and 10 are also available.
I would advise the interested enthusiast to purchase the smaller set that includes the skew chisel C17, and try those before going the whole hog.
For some professionals price would be a secondary consideration.
Personally, I would be prepared to pay much m ore for a tool that would do the job required.
There seems to be a dearth of good small tools across the board.
The old Herring and Addis tools were made with a finesse and temper that modern tools do not approach, let alone equal.
With modern technology, I cannot accept that this standard is out of reach.
The answer must be economics.
Though we do not form the bulk of the market, I would like to speak for all discerning professionals and ask for a ‘top end of the market’ service, where quality comes first.
Perhaps the will is not there.
The market is.
•The Cogelow range of chisels were created by the American carver, Fred Cogelow and are now being made in Britain by Henry Taylor Tools at The Forge, Lowther Road, Sheffield S6 2DR,(0742) 336978.
The chisels are sold in standard black finish, or all-bright, in sets of seven, 10 and 17.
Competition Results
Workshop Creations
Since introducing our workshop carving competition in February we have waited expectantly to see the carved tools, sent to the competition sponsors — The Woodworks — for judging.
Now we can announce that Dennis Hurst of Wigan is the winner of the Koch clamping system, with his smoothing plane  
Philip Wooler's brace and bit won the £139 worth of Koch honing system for second prize.
Michael McLaughlin's block plane (middle left) and A. Wright's smoothing plane (near left).
For humour there was Ian Ford's rat tool, and below it Lee Dickenson's Kirchen carver
Dennis Hurst's smoothing plane wins the Koch carving clamp
Winner Dennis Hurst of Wigan Second Philip Wooller of North Allerton Third Alan Toplin of Basingstoke WE WOULD like to thank our sponsors, The Woodworks, for donating the prizes for this competition.
Their range of carving and turning products can be found at The Field, Shipley, Heanor, Derby DE7 7JJ,(0773) 719842.
Tool extremes: Richard Meighan's gouge and Alan Toplin's Bosch drill which won third prize, and £100 of Kirchen carving tools
The craft of cabinetmaking
Board Games
David Savage explains how to redesign a workshop with cardboard templates, noting the importance of machine table height, and discusses second-hand machinery
Well, I have been and gone and done it this time.
It's all very well putting in applications for the bank to loan you large sums of money, but it is quite another thing to have them accepted.
I am sure some of the guys in my workshop think I am off my trolley.
It wasn't but a few months ago that I was telling them how bad everything was, how we had to keep our spending down to new lower budgets because if we didn't the next cuts we would have to make would be human ones.
Cuts in either wages or staff.
Now I am twittering on about buying a new workshop, equipping it with this or that kind of planer/thicknesser, getting this or that panel saw.
It must be confusing and I have no answer to the criticism, except to blame the clearly short-sighted attitude on management.
Planning out a new workshop is always fun.
I suppose I have had three or four cracks at it now at different times of my life and in different circumstances and every time I have got it wrong.
It seems that the Third Law of Aerodynamics is especially at work in this case.
(The Third Law of Aerodynamics states quite clearly that what ever you do you are knackered).
Incidentally I got that information on the third law from a very reliable source.
Frank was a retired boffin I think from British Aerospace.
He came here five or six years ago on one of our short courses to learn veneering.
In retirement he had set himself the task of making a replica Tomkin long-case clock.
The whole thing: movement, hands, face, case and all.
He sent me a photograph of it recently.
He had managed to complete what was a major undertaking and the thing is, he had made it absolutely superbly.
Frank, if you read this, you should share this project with the Woodworker .
However, I digress.
When you are laying out a new workshop you can play a particularly entertaining board game.
First you need a scale floor plan of your workshop drawn out on graph paper marking where all the doors and windows are, and, if they are already fixed, where all the electrical points and outlets are.
The next stage is to go to the manufacturers of the machines you thinking of installing and get the plan dimensions of their products.
You then make little card templates of each machine in the same scale as your floor plan, then go and look for any other large objects that you might have to install — your bench area, your timber storage area and a storage area for board material.
You measure those up and make little templates to scale to represent them.
You are now equipped to play the game: what is the ideal position for each of these machines allowing for you, the craftsman, to work around them and allowing for a board of a chosen dimension to go across that production set-up?
The key to it is choosing the problem correctly.
Are you handling 8x4ft sheets of MDF or are you handling dirty great 12ft boards of ash or, like our friends the chair-makers in Harland, are your components hardly ever longer than 24in.
Given a large enough supply of machine catalogues and enough flexibility of mind to give yourself different problems, an inventive woodworker could spend the entire winter playing this game.
Think of it as the woodworker's equivalent to Dungeons and Dragons.
There are, of course, several traps.
pitfalls and just general cock-ups that you can make.
I will tell you about one or two just to get you going but it would be unsporting to warn you about everything.
You see, when you are working in plan like this it is difficult to bear in mind that machine table heights can work in your favour and they can also work against you.
For example, if you have the situation where you want to put two occasionally-used machines quite close to one another , it may be to your advantage that their heights are exactly the same so the job can run across both tables.
The converse of this can apply if your table heights are at different levels.
Most bandsaws, for example, have a table considerably above the common machine table height which may enable you to cast long jobs above other machines.
Most planer-thicknessers have a thicknessing table below common machine height, so position your thicknesser very carefully.
For instance, we know in our workshop if you want to plane and thickness timber for a solid wood dining table that is longer than 10 feet, we have got to do it somewhere else.
When it comes to choosing which machine to buy I would suspect that our requirements would be rather different from your own.
This a busy commercial workshop.
Each machine is probably used by half a dozen different people every day.
Some of them may be less careful with it than others so we need machines that can take a battering.
Not, I hope, that ny of my staff or students would batter any of my old ladies but my machines have to be very solid and reliable.
A workshop with one machinist who carefully adjusts and sets the machine up and leaves it that way at the end of the job is not necessarily going to need the heaviest equipment.
I know it is a terribly sexist remark but I do think of the machines in our first workshop as old ladies.
Over the years I have had all sorts of lighter weight machines and I have gradually replaced them with either Wadkin or Robinson versions.
The golden period of manufacture seems to me to have been in the late 1950s and early 1960s when both manufacturers were making superbly engineered, fully adjustable machines.
If properly serviced and looked after they would last certainly one, possibly two, maybe three life-times.
My bandsaw is a classic made in about 1960 by Robinsons.
It is 36in model with all the trimmings It runs superbly, absolutely no vibration.
Like all elderly ladies, however, she needs polite attention.
Her guides need to be adjusted regularly, a spot of oil here and there and a spot of grease here and there periodically.
Look after her like this and she is a sweet tempered old soul.
Apart from Mrs Robinson, the bandsaw, most of my other machines are made by Wadkin.
I must admit to liking Wadkin.
They are horribly expensive but to my mind they are the best.
I will give you an example of why I have come to that conclusion.
A few years ago I wanted to invest in a new spindle moulder.
My aim was to buy a tool that would last out my working life.
I bought a new Wilson FM with a sliding table for tenoning, a reversing switch, roll-on and roll-off tables, all the whistles and bells that would make it a really useful machine.
I bought that because I suppose it seemed to offer nearly everything the equivalent Wadkin moulder had to offer but at £2–300 less.
We have had that moulder now for three or four years and it has done a lot of work.
Nobody in the workshop has a good to say for that machine.
The adjustment to the rise and fall is difficult because it is always sticky, the wood chips tend to collect on the travel of the sliding table making the action very bumpy, the sliding table is always out of adjustment for one reason or another.
It is a heavy serviceable machine and I am not really knocking Wilson because in another situation it would probably do a very good job but for us it is just not a very pleasant tool to be with.
As a consequence I really wish that I had spent the extra money and bought a slightly better machine.
However, I must confess I don't think I will buy new machines again.
Not even Wadkin.
Where possible I will buy really good quality second-hand machines from a reliable dealer.
I have tried buying second-hand machines at auction with some mixed success.
We got our Wadkin PK dimension saw from an auction five or six years ago.
It was the closure of a good, old style joinery firm and there were some very good machines to be had.
I had to go down there for the preview and then go down and bid.
I then had to send Malcolm and Neil down with a rented truck to pick the machine up.
They had to hassle for the best part of the day to get the machine out of the factory because, like most of these auctions, the auctioneers wanted the place cleared immediately.
We then had to drive the machine back and unload the rented van.
Now that is no joke because one of these big old saws can weigh the best part of half a ton.
So we had to rent a forklift truck from somewhere, then manhandle the saw into the workshop.
I don't think anybody enjoyed that day's work.
It was then the best part of a week's work on Malcolm's part to get that saw running sweetly.
It has gone very sweetly ever since but that was a good deal of production time that was lost that cost me a lost more money than I had anticipated.
Certainly if I had been doing all the restoration work myself it wouldn't have cost me so much because I am the cheapest worker in this outfit.
So now if I need a ‘new’ piece of equipment I go to a reputable second-hand wood working machinery dealer.
Next month I will take you to meet Brian Stacey of Daltons in Nottingham.
Space around a bandsaw is vital
Doubtless the door helps for extra length over the planer
Unfortunately, for boards over 10ft long, David has to thickness elsewhere
Three dimensions of chair design
In the first of three articles that follow the progress of a chair making project, Steve Goulden explains how he designs a chair, looking for robustness, comfort and elegance
As an everyday piece of furniture, the dining chair is certainly the most frequently used.
As a design project it is perhaps the most exploited.
But when one considers the requirements of such a piece of furniture, they are really quite simple: it must be robust, comfortable and elegant.
Whereas it is simple to make a robust chair, combining these three characteristics and yet producing a chair which has individual character can be a real challenge.
I would imagine that most chairs made by craftsmen are of the spindled variety, from the Windsor to the Shaker and many shades in between.
Although no one will doubt their possibilities for elegance and robustness, sitting on a solid wood seat can test the limits of comfort after quite a short time and woven seats are little better.
In addition, these styles do not fit well with walnut dining room tables and candlelit evenings.
When such dinners can last for hours, a well-upholstered seat is essential.
My own taste for formal furniture tends to fall between the ‘Arts and Crafts’ and ‘Modern’, rather than‘Repro’, and yet looking at modern designs you see in exhibitions, I doubt their ‘long-sit’comfort and, personally, I feel that the limits of acceptable elegance are frequently passed by many, in the cause of being different.
The demand for elegance carries with it the requirement to fit in with existing furniture and although talking points can be useful, a table surrounded by a set of such chairs could be a positive eyesore.
Talking to professional designer-producers confirms this point: people will stop to admire such designs, but many more ‘traditional’ products are purchased.
So we can put some limits on the project: the chairs must be upholstered; modern in the simplicity of their lines but not ‘Cubist’ for want of a better term; easy on the eye and bottom; they should fit in with other existing furniture; and naturally should be of strong construction so that they will be heirloom quality.
Starting with a blank sheet of paper is perhaps easy for some, but for myself, I can neither draw accurately nor can I imagine  without a picture or actual model to start from.
Consequently I find myself spending a lot of time looking at chairs in museums, shops, exhibitions and other peoples' houses.
The variety is enormous but many can be ruled out in not satisfying all the requirements.
After a long study, I have concluded that I like chairs which have slightly curved rear legs, flairing outwards slightly from the seat both up and down.
A straight back, sloping downwards, seems more comfortable than a curved back.
Much variety is possible for ‘filling’ that back; stick backs and ladderbacks cover many possibilities.
However, to satisfy the requirements of comfort, the back should curve (in the horizontal plane) to accommodate the back of the rib cage, and there should be no large obstruction to the positioning of the backbone.
These two points provide objections to the ladderback design; with sitters of different heights, the cross bars can hit prominent vertebrae.
The thought of producing many curved back pieces is a bit off-putting.
With the stickback style, however, it is only necessary to curve the top piece; the sticks would then position themselves into a curve, even from a straight base.
This base can be the rear seat rail, or another rail fitted above the seat, but if so, no more than 2in above the seat or it would also need to be curved to avoid discomfort.
The chair looks better to me if the seat is wider at the front than at the back, but the front of the seat should only be slightly wider than the top of the back.
Further on the point of comfort, a seat which slopes down slightly front to back is preferable to a horizontal seat.
During a study of the various styles, it became apparent to me that if the back legs are set into the seat rails at an angle, this angle, together with the curvature of the rear legs and backward slope of the chair back can regulate the flair: if the legs are mounted at right angles to the rear seat rail, there would be no flair.
Increasing this angle increases the flair very sensitively, up to the maximum deflection of the curve of the rear leg, if it were to be (impractically!) mounted in the plane or the rear seat rail.
The requirement for robustness also demands that there be leg braces to create a strong rectangle around the rear seat joint, the point of maximum strain in all chairs.
Anyone who has had to reglue chairs will be painfully aware of this fact.
A crossmember between these two braces helps; people frequently put their legs back under their chair seats, and a cross brace between the front legs would be in the way.
The above design conclusions have profound implications for the construction details of my chair.
None of the joints are at right-angles.
The requirement for long-term robustness rules out the general use of dowels but the thought of complex, angled mortise and tenon joints is intimidating.
This project almost died at that point, as I should not imagine that my skills were good enough to meet the precision requirements and the time factor seemed unacceptable.
Fortunately, the contribution by Peter Guyett,(WW/Sept.89/p.803)of his router jig, saved the project.
Considering the tenoning half of his design, I modified it so that it could quickly accommodate a different pair of blocks for each differently angled tenon.
The curved backpieces can be roughed out on the bandsaw, then finished on the router table, using a cutter with a bearing following a template.
The workpiece is held in place on the template using toggle clamps.
At this point, all the head-work has been done.
It is now necessary to decide on real angles and heights.
I planned to make one chair as a trial piece, and, if it looked right, to do a real run of six, using the trial pieces as ‘templates’.
This requires a re-examination of such chairs as please my eye and try to come with a starting point.
Instead of going into all the details of this stage, which are likely to be inapplicable to other designs, as they are so dependent on personal likes and dislikes, I simply show you the design limits worked out (fig.1) and what I made.
In the next article, I will describe the details of the job, and in another the solutions I found to the many problems encountered on the way.
Fig. 1 Side and front elevations of nascent chair
Fig. 2 Early sketch
A variety of chair designs through the ages, culminating in Steve Goulden's chosen shape (below left)
Credence Table
Gothic Traces
For a recent commission Edward Hopkins had to match the Gothic influences of church architecture with a restricted church budget, and produced a table of contemporary simplicity
Initially in awe of the craftsmanship of his predecessors Edward Hopkins arrived at this relatively simple design (left and below).
The corner braces form the Gothic arch shape as well as keeping the whole structure rigid
If you ever think that your woodwork is rather good, to church.
Forget exhibitions and museums.
Ignore the glossy pages.
In almost any parish church there is craftsmanship of quiet excellence.
On some you'll find screens and pews and font-covers of such exuberance they'd more at home in a Moorish palace.
The carving is of a quality I do not even understand.
It is especially clear in figure-work.
Statues of saints and martyrs  sometimes just several inches high, carry enormous poise and serenity.
Most astounding are their faces, and their eyes.
Wisdon and compassion have been captured in the flick of a chisel.
So by now you feel your skills are barely born.
This is great for the soul but not so hot for business.
This time, business was my purpose.
Ahead of me was a chancel screen, a filigree of Gothic tracery.
To the left was a dinosaur of a stone pulpit, all arched and ornamented.
On the right was a gap where the credence table (side table serving an altar) had stood.
Beyond the screen, beyond the choir, was another altar and another gap.
Two fine oak tables were missing, and the space was for me to fill.
The church warden gave me sizes but did not ask for reproduction pieces and anyway, he only had a poor and partial photograph.
He wanted a design of 1991 which would sit happily with the past.
I sat unhappily in the empty church with two lines of thought.
When man's lifestyle is more natural, basic and strenuous, he glories in the ornate.
When, as for us, it is luxurious, busy and restless, we are refreshed by simplicity.
I wanted therefore to make the tables light and clean and spacious but how could I, amongst this Gothic clutter?
Also, the ghosts of the carvers frightened me off.
Most complicated jobs can be reduced to a sequence of relatively simple operations to be approached step by step.
This applies equally to carving, but that's still not easy and it certainly isn't fast.
The tables were on a fixed budget and should take a fortnight.
Now, however medieval my proclivities, my bills are bang up to date, so I waved a sheaf of payment slips at the ghosts of the carvers and they vanished.
Gothic or thin?
Sometimes design is a constructive method, and sometimes a process of elimination.
Wishing hard to avoid the carved arches, I invited all manner of alternatives and shot them down one by one as unsuitable.
Eventually I struck the compromise.
It should be possible to abstract the Gothic elements and represent them.
The main themes were decorated pillars, trefoils and roundels.
Whatever curves I specified had to be made using a bandsaw, a drum-sander, spokeshave and scraper.
Corners must be accessible and easy to clean up.
It is at this stage of the hob that the one-man band plays the best music.
Knowing the problems and the opportunities that your tools offer, you design maximum effect at minimum effort.
Nobody pays you extra to work inefficiently.
As part of the design to construction stage I developed the ‘Gothic bracket’.
These corner braces are curved on either side.
The undersides link up to form an arch while the uppersides are cut to appear as pierced circles.
With the overall dimensions I had been given, it worked out easily that there could be three arches along the front to one at the side.
It is that sort of falling-together that reassures you are on the right lines.
The front arches are not repeated on the back because a credence table is a side table and will always be against a wall.
It is subordinate to the altar and although it may be decorative, it has direction towards the altar.
Another Gothic element is mass.
It is heavy and, when overdone, oppressive.
My Gothic brackets required legs thicker than usual to correspond to stone pillars.
The octagonal section allows easy mortising, and is turned in the middle.
Just before the cylinder is a bead.
This semi-circular motif is repeated on the tabletop, the top rail and underneath the bottom rail.
The top of the bottom rail is scooped as yet another, but much larger echo.
The balancing of these main curves is done on the drawing board.
I advise anyone to resist preconceptions.
Do not, for instance, think ah! yes, a bottom rail here will have to be about 4in deep.
Don't think at all.
Sketch!
See what looks right and then measure it.
So too with the curves which happen to look right circular; the centres of these arcs happen to be in obvious places.
This is either some magic geometry of which I know nothing or it is a happy coincidence.
Either way it makes you feel that you still have your wheels on the track.
The octagon
The more I work with oak, the more I know why.
A job like laminating these legs could hardly be more satisfying.
Cut strips say 2–3/4in wide to finish at 2–1/2in.
Plane them with newly-ground knives and thickness them, reversing them frequently to remove wood equally from both sides.
If they come out at just over 13/16in, three will stack up to make 2–1/2in.
Not all mine did, so I left them all as thick as possible and matched the thick with the thin later.
To glue them up, arrange your heaviest cramps with blocks and, to save time later, go through a dry run.
Separate the laminates (I glued six legs at a time).
Size both surfaces of each joint with a mix, one part PVA, one part water, liberally brushed on.
Be quick.
Then, immediately, brush one surface of each joint with a slightly stiffer mix, line them up and apply the pressure.
The danger is in having a film of glue dry prematurely and appear as a line.
The pleasure is when it doesn't.
The joint between your quartered oak disappear and it becomes one block.
Protect these wet joints from the metal of the cramps or they will stain.
Once dry, plane up the unfinished sides, thicknessing to a perfect square.
Tilt the say and slice away the corners.
Leave enough for one careful pass on the planer.
The result should be a perfect octagon.
The leg-frame of each table is mortise and tenoned; 5/8in on the legs except the little top rail mortise.
This could only be 5/8in long so  it is 1/2in wide.
This allows the machine-chisel to shuffle back and forth, stepping down to full depth.
Joints between the top rail and the bracket are 3/8in.
Much of this is straightforward: some of it isn't.
It is the brackets, of course, which slow down production.
The are structurally brilliant because they triangulate the frame.
Each table has 12 which, with six fat legs, could probably hold the roof up but it is this very rigidity that makes the construction hard.
There is no room for inaccuracy, no room for movement.
Gluing the whole lot up will be interesting enough — even arranging the cramps requires thought.
Persuading recalcitrant joints to co-operate is best left to a bad dream.
Make a full-size drawing of at least the bracket.
Mark on it the width of plank from which the brackets will be cut.
Using the drawing as a template, mark out the brackets on the plank, reversing them head to toe to save timber.
Allow a safe margin for sawing, and cut the blanks.
The next is the crucial stage of the whole operation; nothing else can correct it.
The brackets must end up with their two oblique edges absolutely square, and each bracket must be identical.
I was making 24 of these and needed a repetitive method.
I'm not sure that a radial-arm saw is accurate enough for this at the best of times, but, at the moment, mine rattles up and down its rails like a train in the sidings, and is definitely not fit for the job.
I shot the longer edge down on the planer.
If you need to change angle to land on the line, you take two slight passes, the first either stopping with the wood still on the back table, or starting with it already on the front table, depending which way you want to tilt.
The second pass will level out between the cut and the uncut points.
On a sliding-fence tablesaw you can square off the other edge.
Set a stop to ensure uniformity.
(You can't work from the feathery point you've just planed, so chop it off.
Again, be uniform, so arrange a stop from the planed edge itself).
The risk
A man with a clipboard told me that the cutting of the tenons is a dangerous practice.
I asked how he thought I should do it and he said buy a tenoner.
He was, to be fair, smiling.
It is dangerous (and forbidden to employees), but is you observe common-sense, stand firmly and hold the wood in same way each time, with all soft pink bits well away from the blade, you will not end up like the man in the story that the same Health and Safety Officer delighted in telling me.
A man was sawing and he sawed off his fingers.
He rushed to hospital where the doctor said ‘I could have sewn them back on.
Why didn't you bring them with you?’
The man replied ‘I couldn't pick them up.’
The curves on the brackets are carefully bandsawn and cleaned up before they are bevelled.
How will you bevel them?
Spokeshave?
That might work the underside, but the upperside would require a curved spokeshave, such an awkward bit of kit to use that mine stays permanently sharp.
£
While the ghosts of the carvers were gently chuckling, I considered the bandsaw, the sander and the router.
Each one must be set up with fail-safe guides for a true and even curve.
Each one has inherent hazards.
I tried to arrange guides on the drum sander but quickly gave up.
My bandsaw competes with the radial-arm for clatters and bangs so the big router won with a large chamfer bit.
Two strips of waste wood were slowly fed over the revolving cutter and cramped to the table.
These pointed fingers were adjusted to be my guide and, apart from the very ends of each cut, were quite reliable.
These ends were cleaned up with a spokeshave and then scraped with a twist of the wrist.
The last careful cut on the brackets is the point at which they meet.
This another critical operation: a gap will be there for good.
I fitted the brackets in their pairs to the top rails, grinding away the point on a plate sander.
The dress rehearsal
You probably can't wait any longer.
It's a good enough excuse that you need to check for gaffs, but the real reason for dry-assembly is to see what this hitherto fictitious table looks like.
I tried not to watch as I fitted the frame together and balanced the unfinished top on it.
It is a delicious moment, walking away and then, with an inevitable hint of apprehension, turning round.
Less delicious is having to hit the thing apart again.
The perfect joint responds to a couple taps: any stiffer and you can be in seven sorts of trouble.
The dry-assembly need not be cramped tight, but the wet one obviously must.
Five-foot sash cramps sort out the main frame; the brackets need special treatment.
Take the curved pieces of waste, band-sawn off the underside, and notch them; once parallel to the leg and once to the top rail.
This will allow you to cramp across and pull the bracket tenons tight.
(You can get away with one vertical cramp per arch if you roughly joint in a horizontal bar between the blocks.
Another tip: cut the top-rail tenons just short of the rail depth.
This will allow you to block and cramp directly over the joint.
Put paper beneath the top block or you'll weld it to the rail).
Gluing up wrong is like crashing a car.
The memory stays with you for ever and you'll always be more careful.
You start the clock, paint the glue, fit the pieces, block the cramps.
You knock and heave, squeeze and wipe.
You switch on the kettle and sit on the stool.
Then, with an almost audible stab in the chest, you see one piece upside down or inside out.
Flat panic!
Idiocy!
Fury!
This is one more benefit of being self-employed.
If you weren't, you'd probably sack yourself on the spot.
In future you take preventative measures.
Lay out the components in their final formation.
Keep them in piles and groups.
Mark them (unobtrusively), but most of all, look and check the whole way through.
It has always been a problem: the ghosts aren't laughing now.
Quite often while restoring antique pieces, I come across filled-in mortises or misplaced detail — evidence that they too had ruined mornings.
The change
The top is not what I wanted.
My original design featured an ovolo and round moulding adding detail and delicacy to the edge, but this table was to have a tablecloth in use, and there was a fear that anything placed too close to the edge might tumble.
I was allowed only a small chamfer.
I knew, however, that the top must remain thick.
A simple 3/4in board is an anticlimax after all that architecture, and would ask ‘Why the fuss?’
A double thickness top adds the correct weight and importance.
It is not, of course, 1–1/2in throughout.
There is no need for that.
Instead, in selecting the finest boards for the top, cut them over-length.
After jointing and gluing (be careful where you stop and start your tongues), two pieces can be cut off to finish at four and a half inches each.
These are mitred in to an extra front strip.
A thinner strip runs between them at the back.
This way, all the grain travels in the same direction and you do not store up shrinkage problems.
They must all be wide enough to take the buttons which will hold down the top.
Mould these pieces and glue them in place.
Gluing large surfaces can be difficult because the pieces tend to aquaplane and squidge out of position, so screw them first.
Remember to keep these screws well back, to be hidden by the frame, because although the Faithful kneeling at the altar are meant to have their minds on other things, this is professional woodwork and we don't want them peering up the legs of our fixings.
The wipe
The finish, specified by the church architect, was a mixture of oils and spirits and ammonia, to be followed by beeswax.
This, I'm sure, will give a fine finish in time.
Matt lacquer is a quicker alternative with the advantage of impermeability.
In the (admittedly unlikely) event of consecrated wine soaking into the oiled wood, the credence table must (is my memory of canonical law is correct), be either burnt or eaten.
Still; look on the bright side: they'd have to order another one.
The pair were delivered on a frozen Monday morning.
We lifted them into place, one of them nestling in precisely to the mark on the wall, left by the previous incumbent.
I shook hands and exchanged smiles with the vicar and church warden.
Then I wandered around for a while, casting wistful glances at my tables.
They had occupied three weeks of my life and the whole of my workshop, but here they seemed very small.
Surrounding them in vaulted stone and glass, wood and gorgeous cloth, were millions of man-hours of work.
I listened for any murmurs from the ghosts but heard none.
I wasn't surprised.
Their minds were elsewhere.
The church again seemed very quiet, but not completely empty.
The cleaning lady gave me comfort.
With wax and rag in hand, she eyed up her new target.
Like a big tabby cat she was ready to pounce
Edward Hopkins, The Black Swan, Frome, Somerset BA11 1BB,(0373) 65247.
Cutting tenons on a table saw.
The guards are removed so great care has to be taken and hands kept well clear of the blade (below left and right).
This operation is not to be attempted by novices.
Because of their bracing action the joints have to accurate
Fig. 1 The Gothic bracket
Fig. 2 Credence table plan and elevations
Notches and cross-bars in the waste pieces from the curves, create flat clamping surfaces.
Waste blocks protect the legs (above)
Carving out of his shell
Bertie Somme meets carver David Morgan, and looks at some of the endearing pieces David produces in his West Country workshop
Pond snail in monteray pine David Morgan (or Ned) is one of the rate sorts of person who always appears to be happy and cheerful, making him the natural leader of the Devon branch of the British Woodcarvers Association.
His degree in zoology from Bristol University has doubtless led to his strong feeling for the natural curves and shapes which are so predominant in his work
Slug in ash (above and pond snail in walnut Ned says he ‘loves the infinite variety of wood and feels that woodcarving or sculpture should compliment this…
The pieces that work best are those that are harmonious with the wood's properties of strength and grain, and not battling to impose a feat of engineering that might be better made with some other material.
Nature is full of imperfection, and I prefer to avoid following a strict design.
This allows carvings to develop as they are being produced.’
Fat fish in laburnum (above)‘I have always made things,’ says Ned, ‘and while on a boating holiday on the Thames about 15 years ago I found a branch of very dark wood lying on the ground.
It joined me for the rest of the holiday, much to the annoyance of my fellow passengers.
My first two carvings were produced from this branch: a small whale and an orangutan.
I collect and season most of my wood, which I feel gives me a head start over the clinical pieces available at timber yards.’
Slug in ash (above) and tortoise in burr elm (right)Making no bones about methods or means, David is a proud user of mechanical aids, ranging from lathes to the Woodcarver, from drum sanders to a Black &Decker Powerfile.
That is not to say that the more traditional tools and methods are not in evidence in his workshop, but, true to form, he feels that the finished work is more important than the means.
He is a free spirit, with a long way to go, who should be closely followed
Bob Wearing's Workshop
Edges of Perspex and similar acrylic sheet plane well, but not with the conventional plane.
The thin edged-woodworking cutter blunts very quickly and at times produces a very chipped or chattering surface, so it is modified (fig.1).
A very small 45° bevel is ground on the top surface, giving an approach angle to the work of 90° ie, a scraping cut.
Although the angle on the blade is quite large when compared with the normal, nevertheless it must be kept well sharpened.
The cap iron should be set as far as possible from the cutting edge.
If this is not possible, saw off the end of a cap iron.
Fine cuts are more effective than heavy ones which tend to break out at the far corner.
If this is happening, work from both ends.
Pieces of material much longer than the vice jaws should be gripped between two wood strips and held in the vice with the addition of a G-cramp or screw at each end (fig.2).
Considerably greater downward pressure is required than for planing wood.
A supply of Perspex offcuts can often be obtained from firms  making illuminated signs.
Surplus radio and electronics shops are another source.
Smoked or tinted material is preferred as the instruments constructed can be more easily seen when set aside.
When a more polished edge is required, follow the plane with fine wet and dry paper, used wet, on a wood block.
Be sure not to damage the main surfaces by scratching with the paper or when wiping away the slurry.
The sharp edge or arris can conveniently be removed using the conventional cabinet scraper sharpened normally or else the proprietary Scarsten scraper.
Leave on the protective paper until the last moment to reduce scratching.
Transparent Perspex makes ideal T-square blades.
Few readers will wish to make wood blades and even fewer to fit an ebony edge.
Standard T-squares and the specials for perspective drawing boards (WW/May 83)can be produced in this way, as can longer straight-edges.
There is little point in making the normal 45° and the 30 °/60; ° set squares.
However, a number of specials are worth making.
Readers too, may have their own special requirements.
Mark out with a sharp scriber and saw out with a bandsaw — or hacksaw.
Plane the edges and bore a finger hole.
The latter can be cone very neatly by drilling a small hole then enlarging it with one of the conical sheet metal drills.
Bevelling the edges of T- and set-squares is helpful on two accounts.
With a bevel on top, a thinner edge presented to the work makes drawing easier.
A small bevel underneath prevents smearing when drawing with ink.
Quite a small bevel is adequate for this purpose so in cases where a square has to be turned over, such a small bevel on each side is the solution.
A simple piece of apparatus (fig.8) is required to work the bevel accurately and with a good finish.
Screw together the two strips (it may be desired to alter the overlay in the future).
Groove and glue on a stout strip which can be gripped in the vice.
Ensure that the modified cutter is sharp and adjust for a fine cut.
Cramp the workpiece to the upper board and by means of a wood block ensure that it lines up with the edge of the top board.
Using strong down pressure, plane until the desired bevel has been obtained.
If desired, a fine finishing cut can be removed using a freshly sharpened cabinet scraper.
Wrap the bottom corner with a couple of layers of masking tape to prevent the scraper from cutting the device.
Alternatively a Scarsten scraper can be used having first tapped away the cutter from the lower corner to avoid damage.
When a less opaque finish is required, tape abrasive paper of grade 500, 800 or 1200 to a wood block and proceed as if planing, keeping the paper well wet with water.
Set squares are made in the same way though a little ingenuity may be required to grip the material.
This jig allows wooden T-square blades to be made or reconditioned, using a conventional plane.
Question Box
Your questions
Moveable tops
Q We constantly read that when making table tops and the like from solid timber, one should not fix finishing pieces across the end-grain because the greater lateral expansion across the grain will break the glue joint eventually.
Yet many of the ‘custom designed’ pieces we see have such end pieces, often an integral part of the design.
Are there ways around the problem which are not generally discussed, and is the problem non-existent with some timbers?
Steve Goulden, Hereford
A The received wisdom indicates that to restrain timber across its width will lead to the fracture of either the glue line of the lateral end piece, or the splitting of the board itself.
The effects of movement can be observed in antique pieces from the 17th century onwards, where cleats were put across the ends of structures like writing desk falls in order to gain a flush surface.
Frequently, such furniture now displays longitudinal splits in the boards.
The earlier and well-known technique of framing up a loose panel appears to have been sacrificed to the whimsy of fashion.
In more modern furniture where a composite board of inherent stability, such as plywood, has been used the use of end and side lippings of solid wood is both sage and justifiable in concealing raw edges.
But, where as you suggest, ‘custom designed’ pieces which adopt this practice when using sold wood there is the likelihood of failure whatever the species or moisture content.
I can only volunteer that this is done by designers who have an imperfect understanding of the nature and properties of wood, or who are literally prepared to risk it.
Bob Grant
Fixing handles
Q Could you please tell me the best method of fixing turned wooden handles to cutlery blanks?
I would also like to know if there is any special relationship between the length of the blank and the length of the handle.
Ted Newnham, London
A I have found that the best method of fixing cutlery blanks to the handles is by using Special T-Gap Filling Bond (time 50 seconds).
The method of preparing the blank before inserting the cutlery blank is simply to drill and clean out the hole in the shaft before fixing, put the Special T on the tang and insert with the handle on top so the Special T does not run down the wood.
Any surplus glue can be easily wiped off with a rag and then with solvent.
There is actually no hard and fast rule with size of handle to size of cutlery blank, but depends on the design and shape you require — I often look around shops for ideas and take my tape measure and notebook to jot measurements and ideas down.
Obviously you will need a longer and wider piece of wood than the size of the cutlery blank.
Jamie Wallwin
•Jamie Wallwin is a lecturer of woodturning
Howling timber
Q I have been asked to make an outside sign in timber for my bowls club.
What is the best material, that keeps its shape, lasts in all weathers and takes lettering and varnish?
What is the best finishing process?
Should it be done before or after lettering, and what is the best form of lettering to use?
A sign at our local church is in oak, with gold lettering, but the latter is already fading after three years.
A I think that the design considerations of your notice board should be given some careful thought.
As you say, plain boards lettered and varnished and exposed to the elements soon lose their fresh effect.
Some shielding from sum, wind and rain should be provided even if it is just a capping to the board, and the whole fixed on some sheltered wall.
Better still, the whole board should be protected within a framework rather like a picture frame with its face covered with clear polycarbonate sheet.
This will not only protect the notice face from the weather but also deter the vandal.
The materials used may be selected from the humble waterproof ply-wood suitably painted to clear finished oak.
As to the preparation of the material you would so well to consult your signwriter, usually they specify a well sealed surface as flat as possible, with protective coats of clear gloss applied after the lettering process.
There remains the possibility of incised carved lettering of course.
Bob Grant
•Bob Grant is a professional woodcutter and tutor
Spinning sources
Q I have been, for 70 years, the proud owner of a spinning wheel, stamped with the name ‘Foster’.
It has been in our family since 1850.
I have done certain repairs over the years, but much is still original, and though the marquetry is lifting it remains a beauty.
The main parts are of mahogany, but the spindles are lighter wood, possibly ash or yew?
Could you tell me anything about Foster; where he lived and the dates he worked?
W. Booth, Beds
A Very little is known about Foster, but he is believed to have worked with Leppard in Bristol around 1810–30.
The wheel is of Flemish type, typical of the Donegal flax wheel.
These wheels in pine or fruitwood were sold in large numbers for around 3/ — each, to spinners in Co.
Donegal.
Your wheel appears an upmarket version in mahogany, probably a one-off model.
Bone decor was used instead of ivory.
These wheels were very good workers and many replicas have been built; some very decorative specimens.
A spinning wheel is a working tool so repairs are quite acceptable.
The cane distaff is not unusual and would be required for spinning flax.
Fine grooves in the quill aperture and flyer hecks (hooks) would confirm the use of the wheel for flax.
Wheels are very difficult to date accurately and very detailed examination would be needed to establish its age.
Your wheel certainly appears original and of very good quality and I am sure if tuned would spin quite well.
The lifting marquetry on the saddle is a problem and I hesitate, without examination, to suggest a cure.
The suggestion that the wheel is Welsh I would personally discount as like the Sugar Loaf hat the claims of the Welsh to spinning wheels have very little claim to fact.
There is no indigenous Welsh wheel in the Welsh Folk Museum so I would certainly feel that your wheel came from the Bristol builders.
It is a very good example and well worth restoration and care, and I feel it should be used to spin again.
Roger Sear
•Roger Sear is a maker of spinning wheels
Linseed canister
Q I was recently given a large five gallon tin canister containing linseed oil.
I think it is raw.
Could you advise me on any good uses in the way of finishes for this oil?
I seem to remember a recipe in the Woodworker using linseed oil.
S. thompson, Tyne and Wear
A Raw linseed oil is lighter in colour than the boiled variety but they are both used in wood finishing.
Oil polishing is a lengthy and strenuous process which brings out the beauty of the wood like no other finish and imparts a most durable, dull sheen.
It is particularly suitable for table tops on account of its ability to withstand accidental spillages and does not blister when hot dishes are placed on it.
Either raw or boiled oil may be used.
Raw linseed may be better on light coloured woods because its darkening effect is less than boiled oil.
Whichever oil is used the method of application and polishing is the same.
A small quantity of oil is sprinkled on a clean rag and rubbed well into the surface to be polished.
Continue rubbing until the surface feels dry and then polish vigorously with a clean soft duster.
Because of the amount of hard rubbing needed to achieve a good finish, oil polishing is best confined to plain surfaces.
Many applications are required but once a good shine has been built up it can be maintained by oiling every six months or so.
A good polish reviver can be made by mixing equal parts of raw linseed oil, substitute turps and vinegar.
Shake the bottle well, apply with a clean cloth and polish with a soft duster.
The linseed oil helps restore the shine to a dull surface.
A mixture of equal quantities of raw linseed oil and substitute turps is often rubbed into pine prior to staining.
This gives the pine a more even rate of absorption so that a more uniform colour results when the stain is applied.
Charles Cliffe
•Charles Cliffe is a tutor of finishing, and contributor to Woodworker 
Restoration Gibbons' Blazing Glories
With the restoration of Hampton Court Palace nearing completion, Trevor Barnes meets an American who has been asked to work on some of the most important recreations of Grinling Gibbons' original carvings
David Esterley working on a Gibbons reproduction with the tools ‘to which I am more attached than anything.’
Fortunately photographs were taken of the original carvings (above)
When the World Service broadcast news of the fire which damaged the State Apartments of Hampton Court Palace on Easter Monday 1986 David Esterly was busy at his workbench in up-state New York carving grapes in the manner of his guiding spirit, the 17th century genius woodcarver Grinling Gibbons.
As he listened with mounting alarm he began to realise that the flames would almost certainly have reduced some of the world's finest baroque woodcarving to lumps of featureless charcoal.
In dismay he put aside his tools and set down his reaction to the disaster on paper.
The resulting article, part elegy for the lost carvings, part tribute to the man had transformed the English woodcarving tradition, was later published in 
The Spectator.
With Gibbons, he wrote, oak had given way to limewood and earthbound solidity to feats of impossible lightness.
Soaring compositions of fruit and foliage, tangles of leaves and flowers, garlands of nuts and berries had been artfully choreographed into balletic wood sculpture which seemed to mirror nature then refine it.
Now, he concluded gloomily, some the best examples of the Gibbons technique were destroyed and where was the expertise today to replace them?
Where, that is, if not in a small workroom in up-state New York?
The Spectator article secured him an invitation to Hampton Court and, having offered his specification for the repair work, he was duly hired.
Gibbons carving is a small field so his skill was in demand.
Of all the styles it is the most laborious and there are few professionals able or willing to continue the tradition.
As Esterly puts it, ‘I'm the only person crazy enough to make a living out of original limewood foliage work.
It's so time-consuming that most professional carvers avoid it like the plague.’
Five years after the fire, his work now nearing its end, he is at the centre of a specialist team of restorers replacing the recarving swags and pendants which had adorned the King's Bedchamber and adjoining rooms since the time of Charles II and which now lie boxed or in pieces on shelves and benches at the South East corner of the palace.
With infinite delicacy forget-me-nots and rosebuds, croci and oak leaves are chiselled out of native lime (grown in the grounds of the palace itself) and slotted into ancient floral compositions which, but for a discarded cigarette in the grace and favour flats above, could perhaps have remained undisturbed for the next 300 years.
For all the damage, though, the fire has  brought unexpected benefits.
For one thing it has prompted a full-scale review of all the carving at Hampton Court and given the restorers the opportunity to reverse years of general neglect.
Secondly, it has provided young, highly enthusiastic professionals with unprecedented access to some of the jewels of English carving.
What lies in pieces around them represents, in effect, a unique private exhibition open to a lucky few who for the first time in generations have had the opportunity for hands-on experience of greatness.
Who but Gibbons has been able to reproduce in wood the precise bloom of a ripening peach, the very texture and mass of a bursting apricot, or the exact weight and trajectory of an ear of corn on its stem?
His complete mastery of technique and flawless sense of proportion and design have much to teach.
The restorers are eager to learn.
‘It's exceedingly stimulating,’ says David Esterly.
‘He's been my guardian spirit for years and it's interesting to be forced to suppress all my own creativity in order to copy him slavishly to the last detail.
I'm stealing everything I can!’
Tall and elegantly mustachioed, David Esterly is a softly spoken Californian in his mid-forties whose passion for Grinling Gibbons takes him by surprise even today.
‘I was walking down Piccadilly in 1973 with the woman who was later to become my wife when she grabbed me by the arm and steered me into St James's church to see the carvings’.
What followed dictated the course of his life.
‘It was a conversion experience,’ he says, ‘I had seen his carvings in a vague sort of way already [Esterly was then a post-graduate student at Cambridge and surrounded by some of Gibbons' best work]but I found myself looking at them there in St James's as if for the first time.
The scales fell from my eyes.’
He initially mistook his interest for an academic one and outlined plans to write a book.
But as time went on he realised he could not convey how the style had evolved without understanding the techniques at first hand.
‘So I bought a few chisels and some wood and had a go.
Then I lost all interest in writing.’
There followed lean years in a cottage in Sussex, ‘living on nothing but spaghetti’ while he perfected his newly-discovered skill.
Self-taught to a high degree of proficiency he is engagingly dismissive of his talent.
‘I'm not a fine artist.
I'm not a sculptor.
I'm a humble carver.’
But a humble carver who is essential to English Heritage's programme of restoration.
And one who has arguably the toughest brief of all the carvers at the palace.
While the others are assigned to carvings which were partially damaged David Esterly has to recreate something which was all but destroyed in the fire.
The left-hand foliage pendant which once hung above the west door of the King's Drawing Room bore the brunt of the flames and only two tiny fragments of the original 7ft drop survive; a couple of limewood crocus heads no more than an inch and a half across.
He has had to carve a replacement.
Like a detective displaying the only clues in a case in which he has become personally involved, he holds out the croci with a shrug of quiet resolve.
They are, as they say in the films, all he has had to go on.
Well, not quite.
The restorers' single most valuable resource came in the form of life-size archive photographs of all the Gibbons' carving at Hampton Court, and David Esterly is the first to admit his debt to the unnamed civil servant who in 1939 seeing war clouds gather, prudently took it upon himself to record the work for future generations.
These photographs —‘my life's blood’— are pinned to his bench enabling him to check the size and configuration of the newly-carved elements.
‘We've adopted a very conservative philosophy of restoration’ says Esterly.
‘Nothing which is not either documented by photograph or clearly indicated by surviving is replaced.
Whereas restorers in the past speculated on some of the missing elements and snapped in a few flowers here and there, we take the view that if it's missing when we took the carving down then it will stay missing when we put it back up again.
For the first time we are trying to preserve the historical integrity of the carvings.’
The restoration work has brought to light tricks of the Gibbons trade.
As they lie on the benches within arm's reach, the foliage compositions initially shock by their scale.
Tulips and rushes seem implausible large.
But that, says the quiet American, is all part of the art.
‘The first impression is that the flora is vastly over-modelled.
But that's because we're looking at it at close quarters.
Remember that it was designed to be seen from 20ft below and back.
If it had been carved to life all the detail would have disappeared in a dense and unreadable thicket of vegetation.
That's his genius.’
Twenty years after the conversion experience in St James's the book may yet materialise (as, also, might a planned Gibbons exhibition — the first).
In the meantime David Esterly is content to pursue a humble carver's life.
‘An honourable profession where cheating shows and virtue has its own reward.’
and one which, as he has noticed while walking through the great houses of the world, ‘has given many an anonymous carver a little power over the grave.’
An exhibition charting the history of Hampton Court, and the restoration of fire damaged apartments is now open to the public.
The Fire Exhibition displays some of the discoveries that were made during the repairs.
For instance under the floorboards were tons of sea shells used for insulation, and behind the wooden panels were mock painted versions, obviously applied as an experiment.
The exhibition, in the King's Guard chamber is open from 9.30am-6.00pm, daily, at Hampton Court Palace.
The designs are carefully drawn out (below) before David can attempt any of the oversized carving on a block of lime (below right)
Garden furniture
Sun Seeking seats
David Solman builds a special garden bench, inspired by a sunnier summer than 1991, and makes a simple dowelling jig
Having spent much of the glorious summer last year sitting in the shade of the apple tree I decided that if such summers were to continue it would be a good idea to build a permanent seat around the tree.
The ideal should be a circular seat but I felt it would take a considerable amount of timber with a lot of waster so I opted for an hexagonal shape.
The tree was 360mm in diameter and to enable me to get the correct clearance around the tree and the seat width I drew a rough development on the patio with chalk.
Once satisfied, I got a large cardboard carton and broke it open so that the development could be accurately drawn.
This was all important to enable me to get the correct shape of the legs and the lengths of the rails.
The shape of the legs was formed to make sure that each face that had a rail joint was at right angles to the rail which reduces the time and effort needed for angled joints.
Development
Draw a semi-circle to a radius of 255mm, then on the same centre draw another semi-circle of 665mm radius, and divide the larger semi-circle into three equal parts.
Draw radial lines from these divisions to the centre point, now join with straight lines where these radial lines cross the semi-circles.
From this you can develop the shape of the legs, and calculate the lengths of the different rails.
These dimensions give a seat width of 350mm.
The four legs and four rails that will make up the seat-jointing section are cut oversize so that they can be cut in half.
Pin the angled offcuts from the legs on to a scrap piece of wood to make an excellent cradle for planing and also for clamping blocks.
As there were 68 joints to be made, and I do not own a mortising machine, I decided on dowels.
I used 8mm dowels for all joints except on the thinner rails where I used 6mm.
Use waterproof glue for all joints.
I made a simple drilling jig from a piece of 25x25x3mm angle iron which covered all the correct distances and spaces.
This also made the drilling of all component quick and accurate.
Assembly
Careful thought had to be given to assembly and I found that the easiest way was to join all the inner to the outer legs first, making eight rectangular frames.
With the clamping blocks, join the leg frames with the other rails forming two half hexagons.
Make the top from six slats of 19x44mm material, mitred to fit.
Chamfer the top corners and nail on with 1–1/2in ovals, punched in and filled.
The two halves are screwed together with brass screws, three on each side, two on the outer legs and one on the inner legs.
This enables it to be easily removed for winter storage or recoating with a wood preservative.
Hands on
Shimming up
During last year I came into possession of a large quantity of 1/4in router bits.
A lot of my work includes routing grooves for 5/8in and 3/4in boards, and it takes some time achieving the right width of groove even with the appropriate cutter.
Then I saw a friend using parallel rulers on a map, and I realised that by using a similar technique I could put all those 1/4in cutter into use.
I made two ruler from Tufnol (24x1–1/2x1/2in), then joined them with two brass strips, allowing about 1 in of play between the rulers.
Clamping one of these rulers to the board and keeping both rulers together, I cut the first groove, and then widen the groove by putting a shim between the rulers.
I have even used paper shims for more accuracy.
F. Ensor, Sutton Coldfield
Kitchen cabinets
Fixing kitchen units to walls always poses problems for the ‘one-man’ DIYer, but it can be simplified.
By making a stand it is possible to hold the unit in position at a constant height above the worktop, while marking and drilling the holes, and then fixing the unit in place.
It can always be returned to the same position.
W. Wilson, Ayrshire
•It should be noted that this method does require some help, even if it is of the most menial nature.
For those without any assistance, a similar stand could be made which ensures the unit does not have the tendency to tip forward.
RE
Extra vacuum capacity
Turning, planing, routing and so on generate vast quantities of shaving, and I have found that I have to empty my 17 litre wet and dry vacuum cleaner at frequent intervals.
Then I retrieved a 251 metal container, with a good-fitting lid, from a skip.
I cut two holes int he lid and fitted a couple of turned spigots, using plastic pipe to keep the bore as large as possible.
Then I sealed the lid with hot melt glue.
The large shavings and heavy stuff drop out in the container while the finer dust goes through to the cleaner.
My particular cleaner came with two sizes of suction tube, and experiment has shown that for maximum suck the large diameter pipe must go from the cleaner to the container.
The smaller diameter tube tended to choke with shavings, but I found it cheap and well worthwhile to buy another large section suction tube.
Andrew Lawton, Lancs
Webbing blocks
I find the webbing straps and lever locks used to hold my boat to its trailer make excellent cramps.
It is important though to have corner blocks, and these I make in the time it takes for my tea to go cold.
Take 4in cubes of timber and cut one corner out.
Cut this waste in half and cramp it to the opposite corner of the block, and drill a 1–1/4in diameter hole where the pieces meet.
Then fit a 1 in dowel, 4in long into that recess, secured with some wire.
This dowel can rotate freely, which helps in positioning the blocks.
Richard Smith, Kent
Pencil irritation
Irate with frustration through constantly having to pick up my pencils after bending over, I really thought I'd cracked it when I bought a ‘posh’ mechanical pencil, with a clip.
Imagine my rage when I leaned too hard against a workpiece and bent the pencil.
What I needed was a solid holder that wouldn't let pencils bend or break, and a retainer that would expand and contract a million times.
The solution is two 5/8in-thick pieces of hardwood to fit in a breast pocket; mine is 4x4in.
Clamp them together, making sure they are vertical.
Drill four 5/16in holes in each to take the pencils, turn them 90° and drill a 1/2in hole 1 in from one end and along the joint; this forms a half hole in each block, and hence the reason for making two holders.
Cut a 5/8in wide band of bicycle inner tube.
Stretch this around the holder over the half hole, to form a gripper, and press drawing pins through the rubber into the material between the holes to maintain tension.
A drawing pin through the pocket ensures the holder does not fall out; comfort, security and peace at last.
David Cox, Notts 
Creating a vortex
For waste collection in my workshop I use a Hoover Wet/Dry Powervac Super, fitted with a pleated paper drum filter and connected to my tools and machines with flexible hoses.
I also use the vac in the garden, collecting leaves, grass and hedge clippings.
But by using an auxiliary collecting tank I am able to increase the capacity by more than eight time, thereby avoiding having the empty the vac so frequently.
I acquired a 1301 plastic tank (the kind with a removable lid which is retained in position with a ring clamp) and installed inlet and outlet hose sockets in the sides close to the top at diagonally opposite points.
The hose sockets were the genuine parts supplied with the Powervac.
These required a little modification to get a better fit around the radius of the tank, sealing with a glue gun.
If ordinary drainage fittings are used it is vital that the inner parts of both inlet and outlet are passed through a 90° elbow to create a vortex.
The tank's lid is so good that the suction is enough to seal it, with the ring clamp.
J. Brooks, Leeds
Making tamper-proof nameplate mounts
To make invisibly mounted brass nameplates cut a brass disc of the appropriate diameter and thickness; I use 1 mm sheet, and 1 mm diameter.
The disc should correspond with the diameter of your winged boring bits.
Take a brass screw (i/2in or 3/4in No.8) and solder it to the back of the disc.
Polish the face of the plate and bevel the edge, before burnishing.
Bore a shallow recess with the winged bit and, using the central pilot hole as a guide, drill the workpiece to take a steel screw that matches the one on the back of the nameplate.
Screw this in, and remove it to create the thread.
If the orientation of the writing on the disc is unimportant (in the centre of a bowl, for instance) you can engrave it now, before fitting.
For cabinet work, however, you will need to fit it first, and engrave it in situ.
Put a smear of wax on the screw thread, and screw the plate into position.
Extra twist can be achieved by the wearing of an old rubber glove on the required thumb.
Do practise your engraving first on some scrap metal, and lacquer if desired.
The additional shine will make the nameplate that much easier for your grandchildren to recognise when they see the piece on Antiques Roadshow in a hundred years or so!
Peter Sztencel, Wakefield 
Handson in association with Stanley Stanley Tools are offering £100 worth of Stanley and Rabone tools as shown below for the winner of Hands On competition for readers' tips.
We hope that woodworkers of all types will send in their wheezes, as readers are always asking for more tips.
We also award a Stanley tool worth £15 to runners-up who have their ideas published.
To enter type (if you can) your tip and send it with clearly annotated drawings, and name, address and telephone number to: Hands On, Woodworker, Argus House, Boundary Way, Hemel Hempstead HP2 7ST.
This selection of winning tools includes an English/metric folding steel rule from Stanley's famous Rabone range for every runner-up.
Rabone rustless steel rules are precision made for all kinds of measuring and marking-out tasks, combining a high degree of accuracy with durability in use.
The 57R pattern shown above folds out to 24in in length.
On one side it is subdivided in inches and 16ths.
The special anti-glare finish on all Rabone precision steel provides a marked contrast to the clear, durable black graduations and figures.
Manufactured to conform to British Standards, the 57R can be relied upon to meet stringent accuracy tolerances.
Numerous other lengths in both metric and English graduations are available.
Winner Centre Ejector To avoid the necessity of using a drift to eject the revolving centre from a tailstock, fit a bush of hardwood or metal between the body of the tailstock and the back of the revolving centre.
The bore of the bush should be a snug fit over the moving slide.
The length of the bush should be 1/8in longer than the distance between the back of the centre and the front face of the tailstock casting, when fully retarded.
Then, when the slide is wound back fully, the bush will eject the centre, Jacobs chuck or whatever Morse taper device is fitted.
C. Souter, Rotherham
Next month September on sale 19th August
Classic Cabinets
For woodworkers inspired by furniture and cabinetmaking, the September issue of Woodworker will be filled with potential projects, ideas and techniques.
Michael Burley charts the progression of his collector's cabinet, explaining how to make the piece with veneers, MDF and solid timber.
Adrian Jones, who studied for a number of years at Parnham House, has made a similar cabinet, and in the September issue he displays that piece and talks bout his work as a successful furniture-maker.
Any readers attempting to furnish a home should find ample material in the September issue.
Ralph Sinnott makes a desk and chair, while Hazel Rogers moves from the box she wrote about in the April issue, to a nest of tables.
Brian Cook shows how to make a coffee table, and Steve Goulden will be moving to the second part of his feature on chair design and construction.
Meanwhile David Savage has moving on his mind, with his decision to extend his workshop facilities coming to fruition in his ongoing series, The Craft of Cabinetmaking.
Masters of the Craft
From Australia, former Woodworker editor, Peter Collenette sends a report on the Tasmanian furniture-maker, Alan Livermore, who is one of the few designer-makers to have his designs made in factories and in his own workshop.
In Britain, Bill Watts meets John Pizey, whose finishing skills are devoured by the variety of ‘students’ he teaches, and gains vital advice on those final touches, and how to rejuvenate antique furniture.
We also take a look at William and Mary furniture, and on a contemporary level visit some of the woodworking colleges.
Technical Treatise
Most woodworkers now own a router, so for those who wish they also had a biscuit jointer, Roy Cannon explains how to use the router for biscuits.
John Revell discusses the best sources for reclaimed timber.
For those more concerned with the professional aspects of woodworking, Loretta Radeschi offers advice on the best ways to find publicity through local papers and magazines.
Then, of course, there'll be the regular pages of advice, news, tests, correspondence and competitions that make ‘Woodworker’ Britain's quality woodwork magazine.
Order your copy now.
•We at Woodworker aim to publish in the September issue all the features we've mentioned here.
This may not be possible, so we apologise if any are missing, and guarantee, they will follow shortly.
We hope those articles not mentioned here, but present next month, will be some consolation.
A student on one of John Pizey's finishing courses (left) and a technique for marking angled shoulders (below) with hands removed for clarity.
Robert Ellwood's furniture will be featuring on next month's cover (bottom)
