Arranging a Funeral
December 1990
This factsheet is designed to help those people who have to organise someone's funeral and/or those people who want to plan ahead for their own funeral.
Contents
1.
What happens when someone dies.
a)
Death at home
b)
Death in hospital
c)
Sudden death
d)
Procedure at the Registar's office
2.
Arranging a funeral.
a)
The funeral director
b)
Burial
c)
Cremation
d)
The service
3.
Arranging a funeral without the help of a funeral director.
4.
Financial help from the Social Fund.
5.
The duty of local and health authorities to pay for certain funerals
a)
Duty of Local authorities
b)
Duty of a Health authority
6.
Planning and paying for a funeral in advance.
a)
Planning
b)
Cost
c)
Planning &Cost
7.
Bequeathing a body for research
8.
Donating organs for transplantation
9.
Important organisations
10.
Useful publications
As Scottish law differs from English law, Scottish readers should contact Age Concern Scotland at 54A Fountainbridge, Edinburgh, EH3 9PT, for a copy of their factsheet, available free on receipt of a sae.
1.
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN SOMEONE DIES
Even if the person or family have had little contact with a religious organisation a minister may be willing to visit while the person is dying.
What follows is a short account of the legal procedure —
a)
Death at home
If the person dies at home the family doctor and nearest relative should be informed.
The family doctor who has attended the person must complete a certificate giving the cause of death.
This is issued free.
If the body is to be cremated, two doctors must sign a certificate — but the first doctor will instruct the second doctor who can see the body in the chapel of rest or at the mortuary.
The doctor's certificate must be taken to the Registrar of Births and Deaths in the registration sub-district where the death occurred, normally within five days.
The doctor may provide a leaflet explaining how to register the death and should be able to advise where to do so.
Otherwise funeral directors keep detailed lists, or offices are listed in the phone book, or the Citizens Advice Bureau can advise.
A check should be made that it is the correct registration office and for opening times.
Sometimes a doctor will send the certificate direct to the Registrar, but it is always necessary for whoever is arranging the funeral to attend at the Registrar's office, this is usually a close family member but does not have to be.
b)
Death in hospital
If someone dies in hospital the health authority may give the certificate to the registrar who attends the hospital but, again, someone must attend the registration office.
This will be the district office which covers the hospital which may not be the same office as for the place of residence.
Sometimes the hospital will want to carry out a post mortem, and the hospital will need consent from the nearest relative.
c)
Sudden death
If there is doubt about the cause of death — if, for example, the death was sudden and the doctor had not seen the person within fourteen days of death, or if they had no general practitioner, the coroner must be informed, and will decide whether it is necessary to hold a post mortem .
If the death is then considered to be from natural causes, the coroner will issue a notification that he does not consider it necessary to hold an inquest, and this may be given to the relative to take to the registrar or sent to the registrar direct.
It will always be necessary for someone to attend the registrar's office in person.
The coroner may also order an inquest to establish the circumstances of the death.
An informant is not required to register a death which is the subject of a coroner's inquest, but the coroner's officer may inform the relatives when the coroner has issued his inquest certificate to the registrar so that the relatives can obtain any death certificates from the registrar.
The coroner will also issue an order for burial, or a certificate for cremation free of charge.
d)
Procedure at the Registrar's office
The relative or person who has been given the medical certificate by the doctor must see the Registrar of Births and Deaths for the district where the death occurred, in order that the death may be registered.
The information required will be — the full names of the ceased person, and any other names that they have been known by, including the maiden surname of a woman who has been married; their date and place of birth; their recent occupation, and their husband's full name and occupation, if the person who has died was a married woman.
It will also be necessary to confirm the date and place of death.
This is the essential information which must be included in the death register.
Other questions will be asked about date of birth of surviving spouse, and information about the state pensions and allowances that the person was receiving, including war pensions.
The National Health Service insurance number will be requested, and the deceased's medical card should be surrendered to the registrar if it is available.
However, if this number is not known and the medical card is not available, there is no need to worry.
Once the death is registered, a white certificate is issued free of charge, which contains a social security form to claim any arrears of benefits due to the estate of the deceased person and to ensure that the correct benefits are paid to the widow (if applicable); and a green certificate for burial or cremation (see Section 2).
Copies of the death certificate can be purchased.
A standard version will be necessary for a grant of probate or letters of administration costing £2.00 per copy.
These are documents which are often necessary to obtain access to a deceased person's assets — further information may be obtained from the Principal Registry, Family Division of the High Court, 5th Floor, Golden Cross House, Duncannon Street, London, WC2N.
Copies ordered at a later date may cost £5.00 depending upon the time lapse between the registration of death and the date of the order.
Different special certificates can be obtained (at a price of £1.50) to show banks, social security and building societies, for claiming from friendly societies, and for claiming insurance taken out on the life of the person.
2.
ARRANGING A FUNERAL
When there is insufficient money in the estate of the deceased person to pay for the funeral and if the person arranging the funeral is likely to have a problem meeting the cost then sections 4 and 5 of this factsheet should be read before making any arrangements.
It should be noted that help from the Social Fund for funeral expenses is only available where there is insufficient money in the estate, and where the person making the arrangements is in receipt of income support, housing benefit or community charge benefit, or is the partner of someone receiving these benefits.
The person who makes the arrangements with the funeral director may be considered to have entered into a binding contract, and become responsible for the cost, even if they are not related to the deceased.
a)
The funeral director
When someone dies at home and the person is to be buried, the funeral director can be called to take the body to a chapel of rest as soon as a doctor has certified the death.
If someone dies in hospital, they may rest in the hospital mortuary, or the funeral director will arrange for the body to be taken to the chapel of rest.
Sometimes this can be a considerable expense if the person died some way from where the family wish them to be buried.
Before the funeral can take place the funeral director must have the burial or cremation certificates.
It is important to check whether the dead person left any instructions with the Will about the funeral, or wished the body to be given for medical research (see Section 7), or organs to be donated for transplantation (see Section 8).
If there is a Will, the executor has the right to decide whether it will be a burial or a cremation, whether the Will expresses a particular wish or not.
If there is no Will, the next of kin should decide.
It is important to check whether the deceased has already made arrangements for their own funeral, or carried funeral insurance (see Section 6).
Funeral directors accept that relatives will seek quotations before they decide which company to use — information can be found in Yellow Pages Directories under the heading ‘funeral directors’.
If relatives cannot afford to pay for the funeral they should seek assistance from the Department of Social Security (DSS)(see Section 4).
The National Association of Funeral Directors (618 Warwick Road, Solihull, West Midlands B91 1AA.
Tel (021) 711 1343) has a code of practice for funeral directors which it encourages its members to display.
It can be seen at Citizens Advice Bureaux, or at funeral directors who are members of the Association.
The Association also operates a complaints procedure.
Members of the Association offer a basic funeral which can be requested.
This consists of a fitted and lined coffin, conveyance for the dead person, or delivery of a coffin (at least ten running miles allowed), laying out of the person, which normally includes embalming, use of the chapel of rest, provision of a hearse, and one following car to the nearest local cemetery or crematorium, and necessary conductors and bearers.
They will also attend to all necessary arrangements and papers.
If not all these services are required, the bill should be reduced.
Work done outside normal hours means extra costs.
The funeral director will discuss varying costs of a funeral and cremation, including additional costs of burial, and should have a price list with all types of coffin, casket and services provided.
A written itemised estimate of costs will be given.
Additional costs of flowers, crematorium and cemetery fees, doctors and clergy, often exceed the actual costs of the funeral, and the funeral director will also advise on these.
The funeral director will usually offer to pay costs to the hospital, crematorium, or burial ground, and minister of religion, but these can be handled direct.
Many funeral directors will submit the bill, and offer a discount for payment within a certain time.
Where the dead person had a bank account, the bill can be submitted to the bank.
The Department of National Savings (form SB4 obtainable at Post Offices) and building societies will pay out amounts up to £5,000 on the evidence of the death certificate, although they are not bound to until the grant of probate or letters of administration have been issued.
The funeral director will understand if the bill cannot be paid until then, but the circumstances should be explained when planning the funeral.
b)
Burial
Everyone has a right to be buried in the churchyard of the parish in which they die — assuming that one exists, and that there is space left.
If the dead person has paid for a grave space in the churchyard, there will be a document called a ‘faculty’ in existence, and you will need to produce this.
With a family grave, there will be a fee for opening it up, for moving headstones, and for additional inscriptions on an existing headstone.
If the dead person wanted to be buried outside the parish where they lived, the permission of the local clergy must be sought, and can be refused, unless there is space in an existing grave that the family intended for the dead person.
The charge is likely to be higher than that for a parishioner.
A Parochial Fees Order lays down the fees payable to the Church of England for funeral services and burials in Church of England churches, the churchyards and consecrated parts of cemeteries.
The fee for burial does not include charges for grave-digging, which may be carried out by a parochial officer (in which case the vicar sets the charge), or by a grave-digger hired by the funeral director.
If a monument is required, the consent of the minister must be sought.
The fees for monuments vary according to the type.
There are restrictions covering the types of monuments and inscriptions that are permitted in a churchyard.
An alternative is to be buried in a cemetery.
These are mostly run by local authorities, but some are privately owned and/or denominational.
They too will charge for a plot.
Fees are set by the owners under Acts of Parliament, and vary widely.
Information about the scale of fees and cemetery rules can be obtained by writing for brochures.
Grave plots vary in cost depending on whether they are common or private.
Fees will also be levied for the erection of monuments and borders.
Private ‘lawn’ graves can also be bought, which are cheaper, because they are on grass, and only a simple headstone can be erected.
In consecrated parts of cemeteries, if the burial takes place immediately after a church service, there is no Church of England fee for the burial service.
If the burial service follows a church service on a separate occasion, a fee will be charged.
The clergy's travelling expenses are chargeable as extras.
If a member of the clergy officiates at a service in an unconsecrated part of a cemetery, or at a crematorium, the charge usually reflects the parochial fee for a similar service.
‘A guide to Church of England fees’ is available free from the Pastoral Department (General Section), Church Commissioners, 1 Millbank, London SW1P 3JZ, on receipt of an s.a.e.
Local authorities often charge a different fee to their own residents and ratepayers than to outsiders, although there may be concessions to former residents and community charge payers.
Burial outside the area of residence will be more expensive because of the additional transport costs.
c)
Cremation
In order to prevent anybody being cremated where there is possible doubt about the cause of death, there are very strict rules about certification, which can increase the cost of cremation.
Before a cremation can take place three statutory forms have to be completed, one by next of kin, the others by two different doctors.
Each of the doctors is entitled to a fee £25.75 recommended by the BMA in 1990).
One will be the doctor who has attended the person in their last illness who must see the body before completing the form, and another doctor who must also see the body.
Only the doctor who attended the last illness is required to certify when someone dies in the hospital and a post mortem has been carried out and the results known to the doctor.
When a coroner has issued a certificate for cremation, no other doctors are required to certify, and the coroner's certificate is free.
A final document is signed by another doctor, who is the medical referee to the crematorium.
He must receive the above certificates the day before the cremation is due to take place.
The fee for this usually comes as part of the crematorium fee.
The majority of crematoria are run by local authorities.
Some will charge higher rates to non-residents.
Brochures can be obtained about charges and conditions from the owners of the crematorium.
Fees include the medical referees' form, and the use of the chapel and, usually, recorded music (which can be selected in advance), or an organ.
Many crematoria include scattering or burying the ashes in a garden of remembrance in their fee.
If a relative wants to collect the ashes they can be collected or sent, but they will only be kept free for a time (usually about a month)— a charge will be made after that time.
Some churches are happy to scatter the ashes in the graveyard or bury them according to the family's wishes.
If the minister of religion is required to conduct a service, the family or funeral director arrange this.
The crematoria will have a duty list of ministers.
The Cremation Society of Great Britain (Brecon House, 2nd Floor, 16 Albion Place, Maidstone, Kent, ME14 5DZ.
Tel. (0622 688292) offers free advice and help on any aspects of cremation and publishes a leaflet,What you should know about cremations , which explains what happens at the crematorium on the day of the funeral.
After the cremation the crematorium will send details of memorials and their cost.
Memorials vary from books and stones of remembrance to planted bushes (often roses).
d)
The service
Everyone has the right to a church funeral, and for the body to be taken to the church, but it is not necessary to have a service at a funeral whether it is a burial or a cremation.
A few words can be said by a relative or friend, or, if there is no wish for a religious ceremony, a non-religious one can be planned.
Societies such as the British Humanist Association (14 Lamb's Conduit Passage, London, WC1R 4RH.
Tel. 071 430 0908), or the National Secular Society (702 Holloway Road, London, N19 3NL.
Tel. 071–272 1266) may be able to arrange for someone to conduct a non-religious ceremony, or can send a form of words that could be used (leaflets are available from these organisations on receipt of an sae).
3.
ARRANGING A FUNERAL WITHOUT THE HELP OF A FUNERAL DIRECTOR
A few people wish to arrange a burial without the help of a funeral director.
Sections 1 and 2 have explained the procedure that must be followed, this section explains the additional tasks that the family may have to perform.
If the person dies at home, the district nurse could be asked to complete last offices, or the family may wish to do so.
This must be done fairly soon after the death.
The body is laid out on the back with hands at the side, the eyes are closed (coins or cotton wool on the eyelids will help) the jaw supported by a pillow, and all the natural outlets of the body plugged with cotton wool.
After the doctor has certified the cause of death, the body can be washed, dressed in whatever clothes are desired and hair brushed.
If the body is to remain at home it is advisable for the room to remain cool.
If the person dies in hospital the family will need to collect the body from the mortuary.
It may be possible for the arrangements for the funeral to be made direct with the crematorium or cemetery and minister of religion if desired.
A coffin can be purchased from the undertaker or made.
A large estate car or van will be needed to transport the coffin, and four to six people to carry it.
Some funeral directors will assist in do-it-yourself funerals by supplying a simple coffin and dealing with the documentation.
4.
FINANCIAL HELP FROM THE SOCIAL FUND
The Social Fund, which is a new part of social security, can give grants for those arranging a funeral who do not have sufficient money to cover the cost.
The person who applies for the grant must be receiving income support, housing benefit or community charge benefit or be the partner of someone receiving those benefits.
The person applying must have taken responsibility for arranging the funeral.
Claim form SF200 is obtainable from the local DSS office.
The person who dies must normally have been resident in the United Kingdom, and the funeral has to take place in the UK.
Before anyone applies for a grant from the Social Fund they should check what money is in the estate of the person who has died, such as in bank or building society accounts; whether there will be any money from insurance policies or charities, friends or relatives (either of the person claiming the grant or the person who has died); and any savings that the person claiming has over £500.
(The capital limit is £1000 for people aged 60 and over).
The savings may be in their name or the name of their husband or wife.
They will only get help if they cannot easily realise savings of the person who died to pay for the bill, or if paying for the bill brought their own family savings below £500.
(The capital limit is £1000 for people aged 60 and over).
The funeral payment will cover:-
bringing the body home if the person died away from home but in the United Kingdom
travel to arrange the funeral, or to go to the funeral (one return journey only)
necessary death certificates
an ordinary coffin
transport for the coffin and bearers and the cost of one additional car
‘reasonable’ cost of flowers from the claimant
funeral directors fees
clergy and organist
additional expenses up to £75, which arise from a requirement of the dead person's religious faith.
It cannot cover newspaper announcements, private burial plots or memorials.
It is advisable for the claimant to take along one written estimate for the funeral before the arrangements are made, in order to ensure that the cost will be met by the DSS, but a bill can be taken after the funeral to the DSS for help.
The time limit for making claims is three months (or twelve months if there is good reason for the delay).
If a grant is made and there is money or other assets in the estate of the person who has died, this will have to be used to pay the money back to the Social Fund.
If there is insufficient money to pay the whole cost, what is available will be put towards the cost.
If the person claiming is not looking after the estate, the Social Fund Officer will write to the person who is, at the same time as a payment is made.
Regulations governing this grant are contained in The Social Fund Maternity and Funeral Expenses (General) Regulations 1987 (Statutory Instrument 1987 No. 481), the Social Security (Claims and Payments) Amendment Regulations 1988 (Statutory Instrument 1988 No. 522), the Social Fund Maternity and Funeral Expenses (General) Amendment Regulations 1989 SI 1989/379 and the Social Fund Manual Page 12.
If the grant cannot meet the whole bill some funeral directors may accept weekly payments.
It is difficult to get help from charities towards funeral costs.
If an attempt is to be made it would be wise to approach those organisations with whom the dead person, or their spouse, had some link, eg. Royal British Legion, 48 Pall Mall, London, SW1Y 5JY, Tel. 071–930 8131; or the Soldiers, Sailors and Airmens Families Association, 19 Queen Elizabeth Street, London, SE1 2LP, Tel. 071–403 8783/071–962 9696 if they were in the services.
The local Citizens Advice Bureau, or Age Concern group, may be able to advise.
The Death grant was abolished under the Social Security Act 1986.
5.
THE DUTY OF LOCAL AND HEALTH AUTHORITIES TO PAY FOR CERTAIN FUNERALS
In certain circumstances local and health authorities have a duty to organise and pay for funerals.
These circumstances arise where the person who has died has no relatives or friends who would undertake the organisation, and has not made advance arrangements.
Many people who know that they may die in such circumstances wish to discuss the procedure beforehand, and it is possible that the authorities concerned may be prepared to do this.
a)
The duty of local authorities
Local authorities have a duty under Section 46 of the Public Health (Control of Diseases) Act 1984, to arrange the burial or cremation of any person who has died in their area where it appears that no suitable arrangements can be made other than by the local authority.
However, local authorities have no powers to reimburse burial costs where a third party has already arranged a funeral (but see (b) below in relation to deaths occurring in hospitals).
The authorities concerned would be in the cities — London Boroughs or Metropolitan Borough Councils — and, in the rest of the country, District Councils.
In the boroughs it is normally the Social Services, or the Environmental Health Department who would handle the arrangements.
In the rest of the country it is likely to be the Environmental Health Officer, unless someone dies in a council residential home, in which case the County Social Services Department will organise the funeral.
The local authority will make enquiries to see if the funeral can be paid for by a relative.
Also, if the deceased person leaves any estate, the local authority will claim its expenses from the legal personal representative.
The ways in which individual councils arrange matters vary greatly, but normally a council has an agreement with a local firm of funeral directors for a funeral service.
This usually consists of a simple coffin, no car, no flowers, no organ, but with a minister of religion present.
It is likely that the funeral will be at times when the cemeteries or crematoria are not busy, such as early in the morning.
If there are relatives and friends, arrangements will often be made to suit them so that they can attend.
b
Duty of a health authority
When anyone dies in hospital, and there are no relatives or friends to arrange and meet the cost of the funeral, the Secretary of State for Social Services has agreed that the Health Authority will do so (Hospital Memorandum 1972/41 and Health Notice 1985/31).
Like local authorities, hospitals have arrangements with funeral directors to provide a simple funeral.
Questions about the arrangements should be made to the Hospital Social Worker.
Although technically the health authority bears responsibility, in practice the funeral arrangements are made by the staff of the hospital where the patient died.
6.
PLANNING AND PAYING FOR A FUNERAL IN ADVANCE
Many people wish to plan their funerals in advance, and to know that they have set aside the money to pay for them:
a)
Planning
A letter can be left with the Will specifying the arrangements for the next of kin to follow.
It is also possible to discuss arrangements with the funeral directors in advance — requests will be lodged with the company.
This can be an advisable move if there are no immediate relatives who will be available to make arrangements.
The name of the funeral director can then be kept in a safe place with other important documents, such as the Will, so that whoever is left to deal with the situation can contact the funeral director.
b)
Cost
If savings have been set aside for a funeral, and would now pay for one at current prices, that money, invested at the best rate of interest, may be enough to pay for the funeral when it occurs.
It is also possible to pay a lump sum premium to an insurance company which will pay out to the amount insured.
Some insurance companies offer small sum policies, with monthly or annual premiums, which may pay for the funeral when someone dies, however much has been put into the scheme.
There may be difficulty obtaining a policy over the age of 75.
Such schemes are advertised in the press, and policies can often be bought without a visit from an agent, or a medical assessment.
Abbey Life Assurance, Direct Mailing Dept., 80 Holdenhurst Road, Bournemouth, BH8 8AL or telephone free of charge on (0800) 262422 (maximum age 70) is one of the companies offering this type of policy.
A few companies still arrange house to house collection of the premiums, including:-
Prudential Assurance Co.
Ltd., 142 Holborn Bars London, EC1 N 2NH Tel. 071–405 9222 (maximum age 75 next birthday) A medical may be necessary Premiums collected every 4 weeks
Refuge Assurance PLC, Refuge House, Alderley Road, Wilmslow, Cheshire SK9 1PF Tel. (0625) 535959 (maximum age 75)
The Association of British Insurers, Aldermary House, 10–15 Queen Street, London, EC4N 1TT, Tel. 071–248 4477, is a trade Association for insurance companies which can provide information about its members.
c)
Planning and cost
Some organisations will combine planning a funeral and the cost.
Some funeral directors are prepared to allow payment in advance.
The National Association of Funeral Directors, may shortly have a scheme which will cover funeral costs.
Look for an undertaker who is a member of the NAFD and ask for information.
Chosen Heritage Ltd. has a scheme whereby a firm instruction can be given for a guaranteed price funeral which can be paid for at today's prices.
There are three plans available to cater for individual preferences.
Chosen Heritage nominates a local funeral director.
Details can be obtained by writing to Freepost, Chosen Heritage, East Grinstead, West Sussex, RH19 1ZA, or telephone free of charge on (0800) 525555.
Further information is available from your local Age Concern group or from the Marketing Department of Age Concern England.
Dignity in Destiny, a joint operation between the charity, Help the Aged and P F G Hodgson Kenyon International plc, offers prearranged funeral plans with guaranteed services and prices.
There are four plans available to cater for individual preferences.
Payment at today's price may be by a single lump sum or by instalments.
Details from Dignity in Destiny Ltd., Freepost, Manchester M1 8DJ or telephone, free of charge on (0800) 269318.
A Funeral Bond may be purchased from the Co-operative Wholesale Society through its Co-operative Funeral Services on payment by cash, credit card, or by instalments.
This scheme does not offer set funerals but customers decide on the details of a specific funeral paying in advance at current local prices.
Further information may be obtained from the Co-operative Funeral and Memorial Service, 2 Commonwealth Buildings, Woolwich Church Street, SE18 5NW, Tel 081 317 7317.
Most co-operative societies have some form of funeral prepayment plan which may involve vouchers for goods in their stores.
As schemes differ it would be essential to enquire at a local branch.
The Independent Order of Odd Fellows — Manchester Unity Friendly Society, 40 Fountain Street, Manchester M2 2AB, Tel: 061–832 9361 offer assurance to people up to age 85 next birthday.
7.
BEQUEATHING A BODY FOR RESEARCH
Instructions can be left by those who wish to donate their bodies for research, although these do not have to be followed by the executors.
On the other hand executors can decide to donate the body.
Contact should be made with the nearest medical school of H.M. Inspector of Anatomy whose address may be obtained from London Anatomy Office, P.O. Box 915, London W6 8RP (South East England), or the H.M. Inspector of Anatomy at the Department of Health and Social Security, Eileen House, 80–94 Newington Causeway, London, SE1 6EF (for the rest of England and Wales).
The address for Scotland is the Scottish Home and Health Department, St. Andrews House, Edinburgh, EH1 3DG.
The body may not always be accepted, but swift action must be taken on death to inform the authorities.
Eventually the medical school will arrange the funeral, and the family can participate if they wish.
8.
DONATING ORGANS FOR TRANSPLANTATION
The transplantation of organs such as heart, liver and kidneys can save people's lives, and the transplantation of corneas can save people's sight.
Transplant programmes are being held back because of a shortage of donor organs, and more are urgently needed.
The removal of organs for transplantation is permitted either if the deceased person has previously indicated in writing his willingness to be a donor, for example by signing an organ donor card, or if, when enquiries are made of the surviving relatives, no objections are raised.
Not all patients who die are suitable as organ donors, and the decision on whether to remove the organs is made by the doctors concerned.
Removal has to happen very soon after death — afterwards the body is returned to the relatives for burial or cremation.
The hospital does not contribute towards funeral costs.
Organ donor cards are available from most hospitals, general practice surgeries, dispensing pharmacists, and social security offices.
9.
IMPORTANT ORGANISATIONS
Organisations involved in the practical aspects of funerals have been mentioned in the text.
The following organisations may offer counselling and support through their groups.
There may be other local groups who can be contacted through lists kept at public libraries, or Citizen Advice Bureaux.
Age Concern England , Astral House, 1268 London Road, London SW16 4ER Tel. 081–679 8000, has over 1000 groups who provide services for elderly people.
Some groups offer bereavement counselling.
There are also Age Concern groups in Northern Ireland (6 Lower Crescent, Belfast, Northern Ireland, Tel. (0232) 245729); Scotland (54A Fountainbridge, Edinburgh, EH3 9PT, Tel. (031) 228 5656); and Wales (4th Floor, 1 Cathedral Road, Cardiff, Wales, Tel. (0222) 371821).
CRUSE — Bereavement Care , Cruse House, 126 Sheen Road, Richmond, Surrey, TW9 1UR, Tel. 081–940 4818, offers a counselling service and practical advice after a bereavement.
There are over 170 groups in the country.
National Association of Widows 54–57 Allison Street, Digbeth, Birmingham, B5 5TH, Tel. (021) -643 8348.
Their local branches provide support and help and social opportunities for widows.
They also offer a free advice service.
Gay Bereavement Project , Unitarian Rooms, Hoop Lane, London, NW11 8BS.
A telephone help and support service for people bereaved by the death of a same-sex life-partner.
Can help find suitable clergy and secular officiants for funerals.
For the number of someone to talk to telephone 081–455 8894 (recorded message).
London Lesbian and Gay Switchboard offer a telephone counselling service.
Tel. 071–837 7324.
10.
USEFUL PUBLICATIONS
What to do after a death DSS leaflet D49 — October 1990.
Provides detailed information and advice on everything that needs to be done following the death of a relative or friend.
This leaflet is available free from DSS offices, post offices, or from the DHSS Leaflets Unit, P.O. Box 21, Stanmore, Middx, HA7 1AY, quoting reference number.
Survey of Funeral Costs — The 1990 Odd Fellows Survey.
Available free of charge from the Order of Odd Fellows, Manchester Unity Friendly Society, Odd Fellows House, 40 Fountain Street, Manchester, M2 2AB (tel. 061–832 9361).
What to do when someone dies .
Published by Consumers' Association.
Available from most libraries or bookshops, or by post from Consumers' Association, Castlemead, Gasgoyne Way, Hertford, SG14 1LH.
Funerals without God — a practical guide to non-religious funerals .
Price £3 including postage.
Available from the British Humanist Association, 14 Lamb's Conduit Passage, London WC1R 4RH.
Instructions for my next of kin and executors upon my death .
Published by Age Concern England.
Price 25p.
Available from the Marketing Department.
This document is not intended to replace a Will.
It is a form on which a person can record their wishes concerning funeral arrangements; names of friends and relatives to contact; names and addresses of banks, clubs, life assurance companies, insurance brokers, where to find keys, certificates, receipts, etc.
Making Your Will — Age Concern England factsheet no. 7.
Available free on receipt of an sae (9″ × 6″) from the Information and Policy Department.
Make Your Will : A practical guide to making your own will (England and Wales)— Available from bookshops or by post from Consumers' Association, Castlemead, Gasgoyne Way, Hertford, SG14 1LH.
PLEASE NOTE THAT WHILE THE AGENCIES OR PUBLICATIONS MENTIONED HERE ARE KNOWN TO AGE CONCERN ENGLAND, INCLUSION IN THIS FACTSHEET DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A RECOMMENDATION BY AGE CONCERN ENGLAND FOR ANY PARTICULAR AGENCY OR PUBLICATION.
All rights reserved.
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in unaltered form by Age Concern groups with due acknowledgement to Age Concern England.
No other reproduction in any form is permitted without written permission from Age Concern England 
Help with Heating
July 1991
The aim of this factsheet is to provide advice and information to elderly people on the help that is available to assist with heating costs and other fuel problems.
1.
Heating costs, Income Support and the Social Fund
2.
Housing Benefit and Heating Charges
3.
Grants for Insulation and Draught-proofing
4.
Easy Ways to Save Energy
5.
Gas and Electricity Codes of Practice
6.
Payment Schemes for Gas and Electricity
7.
Disconnection
8.
Services provided by the Fuel Industries* and assistance from Social Services
9.
Where to go for further help
*In this factsheet references to ‘the fuel industries’ or ‘fuel suppliers’means gas regions and electricity companies.
HEATING COSTS, INCOME SUPPORT AND THE SOCIAL FUND
Income Support
Income support replaced supplementary pension in April 1988.
It is intended to provide a regular weekly income if you do not have enough money to live on.
Like supplementary pension it tops up your income to the amount the government says you need to live on.
As with supplementary pension you are supposed to pay for heating out of weekly income.
There are no longer any weekly heating additions to help pay for extra heating expenses, but extra weekly amounts called premiums may be paid on top of income support to people with special needs.
The Social Fund
The social fund is a scheme which makes loans and grants mainly to people getting income support.
It replaces the system of grants to people who were getting supplementary benefit before April 1988.
Applications for social fund payments should be made to your local DSS office.
The social fund is different from the grant system because it is discretionary.
If you are turned down for a grant or loan or you are unhappy with the amount given, there is no right of appeal to an independent tribunal as there used to be.
However, you can ask for a review of the decision, and if you are still not satisfied you can ask for your situation to be referred to a social fund inspector.
There is a limited amount of money available for these payments, so social fund officers have to look at the needs of all those who apply for help and decide which needs can be met.
There are three types of payments under the Social fund:
Budgeting Loans are for people getting income support.
They are to help pay for something you need but cannot afford at the time you need it.
You must have been receiving or entitled to income support or supplementary benefit for a continuous period of 26 weeks (but one break of 14 days or less will not matter).
Savings over £1000 will make a difference to the amount you can get as will your ability to repay the loan.
Budgeting loans are not available for gas and electricity bills.
If you have a large bill which you cannot pay you may be able to go on the fuel direct scheme and deductions will be made from your benefit each week to pay for your current fuel consumption and any arrears.
(For further details about fuel direct see Page 8).
However loans can be available to meet the costs of fuel which are not on mains supply, such as coal, oil, paraffin, or bottled (LPG) gas.
Loans will also be available for the cost of installing a prepayment meter if you find it easier to pay for fuel as you use it.
You can also get a loan for the cost of reconnection of fuel supply after a debt has been paid, and for essential household equipment such as a cooker or heating appliance.
Social fund officers are expected to give high priority to requests for loans for the above purposes.
Budgeting loans are paid back by weekly deductions from benefit.
Crisis loans are to help pay for things needed urgently because of an emergency or disaster.
You do not need to be on income support to get a crisis loan but you must be able to show that it is the only means of preventing serious risk to you or your partner's health and safety.
You also have no money, savings or other resources which you can use.
Crisis loans are repaid by weekly deductions from benefit.
Community Care Grants are to enable people to establish or maintain themselves in the community rather than having to be in hospitals, nursing homes and residential care homes etc.
You must be on income support or be expected to get income support when you move into the community.
Grants may be made for items such as the installation of a prepayment meter, reconnection charges and essential household equipment such as cookers and heaters.
Community care grants do not have to be repaid.
Cold Weather Payments are also made from the social fund.
They are grants intended to help you meet the cost of extra fuel used in very cold weather.
They do not have to be paid back.
If you are on income support and aged 60 or over you will automatically receive £6 for any consecutive period of seven days when the average temperature is 0 degrees celsius or below.
Further details about income support and the social fund are explained in factsheet No. 25,Income Support — Regular Weekly Income available free from Age Concern England on receipt of a large s.a.e.
HOUSING BENEFIT AND HEATING CHARGES
Some people pay a fixed amount for their (heating, hot water, cooking and lighting) fuel bills in their rent.
Normally you will have to pay this fixed amount, even if you get a full rent rebate.
Example:— If your rent is £20, which includes £5 for fuel, the maximum help you can get is £15. (£20-pound; 5 = £15).
If you are getting income support and you have high fuel charges at a fixed rate, you will not have to pay more than a maximum fixed amount.
For further information on this contact your local housing benefit office.
GRANTS FOR INSULATION AND DRAUGHT-PROOFING
If you receive income support, housing benefit, community charge benefit or family credit, and if you are an owneroccupier, private tenant or housing association tenant, you may be able to get a minor works grant from the council.
This can cover the whole cost of draught-proofing, getting your loft insulated, having your pipes and tanks lagged, and possibly wall insulation and secondary glazing.
Unfortunately minor works grants are only ‘discretionary’, ie it is up to the council whether or not you receive help.
To apply, get an application form from the improvement grants section of your council.
Do not buy any materials until you have been told you can have a grant by the council, and once you have, keep any receipts.
Home Energy Efficiency Scheme
From 1 January 1991, if you receive income support, housing benefit, family credit or community charge benefit, you can get a grant under the Home Energy Efficiency Scheme (HEES).
These grants are available for loft, pipe, and hot and cold water tank insulation, draught-proofing and basic energy advice.
You can get a grant for loft insulation up to 150mm if you have less than 50mm.
You can do the work yourself, use a ‘network installer’, or get the work carried out by a contractor.
The size of the grant will depend on the work you have done, and who does it.
The maximum grant is £270, and you will have to pay a fixed contribution towards the cost, up to a maximum of £15.
For details of grants available and how to claim them, contact the Energy Action Grants Agency, Newcastle-upon-Tyne NE1 1JL.
Who can do the work
The Energy Action Grants Agency has appointed approved network installers to work in all areas of the country.
Because network installers have to satisfy certain standards of workmanship and quality, you can be confident that any work will be done efficiently and well.
In addition the network installer will be able to advise you on the most efficient energy use for your home.
For details of your local network installer ring:—Freephone 0800 181 667 .
If you prefer to have a private contractor do the work make sure they are a member of the following relevant trade associations:
Loft Insulation
National Association of Loft Insulation Contractors, PO Box 12, Haslemere, Surrey GU27 3AN.
Cavity Wall Insulation
National Cavity Insulation Association, PO Box 12, Haslemere, Surrey GU27 3AN.
Cavity Foam Bureau, PO Box 79, Oldbury, Warley, West Midlands B69 4BW.
EASY WAYS TO SAVE ENERGY
Although insulation and draught-proofing are the best ways to save money on heating bills, there are many other things you can do which, when combined, can make substantial savings.
If you have central heating:
let the room thermostat control the temperature,DON'T use it as a switch
turning the room thermostat up WON'T heat the room up faster.
A higher boiler temperature will heat the house faster, but will use more fuel.
don't open windows to cool rooms — lower thermostat setting or turn down individual radiators if overheating is a problem.
have the boiler serviced annually, because like a car it will become less efficient at using fuel after prolonged use.
stick kitchen foil — shiny side facing into the room — behind radiators on outside walls.
don't block radiators or air vents with furniture.
don't have curtains in front of radiators.
fit small shelves above radiators; they will deflect the rising warm air towards the centre of the room.
individual thermostatic radiator valves can be used to control the temperature of each radiator individually.
If you don't have them, use manual valves to adjust the radiators or turn them off in rooms not in use.
OTHER TIPS
Save washing-up for a once-a-day blitz.
Rinse dishes in cold water.
Don't wash under a running tap.
Repair dripping hot taps.
Use the right size pan to cover the burner or ring.
Don't over-fill kettles — heat just enough water for your needs.
GAS AND ELECTRICITY CODE OF PRACTICE
British Gas, and the local electricity companies (from the end of 1990), each have a number of codes of practice, setting out their terms of supply, how you can pay your bill, and the services that they offer.
You should be able to get copies of these codes of practice by telephoning your local British Gas office or electricity company, or by calling in at the nearest showroom.
PAYMENT SCHEMES FOR GAS AND ELECTRICITY
If you are worried about being unable to pay your next bill, it may help to pay through one of the payment schemes operated by the fuel industries.
There may be variations in the schemes operated locally, so it is best to check with your local gas or electricity showroom.
The main schemes are listed below.
1.
Prepayment or ‘Slot’ Meter
Both the local gas region and the electricity company can offer you a prepayment meter where it is safe and practical to put one in, although some local fuel boards have been reluctant to offer pre-payment meters to people who are not in debt.
(A slot meter may not be practical, for example, with a gas central heating boiler which goes out every time the money runs out and needs to be re-lit when more money is put in the meter.
Modern gas appliances with electric ignitions are suitable for use with a slot-meter).
Having a slot meter means that you pay for your fuel as you use it and do not have to worry about large quarterly bills.
However, the price of gas and electricity for slot meters is generally higher than for quarterly billing .
If you are worried about your slot meter being broken into, you can insure the contents under Age Concern England's ‘Meter Insurance Scheme’(for the address see WHERE TO GO FOR FURTHER HELP Pages 10–11).
Some electricity companies may be able to offer you a token meter, operated by a token or rechargeable key depending on the type available.
Purchases of tokens (£1 or sometimes £5 minimum) can be made at electricity showrooms or offices.
Token meters are also available from most gas regions.
If you have a disability which makes it difficult to use your slot meter, electricity companies will usually move it free of charge.
British Gas will move a coin, token or credit meter up to a meter from its present position free of charge if you find it difficult to use (see Page no number stated for information on adaptations for meters and appliances).
2.
Monthly Budget Scheme
This scheme means that instead of paying quarterly bills you pay the same amount into your electricity or gas account each month.
Your yearly consumption is estimated, and the cost of the fuel spread out evenly throughout the year.
Payment can be made automatically through a bank or building society.
Alternatively, vouchers are supplied and payment may be made by cash or cheque at banks and showrooms.
Some electricity companies and gas regions offer weekly budget schemes.
A disadvantage of budget schemes is that if your fuel consumption is underestimated, you may have a large sum to pay out at the end of the year.
Also it may mean that you have to pay in advance.
3.
Saving Stamps
You can buy stamps, usually worth £1.00 from local showrooms and use them to pay all or part of the quarterly bill.
You can use gas stamps to pay your electricity bill and electricity stamps to pay for your gas bill.
However, you cannot exchange your stamps for cash.
You can also buy savings stamps from some sub-post offices.
4.
Flexible Payments
Most gas regions and electricity companies will make arrangements for you to pay what you like when you like towards your next bill.
Again, a possible disadvantage is that you must pay in advance.
If you are unsure about any of these schemes, or want further advice, please see WHERE TO GO FOR FURTHER HELP (Pages 10–11).
DISCONNECTION
If you are threatened with disconnection or are already disconnected, it is useful to know the protection given under the Gas and Electricity Codes of Practice to consumers in ‘hardship’.
If you require advice on the protection offered by the Codes, contact your local Citizens Advice Bureau, Age Concern group or Neighbourhood Advice Centre, see WHERE TO GO FOR FURTHER HELP (Pages 10–11).
Be sure to contact the supplier as soon as possible.
1.
If all the people living in your house who have incomes are over pensionable age (60 years for women and 65 years for men), you will not be disconnected between October 1 and March 31 unless it is clear that you have sufficient money to pay.
2.
If you are over retirement age, disabled, or sick, disconnection can be delayed for 14 days or more (21 days in the case of gas) if you inform the fuel boards that you are contacting the Department of Social Security (D.S.S.) or Social Services for help.
For details of the help available from these agencies, see HEATING COSTS, INCOME SUPPORT AND THE SOCIAL FUND (Pages 2–3) and SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE FUEL INDUSTRIES AND ASSISTANCE FROM SOCIAL SERVICES (Pages 8–9).
3.
You can avoid disconnection or be reconnected by entering into a payment arrangement that is reasonable in all the circumstances.
Such an arrangement might be:
a)
The installation of a slot meter :(See PAYMENT SCHEMES FOR GAS AND ELECTRICITY Page 6).
The industries ‘calibrate’ the meter to collect any debt you may owe, so you would be paying above the going rate in order to pay your bill.
This calibration should always take into account how much you can afford to pay.
If you are going to pay off a debt through a prepayment meter, you should get advice from a Citizen's Advice Bureau who will be able to negotiate with the supplier to ‘calibrate’ the meter to pay of any debt at a rate you can afford.
In most cases, the industries will not charge for installing a slot meter if you are in ‘hardship’.
In other cases, if you receive Income Support you may be able to get a loan from the social fund to meet the cost of installing a prepayment meter.
For more information see HEATING COSTS, INCOME SUPPORT AND THE SOCIAL FUND (Page 2).
b)
The Fuel Direct scheme.
This is only possible for those receiving Income Support.
It means that money to pay for your current fuel consumption, and towards the arrears you owe, is taken from your benefit each week and paid direct to your fuel account.
For further advice about this, see WHERE TO GO FOR FURTHER HELP (Pages 10–11).
If you decide to go on the scheme you must enquire at your local Social Security Office to see if you are eligible.
Tell the fuel supplier as well.
c)
An agreement to pay a regular amount each week .
You can make an arrangement to pay off the bill and your current consumption, by regular payments to the fuel supplier.
But you are only protected as long as you keep your side of the arrangement.
However, if your circumstances change, and you cannot keep to an arrangement, tell the fuel supplier, who should not cut you off without offering you another arrangement or a pre-payment meter.
Again you should get advice from your local Citizen's Advice Bureau, to negotiate a level of debt repayment you can afford.
(For the address and other sources of help see WHERE TO GO FOR FURTHER HELP (Pages 10–11).
You cannot be disconnected for a Hire Purchase debt, a Credit Sale Agreement, or a debt for anything other than supply of gas and or electricity.
Nor should you be disconnected for a debt owed by a previously registered consumer, but you must have made proper arrangements with the fuel boards to take over the supply.
5.
If your fuel bill debt is in the name of your landlord, and you pay him for your electricity or gas, you should let your fuel supplier and local council know this is the case.
The fuel supplier will also tell the council.
Your supply will not be cut off for at least fourteen days (21 in the case of gas) to give the council time to help.
SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE FUEL INDUSTRIES AND ASSISTANCE FROM SOCIAL SERVICES
You can get advice from your local electricity company or gas region on various aspects of heating.
1.
Both give general advice on the best way to use appliances, and on how the effectiveness of your heating system could be improved.
Both Gas regions and electricity companies can advise on adaptations available for disabled people, e.g. for slot meters or appliances, which can often be fitted free of charge.
You can arrange for a visit from a Home Service Adviser (gas regions) or Energy Marketing Team (electricity companies) by contacting your local showroom.
2.
You can get a free safety check on gas appliances and installations from British Gas if:your are over 60 years of age and you live alone or with someone who also qualifies; you are a registered disabled person of any age and you live alone, or with someone who also qualifies; or you receive a state disability benefit and you live alone or with someone who also qualifies.
This check will show whether your gas appliances and installations are safe to use.
The check consists of a basic examination and includes any necessary adjustments, and materials up to a cost of £2.50 plus VAT.
One free gas check is available in any period of 12 months.
This check is not a substitute for servicing.
If your appliance is dangerous, the engineer has to disconnect it by law.
If this happens, he will give you written information about what has been done, and where you can get advice or assistance.
Also ask him for the telephone number of the Home Service Adviser for your area, in case you need further advice.
You can also contact your local Social Services Department, who may be able to help in a number of ways.
a)
If you are disconnected, they may be able to lend you heating, cooking and lighting appliances (such as Calor Gas fires and cookers).
b)
They may arrange for you to have short stay daytime, or full time care at a day centre or residential home if you are without heat and light at home.
c)
If you are disabled, the Social Services Department can give you gadgets to enable you to operate various appliances.
There is normally no charge for these.
3.
Some electricity companies do free visual wiring checks for elderly or disabled people.
They may also agree to re-site appliances for disabled people at reduced cost.
It is best to check with your local company for information about the services they offer.
WHERE TO GO FOR FURTHER HELP
Enquiries about the social fund,(Page 2) income support (Page 2) and fuel direct (Page 8) should be made at the local office of the Department of Social Security .
The address is in the telephone book under ‘Social Security’.
You can get advice on general heating problems by calling at your local Citizens Advice Bureau (look in the telephone book under ‘C’) or Neighbourhood Advice Centre .
They may help to negotiate with the fuel suppliers on your behalf where disputes arise.
Your local Age Concern group may be able to inform you of the help available in the area to assist you with your fuel or heating problem.
Details of local Age Concern groups can be found in the telephone book under ‘Age Concern’ or ‘Old People's Welfare Council’.
If you cannot find an address of the local group, ask your local Citizens Advice Bureau, local library, or write to Age Concern England, Astral House, 1268 London Road, London SW16 4ER, Tel:(081) 679 8000.
For details of Age Concern England's meter insurance scheme contact your local Age Concern group or write to Alexander Stenhouse (UK) Ltd, Grosvenor House, 65–71 London Road, Redhill, Surrey, RH1 1YN, Tel:(0737) 774177.
The addresses of local Energy Projects who may be able to help with draught-proofing and insulation, can be obtained from local advice agencies, or by writing to Neighbourhood Energy Action at 2/4, Bigg Market, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE1 1UW.
If you require the help of your local Social Services Department they can be contacted through your local Town Hall.
For further details of the services that the fuel industries can provide, contact your local electricity or gas showrooms.
The address will be in the telephone book under ‘Electricity’ or ‘Gas’.
In case of disputes, you can contact your local Gas Consumers Council , who may refer your complaint to OFGAS (the Office of Gas Supply); OFGAS can be contacted at Southside, 105 Victoria Street, London SW1E 6QT.
OFFER (the Office of Electricity Regulation) can be contacted at Hagley House, Hagley Road, Birmingham B16 8QG.
The addresses of your local Consumer and Consultative Councils is on the back of your fuel bill.
A Winter Warmthline — run by Age Concern, Help the Aged and Neighbourhood Energy Action provides information on heating and can be contacted on Freephone 0800 289404.
Finding Help at Home
September 1991
Age Concern England receives many requests for information about finding help at home.
You may be an older person living on your own or in someone else's home, or a relative or friend helping to look after an elderly person.
You may be looking for light domestic help one or two hours per week, or 24-hour a day care.
Or you may be a carer looking for help to enable you to take a break, either for regular short spells, or to go on holiday or in an emergency.
In this factsheet we suggest possible sources of help for services or improvements to you home; suggest ways of finding companions or live-in help; and list some benefits which may assist you in paying for help.
Organisations mentioned in the factsheet are listed in the final section.
To obtain Age Concern England factsheets mentioned here, send a 9″ × 6″ sae to the Information and Policy Department, Age Concern England, Astral House, 1268 London Road, London SW16 4ER, stating which factsheet(s) you would like to receive.
Please note : As Scottish law and service provision differ from those in England and Wales, Scottish readers should contact Age Concern Scotland at 54A Fountainbridge, Edinburgh EH3 9PT (Tel: 031–228 5656).
CONTENTS
1.
PERSONAL SOCIAL SERVICES AND HEALTH
Social Services Department
Family doctor &community health services
Local Age Concern groups
Hospital discharge schemes
Bereavement
2.
HELP WITH HOUSING
3.
PAYING FOR CARE
4.
A COMPANION AT HOME
5.
EMPLOYMENT OR NURSING AGENCIES
6.
FURTHER HELP OR ADVICE — NATIONAL ORGANISATIONS 
PERSONAL SOCIAL SERVICES AND HEALTH
If you are having a problem coping at home, you should first get in touch with your local social services department, or your family doctor, to see if they can give you some advice or support.
Social Services Department
Your local social services department should be able to advise you about help which it may provide or know about.
The main types of services likely to be offered are described below.
There may be charges for some or all of these services, depending on your income, but it is certainly worth asking about what may be available.
To contact the social services about what may be available.
To contact the social services department, look in your local telephone directory under the name of your local council (county or metropolitan borough), or ask at the library, town hall or Citizens Advice Bureau.
Under the terms of the 1986 Disabled Persons Act, the social services department must assess the needs for day services and services at home of people who are disabled.
The person or someone on their behalf can ask for the assessment.
The social services department should also tell you about services provided by itself or other services known to it which could be of use to you.
What can the social services department do to help?
All local authority social services departments offer different kinds of help and support.
Each authority has its own ways of deciding how much, if anything, you will have to pay.
This factsheet can only suggest some of the ways in which they may help you.
Many areas have special schemes which fit in with the particular needs of individual people at home.
Make sure that you talk to a number of people to find out whether what you need is available.
Talk to your local councillor as well, if you feel there is a need which is not being met.
Here are some of the most commonly known services.
Also listed are some other places where these services may be provided, or where you can get more information.
aids and adaptations:
‘Aids’ to living are gadgets or equipment which may help you if you have a problem in managing certain tasks.
They include for example special taps for people who have difficulty with normal ones.
There are special amplifiers for telephones and televisions, for people with hearing problems.
Magnifiers are available for partially sighted people.
‘Aids’ are available to help people pull themselves out of bed, or to put on stockings.
There are many more, including wheelchairs, sticks, commodes, special non-slip trays, and bath seats.
An occupational therapist from the social services department may be able to tell you about aids which could help you.
Some aids may be available on loan from the Red Cross, Age Concern groups, the WRVS or other organisations.
‘Adaptations’ are changes to your home to help you to get about or to manage better.
They include stair or grab rails; handles in the toilet or bathroom; or a ramp to the front or back door.
They may include more major alterations, such as widening a door for a wheelchair.
An occupational therapist may also advise you about these.
Further information : Carers National Association Fact Sheet 1, ‘How to find out about gadgets and equipment to daily living’.
Available free on receipt of sae from the Carers National Association.
Disabled Living Foundation or Disabled Living Centres.
Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation; Royal National Institute for the Blind; Royal National Institute for the Deaf.
(See also p7 for information about home improvements, including alterations)
alarm systems:
Some older people who live alone or who cannot get out appreciate the security of knowing that they can contact someone in an emergency.
Many different kinds of alarm schemes are available.
Some are provided by council housing or social services departments.
Others are offered by private firms.
Further information : ‘Alarms for Elderly People: a folder of information’.
Price £1.50.
Available from Research Institute for Consumer Affairs, 2 Marylebone Road, London NW1 4DX.
Help the Aged Community Alarms Department offers advice on alarms.
In certain circumstances, they can consider helping with the cost.
Contact: Help the Aged (Community Alarms Department).
day care:
There are many different kinds of day care outside a person's home.
Some offer a chance to meet other people and share activities and a meal; others offer specialist care, for instance to people with dementia.
Some areas have day care available at weekends, or for long days so that a carer can go out to work.
In rural areas, day care may be provided in mobile centres.
Ask what is available in your area.
If you feel that there is a need for a particular kind of care, ask whether it might be arranged.
Further information : local Age Concern group (many Age Concern groups provide day care); local Alzheimer's Disease Society group; local stroke group; local carers group; social services department.
home help, or home care assistant:
Home helps have traditionally provided help with household tasks, shopping, and other practical help.
Some local authorities no longer offer the traditional ‘cleaning’ service.
Instead, many social services departments are now introducing a new type of service, offering more ‘care’ to people who need a lot of help and assistance.
Some Age Concern groups are setting up schemes for home care, in cooperation with the local authority.
There may be a Crossroads Care Attendant scheme in your area, which can provide regular help to give relief to carers.
In some areas, private agencies offer help at home (see p10).
Further information : local Age Concern group; social services department; Association of Crossroads Care Attendant Schemes.
laundry:
Some social service departments provide a laundry service for people with incontinence, or who cannot manage their laundry for other reasons.
Ask if such a service is available in your area.
meals on wheels:
There are many different kinds of meals on wheels services.
Some are run by Age Concern or WRVS groups for the council.
Many offer meals for special diets.
Some provide a freezer for people at home, and then deliver frozen meals so that people can heat their own, when they wish.
Meals on wheels may be offered any number of days per week.
What is available to you will depend on your needs and on the policy of the local authority.
Further information : social services department; local Age Concern group; WRVS.
respite care:
Respite means taking a break.
Respite care is often available to give the carer and the person cared for a break from each other.
It could be for a night, or a day, or longer — for example, a week or two weeks.
It may be possible to arrange respite care in the person's own home, or in a residential care or nursing home or hospital.
Ask for further information.
Further information : local Age Concern group; local Alzheimer's Disease Society group; local carers group, general practitioner, social services department.
‘Taking a Break: a guide for people caring at home’.
This is a booklet providing information on all types of breaks, both at home and away from home.
Price: free to carers, 60p to others.
Bulk orders: 10 copies £4; 100 copies £30.
Available from Department KFP, Bailey Distribution Ltd., Learoyd Road, Mountfield Industrial Estate, New Romney, Kent TN28 8XU.
Cheques to be made payable to Bailey Distribution Ltd.
See Age Concern England Factsheet 4,Holidays for Older People .
sitting schemes:
There is a number of ‘sitting’ schemes run by social services departments or others which may help a carer to take a break.
Arrangements are made for a person to ‘sit in’ in the older person's home.
This could be on a regular basis, for example once a week, or could be available in an emergency.
Ask whether there is a scheme in your area.
Further information : local Age Concern group; local Alzheimer's Disease Society group; local carers group; social services department.
telephones:
If you need help with the cost of installing a telephone, you may be able to get help from the social services department.
Some charities also provide help.
If you have difficulty using standard telephone equipment, British Telecom can provide information and advice on adaptations and equipment.
Further information : British Telecom; Disabled Living Foundation.
See also: Age Concern England Factsheet 28,Help with Telephones .
Family doctor and community health services
Your family doctor should be able to put you in touch with community health services.
If necessary, arrangements can usually be made for you to be seen at home.
The kinds of people who may help or services which may be available include:
district nurse or health visitor
chiropodist
continence advisor
physiotherapist
community psychiatric nurse
hospice at home or Macmillan nurse
Further information : Your local community health council is an organisation which helps people who may need more information about local health services.
You can find their address at the local Citizens Advice Bureau, or in the telephone directory under ‘community health council’.
Specialist nursing or care at home for people with a terminal illness may be available through Macmillan nurses, provided by Cancer Relief, and Marie Curie Foundation nurses, or from a local hospice.
Ask your doctor if there is local support of this kind.
See also: Age Concern Factsheet 23,Help with Incontinence , and Factsheet 5,Dental Care in Retirement .
Local Age Concern groups
The local Age Concern group or Old People's Welfare Council group may be able to tell you about special services in your area, which they or other groups run.
There may be support groups, for example for stroke sufferers, or carers.
They may also know of people seeking work for a few hours or days per week, perhaps to help out with the garden, or heavier household tasks, or shopping.
They may arrange transport, or visiting services.
They may provide day care.
The address and telephone number of your local group should be listed in the telephone directory or is available from Age Concern England.
Hospital discharge schemes
Many older people need help in the period after being discharged from hospital.
Some Age Concern groups, social services departments and other organisations run a variety of hospital discharge schemes which can help people over the first few days or weeks after a stay in hospital.
Ask if such a scheme is available in your area.
Further information : local Age Concern group; social services department; community health council; hospital social worker.
Bereavement
You or someone you look after may have suffered a recent bereavement.
This is understandably a very difficult time which may be helped by support or counselling.
Some people show signs of confusion because of the shock of bereavement.
Others feel that they can't carry on by themselves.
Help at this time may help you or the person you look after to remain at home as confidence is slowly regained in managing in a new situation.
Further information : local Age Concern group; social services department; family doctor; hospital social worker.
Cruse — Bereavement Care is a national charity which runs a counselling service for all bereaved people throughout the UK, offering understanding, advice and information.
HELP WITH HOUSING
Repairs or improvements
Agency services such as‘Staying Put’ or ‘Care and Repair’give advice and practical assistance to older home owners who need to repair or improve their home.
They may also be able to tell you about local organisations which give practical help with gardening or decorating.
Further information : local Age Concern group; the local council's renovation grants section (the borough or district council,not the county council).
If you are a private tenant and you are having problems getting the landlord to carry out repairs,seek advice from : a Citizens Advice Bureau, housing advice centre, or the environmental health department of your borough or district council.
Grants for repairs or improvements
The local council can give grants to home owners to cover all or part of the cost of getting repair and improvement work done.
The size of the grant you get depends on your income.
Some work, such as putting in an inside toilet or repairing dangerous electric wiring, qualifies for a mandatory grant, which means that the council has to give a grant if you qualify on income grounds.
Other types of work may qualify for a discretionary grant, which means it is up to the council whether you get a grant.
Minor works grants of up to £1,000 are available to home owners or private tenants over the age of 60 who are in receipt of Income Support, Community Charge Benefit, or Housing Benefit.
Disabled facilities grants cover all or part of the cost of adaptation work, such as putting in a downstairs toilet.
Some types of work attract mandatory grants.
The renovation grants section must consult the local social services department, and will normally arrange for an occupational therapist to visit you to assess your needs.
The size of the grant you get depends on your income.
Social services departments may also be able to help you pay for work not covered by disabled facilities grants, and can also provide additional facilities to make the property safer, more comfortable and more convenient.
Further information : Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation (RADAR).
See also: Age Concern England Factsheet 13,Older Home Owners — Financial Help with Repairs .
PAYING FOR CARE
There are some social security benefits which may help you to pay for care.
These are briefly described here.
Attendance Allowance
People who require help with their personal needs or bodily functions, or to avoid danger to themselves or others, may be eligible for Attendance Allowance, which is paid regardless of age or income, and is tax free.
Attendance Allowance is paid at a lower rate to people who require personal care or attention by day or night, and at a higher rate to those requiring care by day and night.
It can be paid to individuals who live alone, but who still require a high level of personal care.
Further information and an application form in leaflet DS2, available from local offices of the Department of Social Security (DSS).
See also: Counsel and Care, Factsheet 11,Attendance Allowance for People over Pensionable Age .
Free on receipt of 9″ × 6″ sae.
In April 1992, for people disabled before the age of 65 Attendance Allowance will be replaced by a new benefit — the ‘Disability Living Allowance’.
People disabled after the age of 65 will still be able to claim Attendance Allowance.
Contact Age Concern England for further details.
Invalid Care Allowance
A benefit paid to people under 65 who spend 35 hours or more per week looking after someone who receives Attendance Allowance.
You may not receive any extra money if you or your spouse already receive a state benefit, and your taxable earnings should not be more than £30 per week after the deduction of reasonable expenses.
Further information : Leaflet DS700 from local offices of the DSS.
See also: Carers National Association, Leaflet 5:Invalid Care Allowance.
The rules explained .
Available free.
Income support
If you have a low income and no more than £8,000 savings, you may qualify for Income Support, which is paid weekly and tops up any Income you have to a level set by the Government.
If you are looking for respite care for short periods, or convalescent care, you may qualify for some help through Income Support if you have less than £8,000 in savings.
Further information : Age Concern Factsheet 25,Income Support and the Social Fund , and Factsheet 11,Income Support for Residential and Nursing Homes .
Local DSS office; local Citizens Advice Bureau or Age Concern group.
Independent Living Fund
If you are very severely disabled, you may be able to get a grant from the Independent Living Fund.
This is a discretionary trust fund which was set up to give financial help to people who need to pay for personal care or domestic assistance in order to remain living independently in their own homes.
Whether you can get help or not will depend on your needs and your income and savings, and whether there is anybody else who can provide the help that you need.
People aged over 16 and receiving higher Attendance Allowance are eligible to apply.
Information and application forms available from The Independent Living Fund, PO Box 183, Nottingham NG8 3RD.
Further information about financial help:
Counsel and Care factsheets Help at Home and Which Charity describe the above listed benefits and other sources of help.
The Association of Charity Officers may be able to give advice about grants or statutory benefits.
See also: Age Concern England's annual publication,Your Rights: a guide to money benefits for older people .
Price £2.15.
Available from the Marketing Department, Age Concern England.
A Guide to Grants for Individuals in Need edited by Mike and Nikki Eastwood. 1990 edition.
Price £12.95.
Available from Directory of Social Change, Radius Works, Back Lane, London NW3 1HL.
This may be available in your local library.
Disability Rights Handbook .
Price £4.50.
Available from the Disability Alliance ERA, 25 Denmark Street, London WC2H 8NJ.
Benefit Enquiry Line .
This free DSS telephone line can provide information about benefits to disabled people and their family or carers.
Tel: 0800 882 200.
A COMPANION AT HOME
Some older people feel that they could manage at home if there were someone else living in their home, perhaps helping with light care tasks, or just ‘keeping a watchful eye’.
Some people feel their home is too big for one or two, but do not wish to move.
It is sometimes possible to find a companion, or ‘living-in help’.
Some local agencies may be able to help you, or you might consider advertising in local newspapers, magazines or church journals.
The following national publications may prove useful:
The Lady 39–40 Bedford Street London WC2E 9ER Tel: 071–379 4717 Published weekly; classified ads not accepted by telephone
Choice Magazine Apex House Oundle Road Peterborough PE2 9NP Tel:(0733) 555123 Published monthly
Daily Telegraph South Quay 181 Marsh Wall London E14 9SR Tel: 071–538 5000 Published Mon–Sat
If you do advertise for a companion it is advisable to use a box number and also to take up references.
You should carefully consider the duties you require of a companion and write a ‘job description’ so that there is no misunderstanding by either party as to what is expected.
You may wish to seek legal advice on whether a contract could be drawn up.
Further information: Recruiting and employing a personal care worker by M Dunne.
Price £2.25.
Available from Disablement Income Group, Millmead Business Centre, Millmead Road, London N17 9QU.
EMPLOYMENT OR NURSING AGENCIES
There is a number of private agencies which will recruit and place living-in companions and daily or longer-term nurses or care workers.
Some helpers will not undertake more than light household duties, and heavy washing, ironing and cleaning will have to be done by someone else.
In order to provide ‘permanent’ help, many agencies operate a rota system with the carers working for a period of one or two weeks or a month, and then changing over in a planned way with another carer.
This ensures continuity with more than one worker, where it may be difficult to find one person to live in permanently.
Each agency has its own system for placing staff, and charges and style of service vary considerably.
Agencies may charge an agency or booking fee, and staff may be self-employed and responsible for their own tax and national insurance contributions.
Further information: Local agencies will be listed in the Yellow Pages of the telephone directory under ‘Employment Agencies and Consultants’ or ‘Nurses and Nursing’.
Or contact: The United Kingdom Home Care Association.
FURTHER HELP OR ADVICE
You may not be able to find the help you would like in your area.
We list here some other places where you may be able to obtain help or advice.
We are not able to list all the available sources of help in this factsheet, but we hope that these suggestions will help you to find the help that you need.
Alzheimer's Disease Society , 158–160 Balham High Road, London SW12 9BN.
(Tel: 081–675 6557/8/9/0) Supports families, provides information about all forms of dementia, runs local groups for patients and their relatives.
Arthritis Care , 5 Grosvenor Crescent, London SW1 X 7ER.
(Tel: 071–235 0902) Advice and information, and over 510 branches, for people with arthritis and their families.
Arthritis Care Wyeth Helpline, a freephone advice service, is available on weekdays 1–5 p.m., on 0800 289 170.
Association of Crossroads Care Attendant Schemes , 10 Regent Place, Rugby, Warwickshire CV21 2PN.
(Tel:(0788) 573653) About 190 schemes in the UK which aim to relieve carers.
To find out if there is a scheme in your area, contact the national organisation.
British Diabetic Association , 10 Queen Anne Street, London W1M OBD.
(Tel: 071–323 1531) Help for all diabetics and their families; branches across the UK.
British Red Cross Society , 9 Grosvenor Crescent, London SW1 7EJ.
(Tel: 071 235 5454) Services mainly provided by volunteers and available from local centres: home nursing, transport, holidays, equipment loan for frail elderly people and others with disabilities.
British Telecom .
Dial 150, ask for Freephone Telecom Sales, and ask for the Action for Disabled Customers Liaison Officer.
Carers National Association (or ‘Carers’), 29 Chilworth Mews, London W2 3RG.
(Tel: 071–724 7776) General help and advice for all carers.
Chest, Heart and Stroke Association , CHSA House, Whitecross Street, London EC1Y 8JJ.
(Tel: 071–490 7999) Helps sufferers of asthma, bronchitis, emphysema, tuberculosis, angina, coronary thrombosis, hypertension and stroke illness.
Counselling and welfare services.
Lists available of stroke and cardiac support and rehabilitation groups.
Cruse — Bereavement Care , Cruse House, 126 Sheen Road, Richmond, Surrey TW9 1UR.
(Tel: 081–940 4818) A counselling service for bereaved people throughout the UK.
Counsel &Care , Twyman House, 16 Bonny Street, London NW1 9LR.
(Tel: 071–485 1566, weekdays 10.30–4.00) A general advice agency for elderly people.
Case workers may be able to advise on grants or local agencies which may be able to provide help.
Covers England mainly, but also Scotland and Wales.
Disabled Living Centres (see Disabled Living Foundation)
Disabled Living Foundation , 380–384 Harrow Road, London W9 2HU.
(Tel: 071–289 6111) Information service about equipment for daily living.
Specialist advisory service on clothing.
Incontinence Advisory Service (see below).
Information about Disabled Living Centres in the UK.
Help the Aged (Community Alarms Scheme), 16/18 St James's Walk, London EC1R 0BE.
(Tel: 071–253 0253) Information about personal alarm systems.
The Holiday Care Service , 2 Old Bank Chambers, Station Road, Horley, Surrey, RH6 9HW.
(Tel:(0293) 774535) Free information and support on holidays for people who are old or disabled, or on a low income.
Please enclose large sae if writing for information.
Hospice Information Service , St Christopher's Hospice, 51–59 Lawrie Park Road, Sydenham, London SE26 6DZ.
(Tel: 081–778 9252) Information on hospices in UK (including home care teams).
Incontinence Advisory Service , 380–384 Harrow Road, London W9 2HU.
(Tel: 071–289 6111 Mon–Thurs) Information and advice for those affected by incontinence and their carers.
MENCAP (Royal Society for Mentally Handicapped Children and Adults), 123 Golden Lane, London EC1Y 0RT.
(Tel: 071–454 0454) Support for mentally handicapped people and their families, through local branches.
MIND (National Association for Mental Health), 22 Harley Street, London W1N 2ED.
(Tel: 071–637 0741.
Advice lines 2–4.30 pm weekdays) Information Unit offers support for people in mental distress and their families.
Local groups.
Patients Association , 18 Victoria Park Square, Bethnal Green, London E2 9PF.
(Tel: 081–981 5676) Advice to patients and carers on patients' rights, complaints procedures and access to health services or appropriate self-help groups.
Royal Association for Disability and Rehabilitation (RADAR), 25 Mortimer Street, London W1N 8AB.
(Tel: 071–637 5400) Advice and information on access, housing, holidays, mobility and welfare.
Royal National Institute for the Blind (RNIB), 224 Great Portland Street, London W1N 6AA.
(Tel: 071–388 1266) Many services for people with visual handicaps.
Royal National Institute for the Deaf , 105 Gower Street, London WC1E 6AH.
(Tel: 071–387 8033) Advice, information and a wide range of services.
United Kingdom Home Care Association , 206 Worple Road, London SW20 8PN.
(Tel: 081–946 8202) An association of providers of care at home, with a code of practice.
Lists available of member agencies and others in the UK.
Women's Royal Voluntary Service (WRVS), 234–244 Stockwell Road, London SW9 9SP.
(Tel: 071–733 3388) A nationwide network of community services.
PLEASE NOTE THAT WHILE THE AGENCIES OR PUBLICATIONS MENTIONED HERE ARE KNOWN TO AGE CONCERN ENGLAND, INCLUSION IN THIS FACT SHEET DOES NOT CONSTITUTE A RECOMMENDATION BY AGE CONCERN ENGLAND FOR ANY PARTICULAR AGENCY OR PUBLICATION.
All rights reserved.
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in unaltered form by Age Concern groups with due acknowledgement to Age Concern England.
No other reproduction in any form is permitted without written permission from Age Concern England .
The Community Charge (Poll Tax) and Older People
April 1991
The community charge (often called the poll tax) is the system of payment towards local government services in England, Scotland and Wales, while in Northern Ireland the rates are still in place.
In March 1991 the Government announced that the community charge will be replaced by a new system of local tax.
It is planned that this will start in the year 1993–94.
Until then the community charge will continue.
Further information about recently announced changes is given on page 2.
This factsheet gives general information about the community charge system including details of the help available to reduce bills.
CONTENTS
Changes to the community charge system
What kind of community charge should you pay?
The personal community charge The standard community charge The collective community charge
Who does not have to pay the community charge?
How the community charge works Registration If your circumstances change Paying the community charge Penalties for non-registration and non-payment
The community charge reduction scheme Do you need to claim?
Reductions and community charge benefit How the reductions are worked out Extra help for former non-ratepayers
Community charge benefit (rebate) Who can get benefit?
How to work out if you qualify for benefit Maximum and minimum benefit Your savings Your income What you need to live on Calculating your benefit Examples How to claim benefit
Further information from Age Concern
CHANGES TO THE COMMUNITY CHARGE SYSTEM
On 23 April 1991 the Government announced that they intend to replace the community charge with a new ‘council tax’.
Properties will be allocated to one of seven bands based on their value.
The tax for a property in the highest band will be about two and a half times that for one in the lowest band.
Where only one person lives in a property there will be a 25 per cent reduction.
There will still be a system of rebates for people on low incomes but there will no longer be a minimum contribution — so some people will be entitled to 100 per cent rebates.
There is to be a period of consultation lasting until the middle of June 1991 when individuals and organisations can put forward their views.
It is expected that the new system could be in place in the year 1993–94.
However until then the community charge will remain.
Details of the ‘community charge reduction scheme’ were produced in January 1991 and then modified in March 1991.
Like transitional relief which it has replaced, the reduction scheme is intended to help people who have faced high increases in charges because of the introduction of the community charge.
This scheme is explained in more detail later in this factsheet.
In the budget on 19 March 1991 the Chancellor announced that there would be extra Government grant to enable the community charge bills originally set by councils to be reduced by £140 for every individual (or in the case of Wandsworth to reduce the bill to £0).
People do not have to pay any of their charge until they receive this revised bill.
In addition to the £140 reduction, some people will also qualify for a ‘community charge reduction’ and/or ‘community charge benefit’as explained later.
The £140 lowering of bills will be made before any community charge reduction or benefit.
Example
Mr Smith receives income support so he pays 20% of the community charge.
At the beginning of March his council announced that they had set the charge at £400.
Mr Smith would have had to pay 20% of this — £80 and would have received a rebate for £320.
After the Government announcement the charge was reduced by £140 to £260.
Mr Smith now has to pay 20% of £260 which is £52 and he will receive £208 benefit.
WHAT KIND OF COMMUNITY CHARGE SHOULD YOU PAY?
There are three types of community charge, and nearly everyone aged 18 or over will have to pay at least one of them.
The Personal Community Charge
This is the community charge which most people have to pay in the area where they live.
The level of charge will depend on how much the local council spends on services and the income received from central government and business rates.
A couple will each get a personal community charge bill.
If a couple is married or living together as man and wife, then they are married or living together as man and wife, then they are liable for their partner's community charge if it is not paid.
The Standard Community Charge
If you own or lease property where no-one is living you may have to pay a standard community charge in that area in addition to the personal charge in the area you live.
The standard charge is set by the local council, and can be zero, one half, equal to, one and a half or twice the cost of the personal community charge in the area.
Owners of holiday caravans will not normally have to pay a standard community charge.
People who own holiday homes available for rent at least 140 days a year will not have to pay a standard charge but they will be liable to pay business rates.
You cannot get a rebate on the standard community charge.
For certain classes of property the Government has laid down rules about the level of standard charge.
The charge will be 0 for the first 6 months that a property is empty.
In the situations below the charge will be 0 for an unlimited time:
your previous home is empty because you are permanently living in a hospital, residential or nursing home.
your previous home is empty because you have gone to live with someone else to provide personal care because they are elderly, ill or disabled
your previous home is empty because you have gone to live with someone else in order to receive personal care due to your age, illness or disability.
There are other classes of property not covered here.
Your council can also choose to extend these periods of time or set new classes of property other than the one laid down by the Government.
The Collective Community Charge
The collective community charge is paid by landlords of some properties where people normally only stay for short periods.
These might include some bed and breakfast hotels, lodging houses or certain types of hostel.
The residents will pay contributions to the landlord who will pay these to the council.
The local registration officer will decide when a collective community charge should be paid.
The collective charge has been introduced because it would be difficult to register and collect a personal charge from some people who move about very frequently.
In the rest of this factsheet, the community charge referred to is the personal community charge unless stated otherwise.
If you need more information on the other types of charge contact your council or local advice agency.
WHO DOES NOT HAVE TO PAY THE COMMUNITY CHARGE?
Although most people will have to pay the community charge, certain groups will be exempt from paying the personal or collective charge.
To apply for an exemption you should contact your council's Community Charge Registration Officer.
These are the main groups of people who will not have to pay the charge:
1.
People whose only or main residence is in hospital, or in a residential care home, nursing home or a hostel which provides a high level of care or treatment.
2.
People who are ‘severely mentally impaired’.
Someone will be exempt if they have a certificate from a doctor stating that they are severely mentally impaired and are also receiving one or more of certain social security benefits including attendance allowance, severe disablement allowance, or invalidity benefit.
The cause of the mental impairment is not important — it could be due to a handicap from birth or due to a condition such as Alzheimer's Disease.
People will not be exempt because they have a physical disability.
3.
People who are members of religious communities who do not have any income of their own, and who depend upon their religious community for their livelihood.
4.
People staying in some short-stay hostels or night shelters.
5.
Homeless people with ‘no fixed abode’.
6.
Prisoners (unless they are imprisoned because of failing to pay their community charge).
7.
People aged up to 20 but still at school or in further education, who have no independent income of their own.
8.
Care Workers who are volunteers working for, or introduced to the person they care for, by a charity, and who fulfil certain conditions.
These will usually be young people, belonging to an organisation such as Community Service Volunteers, who receive no more than £25 a week, work at least 24 hours a week and have accommodation provided on the premises.
HOW THE COMMUNITY CHARGE WORKS
Registration
You must register for the community charge in the area where you live.
The information collected is used to compile the ‘community charge register’— a list of people liable to pay the community charge.
The electoral roll, local authority records, and other sources of information may also be used to complete the community charge register.
A simplified version of the register is available to the public, and contains the address, surname, and initials of people registered.
If you are worried about your name appearing on the public register you should contact your local council's Community Charge Registration Officer.
If Your Circumstances Change
If your circumstances change you should inform your local council.
If you move to a new address, you should inform the council in the area you have left and in the area you have moved to, of your change in address.
Paying The Community Charge
Under the community charge rules, the normal payment plan will be for the charge to be paid in 10 monthly instalments.
If you have problems in meeting the instalment plan which the council gives you, you should ask if it can be changed.
The council can choose not to accept instalments of less than £5.
Penalties for non-registration and non-payment
If you do not provide the information requested for registration, this could lead to a fine of £50 in the first instance, and then £200 if you still do not comply.
If people do not pay the community charge they will receive a reminder.
If they still do not pay, the council can apply to the magistrates court for a summons to be served.
There are different ways of enforcing payments such as a direct deduction from wages or income support, or by seizing a person's possessions.
In extreme cases people can be imprisoned for non-payment (this does not apply in Scotland).
THE COMMUNITY CHARGE REDUCTION SCHEME
This scheme has replaced transitional relief which operated in the year 1990–91.
Like transitional relief, community charge reductions will provide payments to some people who face high increases because of the changeover from rates to community charge.
Community charge reductions are worked out after the bills originally set by councils have been reduced by £140 as explained on page 2.
Because bills are now lower, fewer people face large increases, so the number of people entitled to a reduction will be less than originally expected.
The rules are more generous than those for transitional relief and some of the basic points are:
Community charge reductions are only available to people who have not moved since 31st March 1991.
Reductions will be available to people whose charge in 1991–92 is more than £52 (£1 a week) over the 1989–90 rates bill for the property where they now live.
The help is based on the actual community charge set in your area in 1991–92.
Reductions take into account all the chargepayers in a property whereas previously transitional relief was based on a maximum of two charges.
Your income and savings are not taken into account for the reduction scheme.
Do you need to claim?
The reductions will normally be worked out automatically before you receive your bill and you will not need to make a claim, but some people who did not previously pay rates, and who are pensioners or disabled people, can apply to the council for extra help as explained below.
Reductions and community charge benefit
The reductions scheme is not based on your savings and income and is separate from the community charge benefit system.
You may receive a reduction or benefit or both.
Any reduction is made before the benefit is calculated.
Ask at your council or local advice group if you are unsure what you can claim.
How the reductions are worked out
Community charge reductions are available to people who have not moved since 31 March 1991.
They will normally be worked out automatically but see also ‘Extra help for former non-ratepayers' below.
The reductions are worked out by comparing people's rates in 1989–90 with their community charge for 1991–92.
In most cases the ‘rates’ used in the calculation will be the same amount as the actual bill you received in 1989–90.
‘However this will not be the case if you no longer live in the property where you previously paid rates because it is the 1989–90 rates of the property where you now live which is used to calculate any reduction.
If you move on or after the 1st April 1991 you will normally lose the reduction although there are certain circumstances when this is not the case.’
Where there is one chargepayer in the property a community charge reduction will be given if the 1991–92 community charge in your area is higher than your 1989–90 rates plus £52.
You should not normally have to pay more than your rates bill plus £52.
Where there are two people in the property the reduction will be given if two community charges are higher than the rates bill plus £52.
If there are more than 2 people , the threshold for help is increased by £52 for each extra person.
So, for example, £104 is added to the rates bill for a three person household and £156 for a four person household.
Example
Mr and Mrs Forest's bills are as follows:
1989–90 rates £350
1991–92 community charge after £140 taken off £260 each
2 × community charge of £260 £520
£350 (rates) plus £52 (threshold for reductions) £402
Community charge reduction = £520 -£402 = £118 (£59 each)
Mr and Mrs Forest's bills will be reduced by £59 each so they will have to pay £201 each in 1991–92.
Extra help for former non-ratepayers
There may be extra help for some people who were not ratepayers, or the partner of a ratepayer, immediately before the community charge system started in April 1990 and who have not moved since then.
This is available to former non-ratepayers who, by 1 April 1991, were pensioners (women aged 60 and men aged 65 or over) or disabled.
To be considered ‘disabled’ for this purpose you will normally need to be receiving a benefit such as Attendance Allowance, Mobility Allowance, Invalidity Benefit or be registered blind.
If someone else was paying rates on your behalf then you may still be counted as a ratepayer so check with your council if you are unsure whether you qualify.
This extra help will apply to people such as elderly people who live with family and friends.
For those who qualify for this extra help the reduction will be equal to the community charge minus £52.
This means that normally people in this position will receive a bill for just £52.
To receive this help you will need to make an application to the council.
Applications will be accepted as long as they are made by 1st October 1991 but your council can chose to set a later date.
However if you were receiving the extra transitional relief in 1990–91 then you should not need to apply again.
Contact the council if this does not happen.
In Scotland the community charge reduction scheme is basically the same taking into account that the community charge was introduced was year earlier.
In Wales the scheme is different so contact your council for further information.
COMMUNITY CHARGE BENEFIT
This section gives details about community charge benefit (rebate) and how to apply.
If you are not sure whether you will be entitled to benefit, remember that you have nothing to lose by applying.
More information about benefits is available in other Age Concern factsheets (see page 11).
Who Can Get Benefit?
People who are liable to pay the community charge may qualify for benefit if they have a low income and no more than £16,000 in savings.
You can claim if you own your home, you are a tenant or you live with family or friends.
The maximum benefit is 80% of the charge.
If you are entitled to a community charge reduction as explained earlier this is taken off your bill first before your benefit is worked out.
A couple will each receive a community charge bill, but their income and savings will be added together when their benefit is worked out.
Only one partner needs to apply for the rebate which will be divided equally.
How To Work Out If You Qualify For Benefit
To work out whether you can get benefit you need to follow the steps below, which are then explained.
1.
Work out the maximum benefit you could get.
2.
Add up your savings.
3.
Add up your income.
4.
Work out the amount that the Government says you need to live on,(this is called your applicable amount).
5.
Calculate the benefit you are entitled to.
Maximum And Minimum Benefit
The maximum rebate you can receive is 80% of your community charge, since everyone who is not exempt will have to pay at least 20% of the community charge.
In 1990–91 the minimum benefit someone could receive was 50p, however from April 1991 benefit will be paid even if it is less than 50p a week.
The calculations below are all based on weekly amounts so you must first work out how much your community charge is per week.
Your Savings
You cannot receive community charge benefit if you have over £16,000 savings.
Savings of between £3,000 and £16,000 will reduce your rebate.
For every £250 (or part of £250) over £3,000 you will be assumed to have an extra £1.00 per week income.
For example, if you have £4,200 savings you will be assumed to have an extra £5.00 per week income, even if you are not actually receiving any interest from your savings.
If the council thinks that you have given away or used up savings in order to qualify for, or increase the amount of your benefit they can treat you as still having those savings.
This might happen if you give money away to members of your family or if you buy expensive items in order to reduce your savings.
Savings include cash, money in bank and building society accounts, national savings certificates and accounts, premium bonds and shares.
The value of your home if you own it, does not affect your rebate.
For more information see factsheet 16.
Your Income
Most income is counted in full when your entitlement to a rebate is calculated.
This includes the state pension, any occupational or personal pension and invalidity benefit.
Some income is ignored, such as Attendance Allowance, Mobility Allowance, payments from the Social Fund, or any actual income you receive from your savings.
There are other sources of income which are partly or fully ignored.
For more information see factsheet 16.
What You Need To Live On (Your Applicable Amount)
To work out any benefit due, you need to know the weekly amount the Government says you need for basic weekly living expenses (not including rent).
This is called your ‘applicable amount’ and depends on your age and whether you are disabled or not.
If your income is higher than this amount you may still receive some help as explained below.
The main weekly applicable amounts are: Single person
aged 60–74 £53.40
aged 75–79 £55.20
aged 80+ or 60+ and disabled* £58.10
Couple
aged 60–74 £83.15
aged 75–79 £85.60
aged 80+ or 60+ and disabled* £88.45
If one of a couple is disabled or older than the other, the couple will qualify for the higher amount.
The amount may be higher in certain circumstances — for example if you are a carer entitled to invalid care allowance or if you are disabled, live on your own, get Attendance Allowance, and have no one receiving invalid care allowance for looking after you.
(See factsheet 17 for more information).
* You will be classed as disabled if you are registered blind, or receiving Mobility Allowance, Attendance Allowance, Severe Disablement Allowance or Invalidity Benefit.
Calculating Your Benefit
Once you have worked out your ‘applicable amount’, compare this with your income.
If your income is the same as or less than your applicable amount, you will receive maximum community charge benefit of 80%.
If your income is more than your ‘applicable amount’ the maximum benefit you could get is reduced by 15% (15p in every £1) of the difference between the applicable amount and the income.
For example, if a person's income exceeds their applicable amount by £10.00 per week, their maximum rebate will be reduced by £1.50p (15% of £10).
Examples
A.
Mr. &Mrs. Seymour are aged 84 and 77.
The community charge in their area is £5 per week each,(£10 per week for both of them).
They receive the basic state pension of £83.25 and an occupational pension of £45.20 per week.
They have £500 savings.
1.
Their maximum weekly benefit is 80% of £10 = £8.00 for them both (£4.00 each).
2.
They have less than £3,000 savings so this will not affect their rebate.
3.
Their income is: state pension £83.25 occupational pension £45.20 Total £128.45.
4.
The ‘applicable amount’ for a couple where one is aged 80 or more is is £88.45.
5.
Their income is higher than their applicable amount.
The difference is £40.00 (£128.45 -£88.45 = £40.00) 15% of this difference = £6.00
Community Charge benefit = £8.00 (80% of charge)— £6.00 (15% of difference) = £2.00 = £1.00 each
Mr. &Mrs. Seymour each receive a rebate of £1.00 a week so they will have to pay the remaining £4.00.
B)
Mr. Patel is 67, and lives with his son and daughter in law.
The community charge in their area is £4 per week.
Mr. Patel receives a state pension (including additional pension) of £54.40 per week, and has savings of £5,100.
1.
His maximum weekly benefit is 80% of £4.00 = £3.20.
2.
His £5,100 savings will be counted as £9.00 per week assumed income as explained in ‘Your savings’ on page 8.
3.
His income is: state pension £54.40 assumed income from savings £9.00 Total £63.40
4.
The applicable amount for a single person aged 60 to 74 is: £53.40.
5.
His income is higher than his ‘applicable amount’.
The difference is £10.00 (£63.40 -£53.40) 15% of this difference = £1.50 Community charge benefit = £3.20 -£1.50 (15% of difference) = £1.70 (80% of the charge)
Mr. Patel will receive a rebate of £1.70 per week and will have to pay the remaining £2.30 a week.
How to claim benefit
If you claim income support from your local Department of Social Security office you will also be given a form to claim community charge benefit and (for tenants) housing benefit.
Otherwise you should contact your local council and ask for a claim form for community charge benefit.
If a member of your family may be entitled to a rebate, but is unable to manage their affairs you may be able to claim on their behalf and you should contact your council about this.
Normally benefit is not backdated unless you have ‘good cause’ for a late claim.
However this year (April 1991–92) community charge benefit will be backdated to 1st April as long as you make a claim within 56 days of receiving your bill which takes into account the £140 reduction.
If your circumstances change you should let the council know.
FURTHER INFORMATION FROM AGE CONCERN
This is one of a series of free factsheets produced by Age Concern England.
The ones listed below give more detailed information about social security benefits.
No. 16
‘Income related benefits: income and capital’
No. 17
‘Housing Benefit and Community Charge Benefit’
No. 25
‘Income Support and the Social Fund’
If you would like copies of any of these or a list of the other factsheets produced send a stamped addressed envelope (9″ by 6″) to Age Concern England .
All rights reserved.
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in unaltered form by Age Concern groups with due acknowledgement to Age Concern England.
No other reproduction in any form is permitted without written permission from Age Concern England.
