NEWS IN FOCUS
Published by Age Concern England, Astral House, 1268 London Road, London SW16 4ER Tel 081 679 8000
Editor: Elspeth Rodwell October 1991 Issue 72
This month in the News in Focus series we include News in Focus, News for Chairmen, Training News and Publishing News.
We have reviewed our corporate design over the past few months and as from November we will be presenting a new design for this newsletter series.
It will be in A4 format but similar to the banner for News for Local Groups.
So, look out for the ‘New Look’ not to miss out on what is happening in Age Concern each month.
This month will see the launch of the Coldwatch campaign and details can be found in this newsletter together with the pack.
The first of the new style Age Concern Forums, proposed by the Chairman's Working Party, will be held on 30th October and is open to all Governing Body members to attend.
Several regions are holding pre-meetings open to Chief Officers and Chairs.
The ‘Services for You’ Guide — a new directory to Age Concern England services to Age Concern organisations is due for publication later this month.
A basic grants pack is also in preparation and will form part of this series.
We also hope to update the Directory and Who's Who at ACE into a similar format.
Various marketing opportunities have been set up recently by ACE including Christmas Cards and a holiday scheme.
We will continue to look for joint initiatives from which AC groups can also derive financial benefit and will keep you informed as they happen.
We would like to welcome our Ethnic Minorities Development Officer — Meena Patel — and our new Field Officer for Greater Manchester — Maggie Clay — both of whom have started with ACE this month.
Meena will be based with the Fieldwork Services Unit in Astral House.
CONTENTS
ACE Briefing Papers
ACE Training Fund
Age Concern Directory Amendments
Age Concern England Books
Age Concern Events
Age Concern Organisation Accounts
Age Concern Security Card
Basic Facts Card
Breathe Easy: British Lung Foundation Club
Coldwatch 1991
Cold Mailings
Community Care Changes
Conservative Political Centre Programme
Golden Years Appeal Update
Grandparents Day TM : media coverage
Job Advert: Age Concern Coventry
Local Authority Influenced Companies
National Survey of Age Concern services
Newscuttings Service
Parliamentary Unit News
Press Releases
Primetime Programme
We Care — With a Chair
Welfare Benefits Advice
ENCLOSURES
Press Releases
Cold Watch Pack
Cold Mailing Letter
Briefing Paper
Booklist
‘Looking Good, Feeling Good’ book
Basic Factcard
Security Card
ACSIN Questionnaire
Newscuttings subscription form and sample
Age Concern Directory — new pages
AGE Concern 
COLDWATCH 1991 
Your 1991 Coldwatch pack is enclosed.
Please note that the campaign, and the Icebreaker Award, will now be launched on 30th October , rather than 28th October.
A sample of the leaflet ‘How To Cut the Cost of Keeping Warm’, with an entry form for the Icebreaker Award, is included in the pack, as is a sample poster advertising the Icebreaker Award.
NB.
Last year's leaflet is out of date, please order copies of the new one from Distribution Services .
Your allocation of leaflets is 250 , and of Icebreaker posters is 20 .
Thanks to those who responded to our request for information last month — we would still be very interested to receive any information about your own Coldwatch activities and your use of the Coldwatch pack and leaflet.
Please contact Jane Titley, PR Promotions with details.
LOCAL AUTHORITY INFLUENCED COMPANIES under the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 —
Implications for Age Concern Groups 
There is apparently interest on this topic throughout the movement, so the legal unit has been checking the position.
A voluntary group which is a company may be regarded as ‘influenced’ by the local authority where both 20% or more of its voting members or board of directors are associated with the local authority and 50% or more of its business.
Such influenced companies may be subject to controls on borrowing, party political activity, conditions in contracts and other matters yet to be decided.
** However,Age Concern Groups should not need to worry about these provisions at all .
This is because
1)
groups which are not companies are not covered by the Act at all.
2)
various ‘exempt networks’have been proposed, including an Age Concern network.
Regulations giving the detail of both the exemptions and the controls have not yet been finalised, so the relevant parts of the Act are not effective.
When they are,(probably not before April 1992) Age Concern Groups will almost certainly come under the network exemption, provided that they are recognised as groups by Age Concern England, or by the relevant major group.
The legal unit will keep groups informed as necessary, but we expect that no action will need to be taken by existing recognised groups in any case.
COLD MAILINGS 
As winter approaches, the Fundraising department will be undertaking the usual large-scale programme of cold mailings.
The aim is to recruit new donors to support the work of the Age Concern Movement.
The letters are clearly labelled as coming from Age Concern England.
If anyone receives any enquiries or complaints, please refer these to the Fundraising department (Bob Hough or Helen North), if at all possible.
The mailing will be sent to a small segment in late October, the bulk in early November and to another segment at the end of January.
The majority will receive the ‘Operation Enterprise’ pack which has been used for a number of years and is known to the movement.
If anyone has not seen this before and would like a copy, please contact us.
We will also be testing new material, in the hope of improving response.
This will only go to the small segment mailed in October.
It is an entirely new pack, based on the Christmas theme.
The text is enclosed here for information, in case local organisations are approached about it.
If successful the new letter will be used in larger quantities next year.
The text has of course been approved by our Chairman and is enclosed for your information.
‘BASIC FACTS’ CARD 
This card produced by ACE with facts and statistics about older people in the UK was recently updated and a copy is enclosed with this newsletter.
Further copies are available on request from the Distribution Department, ACE.
COMMUNITY CARE CHANGES: IMPLICATIONS FOR AGE CONCERN ORGANISATIONS 
The changes now being introduced in the field of community care will have major implications for Age Concern's work for older people.
To assist understanding of what is involved, ACE is producing a series of booklets on Complaints, Inspection, Community Care Plans, Purchasing &Contracting and Assessment.
All will have a common question-and-answer format, designed to be ‘user friendly’, and all will reflect the emphasis upon user involvement which runs throughout the community care proposals.
Copies of the first in the series, on Complaints, should reach Age Concern organisations by early December; the next two (Community Care Plans and Contracting) should follow in the early part of 1992.
The series should ensure that Age Concern (and its service users) are well placed to participate in the new systems of community care.
ACE TRAINING FUND 
New arrangements for the Training Fund have been devised and are now in operation.
The Training Fund will be divided between the Fieldwork Department and the Training Division.
The monies allocated to the Training Division will be used to subsidise the cost to Age Concern organisations of courses, training needs analysis and other training services provided by the Age Concern Training Division.
Enclosed with Training News are details of the services available and where they can be obtained from.
An application form for Training Division courses is also included.
Also please note that any Training Fund applications submitted within the last four weeks for courses organised by the Training Division have already been forwarded to them for attention.
Contact: Maxine Fawcett Training Administrator Age Concern England Training Division PO Box B96 Hammonds Yard King Street HUDDERSFIELD HD1 1WT Tel:(0484) 510740
The Fieldwork Department will retain the responsibility for applications for grants to cover the costs of courses and training initiatives provided by the Age Concern England Management Development Unit, and all other training providers.
The existing conditions continue to apply and applications should be sent to the Grants Officer at Astral House.
Field Officers will continue to comment upon all applications so you should discuss all plants for training with them.
ACE BRIEFING PAPERS 
The latest in our series of Briefing Papers produced by Age Concern England is entitled ‘Pensioner Organisations in England.’
A complimentary copy is enclosed for your information and use.
The Age Concern England Executive Committee requested at its last meeting that a copy of the Briefing Paper on Council Tax be circulated to Chairs of Age Concern organisations and this will be included with News for Chairmen this month.
AGE CONCERN ENGLAND BOOKS 
Enclosed is a copy of the new ACE Booklist 1991–2, which lists all our consumer titles and intended for distribution to members of the public.
Please dispose of all copies of the current booklist.
Further copies of the new list are available from Gill Cronin, Publishing Department, ACE.
Also enclosed with this newsletter is your group's complimentary copy of ‘Looking Good, Feeling Good’ due for publication at the end of this month.
An order form is enclosed with Publishing News.
AGE CONCERN SECURITY CARD 
As part of our mailing activity we have produced a security card designed to help elderly people check on callers.
The front has space for the older person to put details of gas, electricity, telephone, water, local council and police station numbers.
The back highlights the importance of using caution and suggests how to use the card.
A sample is enclosed and a limited further supply is obtainable free of charge from the Distribution department, ACE.
If there is a demand for these we will look into providing further supplies which we could provide to groups at cost price.
Please contact the PR department if you are interested in purchasing large quantities.
WE CARE — WITH A CHAIR 
Margot Knowles, the originator and co-ordinator of the We Care — With a Chair campaign, has written to many chief officers this summer to enlist your support in the campaign.
Should would like to thank those who have replied, and would be very pleased to hear from anybody else interested in taking part.
Please write to her care of PR Promotions at ACE.
The stickers and leaflets which are the main tools of this campaign (to persuade managers of shops to care for their older and disabled customers by providing a chair) are distributed from PR Promotions.
Unfortunately there have been some problems and delay in getting them reprinted, and we have now decided with Margot to re-launch the campaign with a new logo, new stickers and leaflets.
We very much hope to have the new materials ready before the end of 1991 — watch this space!
PRESS RELEASES 
The following press releases are enclosed in this mailing:
Grandparent of the Year Award Presented by Derek Jameson
Grandparents Day — A day For All Older People
Age Concern Fringe Meeting At Labour Conference
Ageing Today &Tomorrow: Age Concern Reception At Conservative Party Conference
‘Looking Good, Feeling Good’— new publication
GRANDPARENTS DAY™ MEDIA COVERAGE 
The Media Unit would like to thank everyone who carried out radio and press interviews about Grandparents Day.
Although representatives of Age Concern England were interviewed by a number of local radio interviewers the stations are always far more interested in a local angle and it is very helpful when we can refer enquiries to a local group.
Overall coverage and publicity of the day was excellent, with very little adverse publicity.
Particularly strong was local radio and newspaper coverage; again thanks to all who participated.
If anyone would like further details about Grandparents Day media coverage please contact Sarah McHugh at the Media Unit.
PRIMETIME PROGRAMME 
A new series of ‘Primetime’ begins on BBC1 at 3.05pm on Wednesday October 30th 1991.
The third series will feature new slots such as‘Sexy At Sixty’, where viewers will have the chance to nominate their choice of who is sexy at sixty; the major political parties will be quizzed on their policies of older people and there will be regular films of ‘remarkable people doing remarkable things’.
If you have a story or issue you would like to see covered or if you have any enquiries about the programme please write to:
Primetime BBC Television Room 4308 White City Building 201 Wood Lane London W12 7TS
BREATHE EASY — THE BRITISH LUNG FOUNDATION'S CLUB FOR PEOPLE LIVING WITH LONG-TERM LUNG PROBLEMS
Over one million people in the UK have chronic bronchitis, emphysema, sarcoidosis and other long-term lung diseases.
The majority of these people are over 60, many are housebound or have mobility problems, and some use oxygen 24 hours a day.
Struggling for breath can be exhausting and frightening.
And people often feel isolated and depressed when normal daily activities become difficult.
The British Lung Foundation has set up the ‘Breathe Easy Club’ for people living with lung problems, their families and friends.
Breathe Easy is sponsored by DeVilbiss Health Care UK.
The club is free to join and provides a club newsletter three times a year as well as a range of information leaflets on lung disease.
Those who join are able to share experiences and keep up to date with the latest information on lung conditions, treatments and the services available.
Since its launch in April, the Breathe Easy club has received thousands of letters and calls from people with lung problems.
Already over 2,500 people have joined.
But there are many more thousands who could benefit from the club.
If you could help to publicise Breathe Easy by displaying for distribution posters and leaflets please contact: Julie Roberts, Breathe Easy, British Lung Foundation, 8 Peterborough Mews, London SE6 3BL.
Tel:(071) 371 7704.
PARLIAMENTARY UNIT NEWS 
The next stage of our election preparations will be a leaflet to be used during the election campaign itself, entitled ‘Your Vote Counts!’
The leaflet will highlight issues which can be raised with parliamentary candidates when they coming knocking on doors, and will suggest some questions to ask.
We hope to ensure that every candidate will have given some consideration to the issues which affect older people.
The leaflet can be used by Age Concern local organisations or by older people themselves.
We will be including a sample copy and an order slip with the November mailing.
Following a request from an Age Concern organisation, we will also be producing short guidelines on why older people should vote in the first place.
These will be included with the November mailing.
CONSERVATIVE POLITICAL CENTRE DISCUSSION PROGRAMME 
The Conservative Political Centre (CPC) is currently undertaking a consultation exercise on ‘The Contribution of Elderly People To Society’.
This will continue until 8 November.
The Conservative Political Centre is part of Conservative Central Office.
The briefing note which the CPC has sent to local Conservative associations gives Age Concern England as a contact point for further information.
A number of local Conservative Associations have contacted their local Age Concern organisations requesting a meeting or a speaker to attend Association meetings.
Copies of the CPC briefing are available from Jane Clarkson in the Parliamentary Unit.
Jane would also be happy to talk to any Chief Officer who is contacted by a local Conservative Association and would like further information.
AGE CONCERN ORGANISATION ACCOUNTS 
The last ACE Executive Committee meeting in September recommended circulation to Age Concern organisations of the ‘Statement of Recommended Procedure on Charity Accounting’.
These are now on order and will be circulated when available.
GOLDEN YEARS APPEAL UPDATE October 1991 
Launch 
With the election now off until sometime next year media attention continues to be absorbed by party conferences and international activity.
As many of you will have seen the Macmillan Nurse Appeal has also been launched as has the Help The Aged Home Security Appeal, and appeals by Oxfam and Guide Dogs for the Blind, so it appears we have made the right decision to delay until January.
Work on the launch and the focus of the appeal is close to completion and we are benefitting from the good offices of our advertising industry contacts.
The Appeal Video is also close to completion.
Once the right focus has been identified this will be applied to a range of Appeal materials from posters to T-Shirts.
National Appeal 
As before we continue to receive a good flow of donations from the work of the Presidents Committee and their approaches to company contacts.
Employee fundraising appears to be an increasingly popular option and whilst it involves a lot more work than a straight donation it has the ability to generate longer term grass roots support amongst employees.
Unigate and Allied Lyons have now joined Tarmac and Cadbury's in this respect.
We are looking at ways to develop this as well as ways to ensure that groups are kept informed of any activity in their area.
Regional 
Good progress has been made recently towards the establishment of chairmen and regional fundraising committees.
Both direct approaches and efforts to set up regional recruitment events are yielding positive results in four of the regions and we are still awaiting response to the other four.
Media 
We continue, through the Presidents Committee, to develop contacts with the broadcast media.
Strongest connections are with commercial stations but progress has been slowed due to the continuing uncertainty over franchises.
Once this issue has been resolved we will increase our efforts in the regions.
In the meantime we have been able to develop relationships with companies in the South East who have been very keen to schedule programmes on age issues through their social action programming units.
This augurs well for the regions.
Inevitably, these negotiations take time but we are currently contacting various radio and television companies and will keep you involved in the identification of key issues for coverage in your area.
Project Shopping Lists 
All regions have now drawn up at least a first round of projects for inclusion on the shopping lists.
These will all be presented to interested donors in a common summarised format that will provide them with the information they are looking for to make their decisions.
WELFARE BENEFITS ADVICE 
The Lisson Grove Computerised Package
A few months ago we mentioned that a computerised welfare benefits package was available from a medical school research and development team in London.
This is called the Lisson Grove package.
It is designed to help guide experienced benefits advisers through the maize of allowances and exceptions, and users are sent updates whenever the procedures and allowances change.
Until October of this year, the package was free to all who required it.
Now that the project funding has expired, the team have to charge to cover costs.
They have developed a sliding scale charge so that organisations can get together to take advantage of bulk ordering and so save them some of the administration expenses.
If a single user was to buy the package, it would cost £60.00 + VAT for the year (including updates and documentation).
To take advantage of the lower charges, Age Concern England agreed to act as an agent for the movement.
Groups order through us, we place a ‘bulk’ order and pass on the saving when we send out the disks.
Only a few groups responded to our earlier notice, and one or two sent an order directly to Lisson Grove (at the highest price).
This is a last call.
If you wish to be included in our order and have not already told us, do so in writing WITHOUT DELAY.
We estimate that the TOTAL COST to each group ordering through us will be £50.00 — a saving of £20.00.
Send a WRITTEN request please to: Nick Pizey, Age Concern England, Astral House, 1268 London Road, LONDON, SW16 4ER.
The last date for orders is 25 October 1991.
VOLUNTEER DRIVERS EXPENSES 
We are aware of changes being introduced by the Inland Revenue from 6.10.91 and our Field Officer, Hilary Bath, is looking into the implications for Age Concern volunteers.
If you run any schemes with voluntary car drivers who do more than 4000 miles a year and feel this may effect your volunteers please contact Hilary on (0604) 670092.
REQUEST FOR INFORMATION 
NATIONAL SURVEY OF AGE CONCERN SERVICES 
The Services Development Unit at ACE has as part of its primary mission the development of a centralised database concerning the services and activities provided for, and of particular interest to older people, their relatives and carers.
This is an important initiative for the movement as a whole.
It will enable ACE to give accurate and up-to-date information about a whole range of services.
People who contact ACE for information about services — older people, relatives, carers, potential volunteers, students, researchers, reporters, Age Concern groups, other organisations, and many more — will be given much more accurate and appropriate details.
Until now, we have had to rely on casual contacts with groups, annual reports and occasional documents, in order to tell us what Age Concern groups are doing.
This survey is an attempt to capture much more detailed and precise data.
The questions it asks (directly or indirectly) are based on the regular enquiries received by various personnel at ACE from the wide variety of people who contact us, as suggested above.
In building up this database we are initially asking major groups to complete a questionnaire that informs us about what services they provide.
After a period of time we will then ask local groups to provide this information.
The questionnaire form is enclosed with this edition of News In Focus, together with some notes about the form and how to complete it.
PLEASE COMPLETE THE QUESTIONNAIRE FORM(s) AND RETURN AS QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE AND NOT LATER THAN 15 NOVEMBER 1991.
NEWSCUTTINGS SERVICE 
A draft newscuttings list for the month of June is enclosed.
You will see that there are two parts to it — one in which the items have been sorted according to the geographical location (ie by county name, alphabetically); the other by service category.
Some weeks ago we sent a draft of a similar digest to a few Age Concern groups in order that we gain an appreciation of such a service and whether we should develop it further.
The majority of the responses indicated that they would like to receive these digests on a quarterly basis.
In November the first of these digests for the months July, August and September, will be available.
An order form is enclosed to be completed if you wish to subscribe to this service indicating the regularity with which you would wish to receive it.
AGE CONCERN EVENTS 
October
25th
Sally Greengross to speak at Carnegie Inquiry into Third Age
30th
AC Organisations Forum, London ‘Looking Good, Feeling Good’ book launch Coldwatch Campaign launch, London
November
1st
SG to speak at National Council of Domiciliary Care Services study day ‘A Matter of Choice’, London
7/8th
Four Nations meeting
9th
SG Guest speaker at 10th Annual Dinner of Rural Pharmacists Assoc, Stratford-upon-Avon
12th
SG at Law and Vulnerable Elderly People workshop at Notts Poly
13th
SG to speak at conference in conjunction with NAHAT on Demographic changes.
‘Health Care and the NHS — is time running out?’
Queen Elizabeth II Hall, London
AGE CONCERN DIRECTORY AMENDMENTS 
Page 17
AGE CONCERN HARINGEY Correction to new address: The Campsbourne Centre 1–3 The Campsbourne LONDON N8 7PN
Page 30
ACE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE East Midlands Delete L. Jones and A E Ball Insert: Mr A Clark, AC Leicester Tel.:(0532) 704112 Ann Smith, AC Northampton Tel.:(0327) 78060
Page 39
FUNDRAISING PROMOTIONS Insert: Special Events Fundraiser Jane Marsh CORPORATE FUNDRAISING Corporate Campaign Asst Insert: Norah Shortland
Page 41
COMMUNICATIONS DIVISION Insert: Age Well Unit Age Well Officer: John Towers Age Well Asst: Shirley Theniger
Page 44
FIELDWORK SOUTHERN GROUP Field Officer (Mid South) Insert: Jean Jeffrey (1.11.91) Address to be notified.
Page 45
FIELDWORK NORTHERN TEAM Field Officer (Greater Manchester) Margaret Clay 68 Church Street Bollington, CHESHIRE SK10 5QD Tel.:(0625) 576920
The re-distribution of Field Officer areas in the North West will be confirmed in November's News in Focus.
Page 49–53
TRAINING DIVISION Insert new pages
Age Concern Briefings
Age Concern England national Council on Ageing
Needs of Older People 
There are more than ten million pensioners in the United Kingdom today.
In 1990, 18.27% of the population of the UK (10,490,000 people), were over pensionable age.
People often refer to ‘the elderly’ as if they were a single group of people, but their needs are as varied as those of any other group in our population.
This briefing aims to provide an introduction for anyone interested in what some of the needs might be.
It is difficult to say that such a vast group of people has special needs, and indeed many older people may prefer not to be separated out from the rest of the adult population.
But ‘old age’ may bring disadvantages and less favourable social and economic circumstances.
Like most people, older people want to have enough income for their needs and to live in homes which they can manage and keep warm.
Most older people cope with the ups and downs of their daily lives.
But, as with others in society, there are times when extra help or advice is needed.
Age Concern England receives thousands of enquiries a year about many of the problems which older people face and the changes which they may have to cope with.
Many of the enquiries focus on income; housing; heating; getting about; health and community services; or leisure opportunities.
INCOME 
Many people believe that pensioners are becoming increasingly well off financially.
People retiring now are likely to have an occupational pension on top of their state pension and the average income of pensioners rose by 31% more than the rate of inflation between 1979 and 1987.
However, average figures can be misleading.
While some pensioners have sufficient money to take long holidays and enjoy a comfortable retirement, many find it difficult to manage on their weekly income.
The weekly basic state pension from April 1991 to April 1992 is £52.00 for a single person and £83.25 for a married couple.
This is equal to 20% and 32% respectively of average adult earnings.
To qualify for the full basic pension, someone would need to have paid national insurance contributions for most of their working life (usually 44 years for a man).
The state pension is paid to men aged 65 and women of 60 — Age Concern believes that the law should be changed to make pension age the same for both sexes.
In addition to the state pension, people may receive a graduated pension based on earnings between 1961 and 1975 and/or an additional state earnings related pension (SERPS) if they have worked after 1978.
In 1989, 70% of pensioners received a graduated pension, with the average amount being £1.38.
26% received an additional pension and the average amount was £6.86.
In 1987, 52% of pensioners received an occupational pension.
The average weekly amount was £44.80.
However, when these figures are broken down, it can be seen that certain groups, such as single women over 75, are less likely to have an occupational pension, and, if they do, the average amount is less.
It is only a limited number of pensioners who at present enjoy substantial occupational pensions.
Nearly 60% of pensioners receive at least 75% of their income from state benefits, particularly the basic pension.
For many older people, income is so low that they have to claim additional means-tested benefits such as income support, housing benefit and community charge (poll tax) benefit.
Income support makes a person's income up to a level set by the Government.
For example, a 70 year old person living alone would have their income made up to £53.40 a week.
Housing benefit would then pay their rent and 80% of their community charge.
Out of this £53.40, the older person must pay for their water rates, 20% of their community charge, heating, food, clothing and all other essential spending.
This clearly does not leave much money for other items such as a television licence and rental, or holidays.
It is also difficult to save for an emergency such as house repairs or other expenses like a new winter coat.
1,607,000 pensions (single people or couples) in Great Britain were receiving income support at the time of the last available figures (May 1989).
Many thousands more who do not get income support receive some help towards their rent and/or community charge.
However, it has been estimated that around one in five of pensioners entitled to these benefits do not actually claim them.
There are many reasons why people do not claim.
It may be because people are not aware that these benefits exist; they do not wish to ask for help while they can manage on what they have; or they may be too proud to claim, thinking that it is like asking for charity.
Others may be put off by the complicated forms.
Although working people are now more likely to be contributing to an occupational or personal pension, even in future years not all people will have been able to accumulate sufficient provision to support themselves in retirement — for example those people who have not worked for many years because they were unemployed or disabled or caring for relatives.
Those in low-paid work will also find providing for retirement difficult.
Age Concern believes that the basic state pension should be equal to one third average earnings for a single pension and one half for a couple.
This would ensure that most pensioners would not need to rely on means-tested benefits.
HOME 
In households in Great Britain in 1988 where the head of the household was aged 65 or over, 47.5% were owner occupiers without a mortgage and 4.5% with a mortgage, 40% were renting from a council or housing association and 8.5% were renting from private landlords.
Only a minority of people move in retirement — most stay where they have always lived.
The comfort of their home can be especially important if they spend a lot of time there.
Yet older people tend to occupy the oldest, poorest housing and are more likely to be private tenants than other groups.
The 1986 English House Condition Survey found that 62% of dwellings lacking one or more basic facilities were occupied by people aged 60 and over.
Almost 40% of unfit properties, and 35% of properties in poor repair, were occupied by people aged 60 and over.
Some older people may want to move to obtain more suitable housing or to be nearer their children or brothers or sisters.
Increased frailty may suddenly make a house or flat, lived in for years, totally unsuitable — the garden is too big to manage, upstairs bedrooms become inaccessible, or getting to the shops and other local services presents difficulties.
Apart from the lack of suitable housing, there can be problems of access to the alternatives that do exist.
It may be difficult to move areas since many local authorities and some housing associations operate strict residence restrictions.
Owner-occupiers are often given no priority on local authority waiting lists, or have no access at all.
The National Mobility Scheme and Tenants Exchange Scheme do, however, enable a small number of older people to move.
For those who wish to stay at home, or who cannot obtain a move, Age Concern believes that there is an urgent need to improve housing conditions.
Tenants need help decorating their homes when they can no longer do it themselves, and owner occupiers on low incomes need both financial and practical help to adapt, repair and improve their homes to suit their needs, or just to make them habitable.
There are around 180 repair schemes to help older people obtain grants or loans for repair and improvement work.
These are often called ‘Staying Put’ or ‘Care and Repair’schemes.
However, most older people still have no such help in their area and far more schemes are needed.
Age Concern believes that there is also a need for more provision of smaller accommodation, particularly in the public sector.
There is a widespread need, too, for part-ownership options for older people who do not have enough capital to make a full purchase.
Some older people are keen to live in sheltered accommodation where they hope for a combination of independence and security.
Sheltered housing is accommodation in a group of self-contained flats (or sometimes bungalows) with a resident warden, alarm system and some shared facilities such as a residents' lounge, guest room and laundry.
Around 5% of older people now live in sheltered housing provided by local authorities, housing associations, and, increasingly, by private developers.
KEEPING WARM 
A warm home is essential to the wellbeing of older people.
It is not known exactly how many people die from hypothermia (ie die ‘from cold’, because their inner body temperature has become dangerously low), but thousands of older people do die each winter from cold-related conditions.
The death rate in winter for those aged 60–69 is on average 12% higher than in summer; this increases to 17% for those in their seventies and 26% for those aged 80 and over.
It has been estimated that there are 8,000 ‘excess deaths’ for every degree celsius that the winter is colder than average.
Older people are more likely to experience the circumstances that cause ‘fuel poverty’— low income; poor quality housing with little or no insulation; and reliance on expensive and inefficient heating systems.
They are also likely to have greater need for heating than other groups, because they spend more time at home.
The Family Expenditure Survey 1989 found that over 36% of single pensioner households do not have central heating.
Even people with adequate heating may not use it because of the cost.
Poorer pensioners spend much more of their weekly income on fuel than other households.
In 1986, they spent 14.4% of total expenditure on fuel, compared with 7.4% for non-pensioner households.
Rises in fuel prices have been relatively stable in recent years, although this restraint may be ending, with the possible introduction of a ‘carbon tax’ on fossil fuels to combat global pollution, and the running down of the cheapest supplies of natural gas.
Age Concern believes that a national energy strategy is required to improve standards of insulation and energy conservation and to reduce the high costs of heating which deter poorer consumers from keeping themselves warm.
GETTING ABOUT 
Maximum mobility is important for people of all ages.
The mobility of older people, which affects their access to the facilities that they need to use, may decrease with age.
Slowing down means that roads have to be crossed with more care and that bad road and pavement conditions are greater hazards.
The mobility needs of older people therefore should be taken fully into account in transport and land-use planning.
The need to be able to get about is essential for daily life, and also to take advantage of increased leisure time.
The National Travel Survey 1985–86 found that, overall, older people make 50% fewer journeys per week than the population as a whole.
They also make significantly fewer social and recreational trips than the overall population.
Both public and private services, such as hospitals and shopping centres, are increasingly concentrated in large, sometimes inaccessible sites.
This has further increased the importance of mobility.
In 1989, only 7.8% of pensioners who were mainly dependent on state pensions and living alone had a car.
The combination of lack of access to a car, difficulty in using public transport because of the increased likelihood of disability, and inaccessible location of necessary services, means that older people are both more likely to have difficulty walking and yet more likely to depend on walking as means of getting about.
Access to public transport depends upon the cost and availability of services, particularly in rural areas.
There is little consistency in the travel concessions available to older people.
British Rail and some coach companies offer reduced fares to older people.
Locally, however, there are big variations in the concessions that are provided.
A transport survey in 1988 showed that only 19 local authorities gave free travel to older people, 265 made a charge or issued limited value tokens, and 30 made no concessions at all.
Community transport schemes organised by voluntary schemes can make a valuable contribution, particularly in areas where appropriate public transport is not easily available.
Mobility Allowance is paid to people who become unable to walk or virtually unable to walk before the age of 65.
At present, the allowance is only paid to people under the age of 80.
Age Concern believes that Mobility Allowance should be extended to those who become disabled after 65 and that payment should continue regardless of age.
HEALTH AND COMMUNITY SERVICES 
The idea of ‘care in the community’ has developed over the past 20 years to encourage the development of services to help older people in need of care to remain in their own homes for as long as they wish, and for as long as is practical.
‘Old age’ is not a disease in itself, and it is not helpful to think of the problems which face older people as being caused ‘by their age’.
Older people are not necessarily ill or frail — most are fit and active.
As people grow older, however, they may be more likely to develop illnesses or conditions which make it more difficult for them to cope without some help or support.
This is particularly true for some people over the age of 85.
For example, one in five people over the age of 80 are likely to develop Alzheimer's Disease, a form of senile dementia.
One in three women over the age of 80 at some time have a fracture of the hip.
It is specific conditions like these, and others such as arthritis, diabetes, blindness or deafness, which lead some older people to need extra help.
Most of the help that older people receive is provided by their family, neighbours and friends.
The idea that families do not ‘look after their own’ is not found to be true in practice.
Many ‘carers’ are husbands and wives, but there are also children who look after their parents — these are mainly women, many of whom have work or other family commitments of their own.
In recent years, attention has increasingly focussed on the needs of these carers, who may very much want to care but who may need practical help and advice as well as emotional support.
In 1985, 26% of carers who devoted over 20 hours a week to caring were over 65 themselves.
However, many older people are not married and do not have children — and a small number outlive their children.
In 1988, only 23% of women aged 75 and over were married.
For these people, some extra help may be needed.
During the course of a year, most older people will visit their general practitioner.
They may have a medical problem which the doctor can help with, but the doctor can also help them to find help at home.
He or she may recommend chiropody, or visits from a district nurse; or physiotherapy may be required to help regain mobility after an operation.
The help of an occupational therapist may be needed to recommend aids and adaptations to help the older person.
The doctor can refer the person to the social services department for a home help, or meals on wheels, or a place at a day centre.
The availability of such services for older people and their carers varies considerably in different areas.
The General Household Survey found that in one month in 1985, out of people aged 65 and over, 34% had seen their doctor; 5% had seen a nurse; 1% had seen a health visitor; 11% had seen a chiropodist (footcare): 9% had seen a home help; 2% had received meals on wheels; and 5% had been to a day centre.
Only a small proportion of older people live in institutions (residential homes, nursing homes or long-stay hospitals).
About 250,000 people live in residential homes, which are run by local authorities, charities or private companies.
These numbers have increased considerably over the past few years, partly because income support is available to help cover the fees of residential and nursing home care, and money to pay for care at home is not easily available.
At the time of writing, the Government's plans are to change this system from April 1993.
Local authority social services departments will become responsible for assessing and arranging packages of care for people who need help.
Such people will, in most cases, be assessed for their ability to pay for services at home or in residential or nursing homes.
For older people at home, voluntary organisations such as Age Concern may provide a wide range of services and activities, both to help look after older people with care needs, and to provide day centres, for example, where people may meet others with similar needs or interests.
Support groups for people with particular needs or conditions also play a vital part in helping some older people and their families to adapt to changes in their lives.
These groups include the Alzheimer's Disease Society, the Parkinson's Disease Society, the Chest, Heart and Stroke Association, and the Carers National Association.
The expectations of older people, their families, and people who work with them, may significantly affect the way that they cope with illness or disability.
People who ‘expect’ older people to have worsening health or to ‘decline’in their faculties, may not have a positive approach to various ways of coping with physical and mental changes.
This may lead some health workers, families and older people themselves to believe that there is little to be done to improve the circumstances of people with care needs.
Yet new approaches to treatment of incontinence, for example, mean that many people can learn to cope with the problem; learning about how to communicate with deaf people can reduce the isolation of someone who has withdrawn from social contact because of hearing loss; and modern drugs and careful monitoring by a general practitioner can reduce the effects of Parkinson's Disease.
LEISURE 
Retirement is a time of great change and should also be a time for development.
Either from choice or because they cannot find employment, people are retiring earlier.
In Great Britain in 1989, only 54.6% of men aged 60–64 and 54.3% of women aged 55–59 were working.
Yet despite the trend towards early retirement, there is only very limited pre-retirement education available.
Most people will welcome advice and guidance before and after retirement.
Libraries, adult education and leisure centres and other local agencies are beginning to respond to the needs of older people in the leisure field.
There is also a growth in the number of commercial organisations offering information, services and activities.
Increased leisure time is a challenge for older people and most will welcome the challenge.
Leisure activities offer opportunities for older people to meet others who share similar interests.
There may be time for hobbies or interests, either life-long ones where skills can be renewed and activities expanded, or new ones where opportunities to learn can lead to great personal satisfaction.
There may be time available for voluntary work.
Many organisations rely heavily on older volunteers.
The 1987 General Household Survey found that 22% of people aged 60–69, and 13% of those of 70 or older, were participating in voluntary work.
Age Concern believes that older people need a wide variety of educational and leisure opportunities, to suit their broad range of backgrounds and abilities.
The barriers to greater participation include finance, mobility, and sometimes lack of knowledge about what is available.
Older people are now becoming involved in an increasingly wide range of activities.
These may include activities with organisations that are concerned with the quality of their lives (eg pressure groups), intergenerational activities and those which promote individual development.
As each generation reaches retirement age, their expectations may cause them to be more active in all of these areas and make greater demands on service providers.
Age Concern believes that the participation of older people in all activities which put their skills and enthusiasms to good use should be encouraged.
The Age Resource project, which Age Concern England co-ordinates, seeks to promote such schemes.
In this briefing paper we can only illustrate some of the needs which older people may have.
Needs vary, as do expectations and demands made of available opportunities and services.
However, as for everyone in society, the most common needs are, broadly speaking, a sufficient income, good physical and mental health, suitable accommodation, and social opportunities.
Where these opportunities are not as good as possible, we have tried to show some of the many ways in which older people can be helped.
FURTHER READING:
BOND, J and COLEMAN, P (eds.).
AGEING IN SOCIETY: AN INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL GERONTOLOGY (Sage, 1990).
DARNBROUGH, A and KINRADE, D. DIRECTORY FOR OLDER PEOPLE (Woodhead-Faulkner, 1989).
FENNELL, G et al.
THE SOCIOLOGY OF OLD AGE (Open University, 1988).
GARRETT, G. OLDER PEOPLE: THEIR SUPPORT AND CARE (Macmillan, 1990).
LODGE, K. (ed.).
DIRECTORY OF SERVICES FOR ELDERLY PEOPLE IN THE UK (Longman, 1990).
NORTON, D. THE AGE OF OLD AGE (Scutari Press, 1990).
(Historical account of care provision for older people).
TINKER, A. THE ELDERLY IN MODERN SOCIETY 2nd edition.
(Longman, 1984).
You should be able to buy these books at a bookshop or borrow them from a library.
A longer reading list is available from Age Concern England's Information and Policy Department if you send in a stamped addressed envelope.
For further statistics, you may like to look in your library at recent editions of SOCIAL TRENDS, the GENERAL HOUSEHOLD SURVEY, SOCIAL SECURITY STATISTICS and the FAMILY EXPENDITURE SURVEY.
Compiled by staff of the Information and Policy Department, Age Concern England.
August 1991.
(LC/SD)
Age Concern Information Circular
OCTOBER 1991 
CONTENTS
Arts — therapy
Carers — literary contest
Christian Council on Ageing
Community care — Mental Illness Specific Grant
Consumer Complaints — MORI survey
Council tax — Audit Commission's response
Counsel and Care
Disabled people — Orange Badge scheme
Energy efficiency — House of Lords Committee report
Eurolink Age
Home equity — investment bond income schemes
Housing — effectiveness of current leasehold legislation
Housing — elderly persons' housing and the Right to Buy
Housing — Government allocations to local authorities
Housing — regulation of estate agents
Imperial War Museum — items for use in reminiscence work
Mental health — Age Concern response to Law Commission report
Methodist Homes for the Aged — change of address
NHS — access to medical records
NHS — continuing care: ACE letter
NHS — continuing care: selected reports of the Health Service Commissioner
NHS outpatient services
NHS Trusts — third wave
NHS waiting lists
Older people and HIV
Optician home visits
Pensioner organisations in England — ACE briefing
Probate — new ACE factsheet
Residential care — local authority homes
Residential care — local authority supported residents
Social security — ACE letter on upratings
Social security — changes to rules on benefit backpayment
Social security — consumer views on Attendance Allowance medical examinations
Social security — extension of carer premium, definition of remunerative work and other changes
Social security — Housing Benefit: guidance on the treatment of income
Social security — Housing Benefit reviews
Social security — Invalid Care Allowance study
Social security — Social Fund
Social security — support for low income families
Statistics about older people
Telephones — ACE letter on BT price rises
Telephones — braille bills
Telephones — BT security deposits
PERIODICAL ARTICLES
NEW PUBLICATIONS
COURSES AND CONFERENCES 
The Information Circular reports developments of interest to people who work with and for older people.
Mention in the Circular does not imply support or recommendation by Age Concern England.
The subscription rate for the Information Circular is £15.00 per annum for twelve issues.
EDITED BY LYNETTE CAWTHRA
Assistant Editor
: Audrey King.
Housing
: David Bookbinder.
Health and Personal Social Services
: Barbara Meredith and Jane Whelan.
Income Maintenance
: Sally West.
Consumer Affairs
: Robin Versteeg.
Press
: Margaret McLellan.
Parliamentary
: Jane Clarkson.
Editorial Secretary
: Nimal Dharmasena.
Education &Leisure
: Dianne Norton.
Additional contributions by
: Evelyn McEwen and Kate Callen.
Distribution
: Brian Reed.
Subscriptions
: Linda Simmons.
Printed by
: Age Concern England Print Unit.
COUNSEL AND CARE
Until further notice Counsel and Care will not be able to consider new applications for financial help with home fees, the cost of care at home or single need payments.
This is due to increased demand on funds.
This decision will be reviewed shortly and it is hoped that the grants programme will be started again if there is a sufficient improvement in finances.
The charity's free and confidential advice service on all aspects of residential and nursing home care will continue.
Further information from Alison Birch, Information and Policy Officer, Counsel and Care, Twyman House, 16 Bonny Street, London NW1 9PG.
Tel: 071–485 1566.
OLDER PEOPLE AND HIV
The Red Admiral Project, a counselling centre for people affected by HIV or AIDS, is considering setting up a group for older people.
This would include partners as well as people diagnosed as HIV positive.
Further information from John Shine, Project Director and Senior Nurse Counsellor, Red Admiral Project, 51a Philbeach Gardens, London SW5 9EB.
Tel: 071–835 1495.
Confidentiality is assured.
PENSIONER ORGANISATIONS IN ENGLAND — ACE BRIEFING
Age Concern England's briefing paper,Pensioner organisations in England , has just been revised.
It lists over 40 bodies, from public service and trade union pensioners organisations to ones run by employers, as well as national general groups.
There is a description of the aims and activities of each body, plus a contact name and address.
Pensioner organisations in England .
Available free on receipt of (9″ × 6″) sae from Donna Pearce, Services Division, Age Concern England.
METHODIST HOMES FOR THE AGED — change of address
Methodist Homes for the Aged moved in December 1990 to the following address: Epworth House, Stuart Street, Derby DE1 2EQ.
Tel:(0332) 296200.
Fax:(0332) 296925.
CHRISTIAN COUNCIL ON AGEING
The Christian Council on Ageing (CCoA) is a national voluntary and inter-denominational organisation, inaugurated in 1982, which believes that churches should give greater attention to the particular needs — and potential — of older people.
It sees the practical development of its work as taking place mainly at local level, and to this end encourages the formation of autonomous local groups which can respond to needs in their own area.
The CCoA produces a quarterly journal,Plus ; publishes occasional papers; runs courses; and promotes in-service training on ageing and pastoral care for clergy and pastoral workers.
It is also currently developing devotional material for use in residential homes.
Further information from CCoA Membership Secretary, 20 West Way, Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire, WD3 2EN.
STATISTICS ABOUT OLDER PEOPLE — ACE FACTCARD
Age Concern England has updated its factcard which gives basic statistical information about older people in the UK, covering areas such as population structure, income, housing, mobility, and health.
Older people in the United Kingdom: some basic facts .
Available free on receipt of (9″ × 6″) sae from Distribution Department, Age Concern England.
Charges for multiple copies will be given on request.
EUROLINK AGE
Eurolink Age, a European network concerned with older people and issues of ageing, has produced a new leaflet in French and English outlining its work and objectives.
Available on receipt of (9″ × 4″) sae from Eurolink Age, c/o Age Concern England.
RESIDENTIAL CARE — LOCAL AUTHORITY HOMES
Local Authority Circular LAC(91)112 was issued in August.
It contains guidance on arrangements to transfer local authority residential care homes to independent control; it also gives Directions from the Secretary of State for Health about local authorities' continuing responsibility for residents in transferred homes whose care was arranged by the local authority under Section 21(1) of the National Assistance Act 1948 (as amended by paragraph 2(1), Schedule 23 to the Local Government Act 1972) and under paragraph 2, Schedule 8 to the National Health Service Act 1977.
The Circular also contains appendices and annexes which discuss related issues, and which report the statements by the Secretary of State for Social Security on eligibility for Income Support of residents of transferred homes.
Under objectives stated in the White Paper,Caring for people , local authorities are required to take all reasonable steps to ensure a diversity of provision in their area.
However, the Circular states that they will also be expected to ‘retain the ability to act as direct service providers, if other forms of service provision are unforthcoming or unsuitable.
This is likely to be particularly important in services for people with high levels of dependency, or particularly challenging patterns of behaviour, whose care it is essential to safeguard’(paragraph 3).
‘It is the view of the Department that Section 42 of the National Health Service and Community Care Act 1990, which is to be implemented in April 1993, will require authorities to make some direct provision for residential care under Section 21 of the 1948 Act’(paragraph 5).
In moving homes to other management, local authorities ‘must have full regard, particularly at the transitional stage of ownership change, to the welfare and wishes of the residents in any homes to be transferred’(paragraph 4).
The Directions to local authorities contained in this Circular, and the Income Support Amendment Regulations (SI 1991 no 1656 — see Information Circular, August 1991) came into effect on 12 August 1991.
They are not retrospective.
An Appendix to the Circular discusses a number of related issues, and relevant legislation.
Subjects covered include: assistance for privately let housing; disposal of land; assistance to voluntary organisations under Section 65 of the Health Service and Public Health Act 1968; transfer of staff of homes; local authority capital finance; promotion of bodies to acquire homes; controls on local authority companies; compulsory competitive tendering; and restrictive trade practices.
Community care: review of residential homes provision and transfers .
Local Authority Circular LAC(91)12.
Available from Health Publications Unit, No 2 Site, Manchester Road, Heywood, Lancashire, OL10 2PZ.
RESIDENTIAL CARE — LOCAL AUTHORITY SUPPORTED RESIDENTS
Statistics have been published showing numbers of residents supported by local authorities in England in their own homes, and in private and voluntary establishments, for the year ending 31 March 1990.
The figures show that in 1990, there were 90,843 people over the age of 65 supported by local authorities in all types of accommodation (of whom 87,652 were in their own or other authorities' homes).
Equivalent figures for 1980 were 118,813 and 102,890; and for 1985, 110,169 and 101,526.
Between 1985 and 1990, however, the number of people aged over 85 supported in residential care by local authorities has declined at a slower rate than that for all people aged 65+.
The proportion of those aged 85+ has increased from 38.7% to 44.2% during this period.
Figures are given for each local authority, showing numbers and proportions of residents aged under 65, and 65+, supported in each type of accommodation.
Some local authorities only support elderly residents in their own homes, whereas two authorities have no directly provided provision.
One authority supports elderly residents solely in voluntary establishments, whereas the other uses a combination of private and voluntary provision.
Residential accommodation for elderly and for younger physically handicapped people: local authority supported residents: year ending 31 March 1990: England .
Department of Health, Personal Social Services, Local Authority Statistics RA/90/1.
97pp.
Available from DoH, Room 821, Hannibal House, Elephant and Castle, London SE1 6TE.
COMMUNITY CARE — MENTAL ILLNESS SPECIFIC GRANT
A report has been published which looks at the operation of the new Mental Illness Specific Grant in the first few months after its introduction in April this year.
The report summarises the types of schemes which have been launched under the grant, noting that many schemes so funded are not ‘new’, but are continuations or expansions of existing provision.
The report discusses the implications of the short time local authorities had to plan for use of the grant, in particular the difficulties within the time scale of consulting users, carers and others in planning for and providing new services.
The adequacy of the capital and revenue parts of the grant are discussed.
The Mental Illness Specific Grant: the early days by Gary Hogman and Jerry Westall.
40pp.
Price £5.
Available from National Schizophrenia Fellowship, 28 Castle Street, Kingston-upon-Thames, Surrey, KT1 1SS.
CARERS — LITERARY CONTEST
Crossroads Care is organising a literary contest for carers.
Entries, which must not exceed 2,000 words, can be on any subject, fact or fiction and there is a separate section for poetry.
Cash prices will be awarded to three winners in the general category and one in the poetry section.
The closing date for entries is 28 October.
Further information and entry forms available on receipt of sae from Crossroads Care Literary Contest, 5 Hillside Court, 409 Finchley Road, London NW3 6HQ.
NHS — CONTINUING CARE: SELECTED REPORTS OF THE HEALTH SERVICE COMMISSIONER
The Health Service Commissioner (the ‘Ombudsman’) has published a report of selected investigations completed between October 1990 and March 1991.
Three of these decisions relate to, among other things, health authority provision of long-term care.
In making a decision on the first of the three cases cited, the Commissioner communicated with the Chief Executive of the National Health Service Management Executive, asking him about a health authority's duty to provide continuing nursing care which is assessed as being needed, and which is not otherwise available.
In the particular case in question, the complainant's father had not been offered a bed by the health authority, although he was assessed as needing nursing care.
He entered a nursing home, and subsequently his resources ran down and his daughter was threatened with being sued by the nursing home for outstanding fees.
The Commissioner referred to the letter to Age Concern England in 1988, from Nicholas Scott (now Minister for Social Security and Disabled People) which stated, ‘In the last analysis, where a person in a home can no longer meet his fees but still requires nursing home or residential home care it will fall to the NHS or local authority as appropriate to provide that care if it is not otherwise available to the person’.
The Commissioner states in his report: ‘Because it seemed to me that the Minister's letter implied that the NHS had an absolute duty to provide care for the complainant's father once it became clear that he could no longer meet the nursing home fees, I asked the DoH for clarification of the legal position and invited their general views.’
The Chief Executive replied that the health authority had a duty to provide care without charge if:
‘in a doctor's professional judgement a patient needs NHS care…
In the case of a patient such as you describe, this can be done by providing community nursing care to the patient's own home, by providing in-patient care or by a contractual arrangement with an independent sector home (ie paid for in full by the health authority).
The level of service provided overall is a matter for individual health authorities in the light of local circumstances and priorities’.
The Chief Executive expanded on this:
‘there is no general duty on a health authority to provide inpatient medical or nursing care to every person who needs it.
Legal precedents have established that the Secretary of State's duty under Section 3 of the Act is qualified by an understanding that he should do so ‘within the resources available…’.
The three cases described by the Health Service Commissioner differed in detail, and in each the Commissioner came to slightly different conclusions.
The issues raised in his report relate directly to Age Concern's ongoing work on NHS continuing care and hospital discharge.
A discussion note will be prepared on the implications of the Health Service Commissioner's decisions, and should be available by the end of October free on receipt of (9″ × 4″) sae from Francis d'Costa, Information and Policy Department, Age Concern England.
Health Service Commissioner second report for session 1990–91: selected investigations completed October 1990 — March 1991 .
(HC 482).
119pp.
Price £12.60.
Available from HMSO.
NHS — CONTINUING CARE: ACE LETTER
Sally Greengross, Director of Age Concern England has written to William Waldegrave, Secretary of State for Health, about Age Concern's recent report,Discontinuing care (see Information Circular, July 1991).
The letter links the findings of Dis-continuing care with Age Concern's recent work on hospital discharge and other issues, and refers also to the recent decisions of the Health Service Commissioner on health authority responsibilities for provision of long-term care.
The letter reiterates questions raised earlier this year by Age Concern about ‘bottom-line’ responsibilities of health and local authorities.
Age Concern England has urged the Government to monitor more closely the provision by health authorities of continuing care, and has made a number of recommendations about how this might be done.
Continuing care for elderly people in the National Health Service .
Letter from Sally Greengross to William Waldegrave, 19 August 1991.
Available free on receipt of (9″ × 4″) sae from Francis d'Costa, Information and Policy Department, Age Concern England.
NHS — ACCESS TO MEDICAL RECORDS
From 1 November 1991, under the Access to Health Records Act 1990, individual patients will have the right of access, subject to certain exceptions, to all health information recorded about them.
The Act imposes a duty on all holders of health records, usually a hospital or GP, to disclose information on application by a patient.
The Act applies only to records produced from November onwards .
A DoH press release states that ‘access to records will be free except when they have not been added to in the previous 40 days.
When this is the case, a fee of up to £10…may be charged’.
DoH Press Release H91/403, 27 August 1991.
NHS TRUSTS — THIRD WAVE
Health Service Managers have been invited to express interest in joining the third wave of NHS Trusts, scheduled to come into operation on 1 April 1993.
The deadline for expressions of interest was 16 September 1991.
A DoH Press Release reported that a total of 113 applications to join the second wave of Trusts had been received.
This second wave will come into operation on 1 April 1992.
DoH Press Release H91/369, 5 August 1991.
NHS WAITING LISTS
The NHS Management Executive has issued to health authorities a report containing examples of good practice guidelines on Managing waiting lists for in-patients and day cases .
The report, drawn up following a study commissioned by the Department of Health in 1989, contains guidelines on how best to manage and organise waiting lists.
Recommendations cover:
keeping records accurately and scrupulously maintained;
regularly validating lists to ensure that they do not contain the names of patients no longer requiring treatment;
keeping patients fully informed;
dealing with cases where patients do not respond to offers of admission.
Managing waiting lists for in-patients and day cases by Ken Churchill, John Howard and Bob Jayes.
70pp.
Individual copies available free from Qa Business Services Ltd, Techno House, 226 High Street, Harborne, Birmingham B17 9PX.
Tel: 021–426 1050.
NHS OUTPATIENT SERVICES
The House of Commons Committee of Public Accounts has published its report on NHS outpatient services.
The report states amongst its main conclusions:
‘We are profoundly concerned about the length of some waiting times first non-urgent outpatient appointments which in some cases have increased since the National Audit Office examination’.
The Committee recommends that the NHS Management Executive should ensure that all English Regional Health Authorities set broad standards for waiting times for such appointments, and that the Management Executive should require District Health Authorities and Family Health Services Authorities to take urgent action to reduce waiting times for first appointments.
NHS outpatient services .
House of Commons Committee of Public Accounts thirty-fifth report, Session 1990–91 (HC 270).
31pp.
Price £10.30.
Available from HMSO.
OPTICIAN HOME VISITS
Virginia Bottomley, Minister for Health, has announced that some people on low incomes who also find it difficult to visit their local opticians will be able to get help from the NHS to pay for the optician to visit them at home.
From 1 November 1991, people who hold a partial help certificate (AG3) under the NHS Low Income Scheme will be able to put their patient contribution towards the cost of a private home visit by their optician.
Previously the contribution could only be spent on sight tests and buying glasses.
DoH Press Release H91/401, 22 August 1991.
DISABLED PEOPLE — ORANGE BADGE SCHEME
The Minister for Roads and Traffic, Christopher Chope, has announced changes to the Orange Badge Scheme which provides parking concessions for people for disabilities.
The main changes are:
automatic entitlement to an Orange Badge for those getting Mobility Allowance and War Pensioners' Mobility Supplement;
eligibility for people with very severe upper limb disabilities who regularly drive a vehicle;
introduction of a passport-style badge;
provision in the Road Traffic Bill to tackle abuse;
increase from two to three hours in the limit on yellow line waiting.
The Minister intends to bring forward amending regulations in the autumn.
Department of Transport Press Notice 227, 24 July 1991.
MENTAL HEALTH — AGE CONCERN RESPONSE TO LAW COMMISSION REPORT
Age Concern England has replied to the Law Commission's consultation paper,Mentally incapacitated adults and decision-making (see Information Circular, June 1991).
In this response Age Concern England welcomes the wide-ranging review of the law and the account taken of so many of the issues highlighted in 1986 in its publication The law and vulnerable elderly people .
The response recognises the need for substantial reform in this area of the law, including clarification and guidelines in regard to tests of capacity.
Age Concern would welcome an attempt to introduce a single unified system and favours an element of formality and monitoring with a local and ‘user-friendly’ face.
Age Concern considers that an individual should be able to make statements about their future life circumstances, health care and the like in addition to financial aspects, and would therefore wish to see Enduring Powers of Attorney extended to cover other areas.
The view is also expressed that personal care and welfare aspects cannot be divorced from financial and property matters, while it is recognised that proper safeguards are vital.
Age Concern wishes to see safeguards against abuse, exploitation and neglect of duty for those who can take decisions plus procedures for those who cannot do so.
Expansion of the work of the Court of Protection is favoured but if this is not thought appropriate then some form of locally accessible tribunal or court to exercise supervision, possibly supplemented by some form of guardianship, is considered desirable.
Available free on receipt of (9″ × 6″) sae from Legal Unit, Age Concern England.
IMPERIAL WAR MUSEUM — ITEMS FOR USE IN REMINISCENCE WORK
Amongst items produced by the Imperial War Museum are some suitable for use during reminiscence sessions.
They include 35mm slide packs on subjects such as the home front and women at war, photographs of wartime London and the Battle of Britain, and postcard sets on such topics as fashion in the 1940s, wartime posters and World War I cartoons.
Further information from Chris Lewis-Ashley, Business Development Officer, Imperial War Museum, Lambeth Road, London SE1 6HZ.
ARTS — THERAPY
The Sesame Institute UK offers training for people working in therapeutic situations.
It uses movement and drama to develop the clients' sense of self and to broaden their interests.
Since 1964 it has been working with people of all ages and varying needs.
The method works on the principle that the art form is a healing agent but that time must be allowed for the work to be effective.
Short, long and advanced courses are available.
Further information from Administrative Secretary, Sesame Institute UK, Christchurch, 27 Blackfriars Road, London SE1 8NY.
Tel: 071–633 9690.
ENERGY EFFICIENCY — HOUSE OF LORDS COMMITTEE REPORT
The House of Lords Select Committee on the European Communities' report,Energy and the environment , says that without ‘enormous political will and commitment’ the Government's promise to stabilise carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels ‘will never be met’.
The key recommendation is that a workforce should be recruited and trained to bring five million energy-inefficient homes to current building standards at a cost of £2–3,000 each or a total of £40–45 billion.
Such a programme could, says the report, save 10% of the total energy consumed in the UK, or £4.5 billion a year.
Energy and the environment .
House of Lords Select Committee on the European Communities thirteenth report, Session 1990–91 (HL62).
29pp.
Price £7.95.
Available from HMSO.
CONSUMER COMPLAINTS — MORI SURVEY
A National Consumer Council report of a MORI survey of 2,005 consumers in March finds that almost a third of the population is unhappy with local authority services.
Road maintenance was the biggest source of complaint, with 54% dissatisfied.
Refuse collection was seen as the best service, pleasing 85%.
Street lighting and libraries also received high ratings.
32% were dissatisfied with district councils, whilst almost a quarter were unhappy with county councils.
Council tenants were generally satisfied but were concerned about quality and speed of repairs, with 49% finding them too slow.
Two-thirds of the respondents were satisfied with local bus services, while coach services won 85% approval.
Half of those questioned were happy with British Rail's service, with 31% dissatisfied.
Local electricity, gas, telephone and post office counter services all satisfied more than 70% of their customers, with the electricity board coming out on top with an 85% approval rating.
Consumer concerns 1990: a consumer view of public and local authority services .
58pp.
Price £5.
Available from National Consumer Council, 20 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W 0DH.
TELEPHONES — ACE LETTER ON BT PRICE RISES
Sally Greengross, Director of Age Concern England, has written to British Telecom (BT) expressing concern about the likely effects on older people of the price rises announced on 1 August (see Information Circular, September 1991).
In her letter of 21 August, Ms Greengross referred to the 1989 Family Expenditure Survey which found that 25% of retired people living alone mainly dependent on the state pension do not have a telephone and linked this ‘poor level of penetration among people who need a telephone most…to the policy of increasing rental and connection charges to the maximum permitted by the retail price index (RPI) + 2% price cap, while targeting businesses and heavy residential users for international call rate reductions and volume discounts’.
The letter continues: ‘Any increase in connection and rental charges above the RPI will act as a disincentive to pensioners — since the state pension is uprated only in line with the RPI.
Inevitably, the £10 increase in the connection charge will only serve to put telephone ownership out of the reach of more elderly people.
‘A commitment to freeze connection and rental charges at current levels for state pensioners and exemption from deposit demands should be the essential prerequisites to improving penetration levels’.
Available free on receipt of (9″ × 4″) sae from Pam Zeida, Information and Policy Department, Age Concern England.
TELEPHONES — BT SECURITY DEPOSITS
The maximum security deposit that British Telecom (BT) can ask of new residential customers is now £150 compared to amounts of up to £700 previously.
In addition, customers asked for a deposit may now appeal against the decision by BT to charge a deposit.
The changes, announced on 15 August, come after an investigation into BT's deposits policy by the Office of Telecommunications (OFTEL).
OFTEL had expressed the concern that the level of the deposit had amounted to ‘an effective denial of service to some customers’.
BT is also revising its credit procedures to reflect the credit-worthiness of potential customers more accurately and will allow appeals against unfair ratings.
BT will no longer make deposit decisions based on a customer's address — the major criterion used to determine the level of deposit under the old policy.
OFTEL Press Notice 19/91, 15 August 1991.
TELEPHONES — BRAILLE BILLS
British Telecom (BT) can now produce bills in braille and in large print for the partially sighted, free of charge.
The new bills have already had successful trials in the East Midlands.
The braille bills are produced for BT by the Royal National Institute for the Blind (RNIB).
Mr John Wall, chairman of RNIB commented: ‘RNIB urges other companies to follow the example of BT and to give visually impaired people the right to privacy’.
BT News Release NR64, 12 August 1991.
PROBATE — NEW ACE FACTSHEET
A new title has been added to Age Concern England's information factsheet series.
Probate — dealing with someone's estate (Factsheet no 14) explains ways in which money may be collected, debts paid, and the balance distributed to those who are entitled to receive a share in the estate.
Other areas covered are: how to apply for a grant; who may apply for a grant; inheritance tax; settling the estate; intestacy; and other sources of information.
Fact no 11,Income Support for residential and nursing homes , has been updated.
Single copies of factsheets available free on receipt of a (9″ × 6″) sae from Distribution Department, Age Concern England.
An updated list of factsheets, and details of subscriptions to the factsheet folder service and the cost of bulk orders, are available from Audrey King, Information &Policy Department.
HOUSING — GOVERNMENT ALLOCATIONS TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES
The Government has announced plans for local housing authorities to compete against each other for part of the money they need to renovate their stock.
Michael Heseltine, Secretary of State for the Environment, stated that from April 1992, 60% rather than the current 50% of Government housing finance will be allocated on a discretionary basis following civil servants' assessment of councils' performance.
The proportion allocated according to a need formula will drop to 40%.
Amongst the performance criteria to be taken into account when deciding allocations will be councils' willingness to involve the private sector in the management and maintenance of its housing stock, and the extent of tenant participation in the management of estates.
Daily Telegraph 1 August 1991.
Guardian , 2 August 1991.
HOUSING — EFFECTIVENESS OF CURRENT LEASEHOLD LEGISLATION
The Department of the Environment has published the results of a study investigating the impact of the Landlord and Tenant Act 1987 on resolving problems faced by leaseholders in flats.
The survey, carried out by Social and Community Planning Research, interviewed leaseholders, landlords (ie freeholders), managing agents, housing advisers and solicitors.
Leaseholders were found to have experienced a variety of problems with the management of their block, including failure on the landlord's part to carry out repairs, too little or excessive refurbishment, estimates ‘rigged’ by landlords or managing agents, failure to consult leaseholders and difficulty in obtaining information about accounts and insurance.
Areas where the legislation was felt to be insufficiently strong included many rights which were considered to be beneficial in theory but ineffectual in practice.
In particular, the process of consultation, and the provision within the Act to challenge service charges, were felt to be very difficult to enforce.
The Act was often said by advisers to be powerless to deal with problems of insufficient, inadequate or poor quality management services.
Respondents identified a number of procedural deficiencies in the Act which was said to lack sufficient powers to enforce compliance.
These was felt to be an excessive use in the Act of phrases such as‘consult’, ‘challenge’, ‘take note of’ and ‘reasonable’, which were thought by many to be vague and open to interpretation.
Furthermore, landlords and managing agents were said to use a range of ‘sharp practices’ to circumvent the law or to stop or reduce the likelihood of tenants taking legal action.
Coincidently , the report was published not long after the Government's announcement of its intention to introduce commonhold legislation (see Information Circular, August 1991), which is aimed at strengthening the rights of existing leaseholders.
The Landlord and Tenant Act 1987: awareness, experience and impact .
114pp.
Price £9.
Available from HMSO.
HOUSING — REGULATION OF ESTATE AGENTS
Edward Leigh, Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Industry and Consumer Affairs, has announced the introduction of improved protection for consumers from unscrupulous estate agents.
The new regulations came into force on 29 July 1991.
Individuals can now be banned from estate agency work if they have engaged in ‘undesirable’ practices such as failing to inform the vendor about services being provided to prospective purchasers, discriminatory conduct against purchasers who are not accepting services from the agent, misrepresenting the existence or status of a prospective purchaser and failing to send written details of offers made by prospective purchasers.
Estate agents will now have to give consumers more information, with specific requirements to write to clients informing them of services they intend to offer to prospective purchasers, and to explain in writing terms such as‘sole agency’, ‘ready, willing and able’, and ‘sole selling rights’.
Department of Trade and Industry Press Notice P/91/414, 29 July 1991.
HOUSING — ELDERLY PERSONS' HOUSING AND THE RIGHT TO BUY
An internal survey by the Association of District Councils (ADC), reported in the journal Housing , has found that many local authorities are having great difficulty in exempting from the Right to Buy those properties they consider to be especially suitable for older people.
The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 gave back to the Secretary of State for the Environment the power to make determinations excluding certain elderly persons' dwellings from the Right to Buy.
The ADC found that all of the 83 district councils responding to the survey expressed concern with the way in which the Secretary of State was implementing the legislation.
According to the ADC, in the cases quoted by councils the properties by and large fulfilled all the principal criteria set down by the Government for a property suitable for occupation by older people, ie that it was let to persons over pensionable age; access was relatively easy; the accommodation was on level ground; the dwelling had no more than two bedrooms; the heating arrangements were adequate; the property was reasonably conveniently located.
Examples of reasons given by the Secretary of State for not allowing a property to be exempted include:
the accommodation was located on a busy road which generated excessive noise.
The ADC felt that this was ironic, given that a property has to be close to amenities if it is to be excluded from the Right to Buy;
the accommodation had an ‘exceptionally large garden’, was located on a ‘hazardous road’ and was a ‘good distance’from local shops.
According to the council, the garden was indeed large but much of it was paved; the property was in an urban area where the speed limit was 30mph; the shops were located 700 yards from the property;
the accommodation was located in an area where younger households lived.
In this case the council argued that the property was set within a block in which all but one of the tenants were over pensionable age.
This flat had to be sold by the council, and the ADC states that by allowing tenants to purchase such dwellings, the Government will ensure that over time younger households will buy up accommodation formerly occupied by older people;
the accommodation was let to a couple in which the man was just under 65.
The council argued that it had adopted a sex equality policy to enable both men and women over 60 to rent elderly persons' dwellings, but that they would now have to review these ‘progressive’ policies.
Selling by the back door by Roger Jarman.
Housing , August 1991.
(See Periodical Articles section).
HOME EQUITY — INVESTMENT BOND INCOME SCHEMES
Some of those caught up in investment bond income schemes (see Information Circular, June 1991) have the right to go to FIMBRA's Consumer Arbitration Scheme, where any award against the broker is legally binding.
At the end of August the first arbitration case was decided upon.
The arbitrator stated that the elderly couple in question had been sold an unsuitable product and had not been given adequate risk warnings.
However, in making his award, the arbitrator subtracted those moneys (plus interest) already received by the couple, who were awarded £9,000 against their current building society debt of £18,000.
At the time of writing it appears that the broker in this case has gone into liquidation without making the required payment, and the couple must now turn to the Investors' Compensation Scheme, which can pay compensation in cases where (a) the broker has gone into liquidation, and (b) the original investment was taken up about 28 August 1988.
A number of the 150 people who have contacted Age Concern England about the debt they face took up their scheme before this date and will not be able to obtain compensation even if they are granted an award through arbitration or private legal action.
Sally Greengross, Director of Age Concern England, has written to the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators urging that awards made by arbitrators should enable investors to escape their debt completely, ie to pay off the whole of their outstanding loan, which will otherwise ‘roll up’ on a daily basis, in some cases leading to repossession.
SOCIAL SECURITY — SUPPORT FOR LOW INCOME FAMILIES
This report looks at the effect of the introduction of Income Support and Family Credit in terms of the standard of service, the impact on low income families and the staffing needed.
Amongst its conclusions, the report welcomes the emphasis being placed by the DSS and Social Security Benefits Agency (SSAB) on ‘customer care’, and the recognition that much remains to be done to be sure that an adequate service is given.
They note that relocation and reorganisation programmes are expected to improve the service and also that it is the intention to provide training and advice to staff on dealing properly with customers.
A system of assessing ‘tolerable’ and ‘desirable’standards at offices is being used based on 13 different factors such as accuracy and time for applications to be processed.
In giving evidence, Michael Bichard, Chief Executive of the SSAB, listed the 14 offices (out of around 470) that failed to reach tolerable standards.
These are: Birmingham Ladywood, Birmingham Ravenhurst, Leicester Burleigh's Way, Ealing, Oxford, Neasden, Paddington, Aldershot, Battersea, Brixton, Lewisham, Streatham, Woking and Chelsea.
Support for low income families .
House of Commons Committee of Public Accounts twenty-sixth report, Session 1990–91.
(HC216).
21pp.
Price £7.95.
Available from HMSO.
SOCIAL SECURITY — CHANGES TO RULES ON BENEFIT BACKPAYMENT
The Government has now introduced changes to the rules for the backpayment of social security benefits (see Information Circular, May 1991).
It was originally proposed that Supplementary Benefit and National Assistance would be removed from the provisions of Regulation 72 of the Social Security (Adjudication) Regulations.
(Under Regulation 72, unlimited backdating can be made in cases of official error).
However a DSS Press Release states that the Government has accepted the recommendation of the Social Security Advisory Committee to adopt an alternative approach whereby the circumstances under which unlimited arrears can apply is more explicitly defined.
The circumstances are: where the adjudications authority failed to take into account specific evidence before it relating to a claim; where a member of staff did not submit or record relevant evidence; or where an adjudication officer overlooked and misconstrued a provision in legislation or case law.
The regulations originally were intended to come into effect on 11 September 1991, but the commencement date was brought forward to 31 August.
Nicholas Scott, Minister for Social Security and Disabled People, said that this was ‘to prevent widespread abuse of the system’.
DSS Press Release 120/91, 21 August 1991.
DSS Press Release 91/123, 30 August 1991.
SOCIAL SECURITY — AGE LETTER ON UPRATINGS
Age Concern England has written to Tony Newton, Secretary of State for Social Security, prior to his announcement on social security upratings which is expected at the end of October.
The letter asks him to consider the needs of older people dependent on state benefits.
The issues covered include: the level of the state pension, the position of older people with incomes just above Income Support level, the minimum Community Charge Benefit, Income Support for residential and nursing home fees, the assessment of capital for income-related benefits, the Social Fund budget and disability benefits.
Available free on receipt of a (9″ × 4″) sae from Cathy Bennett, Information and Policy Department.
SOCIAL SECURITY — EXTENSION OF CARER PREMIUM, DEFINITION OF REMUNERATIVE WORK AND OTHER CHANGES
Two sets of regulations have been laid before Parliament which make a number of changes to Income Support, Housing Benefit and Community Charge Benefit.
These include:
the extension of the care premium for eight weeks after the claimant ceases to be entitled to Invalid Care Allowance.
For Income Support the claimant will not be required to be available for employment during that eight-week period.
This will come into effect on 7 October 1991; that the value of the right to receive a personal pension will be disregarded as a person's capital from 7 October 1991;
that the hours of work required for a person to be treated as in ‘remunerative work’ will be reduced from not fewer than 24 to not fewer than 16 hours a week from April 1992.
This will mean that a person working 16 hours a week or more will not be able to claim income support.
The Housing Benefit and Community Charge Benefits (miscellaneous) amendment regulation 1991 .
Statutory Instrument 1991 no 1599.
10pp.
Price £2.20.
The Income Support (general) amendment no 4 regulations 1991 .
Statutory Instrument 1991 no 1559.
10pp.
Price £2.20.
Both available from HMSO.
SOCIAL SECURITY — SOCIAL FUND
On 8 August 1991, Nicholas Scott, Minister for Social Security and Disabled People, announced increases in the Social Fund budget for 1991–92.
The budget for grants has been increased by £10 million and for loans by £30 million, increasing the total amount from £228 million to £268 million.
All districts will receive increases taking into account ‘pressure of local unemployment patterns and of the importance of focusing extra help on those most in need’.
DSS Press Release 91/118, 8 August 1991.
The Social Fund annual report for 1990–91 has been published.
More than 1.3 million discretionary payments were made in the year in question.
Of the total £68.1 million allocation for community care grants, £67.4 million was spent.
For loans the total allocation was £160.4 million of which £27.8 million was awarded for crisis loans and £128.4 million for budgeting loans.
For all client groups 40% of decisions on community care grants resulted in awards.
20.4% of the grants made and 3.6% of loans were awarded to pensioners.
The report also gives details of the reasons for refusals.
For older people just over half the refusals for grants are reported to be because the basic criteria are not satisfied.
Annual report by the Secretary of State for Social Security on the Social Fund 1990–91 .
42pp.
Price £7.35.
Available from HMSO.
A report by the Social Security Research Consortium calls for the discretionary Social Fund to be abandoned because it is failing to help those who most need it.
The report starts by reviewing the pattern of spending in the first two years of the fund.
It then looks at the impact on users of social services and social work departments.
Monitoring revealed widespread financial need that the Social Fund could not meet.
Loans were felt only to provide a short-term solution while grants were inadequate or not available to those in need.
Social workers in the study had ‘grave reservations’ about the fund and a few felt it was quicker and easier to apply to charities for help.
A second report on the same research study gives further information about clients' use of the fund.
Information was obtained about 1,200 people approaching local authority departments with financial needs not met by their weekly benefits, and about 1,084 people approaching Citizens' Advice Bureaux (CABs).
The characteristics of the clients are described, as are the circumstances leading to their requests for help.
Around half of those approaching social services, and 60% of those calling at a CAB, already had debts or direct deductions from their benefits.
Often the need for help arose from a specific pressure such as damaged or lost equipment or from a life event like moving house or the birth of a child.
The report then looks at how the fund was used, the outcomes obtained and the options for those refused help.
Half the people in the study received nothing from a formal agency and the authors conclude that the Social Fund ‘is largely irrelevant to most real-life situations within which the poorest people find themselves’.
Cash limited: limited cash by the Social Security Research Consortium.
47pp.
Price £7.
Relieving poverty: use of the Social Fund by social work clients and other agencies by Gill Stewart and John Stewart.
53pp.
Price £12.
Both available from Association of Metropolitan Authorities, 35 Great Smith Street, London SW1P 3BJ.
The annual report of the Social Fund Commissioner for 1990–91 on the standards of reviews has also been published.
9,775 applications for review were received, an increase of 24% on 1989–90.
The aim to clear applications within six weeks was achieved from August to December 1990 but the backlog then rose to eight weeks as applications increased.
Twenty-five per cent of decisions reviewed were changed, 57% were referred back to the local office and in 18% of cases the original decision was confirmed.
The Commissioner considers the quality of decisions by Social Fund Inspectors to be high with around 90% reaching the ‘high quality standard required’.
Annual Report of the Social Fund Commissioner for 1990–91 on the standards of reviews by Social Fund Inspectors .
49pp.
Price £6.85.
Available from HMSO.
SOCIAL SECURITY — HOUSING BENEFIT: GUIDANCE ON THE TREATMENT OF INCOME
A recent DSS Housing Benefit/Community Charge Benefit circular has given guidance about the treatment of income which is paid at intervals other than one week.
Where income such as an occupational pension or Retirement Pension is paid into a bank or building society account on, for example, a monthly or four-weekly basis, in some cases this has been treated as capital resulting in a possible reduction of benefit.
In effect it appears that the pension has been assessed both as income and capital.
The circular states that income to cover a certain period should be ignored as capital for that period.
For example if a person who has £3,000 capital receives a monthly pension of £200 paid into their bank account, this should not be assessed as an increase in savings unless it remains unspent at the time the next payment is due.
DSS Circular HB/CCB (91) 15, 30 July 1991.
SOCIAL SECURITY — HOUSING BENEFIT REVIEWS
This study looks at the Housing Benefit review system, drawing on data collected from a number of sources.
This includes information from local authority staff and records, a postal questionnaire of councillors on Review Board panels, and fieldwork in six areas which included interviews with claimants, housing benefit officers and advice workers.
In the present system claimants can ask for an internal review and if they are still dissatisfied, take their case to Review Board of local councillors.
Among the findings were:
claimants' knowledge of their rights of review and the procedures was limited, and most authorities give little information and publicity about this;
the way reviews are carried out reflects the size and type of authority and the attitude of senior officers and councillors;
some local authorities have institutionalised unlawful practices such as having a second internal review before the case has a chance to go to a Review Board;
claimants did not generally feel Review Boards to be independent.
Although local authority staff and councillors accepted that Review Boards could not be truly independent, members feel that in practice they did act independently;
few Review Board hearings took place within the statutory six weeks;
decisions are sometimes influenced by factors such as the local authority's policies, political views of Board members and the character of the appellant.
In some cases decisions in favour of claimants went beyond the powers given in regulations.
The report considers options for changes to the system.
It argues for a one-stage system with challenges to decisions being thought of as ‘appeals’ rather than‘reviews’.
Although the authors see some advantages in a system within the local authority, they conclude that claimants would be better served by independent tribunals and feel Social Security Tribunals are well placed to take on the task.
Housing Benefit reviews .
DSS Research Report no 3 by Roy Sainsbury and Tony Eardley.
136pp.
Price £16.50.
Available from HMSO.
SOCIAL SECURITY — INVALID CARE ALLOWANCE STUDY
This report looks at the role of Invalid Care Allowance (ICA) through secondary analysis of available statistics and a survey of 60 ICA claimants.
The survey included people receiving ICA, some who had stopped receiving ICA three to twelve months previously, and others who had been refused the allowance.
Although around one million people were estimated to be caring for at least 35 hours a week, only 109,000 received ICA in December 1989.
Few carers in the study were in employment, reflecting the earnings limit which was only £12 at the time.
However low levels of employment were also found among ex-carers particularly those in their fifties and sixties.
Data from the General Household Survey and Family Expenditure Survey showed that carers and carer households have substantially lower incomes than average.
Usually ICA claimants had particularly low average household incomes.
In addition carers often reported further expenditure related to disability and caring which had resulted in using savings and cutting down on normal expenditure.
Around a third of people in the study reported being affected by the overlapping benefit rules, and this aroused strong feeling of unjustice .
Despite negative comments about the level of the allowance and overlapping benefit rules, ICA is seen as a valuable addition to the resources of carers.
The report also looks at ways in which the effectiveness and targeting of ICA could be improved — for example by increasing the level, raising the earnings rule and by improving the take-up of Attendance Allowance.
Social security and community care: the case of the Invalid Care Allowance .
DSS Research Report no 4 by Eithne McLaughlin.
67pp.
Price £9.70.
Available from HMSO.
SOCIAL SECURITY — CONSUMER VIEWS ON ATTENDANCE ALLOWANCE MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS
This is a research report after a study looking at Attendance Allowance claimants' views of the medical examination they underwent.
Data was collected using a postal questionnaire sent to just over 3,000 people in two regions — Bristol and Manchester.
This produced about 2,500 completed questionnaires.
Overall the results show high levels of satisfaction in the aspects covered by the questionnaire.
Seventy-five per cent said they had received at least 3 days notice of the visit and 94% were happy with the amount of notice.
Ninety-one per cent of people asked to demonstrate certain movements or activities were content with or indifferent about this aspect while 5% were not happy.
Of claimants who had a clinical examination, 90% were satisfied while 7% were dissatisfied — mainly due to a perceived lack of thoroughness.
The manner of the examining doctor was described as pleasant by 85% and as unpleasant by 2%.
Older people were more likely to express satisfaction.
Other factors related to satisfaction level included the outcome of the claim (where this was known) and the way examinations were carried out.
In discussing the findings the author concludes that while a number of people do have cause to complain about their medical examination, these results indicate that only a small percentage have problems.
The Attendance Allowance medical examination.
DSS Research Report no 5 by Julia Chilvers.
37pp.
Price £5.50.
Available from HMSO.
COUNCIL TAX — AUDIT COMMISSION'S RESPONSE
The Audit Commission's response to Government proposals for the council tax focuses mainly on administrative implications.
The Commission concludes that the community charge will become harder to collect and that every effort should be made to introduce the new tax in April 1993.
However, the timetable for the council tax is tight and will only be achievable if lessons are learnt from the introduction of the community charge.
The Commission believes that the abolition of the 20% minimum contribution will ease the administrative burden, but notes that the consultation paper is vague on a number of administrative details.
The paper also comments on the low proportion of expenditure to be raised through local taxation and the high ‘gearing’ on tax rises.
‘Gearing’ refers to the increase in bills caused by authorities raising spending above their Standard Spending Assessments (SSAs).
In some areas a 1% increase in spending will result in a 7 or 8% increase in bills.
The Commission concludes that the Government should consider options to enhance the local tax base and should make efforts to increase the understanding and acceptability of SSAs.
A response to the Government's consultation paper: A new tax for local government by the Audit Commission.
14pp.
Limited number of copies available from the Audit Commission Library.
Tel:(0272) 236757.
PERIODICAL ARTICLES
An evaluation of an alternative to long-stay hospital care for frail elderly patients: 1.
The model of care: 2.
Costs and effectiveness by David Challis and others.
Age and Ageing 20 , 1991, pp 236–244, 245–254.
Describes a project where case managers employed by social services, with devolved budgets, were located in a geriatric multi-disciplinary team.
Concludes that older people receiving community-based care had a higher quality of life than those in hospital, and that there was no evidence of greater stress upon carers.
Issues in physician-elderly patient interaction by Ronald Adelman, Michele G. Greene and Rita Charon.
Ageing and Society 11 , 1991, pp 127–148
Considers barriers to communication such as sensory or cognitive impairment, and reviews studies of doctor-patient relationships.
Talks to elders: social structure, attitudes and forms of address by Linda A. Wood and Ellen Bouchard Ryani.
Ageing and Society 11 , 1991, pp 167–187.
Reviews research on attitudes and talk to older people, with particular reference to the concepts of status and solidarity.
The Children Act by Katja Faber.
Choice , September 1991, pp 41–43.
Describes the rights this new legislation will afford to grandparents and other non-parents.
The dark incontinent by Maureen Cleave.
Daily Telegraph , 20 August 1991.
Short overview of the subject of incontinence.
Elderly people and energy efficiency by Ann Salvage.
Energy Action , August 1991, pp 8–9.
Includes discussion of lack of awareness amongst older people of means to help save energy.
New face of ageism by Anne Karpf.
Guardian , 3 August 1991.
Critique of what is claimed to be a new, over- positive stereotype of ageing which denies its problems.
Selling by the back door by Roger Jarman.
Housing , August 1991, pp 18–19, 21.
Claims that the legislation designed to protect council-owned elderly persons dwellings from Right to Buy is being undermined — see elsewhere in this Circular.
The law and house adaptations for people with disabilities by Derek McConnell.
Housing , August 1991, pp 26–27.
Discusses the provisions of the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 and other legislation.
A two-faced society by Sheila Green.
Nursing Times , 14 August 1991, pp 26–29.
The author disguised herself as an eighty-year old and reports considerable discrimination in shops and on public transport which disappeared when she returned to the same situations in her normal persona.
Legal lessons by Neil Bateman.
Social Work Today , 1 August 1991, pp 15–17.
Discussion of advocacy.
New age problem by Mary Ann Hildrew.
Social Work Today,22 August 1991, pp 15–17.
Report on local authority guidelines on elder abuse.
Hidden grief by Emma Small.
Social Work Today , 29 August 1991, p 21.
Report on the work of the Gay Bereavement Project.
Single copies of any of the above periodical articles can be supplied by the ACE library.
We are required by the Copyright Act to have a written request before we can supply the copy, for which the law demands that we make a charge.
Forms are available for this purpose from the Librarian.
NEW PUBLICATIONS
Supporting Black Voluntary Action
This report is written primarily for funders, such as local authorities, Government, trusts and businesses, and describes the importance of Black and Ethnic Minority Local Development Agencies in developing black voluntary action.
Drawing on the experience of the Local Development Agencies Development Fund, the report gives guidelines on grant-aid procedures, labelling, and effective ways to support management committees of Black Local Development Agencies.
Supporting black voluntary action by Audrey West.
37pp.
Price £5.
Available from National Council for Voluntary Organisations, 26 Bedford Square, London WC1B 3HU.
Researching Voluntary and Community Action
This publication is the final report of a seminar organised by the Association of Researchers in Voluntary Action and Community Involvement (ARVAC) and hosted by the Voluntary Services Unit at the Home Office in November 1990.
This report contains three keynote speeches on commissioning, carrying out and disseminating research.
Also included are summaries which discuss particular experiences from many areas of the voluntary sector.
Researching voluntary and community action: questions of policy and practice edited by Peter Lloyd, Pat Marsden and Duncan Scott.
152pp.
Price £9.75 (plus £1.25 postage and packing).
Available from ARVAC, Unit 29, Wivenhoe Business Centre, Brook Street, Wivenhoe, Essex, CO7 9DP.
Lifetimes of Commitment
Lifetimes of commitment explores the ways in which political belief is developed and sustained throughout the course of a lifetime.
Through extensive interviews, it focuses on the lives of 15 British men and women, aged between 70 and 90, who have dedicated half a century or longer to working for social change and justice.
Lifetimes of commitment:aging , politics, psychology by Molly Andrews.
229pp.
Price £30 (hardback), £10.95 (paperback).
Available from Cambridge University Press, Edinburgh Building, Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge, CB2 2RV.
Medical Advice for Residential Homes
This guide contains information about specific medical conditions which may affect older people in residential and nursing homes and other places where they may be cared for — such as hotels and guest houses.
The book briefly describes the regulations relevant to setting up and running care homes; looks at general issues to do with medical care in homes — such as relationships with general practitioners, prescribing and use of drugs, and admission to hospital; and then summarises the implications of a range of clinical conditions which may affect older people in care homes.
Medical advice for residential homes by Graham Hunter.
104pp.
Price £12.95.
Published by Longman in association with the Social Care Association.
Available from Longman Group UK Ltd, Longman House, Burnt Mill, Harlow, Essex, CM20 2YE.
Residential Care Training Video
An hour-long video from the Centre for Applied Gerontology,Training to care the video way , discusses physical handling, incontinence and communication.
It is aimed at new staff in residential care homes.
Training to care the video way .
Price £55.81 plus £2.35 postage and packing (cheques payable to University of Birmingham).
Available from Centre for Applied Gerontology, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT.
Community Care Planning
The changes in provision of community care services initiated by the white paper,Caring for people , have major implications for local authority social services departments.
A report from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation discusses many of the themes raised in the white paper, including joint working, assessment procedures, and quality control.
The discussion is illustrated by the results of interviews with ten directors of social services, and draws on illustrative material from authorities which are already tackling aspects of the community care reforms.
The study particularly notes the difficulties which may arise in defining the split between ‘health’ and ‘social’care.
Concern is also voiced about the adequacy of resources for implementation of the new policies.
From providing to enabling: local authorities and community care planning by Nirmala Rao.
78pp.
Price £5.50.
Available from Joseph Rowntree Foundation, The Homestead, 40 Water End, York, YO3 6LP.
Markets in Social Care Services
A resource pack has been produced by the School for Advanced Urban Studies at the University of Bristol.
The pack is designed to help local authorities and independent service providers address the practical and conceptual issues around markets and contracts in community care services.
The pack includes a discussion paper and seminar report on issues related to markets in social care; plus additional materials, including journal articles and specimen contracts and service agreements.
Markets in social care services resource pack by Lesley Hoyes.
Price £14.50.
Available from School for Advanced Urban Studies, University of Bristol, Rodney Lodge, Grange Road, Bristol BS8 4EA.
Support for Carers of Afro-Caribbean Elderly People
The King's Fund Centre Carers Unit has developed a project looking specifically at the needs of Afro-Caribbean carers.
The project has produced a booklet based on research in selected London boroughs and other areas of the country.
The project consulted carers themselves about their needs, and also worked with voluntary and statutory agencies dealing with Afro-Caribbean elderly people.
The booklet describes services which might be available to Afro-Caribbean carers, and includes quotations from interviews and examples of experiences of carers.
There is advice about benefits, legal help, housing, health and social services.
There is also a list of the Afro-Caribbean organisations contacted during the project's work.
The support you need: information for carers of Afro-Caribbean elderly people by Lynda Eribo.
70pp.
Single copies price £2 (plus 50p postage and packing); bulk orders of over 100 copies price £1.50 each including postage and packing.
Published by the King's Fund Centre.
Available from Dept KFP, Bailey Distribution Ltd, Learoyd Road, Mountfield Industrial Estate, New Romney, Kent, TN28 XU.
Carers' Local Groups
Carers National Association has recently produced a publication,Branching out , aimed at carers' groups, about the work of its 85 local branches which provide support and information to carers in their area, and endeavour to raise awareness of carers' needs.
It briefly outlines activities such as helplines, respite care services and consultation on community care proposals.
Branching out: the voice of carers at local level edited by Margaret Unwin.
20pp.
Available free from Carers National Association, 29 Chilworth Mews, London W2 3RG.
Informal Carers Training Pack
A booklet and set of cards form a training exercise which aims to stimulate discussion about the needs of informal carers, and to confront some assumptions on which services are based.
The package is designed to be used with staff from health, social services, housing, voluntary and private agencies.
The three stages of the exercise are: examination of personal values of the participants; evaluation of existing services in the light of values expressed; and a focus on ways of changing services so that carers can have access to ‘valued lifestyles for themselves, as well as for the people they care for’.
New lifestyles for carers: a training exercise for staff and carers based on the principle of normalisation by Hilary Brown and Thurstine Bassett.
26pp plus two overhead projector transparencies and one set of New Lifestyles cards (sufficient material for two groups of up to twenty-four people in total).
Price £29.75 plus 10% postage and packing.
Available from Pavilion Publishing (Brighton) Ltd, 42 Lansdowne Place, Hove, East Sussex, BN3 1HH.
NHS Handbook
The 1991 edition of the NHS handbook has been published by the National Association of Health Authorities and Trusts (NAHAT).
The handbook is intended to be a readable guide to the NHS for all those interested, whether health authority members, staff or members of the public.
This latest edition incorporates the changes introduced by the NHS reforms, and aims to provide a comprehensive description of the new organisation and structure of the NHS.
The guide includes information on the role of health authorities and Trusts; the new roles of members of health authorities, Family Health Services Authorities and Trusts; complaints, quality assurance and planning in the NHS; assessing the healthcare needs of local populations; Care in the Community; and services for elderly people.
The NHS handbook 1991 .
7th edition, edited by Barbara Connah and Ruth Pearson.
267pp.
Price £18.95 plus postage and packing.
Available from Macmillan Education, Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hants.
RG21 2XF.
National Targets for Health
The Faculty of Public Health Medicine has published the first report of a working party set up to investigate available indicators of the nation's health.
The report,UK levels of health , discusses the need for a common, strategic approach to improving the health of the nation.
It aims to present the available evidence on selected topics of concern, and to highlight areas for future improvement.
The report details the targets which the Working Party developed for five main areas of public health concern, and the associated needs for improved information and data sources.
One of the five fields dealt with is disability in the elderly.
UK levels of health: first report, June 1991 .
61pp.
Price £5.90.
Available from Faculty of Public Health Medicine, Royal College of Physicians, 4 St Andrew's Place, London NW1 4LB.
District Health Authorities and Assessing Local Populations' Health Needs
The Centre for Health Economics at the University of York has published a discussion paper on District Health Authority assessment of local populations' need for health services, and of priority setting.
This paper considers the usefulness of existing sources of data for health needs assessment.
Future role of the District Health Authority: assessing needs for services and setting priorities by Brian Ferguson and Steve Ryder.
58pp.
Price £5.
Available from Publications Secretary, Centre of Health Economics, University of York, York YO1 5DD.
Primary Care
The King's Fund Institute and the Nuffield Provincial Hospitals Trust have published a report called Developing primary care: opportunities for the 1990s .
The report draws on the experience of the first 14 Primary Care Development Fund Projects, which were established in 1989.
It attempts to identify key primary care questions to be resolved in Britain in the 1990s.
Topics discussed include discharge from hospital and supporting individuals with chronic conditions.
Developing primary care: opportunities for the 1990s by David Taylor.
(Research Report No 10).
48pp.
Price £5 plus 50p postage and packing.
Available from Department D/KFP, Bailey Distribution Ltd, Learoyd Road, Mountfield Industrial Estate, New Romney, Kent, TN28 8XU.
Nurses' Guide to Activities Programmes
This book is a practical guide for nurses who wish to develop activities programmes for their older clients.
The book describes ways of going about setting up a variety of programmes with different purposes.
It contains practical suggestions for different activities, and includes a set of worksheets which can be photocopied to help with planning and record keeping.
The overall aim of the book is to help with developing activities which meet the needs and wishes of individual older people.
Develop an activities programme: a practical guide for nurses working with older people by Theresa Briscoe.
83pp.
Price £9.95.
Available from Winslow Press, Telford Road, Bicester, Oxon, OX6 0TS.
Health Visiting and Elderly People
The second edition of Health visiting and elderly people: a health promotion challenge has been published.
It is primarily intended for health visitors, plus public health nurses, health promotion workers and other staff.
The book includes consideration of health promotion in later life; the relationship of World Health Organisation targets to the care of older adults; and the specific needs of ethnic minority older people and of frail, vulnerable older people.
Health visiting and elderly people: a health promotion challenge .
2nd edition, by Mary McClymont, Silvea Thomas and Michael J Denham.
334pp.
Price £16.50.
Published by Churchill Livingstone, Robert Stevenson House, 1–3 Baxter's Place, Leith Walk, Edinburgh EH1 3AF.
FHSAs and Dental Services
The Department of Health and the Welsh Office have published the report of a working group on the future role of Family Health Services Authorities (FHSAs) in relation to general dental services, and the Community Dental Service.
The report assesses the current role of FHSAs, Regional Health Authorities (RHAs) and District Health Authorities (DHAs) in the management of primary dental services, and makes various recommendations, such as that FHSAs should become the focus of responsibility for co-ordinating primary dental care, including in the long term the treatment role of the Community Dental Service.
The role of Family Health Services Authorities in primary dental care .
37pp.
Available free from FHS2A, Department of Health, Room 526, Portland Court, 160 Great Portland Street, London W1N 5DT.
Know Your Medicines
The second edition of this guide to medicines for older people and those who help care for them has been published by Age Concern England.
It explains how the body works and how it is affected by drugs.
Know your medicines is divided into three sections: section 1 gives general information on using medicines, and advice on questions to ask a doctor, nurse or pharmacist; section 2 covers the actions of medicines on the body system; section 3 is an index of medicines to enable users to check what each is for and what effects they can have.
The side-effects of medicines are also listed.
This edition additionally incorporates information for those working in residential homes.
Know your medicines .
2nd edition, by Pat Blair.
144pp.
Price £6.95.
Available from Publications Department, Age Concern England.
Disability and Health — Older People's Perceptions
A sample of older people was derived from age/sex registers of five general practices in Kent.
Two hundred of these were interviewed with the aim of finding out how they felt about their health and physical disabilities, and comparisons were made with findings from a range of objective measures included in the interviews.
Most of the older people interviewed perceived that they were in good health.
Their measure of their health status was related to what they could do, rather than to the presence of current disease or conditions.
Their views of appropriate actions for resolving problems of disability related to their own value systems; the authors of the study conclude that a standard service, which does not take individual values into account, will conflict with the view of some people it is trying to help.
They suggest that clinical psychologists, with an understanding of psychological aspects of disability, may have a role to play in the development of services for older people with disabilities, and in training other health service professionals in how to respond to problems of disability in older people.
Disability and health services: perceptions, beliefs and experiences of elderly people by C J Partridge, M Johnston and L Morris.
24pp.
Price £3.
Available from Centre for Physiotherapy Research, Kings College London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS.
Ideas for Alzheimer's Carers
The Alzheimer's Disease Society has published a book called Exchanging ideas .
It is primarily intended for carers, and draws together practical hints and ideas sent in by carers of people with Alzheimer's Disease, on subjects including household tasks, exercise, using transport, music, games and gardening.
Exchanging ideas: ideas, suggestions and helpful hints from carers of Alzheimer's Disease sufferers compiled by Ann Blofield.
56pp.
Price £3.50.
Available from Alzheimer's Disease Society, 158–160 Balham High Road, London SW12 9BN.
Meanings of Death
This book shows something of what has emerged out of religious interpretations of death, not as a history of death but as an indication of what lies at the root of the major religious traditions, lending to each its characteristic style.
It includes sections on death and the origins of religion, and religions and the origins of death, from various religious perspectives — those of Judaism, Christianity, Hinduism and Buddhism.
The conclusion suggests how religious and secular attitudes to death might be unified in a manner that could support pastoral involvement in hospice and hospital work.
The meanings of death by John Bowker.
243pp.
Price £16.95 (plus £1.85 postage and packing).
Available from Cambridge University Press, Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 2RU.
Reminiscence — West Indian Stories
Age Concern Thamesdown's Caribbean Lunch Club has produced a book of reminiscences and recipes.
The idea grew out of their weekly meetings and from the desire to inform younger West Indians about their heritage.
The book consist of 12 stories, a number of recipes and some Ring Play Rhymes.
‘We just came for five years…’: writings about young life in Jamaica and adult life in England .
46pp.
Price £3.
Available from Age Concern Thamesdown, 14 Milton Road, Swindon SN1 5JE.
Multicultural Healthcare and Rehabilitation for Older People
Demographic changes in Britain are resulting in a varied ethnic minority population.
Age Concern England and Edward Arnold have jointly produced a book which brings together various authors experienced in addressing the particular needs of elders from ethnic minorities.
Health needs and beliefs, special circumstances, cultural requirements and the history of immigration are amongst the subjects discussed with reference to individual minority groups.
There is also a section on future planning of services for multicultural elders.
Multicultural healthcare and rehabilitation of older people edited by Amanda J Squires.
206pp.
Price £9.95.
Available from Publications Department, Age Concern England.
Arts Provision for Older People
Partnerships , a quarterly newspaper highlighting issues in the fields of arts and disabilities in the West Midlands, has produced a special issue looking at arts provision for older people.
Partnerships , summer 1991.
8pp.
Limited number of copies available free from Art Link, The Garage Arts &Media Centre, 1 Hatherton Street, Walsall WS1 1YB.
Using Informal Education
This book looks at the development of informal education, its theory and practice, in a variety of settings including residential care and community.
It includes the uses of informal education for carers.
Using informal education edited by Tony Jeffs and Mark Smith.
176pp.
Price £30 hardback, £10.99 paperback.
Available from Open University Press, Celtic Court, 22 Ballmoor, Buckingham MK18 1XW.
Educational Guidance Services
The National Educational Guidance Initiative has published its comprehensive listing of educational information and advice services for adults.
All the services listed offer free guidance to anyone over the age of 19 who has been away from education for a significant period.
Information is available on all kinds of education and training opportunities, full and part-time, vocational and non-vocational.
Entries include information on facilities such as disabled access and interpretation services.
Educational guidance services for adults: UK Directory 1991–92 .
110pp.
Price £5.
Available from NIACE, Publication Sales Department, 19B DeMontfort Street, Leicester LE1 7GE.
Housing — Social Landlords and Housing Complaints Procedures
A National Consumer Council report suggests that only 31% of council and housing associations tenants were satisfied with the way in which their complaints were handled, and that one in six tenants dissatisfied with the service provided by their landlord had not made a complaint at all.
The report is based on a University of Salford research project entitled Voicing grievances and getting redress , which is a comparative study of tenants of different types of public sector landlord.
It looks at the reasons for dissatisfaction at the ways in which complaints are handled, highlighting an example of an elderly couple who had waited two years for someone to come round with a colour chart, prior to decorating the outside of their house.
The report looks at the reasons for having a complaints procedure and discusses the principles of good practice for complaints and appeals procedures.
Considerable stress is laid on the accessibility and approachability of the landlord organisations, especially given that most tenants stated a preference to speak rather than write to housing staff about their problems.
Housing complaints procedures: principles of good practice for social landlords .
60pp.
Available free from National Consumer Council, 20 Grosvenor Gardens, London SW1W 0DH.
The State and Social Welfare
This book aims to present a reappraisal of the objectives and achievements of the welfare state.
After an overview of issues, questions of principle are raised with chapters reflecting different viewpoints.
The third section covers the practical implementation of policy including a chapter on the British state pension.
The book also looks at European policies, and considers the implementation of policy changes within a political and institutional context.
The state and social welfare edited by Thomas and Dorothy Wilson.
305pp.
Price £16.50.
Available from Longman Group UK Ltd, Longman House, Burnt Mill, Harlow, Essex, CM20 2YE.
Training for Older People
Training for older people is an International Labour Office handbook written for trainers and training institutions of all kinds dealing with the training of older workers or older people in general.
This handbook emphasises the design of training programmes directed towards placing older people in the labour market.
It provides information on methods to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of training programmes for older workers, including helping older workers to find productive employment.
Training for older people: a handbook by Peter C Plett and Brenda T Lester.
200pp.
Price £11.
Available from International Labour Office, Vincent House, Vincent Square, London SW1P 2NB.
All rights reserved.
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part in unaltered form by Age Concern groups with due acknowledgement to Age Concern England.
No other reproduction in any form is permitted without written permission from Age Concern England.
AGE Concern
WORKING FOR PATIENTS
A DISCUSSION PAPER ON THE NHS REVIEW
INTRODUCTION
The Government has published its review of the National Health Service and has subsequently released 8 working papers.
The review focusses on management structures, budgets and monitoring their use, securing value for money, and directing money to those hospitals which treat most patients.
The working papers develop some of the organisational and management implications of proposals in the Review.
Age Concern has prepared a Briefing Paper which summarises the White-Paper and the working papers, and which is available from the Information and Policy Department.
This discussion paper considers points made in the Review and in the working papers.
It is difficult to relate the proposals in the review to prospects for services for elderly people, as although it is entitled ‘Working for Patients’, the Review makes little mention of health care for individuals or particular client groups.
Nor does it make any statements about the costs of administrative and managerial change, or of the considerable developments in information technology which will be required to carry out some of its proposals.
The points raised in this discussion paper are based on existing Age Concern policies.
COMMUNITY CARE
The review scarcely mentions health authority services related to community care.
It thus appears to neglect a significant part of care under the National Health Service which is of crucial importance to elderly people and their carers.
Age Concern's response to Sir Roy Griffiths' review of community care emphasised the importance of community health services in care and rehabilitation of elderly people at home.
The report just released by the Royal College of Physicians on Care of Elderly People shows just how far there is to go in improving services for mentally ill elderly people and their carers.
Age Concern believes that there is an urgent need for the Government to clarify the role of the health service in providing community care.
Community care also depends crucially on cooperation between different professional workers, and between different service providing agencies.
The White Paper and working papers do not discuss how the new organisational and managerial arrangements will improve links in development of community care.
Age Concern believes that these issues should be explicitly considered when discussions take place about responsibilities of health authorities, family practitioner committees and self-governing hospitals.
MAINTENANCE OF CORE SERVICES.
The White Paper and Working Paper 2 refer to ‘core services’ which must be maintained by the District Health Authority.
But the working papers state that the list in the White Paper is not definitive, and that DHAs will be able to decide what core services are appropriate for them to maintain.
Working Paper 2 states: ‘…even where a service is regarded as one which must be provided locally, it does not follow that every patient must have that treatment locally, it does not follow that every patient must have that treatment locally, if the patient and the GP or DHA as purchaser believe it to be better for them to be treated elsewhere’.
This appears to make the concept of locally-available core services a rather uncertain one.
As time goes on, the Government envisages more and more hospitals becoming NHS Trusts, with powers to negotiate what services they will provide.
Working Paper 1 states that many core services ‘are currently provided by hospitals likely to seek self-governing status, and the Secretary of State, in first establishing an NHS Hospital Trust, will approve the arrangements for providing core services.
Thereafter Trusts will be expected to continue to provide such services subject to review at the request of either party to the contract and, in the event of disagreement, the approval of the Secretary of State.’
The imprecision in definition of core services will make it difficult to ensure that people will have access to appropriate, locally-based services, regardless of where they live.
WAITING LISTS.
A main aim of the White Paper is to improve services, and the document refers repeatedly to the need to reduce waiting lists.
The major means for doing this is to encourage doctors and health authorities to seek care where it can mostly cheaply and efficiently be provided.
One ingredient of the proposed contracts is a stipulation about waiting times.
Waiting lists are known to be an inaccurate indicator of need, as many doctors do not refer patients if they know the wait will be long (this is as true for instance for hearing aids as it is for hip replacements).
The reasons for waiting list length are complex, and may be as related to shortages of aftercare facilities and ancillary staff as to the availability of surgical facilities.
The White Paper implies that waiting lists will be reduced by increased efficiency — often meaning more operations and shorter periods of time spent in hospital by patients.
The White Paper does not deal with the implications of this increased activity for, say, community physiotherapists, and rehabilitation facilities.
Reduction of waiting lists is not necessarily an indicator of improved ‘quality’ of care for elderly people, whose needs may go beyond a brief period of surgery and recovery.
The White Paper offers no reassurance that resources will be made available to provide appropriate support facilities.
For elderly people, there must also be concern that emphasis on reducing waiting times by contracting for services non-locally will impose serious hardship on those unable or unwilling to travel.
It is also difficult to see how such a policy will ensure continuity of specialist care, for instance through outpatients, after a distantly-resident elderly person has been discharged from hospital.
There will also be considerable implications for hospital transport services, as well as financial implications for the individuals involved, which are not acknowledged by the White Paper.
CONVALESCENT CARE.
Age Concern believes that convalescent facilities must be available to all elderly patients who require them.
The White Paper gives no indication of how such care will be planned and budgeted for, and there is an urgent need to consider this aspect of health service provision.
Age Concern believes that the Department of Health should develop a policy and issue national guidelines on the provision of such care.
Each health authority should assess the need for this care and make provision accordingly, perhaps requiring the opening of convalescent homes or contractual arrangements with private and voluntary sector providers.
If budget allocations for regions and districts are made on the basis of continuing existing spending patterns, this need will be overlooked, as most authorities do not have adequate provision for post-hospital care for elderly people.
HOSPITAL DISCHARGE.
Hospital discharge procedures for elderly people often include a trial visit home and multidisciplinary conferences with community workers and hospital workers.
They must take fully into account the availability of and needs of informal carers, and the adequacy and accessibility of the home environment.
It is often recommended that such work is coordinated by a ‘key worker’.
How can this be done if the patient is 50 miles or so from home?
How can health and local authorities develop cooperative procedures if care is spread across many health districts?
The need for proper assessment and cooperation at the time of hospital discharge is an essential preventive measure to ensure that elderly people are not discharged to inappropriate care settings.
A booklet on hospital discharge procedures is now imminent from the Department of Health.
It is imperative that provision for suitable hospital discharge procedures is an integral part of contracts negotiated by district health authorities and GP budget holders, and is also included in requirements to be made of self-governing hospitals.
IMPROVEMENT OF CHOICE.
General practitioners .
Age Concern welcomes the Government's proposals to remove administrative barriers to people who wish to change general practitioners.
Age Concern also believes that general practitioners should be able to provide information about their services, and that there should be increased health promotion and preventive screening provided by general practices.
7.1.2 The proposals of the White Paper and Working Papers 3 and 8 do not appear to offer disincentives to general practices to work with elderly people, and to welcome them to their lists.
However, there is nothing in the White Paper to act as a positive incentive for such work, and Age Concern is worried by the proposal in Working Paper 3 that once allocations are made to practices holding their own budgets, they will be free to shift expenditure within the year between the individual components of the budget.
The granting of a higher capitation allowance for elderly people will not necessarily mean that this money is spent on services for elderly people.
7.1.3 Age Concern receives reports from elderly people of difficulties in registering with general practitioners.
Age Concern would like to see this issue specifically addressed, so that elderly people will be assured of being able to register with a practice near their home.
7.1.4 There may be special problems in areas with large numbers of residential and nursing homes.
Residents of these homes should have the same rights to choice of general practitioner and to NHS care as any other person.
Choice of place of treatment .
A major change for the National Health Service will be the introduction of contracts for the provision of hospital services.
GPs with their own budgets and District Health Authorities will be expected to place either block contracts for a defined range of services, or cost and volume contracts, for a certain number of cases, for most services.
Allowance will be made for contingencies, but these are to be the exception rather than the rule.
7.2.1 At present, general practitioners are free to refer to the hospital and consultant of their choice, although in practice this freedom has been restricted in recent years, partly because of health authorities' reluctance to accept cross-boundary patients.
The new contracts may improve accounting procedures, but do not appear to offer more choice to either doctors or consumers, who will be bound by contractual arrangements, which the government recommends should be on a three-year rolling basis.
7.2.2 The White Paper comments that some GPs may have to be ‘re-educated’ in their referral practices, if the DHA arranged a contract with a hospital other than that which the GP has used by choice.
Even within a GP practice, it is likely that doctors will wish to use different hospitals and consultants, but may now be constrained from doing so.
7.2.3 For elderly people, the proposals appear to overlook the difficulties which they may face if, for instance, the contract for cataracts or hip replacements is placed at a hospital some distance away.
This may well be more economic in ‘costs’ to the GP budget or DHA involved, but could well create considerable extra cost for the person and his or her family, both in terms of travelling to and from hospital and in loss of support from friends and relatives who may not be able to visit.
USE OF CONTRACTS.
DHAs and GP budget holders will be free to negotiate contracts with private or NHS providers.
Age Concern expressed reservations in its response to the Griffiths Review of Community Care that contracts for certain services might prove unprofitable to private sector providers after a few years, by which time District Health Authorities would have divested themselves of the resources to provide similar services.
What protection will there be for potentially unprofitable, yet necessary services to continue to be available under the NHS?
Certain types of contracts will be negotiated on a ‘cost per case’ basis.
If the cost exceeds the budget, the hospital will pay, but conversely, if the actual cost is cheaper, the hospital profits.
There is evidence from America that costing by ‘Diagnosis Related Group’ may provide a disincentive to offering support and aftercare to elderly people, as average figures for ‘cost per case’may not take into account the higher costs incurred by some elderly people who need longer recovery times or more aftercare.
TAX RELIEF ON PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE.
Private health insurance may help some elderly people to gain access to hospital treatment more quickly than would otherwise be the case, although there seems little justification for a National Health Service which cannot cater for the needs of people in acute pain or discomfort as and when necessary.
The limitations of private haalth insurance mean that many elderly people may not be comprehensively covered under its terms.
Even where relatives or friends purchase a policy on behalf of an elderly person, the insurance companies reserve the right, for instance, to re-negotiate a policy held through a company when the person reaches retirement age.
At this time, certain pre-existing conditions may be excluded, as will happen if a new policy is negotiated for an older person.
Private health insurance provides for acute treatment and related care.
Many policies specifically exclude rehabilitative or convalescent care.
Such policies also pay only for hospital-related treatment, and many exclude treatment which does not include invasive techniques.
Thus, therapy for a particular ailment may specifically be excluded from a policy, whilst surgery would be covered.
The choice of treatment may be skewed towards that which can be paid for, rather than that which may be in the best interests of or preferred by the patient.
DRUGS BUDGETS.
Age Concern believes that GPs should be encouraged to make rational, efficient, effective and economic use of resources in relation to prescribing, and that the use of drugs for elderly people should be closely monitored.
Cash-limited budgets may not necessarily mean that prescribing practice improves.
Working Paper 4 states that new patients on a list or changed clinical conditions of existing patients will bring corresponding adjustments to the drugs budget, but it is not clear whether these adjustments will have to be made within the overall regional allocation to the FPC, or whether new funds can be made available during a year in recognition of patient migration.
This point will be particularly important in areas which have net inflow of elderly patients, and in areas where there is extensive new building of residential or nursing homes.
LONG-STAY CARE OF ELDERLY PEOPLE
There is no clear indication about expectations for long-stay care.
In its response to the Griffiths review of community care, Age Concern commented on the continued need for long-stay facilities to be available for some elderly people.
Age Concern receives frequent reports about health authorities closing long-stay beds, without ensuring that appropriate alternative provision is available.
Age Concern believes that this issue needs urgent consideration in the context of the NHS Review, and that the statutory responsibilities of health authorities in this respect should be clarified.
Hospital Trusts appear to have the freedom to choose what they provide, and as they increase in number and DHA provision declines, it is possible that long-stay care will become a residual service, separated from profit-making, ‘attractive’ services.
GERIATRIC AND PSYCHOGERIATRIC SERVICES
Similar concern might be expressed for the continuation or development of geriatric and psychogeriatric services.
Recent developments have seen the growth of such services closely linked with other locally-based care, although in many areas services are not adequate to need.
The devolution of responsibility to hospitals, DHAs and FPCs may prevent the broadly-based planning which is necessary to ensure that such services continue to grow and prosper.
STAFF.
If Hospital Trusts attract more staff and can determine their own pay rates, there must be concern about shortfall in other services.
In addition, the Government states that expansion of the private sector will benefit the community by reducing demand on the NHS.
If the private sector expands, staff already in short supply may be further stretched.
More ‘attractive’ services will be likely to attract trained, qualified staff, as the White Paper suggests.
This may mean that planning for care of so-called ‘priority’ groups will become increasingly difficult as provision and accountability are fragmented, unless there is a commitment to increase resources specifically for these groups.
There is an urgent need for the NHS Review to focus on the development of training at all levels to ensure that properly qualified, trained staff are available to provide not only hospital care, but support and rehabilitative care for increased numbers of patients.
MANAGEMENT OF HEALTH AUTHORITIES
The reduction in size of District Health Authorities, and their restructuring on managerial lines, may reduce the involvement of local bodies such as voluntary agencies in health service provision.
Community Health Councils will remain as the link between authorities and the consumer, and the working papers mention consulting consumers in audit of services.
Age Concern believes that the work of community health councils should be expanded and better funded, and that membership of voluntary organisations on CHCs should be increased, with the interests of elderly people represented.
These developments should be an integral part of change in the NHS.
CONCLUSION
Age Concern welcomes the attention drawn by the White Paper to the necessity for an efficient and effective National Health Service freely accessible to all.
However, it is not entirely clear how the White Paper's proposals will affect services for individual patients, particularly those with complex or chronic conditions.
A considerable injection of resources will be required to provide the managerial and technological expertise called for in the White Paper.
Age Concern would like to see similar attention paid to the extra resources required to ensure provision of adequate staff and facilities to enable high quality health care to be provided for elderly people, both at home and in hospital.
BM/2.3.89 
