THE AGE OF THE TRAIN
THREE-quarters of the track including half the through lines, the semaphore signals, the last vestiges of freight facilities and the last of the men who used proudly to work for the old railway company have gone, yet the long-distance service is faster, more frequent and above all better used than at any time in railway history, and the number of passengers passing through probably at an all time high.
The comment happens to be about the writer's home station, but much of it might equally apply to numerous others.
One thing is for certain.
The eighties was not the decade in which people abandoned railways, not anyway in Britain.
Virtually everywhere from the Highlands to London's suburbs, main line and local, passenger trains were steadily busier, the total number carried exceeding that of pre-Beeching days when the system was much larger.
Indeed, the vast majority of lines remaining carried record numbers of passengers for peacetime on ordinary working days, the great holiday and excursion tidal waves of traffic of course being history.
The statement is truer of lines than individual stations since average journey lengths are much longer, and continued to increase during the eighties.
And while BR gave up carrying more categories of goods and our daily newspapers overnight, the overall freight picture again improved to a greater extent than most people forecast.
If newspaper trains ceased to cause nocturnal activity over much of the system, the number of travelling Post Offices actually increased.
The eighties was a decade of paradoxes, great and small.
As the government squeezed the finances ever harder, British Rail became more efficient, and while even InterCity began by pruning 10 per cent of its mileage, at the end most of the sectors were more concerned about how to handle their increasing traffic.
As financial results improved and there was increasing reason to believe the slogan on everyone's lips at the decade's start, ‘This is the age of the train', morale deteriorated further.
While much was achieved in improving safety standards, towards the decade's end there was a series of accidents that perhaps shocked the public more than anything since Harrow &Wealdstone in the very early days of nationalisation.
And while the eighties saw fewer closures and many more reopenings than anyone could reasonably have hoped, it ended with thunder clouds of uncertainty about management style, privatisation, how to solve overcrowding, the Channel Tunnel.
Then there was the paradox that the erstwhile Premier Line out of Euston steadily slipped down the speed and performance league as the High Speed Trains out of King's Cross, St Pancras and Paddington proved (for all the    undoubted technical troubles) that they could sustain their role as InterCity's workaday tool.
Catering that had been so under threat in the later seventies suddenly attracted new importance; indeed, the single Manchester Pullman that looked almost certain to be a casualty of further standardisation in the eighties was joined by a bevy of Pullmans if only Pullman service on HSTs and Mark 3s.
But it became clear that the passenger was not automatically right: only when he paid up!
Thus while first-class patronage was encouraged, and more businessmen complained bitterly that they had to go first-class in order to enjoy their British breakfast, more humble individuals who merely wanted to enjoy the view from the train were not so generously treated.
It was perhaps the miracle of the decade that BR was allowed to invest so heavily in a new generation of multiple units.
Enthusiasts were less surprised that much of that investment went sour through design faults and technical failures, and grieved that so little thought was given to the simple, old fashioned matter of looking out, the deprivation of forward and backward view that had encouraged so much travel on the first generation of multiple units allegedly being due to the unions not liking the public seeing their men at work.
Not that the working man's point of view has been generally well heard.
Management-union relations were of course at the heart of many developments.
Once private enterprise was excluded in passionate principle.
If Travellers Fare did not wish to provide a service on a train, there should be none; if they closed a refreshment room, it had to lie idle for a year before a private operator was allowed to take over.
The eighties brought commercial pragmatism, with for example many refreshment-trolley services run by private firms that employees of any organisation as large as BR would almost certainly have found impractical.
In all kinds of ways many bad old practices disappeared, while at last the central administrative overhead came under control.
Generally, and one says it graciously, sectorisation has worked, the eighties seeing it flowering and bringing both improvements and cost savings.
InterCity has its own clear identity, though the greatest achievements have perhaps been with Network SouthEast, where the tide has really turned, and in Provincial with its own increasing network of imaginative expresses often resulting from stringing several services together.
Suddenly many stations have through services to many more destinations.
The need to emphasise that God would not maintain the system indefinitely   no matter what restrictive practices and losses could hardly have been greater.
Yet this writer's abiding impression of the eighties is that management along with the government did not know when to stop.
Yes, there has been more consistency, a following of the capitalist competitive dream, which has paid good dividends.
But the pressure for productivity has sometimes been remorseless.
Generally the culture has lacked colour and personality, certainly fun and pride on the job.
Improving ratios might have satisfied officials at headquarters but have only produced harder work and often more complaints from the public for the railwayman out on the system.
To a large extent this is perhaps inevitably a criticism of the chairman from September 1983, Robert Reid.
But then another paradox is that he was successful in persuading the government to allow increased investment, especially in rolling stock.
Sir Peter Parker who he replaced will always be remembered as an enthusiastic chairman with a human touch.
The ‘This is the age of the train' slogan thoroughly suited him.
He will not however go down in financial history as a great achiever, and it has to be said (as recorded later in these pages) that even under his leadership labour relations were far from perfect.
That Sir Robert Reid has been more effective is one of the headlines of the eighties.
He proved himself to be thoroughly professional as a railwayman and ruthless as a manager.
But the pips squeaked and still the remorseless pressure was on…and on, in a cool, impersonal style.
Any joyous note there was came very occasionally from the sector managers, but they were seen as too much under corporate control to exercise real individuality of style.
The Clapham accident of December 1988, the first for half a century in Britain due to the failure of the signalling, appalled the public in demonstrating how poor morale and discipline were in a vital part of the service at a key point.
The industrial labour dispute of early summer 1989 had virtually the whole public ridiculing BR's labour relations and calling for a change of style.
It was a sad but inevitable outcome of not maintaining a proper balance between productivity and personality.
Those who used large parts of the system regularly saw from daily observation that many staff enjoyed ever less satisfaction.
Everyone has his own story of being ignored when requesting information and of being left uncertain what to do when things have gone wrong, such as connections lost.
Management decidedly cannot rely on having its spokesmen on the spot in the shape of co-operative station staff.
Which is not to say that much fine work is not achieved.
Driving standards on the whole improved during the eighties and certainly average speeds increased, in some cases dramatically.
The overnight maintenance work on HSTs in particular deserves the award of many medals.
Though frequently finding some initial reason to put you, the customer, down, restaurant-car stewards then generally look after you well, and enjoying good food at speed remains one of the joys of railway travel.
It is just that it could have been more meaningful and less unpleasant had it felt a touch more like a pilgrimage than a harsh, faceless drive for productivity.
Even the lack of a catchy slogan  at the decade's end (‘The age of the train's’ replacement ‘We're getting there’only lasted briefly) contributes to this lack of social purpose.
What will the enthusiast's main memories be of the eighties?
Not, to be sure, the rapid changes in administrative structure, much though the results of sectorisation have been felt actually on the track.
One memory will certainly be of the running of far more steam trains than seemed possible in the seventies, not all of them successful…
The GWR 150 specials, the Blackmore Vales, Cambrian Coasts, Cumbrian Mountains and regulars for some seasons into Scarborough and over the West Highland.
While ordinary motive power generally became more standardised, and again as told later in these pages the difference between locomotive-hauled and multiple-unit stock less marked, the variety still remains impressive and just as many notebooks and cameras record the passage of trains at the end as at the beginning of the eighties.
Liveries have of course proliferated; not since pre-1923 days have so many different colour schemes been seen, the only snag being that often    two or more liveries are included in the same train where for example the PTE's dedicated stock gets diverted.
Most of the semaphores of 1980 have gone, virtually no large gantries remaining in total use.
But multiple-aspect signalling has not been (nor ever will be) universal.
Radio signalling made more than a debut, helping toward the achievement of one of the decade's miracles, not only the survival but with greater expectation of long life of much of the Highland lines and many more.
Indeed, no major routes closed in the eighties.
Survivals include the Cambrian Coast, radio signalled in 1988, where Barmouth viaduct was after all repaired, the Central Wales where a decision was taken to rebuild the bridge which collapsed while a train was crossing it in high flood, and the Settle &Carlisle where the government perhaps surprisingly refused closure.
Another memory must surely be of the improvement to many stations, some of the London termini becoming shopping meccas, albeit the reduction in size of key ones such as Crewe and the general simplification of track layouts.
The wartime hunt for German spies was not carried out with greater enthusiasm than the campaign to eliminate diamond crossings!
Station improvements, and most of the reopenings, of course resulted from that new pragmatic combination of railway, municipal and industrial sponsorship.
Repainting schemes in particular have been more imaginative, and for example one can proudly take overseas visitors interested in railways around our great cathedrals of the steam age now doing record business in a whole variety of ways…more trains and passengers, more refreshment facilities, many more shopping complexes.
What you cannot turn to with such pride is BR's printed timetable, which changed format several times during the eighties and ended as a poor thing, well below continental standards.
Throughout the eighties some officials displayed a tendency to overdo the latest idea, often itself not particularly sound.
Thus we were told that, since the timetable was only used ‘by enthusiasts and the travel trade’, it was pointless to indicate which trains had meal service, and while vital to show which services were operated by Sprinters nobody was interested in which were HSTs.
Then long-term account holders were told that when they reached sixty they could no longer use BR's own rail warrants but had to switch to credit cards on which a commission is payable.
BR's own credit card experiment at the decade's start failed through sheer ineptitude.
It is not hard to portray the BR of the eighties Monty Python style with such stupidities as creating a semi-autonomous Cornish Railways with great enthusiasm one year only to abandon them the next as though that were equally great progress.
Happily achievements do take place alongside such nonsense.
And the abiding memory of the eighties must be of the greatest achievement, the enormous increase in passenger traffic.
BR indeed continued to change the country's very geography, Gatwick suddenly becoming much closer to London with its Express every fifteen minutes, places like Peterborough and Swindon now almost as accessible as suburbs only fifteen miles away from Piccadilly.
In the decade's final timetable, there is an express     every 15 minutes (plus one extra) between Swindon and Paddington over a two-and-a-half-hour period in the morning rush.
Though the policy has been to raise the price of long-distance season tickets well above the average, for thousands there is still standing room only on the high-speed commute.
Despite the cost, many measure their distance from London in time, and corridors along the main lines north and west out of the capital compete very favourably with traditional Metroland and Southern electrified territory.
Not that Network SouthEast's more everyday trains are short of patronage.
The experts got their calculations wrong and the daily influx into London is vastly greater at the end than the start of the eighties, or any prediction forecast.
Nor is it only an influx into London.
More commuters actually go from London to Reading to work than vice versa.
Swindon and Peterborough probably have more commuters going to them than their total everyday passenger traffic in the steam age.
Many of the northern and Scottish cities also experience sharply enhanced rush hours.
It is again the age of going to work by train.
The buoyant economy at the end of the eighties of course helped in part by increasing road congestion, forcing many to take the train who would have preferred to drive.
This happens even in rural areas, such as between Exmouth and Exeter.
Bus competition has been hampered not only by road congestion but upheaval in the road-passenger industry.
Who a decade ago would have thought it possible that the chief benefactor of bus deregulation would be BR?
That it is results from the chaotic competition and lack of liaison, hundreds of thousands of would-be passengers turning to the railway with its reliable timetable for want of proper information about road services.
That planning has been poor is more the fault of the economy than BR, the high interest rates at the end of 1989 being seen as likely to repeat the recession of 1981 out of which we climbed so painfully.
Yet every year one questions the quality of many BR decisions.
In 1989 we were assured there was no, absolutely no, case for electrifying between Edinburgh and Glasgow:.
a short trunk route between two major conurbations, electrification already in place at either end, that would seem to be the absolute classic next stage.
But there never has been anything as sensible as a planned, rolling programme of electrification.
The achievement of the eighties was that at least something was achieved out of the stops and goes.
And on the whole achieved at less cost than earlier schemes — with less disruption, too, especially on the East Coast main line.
So Bedford, Leeds, Norwich, Hastings, Weymouth, are added to the places from which you travel electric to London, perhaps not so bad a score for the decade.
Even Paddington's platform ends were given supports for overhead electrification when the Lawn was extended to accommodate a shopping centre, leaving Marylebone as the only other London terminus yet to see electric activity.
But even Marylebone sees a revitalised Chiltern service.
(Amazing how quickly BR abandoned its scheme to close Marylebone when a scheme popped up to turn it into a kind of Victoria Coach Station for northern routes!)
Personal memories: of the larger knots of passengers at reopened Templecombe than at most other stations between Exeter and Salisbury, a route far busier and better served than ten years ago; but of travelling from Southampton to Newton Abbot via Westbury having dinner with a traveller from London to Crewkerne, the common Westbury-Taunton section way north of both passengers' direct line being attractive because of the faster pace of HSTs.
Of the scandalous way in which the railway hotels were sold off and nine-tenths have deteriorated rapidly since.
Of the way that stations such as Inverness still remarkably reflect their region's economy.
Of the Persil soap powder offers that enabled two passengers to travel for the fare of one and of the utter complexity of offers and restrictions that taxed the ingenuity of many booking clerks and ticket collectors until the Blue (cheaper) and White (all Fridays and occasional other days) Savers were standardised as BR's on the whole highly successful marketing tool against coach competition.
Of ancient multiple units that keep going well beyond their years, the bane of commuters but still offering forward views of stunning coastal and moorland scenery.
Of quadrupled track being reduced to double, double to single, more blade ends and diamonds taken out, yet a highly complex system still remaining on a truly national scale.
Of more money-making opportunities taken such as Settle &Carlisle regular trains hauled specially by freight locomotives and carrying more passengers than any service train probably since the war.
Of splendidly smooth rides out of King's Cross and Paddington, sporty ones out of St Pancras on the HSTs, and nerve-racking, noisy ones with hunting bogies on ordinary stock out of Euston.
Of days one was proud to be associated with railways and too many (still only a sprinkling but so devastatingly disrupting) that one swore always to take the car next time.
This book aims to serve several purposes.
It should provide quick reference on the important events and trends, including motive power, traffic, vehicles and safety, in the eighties.
With its pictures as well as text contributed by a team of experts, it portrays a colourful decade in which hope was more rekindled than lost.
Our wish is that it will enable you better to recall and enjoy your own memories.
Might we indeed suggest adding a personal looseleaf comment and photograph or two within your copy for posterity?
Finally, a few guideline wishes for the 1990s: undoubtedly, first, that the Channel Tunnel will be completed without undue delay and that a new highspeed route will rapidly follow through Kent; that under their new chairman, Robert Reid the second, from Shell, due to take his post in October 1990, BR will somehow regain a touch of personality, warmth, humanity, without losing their commercial edge; that the policy of providing new and cheaperto-operate stock for secondary routes rather than handing down yesterday's worn-out express trains pays real dividends and prevents too much discussion of ‘bustitution’; and that defensive theory will give way to common-sense pragmatism over matters such as the quality of the printed timetable and what really benefits the customer.
Class 50 No 50021 Rodney leaves Newton Abbot with the 10.30 Liverpool to Penzance train on 10 March 1987 a few weeks before the removal of the semaphore signals .
The 1980s certainly proved to be the age of the train, but not the age of the ATP as this entrance barrier at Glasgow Central proclaims in May 1983.
manchester Pullman.
No 86244 The Royal British Legion (named 2 November 1981) gets away from Crewe with the 16.00 ex-Euston on 16 August 1988.
The rake is mostly Mk 3A and Mk B (1985 Pullman) coaches.
The last BR all-Pullman service, to Manchester, ceased in May 1985 .
Class 31 No 31486 and Class 47 No 47010 receive attention in the maintenance area of Crewe diesel depot on 22 June 1988.
A pair Class 20s, Nos 20007 and 20053, struggle up the steep incline out of Coalbrookdale with an empty MGR train on 3 November 1988.
This freight line has seen a limited summer weekend passenger service to a temporary station at Coalbrookdale for the Ironbridge museum since 1987.
No 37669 in early Railfreight grey livery brings down English China Clays train, consisting newly introduced CDA wagons, into Lostwithiel station on 6 May 1988.
No 87028 Lord President displays its InterCity livery while pausing at Carlisle with a southbound express on 27 August 1988.
It does not carry the swallow symbol .
Jubilee Class 4-6-0 No 5593 Kolhapur rounds the curve into Rotherham Masborough station (now closed) en route from Birmingham to Carnforth via York and Leeds on 4 June 1988 .
The crisp Highland air makes for a fine display of steam form K1 No 2005 as it hauls the Royal Scotsman along the shore of Loch Eil on the Fort William to Mallaig line in 1988.
Two veteran campaigners.
Class 40 No 40160 tows a failed Class 108 dmu near Seascale on a Barrow-Carlisle service.
Both designs first appeared in 1958 and by the 1980s were showing signs of their age.
This photograph is dated 15 June 1984; No 40160 was withdrawn in November.
The skyline of Brignorth, dominated by Telford's church tower, provides a backdrop for this view of Class 59 No 59001 Yeoman endeavour leaving the Severn Valley terminus with a train for Kidderminster on the SVR diesel weekend in May 1988 .
Parcels sector locomotive No 47567 Red Star leaves Carlisle with the Hadrian special on the return journey to King's Cross via Settle &Carlisle line in June 1988 .
Class 37 hauled freight.
Nos 37077 British Steel Shelton and 37077 double head the 10.50 Lackenby to Corby ‘steel–liner’ train through Cargo Fleet, Middlesborough on 9 December 1986 .
With the advent of 110 mph running on the West Coast main line a number of Mk1 gangwayed full brakes (fitted with B4 bogies) coded NHA were specially maintained for high–speed running.
No 92032 is seen here at Crewe in September 1989.
Alexander/Barclay Class 143 dmu No 143022 in Tyne and Wear PTE colours crosses the High Level bridge into Gateshead with 14.17 Newcastle to Middlesborough service on 7 November 1986.
The original narrow–bodied Leyland/BREL Class 141 dmu consisting of Nos 55503/55523 approaches Heaton Lodge Junction, Mirfield with the 14.51 Leeds to Marsden train on 21 March 1987.
The set sports West Yorkshire PTE colours.
No 47475 rounds the curve at King Edward Bridge Junction, Gateshead with the 10.23 Newcastle–Liverpool Lime Street on 16 May 1989.
Both locomotive and train are in the Provincial colours.
The leading vehicles are Mk1 gangwayed full brake carried on B4 bogies and Mk2 corridor first.
Note the metro bridge in the background.
Class 58 locomotives Nos 58016, 58017 and 58018 under construction inside Doncaster works on 28 July 1984.
They were taken into BR stock in October 1984 and allocated to Toton depot.
Railfreight–liveried Class 37 (coal sub–sector) No 37235 The Coal Merchants Association of Scotland on display at the Coalville depot open day on 11 June 1989 .
Eastfield–allocated Class 37 No 37413 hauls the 09.50 Glasgow Queen St to Fort William near Achallader, approaching Rannoch Moor, on 29 September 1987.
The rake is made up of early Mk2 and Mk1 coaches.
The leading vehicle is open brake second (micro buffet) No 9107, one of eight converted from Mk2 BSOs during the 1980s.
One of the troublesome Leyland Class 155 units No 155302 forms a Provincial sprinter service, the 15.10 Portsmouth–Cardiff in July 1988.
It is climbing the 1 in 75 of Ashley Hill Bank Bristol.
There is still much evidence of the traditional railway environment in this view of Whitby on 18 August 1982.
A Metro–Cammel three–car dmu passes Bog Hill signalbox with semaphore signalling, redundant engine and goods sheds and a rather derelict goods yard (with full coal staiths) on leaving the station with the 09.15 Whitby–Darlington service.
ATP–P unit No 370001 passes Lambrigg, north of Oxenhlome, at 10.52 on 19 March 1986 with a high–speed test run between Crewe and Carlisle.
Scrapping of the ATP vehicles commenced a few moths later.
Peppercorn K1 2–6–0 No 2005 reflects the morning sun as it passes Bolden Colliery with the Northumbrian Mountain Pullman on 22 January 1983.
This was a North Eastern Locomotive Preservation Group special (No 2005's owners) which included the SLOA Pullman rake.
No 86427 The Industrial Society and 87005 City of London head south through the Lune Gorge with a Mossend–severn Tunnel Junction steel coil train on 23 February 1988 .
Birmingham RCCo Class 104 unit No 104325, in the bizarre ScotRail ‘mexican bean’ livery, works the 09.55 Oban to Crianlarich service near Tyndrum Lower on 29 September 1987.
Note the high–intensity headlamp fitted above the destination blind.
A version of LNER apple green was applied to No 47522 Doncaster Enterprise during the 1980s.
The locomotive is seen here passing Stonebridge, Durham working the 17.29 Heaton carriage sidings in York, with the stock for the York–Cardiff postal service, on 10 June 1988 .
GWR–liveried Class 50 No 50007 Sir Edward Elgar originally Hercules,renamed in 1984) hauls a NSE service, near Pirbright Junction on 29 July 1989 .
The 14.20 King's Cross–Leeds InterCity service pulls away from Wakefield Westgate on 25 April 1989 powered by a Class 91 No 91008 Note the difference in profile between the Mk3 stock and the Mk4–styled locomotive.
MEMORIES OF THE 1950s
CHAIRMAN Sir Peter Parker was doing his best, but the 1980s opened with much the same worries of insecurity over government policy, lack of investment, and working practices which harked back to the old company rules.
Although the new chairman Sir Robert Reid had his critics, at the decade's end it was clear that his method of management had produced decisive changes.
A slimmer BR was more confident, easier to contemplate privatising.
There was no longer just the promise of investment, but much of it in place.
With a backbone of electrification, traffic rising and the prospect of the Channel Tunnel, everyone was talking about the railways.
1980.
At first, it seemed that the antics of marine woodworms in the piling of Barmouth's 115 span timber bridge would rob the Cambrian coast of its railway, but BR surprisingly stumped up £500,000 for short-term repairs, and, after a seven-month closure, the line was back in business.
With hyper-inflation, BR started the year with a 20 per cent fares increase — despite furious cost-cutting.
There were increasing signs that the APT project was foundering.
The introduction of the three pre-production prototypes into timetabled service was abandoned through ‘a series of technical difficulties’.
The submission for sixty production trains was postponed.
The Liverpool &Manchester's 150th was celebrated by a cavalcade of locomotives through Rainhill.
Unlike the Shildon display five years earlier, diesels and electrics were included.
BR spoke of replacing Ribblehead viaduct on the Settle &Carlisle with a new earth embankment to reduce maintenance, not that the stone structure was unsafe.
1981.
‘Deltic Mania’ is not too strong a label to attach to the last full year of the locomotive flagships of the East Coast main line.
Undoubtedly the most powerful, distinctive and popular design of the post-steam era, their final months on secondary workings produced a near manic enthusiasm that happily led to six of the fleet of twenty-two heading for preservation.
It may have been heralded as a strategic disaster, but the Manchester-Sheffield electric route via Woodhead tunnel slipped quietly into oblivion, due ceremony avoided because of the public puzzlement that a heavy freight route should be axed only twenty-five years after complete modernisation.
The post-mortems continue but the truth is, that from an operational     viewpoint, the 1,500V DC Woodhead line is not missed for a moment.
Unprintable were many of the comments when BR and Leyland collaborated on the ultimate basic DMU, slotting standard bus bodies on to coach frames, with an underbody power unit, and a flimsy cab bolted to each end.
The seats were simple and uncomfortable, the noise intolerable, but it still shaped a disastrous decade of short-term economy stock building that is now being regretted.
1982.
Millions of pounds of investment meant nothing to Bedford-St Pancras commuters when their long-awaited new electric trains were laid up in the sidings while BR and the rail unions hammered each other over one-man operation.
It eventually saved a year's tyre wear on the Class 317s, and meant a lot more string and sticky tape on the clapped-out DMUs.
Britain as a whole experienced thirty-four days of strikes.
We all feared the worst when BR withdrew InterCity services from the Settle &Carlisle.
Stories started about the unsafe state of Ribblehead viaduct; it was another case of closure by stealth.
Enter the campaigners.
The visit of Pope john Paul II over the Spring Bank Holiday returned people to the railways in numbers not seen since the 1950s.
It was an enthusiast's delight as BR moved rolling stock from anywhere and everywhere to convey Papal followers to masses at Canterbury, York, Wembley, Coventry, Liverpool, Manchester, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Cardiff.
That meant twelve-car DMU rakes, Sunday services on non-Sunday routes, and hosts of locomotive-hauled ‘Popex’ specials.
As for his Holiness himself, he was treated to a ride from Gatwick to Victoria behind the Royal loco No 73142 Broadlands bearing the special Southern headcode ‘HF’(Holy Father).
The adoption of the name ScotRail by the Scottish Region was far more than a marketing ploy.
The new regular-interval timetable was actually understandable by the common man, the first real hint of a corporate localised identity, and the first appearance centre stage of one of the new breed of managers — Chris Green.
How unfortunate that the long-awaited arrival of comfortable Mark 3 sleeping coaches coincided with a downturn in the national economy.
While the sleepers ran empty, BR picked up the hard-pressed nocturnal travellers with a new cheapo ‘Nightrider’ using spare first-class coaches with fluorescent lighting encased in soothing blue plastic.
It became possible to change trains again at the Welsh mining town of Blaenau Ffestiniog.
Yes, the twenty-eight-year effort by the Ffestiniog to restore service to Blaenau Ffestiniog was finally completed, resulting in increased business on BR's branch from Llandudno junction.
1983.
They were building new railways across the world, but there had to be an extraordinary reason to do that in Britain.
The fourteen miles of new mainline railway on the East Coast main line, bypassing Selby at a cost of £60 million, resulted from threat of coalmining subsidence under the old formation.
Class 50 locomotive No 50041 Bulwark arrived at Paddington station on its side!
It had been derailed at the entrance while approaching at speed with a sleeper service from Penzance; miraculously there were no serious injuries, though much of the track at the station throat had to be relaid.
As for Bulwark , it was severely damaged, but valuable enough to be repaired.
Orange and black meant Strathclyde, green and cream West Yorkshire, and yellow and white Tyne &Wear, as passenger transport executives provided public proof of their interest (and subsidy) of metropolitan rail services by applying their own liveries.
As for the West Midlands, it tried various shades of red, white, blue, and grey and even canary yellow but by the end of 1989 had still not got its formula worked out.
The latest economy drive saw the introduction of a prototype bus-bodied hauled passenger coach, quickly labelled by journalists as ‘third class’.
They were right.
The arrival of the new Saturday l25mph High Speed Train service from Swansea to Pembroke provided a new job for the train guard: he had to leap out at Manorbier to open the crossing gates, wait for the train to clear the crossing, close them, and then walk seven coach lengths to give the driver the right away.
LNER Flying Scotsman became an old age pensioner in style with a series of runs over its old haunts from Peterborough to York.
A pity so many kamikaze spectators chose to stand in the four foot to watch it go by.
Whoever would have thought it possible?
Almost unnoticed, the standard vacuum-braked 12 ton freight van was eliminated.
They were so ubiquitous that grounded bodies used as sheds will be a feature of Britain's farmyards for decades to come.
Surprise, surprise, the year ended with the news that BR wanted to close the Settle &Carlisle.
The rescue machine was poised for action, and the rest is now history.
1984.
Great news — the £306million electrification of the East Coast main line was approved in one go on 27 July.
A veritable flood of new locomotive liveries, some smart, some misguided and dreadful, transformed the station scene from a mass of standard blue and grey to an unpredictable display of sector showing off.
The Western Region won the prizes however for its nostalgic application of lined GWR steam-style livery to five of its top-link diesels.
Sir Edward Elgar would have been delighted.
The economist's Utopian dream of a rural railway without station staff, platelayers and expensive signalling staff came closer with the introduction of radio signalling over the Far North lines from Inverness.
As BR discovered however, it is essential to give maintenance crews skiing lessons to cope with mountaintop transmitters in winter, and placate Irish TV viewers whose screens suddenly go fuzzy.
The Gatwick Express was a good demonstration of how to create maximum impact with the minimum of resources, simply recycled Mark 2 coaches, a  rebuilt driving trailer from a scrap EMU, a spare Class 73 locomotive converted to push-pull, and a generous helping of new paint.
The result: millions of contented passengers, and millions of extra revenue.
The late 1980s will be remembered by many for their tragic rail accidents, but 1984 witnessed the deliberate, spectacular and entertaining wrecking of Class 46 locomotive No 46009 to demonstrate that a nuclear flask is safe even when struck by a 100mph train.
The £1.5million show by the CEGB also showed that Mark 1 coaches are remarkably resilient to high-speed impacts.
However, eighteen people were killed during the year.
Major incidents were at Wembley, Eccles, and Morpeth.
Goodbye LNER, farewell soon LMS.
The replacement of the old electric units on the Manchester-Hadfield line and most of the Merseyrail network with second-hand BR sliding-door stock removed the last pre-Nationalisation trains.
Happily, preservation groups stepped in to save some stock for posterity.
Despite all the publicity to the contrary, Trans-Pennine services moved through another Cinderella phase when the travelling public quickly rumbled that the ‘new’ locomotive-hauled services used rolling stock actually older than the DMUs they replaced.
However, at least a new generation of diesel unit was in mind.
Steam made its last gasps in BR passenger trains, through the heating pipes of passenger coaches.
There were enough new coaches at last to enable the steam-heat-only Mark 1 vehicles to be discarded, and enact new operating practices with newly converted electric heat, air-braked diesel locomotives.
Even in Scotland.
Gresley ‘A4’ Pacifics were big news.
No 4468 Mallard was being prepared for a return to steam for the 50th anniversary of its 1938 world record speed run.
There were also delightful rumours that the heavy overhaul on sister No 4498 Sir Nigel Gresley would see it repainted green as No 60007.
Wishful thinking.
It reappeared in garter blue.
1985.
The 150th anniversary of the founding of the Great Western was marked in style but to many it will be remembered for the decision to shut down Swindon Works.
Union leader Arthur Scargill's dream of political victory crumbled with the collapse of the national miners' strike.
But it decimated BR's annual accounts, and ultimately the freight network, as the government then approved a severe pruning of unremunerative collieries.
British Coal had its own Dr Beeching.
The West Country's joy at being able to combine quality and tradition in the shape of brand-new brown-and-cream-liveried bus-based four-wheeled diesel units for local branch services turned to dismay when their long wheelbase caused ear-splitting squeals on tight curves, and they had to be rapidly replaced by the thirty-year-old DMUs they had supplanted, fortunately not yet scrapped.
Publicity machine called the units ‘Skippers’.
Locals called them ‘Slippers’.
It was goodbye to the Class 40s.
Fashions change, and the hulk-like diesels that were so unwelcome as steam replacements twenty-five years previously were given a massive send-off from the new generation of enthusiasts.
On cold january nights, they camped out on platforms for the last experiences of ‘Whistler’ haulage, as the class of two hundred was whittled down to just one, the rebuilt, pioneer D200.
What was described as ‘modular catering’ or ‘Cuisine 2000’was introduced on expresses out of Euston.
The exotic land-prepared dishes did not go down well.
Technology has not managed to replace the smell, taste and enjoyment of freshly cooked food, but some traditional cooking on board did survive.
1986.
The thirty-year rundown of the Great Central Railway terminus at Marylebone (a prelude to seemingly inevitable total closure), was dramatically slammed into reverse gear on 30 April when BR admitted blossoming Chiltern Line services could not possibly be handled by Paddington, Euston, or even handed over to London Transport.
The answer, was, investment and modernisation.
A new film Give My Regards to Broad Street achieved extra significance on 30 September when all pleas for a reprieve were rejected, and the North London mausoleum closed its doors to passengers and awaited total demolition.
It was bad enough having to admit that the APT train project was a dead  duck, but BR shot itself in the foot and provided the cynical national media with a field day by selling off some of the vehicles to a Sheffield scrapyard.
The strict rules of disposing of redundant vehicles by public tender was forgotten for the rest of the stock, dismantled very much behind closed doors at Derby Works.
By 1989 InterCity director Dr john Prideaux was reassuring his customers that it was wrong to regard the APT as a failure; it had indeed been a great design success!
Unfavourable train reliability statistics are easily shrugged off until one of your passengers is a VIP.
Eyebrows were raised in high places in February when Class 47 locomotive No 47457 failed near Cambridge in charge of the Royal Train.
Inside was none other than the Queen.
After his success in rebuilding morale in Scotland, Chris Green went for the big one — London.
As the director of the new Network SouthEast, he never shied away from the divisive problems of pre-Grouping company loyalty and post-war neglect, and as a media lover soon became a star.
To the commuter, the new red, white and blue house colours just had to represent a commitment to strive for quality.
It did sound convincing.
The Yanks are coming!
The entire railway freight business took note of Foster Yeoman's radical decision to buy its own fleet of locomotives off the shelf from an American builder.
An unshackled BR first seemed keen to follow suit, but then took the safer political option of ordering its own replacement machines from a domestic supplier.
1987.
It was a big year for electrification.
Norwich and Cambridge were reached; Clydeside's £85million showpiece was completed with the linking up of Largs and Ardrossan Harbour to the main Ayrshire system; and the Great Northern system was extended north to Huntingdon and Peterborough.
Royston-Cambridge and Watford-St Albans fill-in schemes were also approved.
But the government proved it was no pushover when ruling that the Far North line from Inverness to Wick/Thurso could not share the new road bridge over the Dornoch Firth.
All pleas fell on deaf ears.
BR meanwhile accelerated its elimination of older locomotive types redundant through a reduction of trip workings and arrival of new designs.
The net effect was the end of the Class 25 and 27, and a remarkable stack of over thirty asbestos-contaminated loco bodies piled high in Vic Berry's Leicester scrapyard as he struggled to cope with the influx.
The great ‘volte face’ came on 7 October when BR's chairman Sir Robert Reid officially opened (or re-opened?)
Birmingham's Snow Hill station closed after the LMR took over the old Great Western's lines.
The tape was broken at the tunnel's exit by Isambard Kingdom Brunel in green with GWR-type plates and name.
Old Moor Street station closed and all trains previously running there now use the new station.
Work started almost immediately in planning the replacement of tracks northwards to Smethwick and the line to Stourbridge, Worcester and Hereford.
A new Act was prepared for placing before Parliament the inter-urban tramway link to Wolverhampton.
The organisers of the Basingstoke Open Day succeeded in assembling the largest collection of motive power types ever seen on BR.
Present were (deep breath), Classes 20,24,25,27, 31,33, 35,40,44,45,46,47,50, 52, 55,56, 58, 73, 77 and 86.
The year ended in tragedy.
The night of 16 October saw some of the worst storms across the south of England for hundreds of years.
Trees fell across tracks like dominoes, and barely had services begun to return three days later when a Central Wales line bridge collapsed while being traversed by a DMU.
Four lost their lives.
The end of year deadline for eradication of asbestos-contaminated rolling stock, agreed many years ago between BR and the unions, was quietly and mutually forgotten when it was realised it was a long way from being achieved unless services were decimated.
Not BR, to be sure, but the showpiece Docklands Railway opened with its driverless trains.
1988.
The year started with five regions, and ended with six.
The newcomer was Anglia, to manage the area east of the GN main line which has the fastestgrowing population in the UK.
It was there for all to see — BR became less of a corporate business, more an overlord for the sectors who were expected to find their own feet with or without government subsidy.
Privatisation was now daily conversation.
London's rail system was transformed with the opening of the Snow Hill tunnel, providing a through link from Bedford to Brighton via King's Cross Midland and Blackfriars.
What a difference!
January saw the inauguration of the Bournemouth-Weymouth electrification and three months later £16.4million was promised to convert the Portsmouth-Southampton route.
Enter the Class 91, the new breed of East Coast main-line electric locomotive.
The prototype series of ten appeared from BREL Crewe Works with a collection of teething troubles, but were in regular passenger traffic to   Leeds by the end of the year.
What happened to their Electra branding, by the way?
Exit the Class 45 ‘Peaks’, the last surviving locomotives built at Derby Works — and Flying Scotsman to Australia for a year's tour.
The Sprinter DMU, the saviour of Provincial, proved both a success and a disaster.
The success was the Metro-Cammell Class 156, which helped create a new-style hourly Anglia-North West service and transform domestic Scottish and Welsh services.
The headache was the Leyland Class 155, withdrawn after only a few months with doors that jammed open.
The bustle at London termini to load newspaper trains ended in july when BR terminated the contracts remaining after the previous year's transfer to road by News International and the Mirror Group.
For sale: a complete railway.
BR issued a prospectus for the handing over of the entire Settle &Carlisle line to private enterprise.
But there were no serious takers.
Cornwall became more of a standardised railway with the demise of the timber-bodied clay hood.
In their place arrived 125 new BR-sponsored airbraked CDA hoppers.
Steam really did come to an end on BR when the state-owned narrow-gauge Vale of Rheidol was sold, not without tears, to the Brecon Mountain Railway.
In the deal were three steam locomotives and a new interloper in the shape of a diesel.
The biggest, and most tragic, news event of the year was the 12 December Clapham disaster, discussed in detail elsewhere.
1989.
With Clapham still in people's minds, public confidence in BR was shattered again on 4 March when two Saturday afternoon trains collided at Purley, killing six and injuring over eighty more.
This time, it was driver error.
Still with disaster, swirling flood waters felled the River Ness bridge at Inverness, isolating the Kyle and Far North lines.
Good news was the decision to build a replacement.
Not in my back yard!
While the citizens of Amiens demonstrated in favour of the High Speed Line from Paris to the Channel Tunnel serving their city, the rural stockbrokers of Kent revolted against the idea of an equivalent new railway from the tunnel to London.
The Settle &Carlisle was reprieved in a shock statement issued on 11 April, a triumph for pressure groups and local authorities.
BR made an immediate start on the backlog of maintenance, including repairs to Ribblehead viaduct.
Recognition that London's traffic problems are reaching seizure point came when BR announced schemes for two new cross-city links costing £2,000 million — links between Paddington and Liverpool Street, and from King's Cross/Euston to Victoria; plus a tube line from Hainault to Wimbledon via Chelsea and Hackney.
(But the new tube was less sure of itself, and revised versions of it during the next few months whiplashed over the map of south London like a demented snake.)
BR disposed of its BREL engineering business to its management.
The rail unions staged a series of strikes over poor pay and BR insistence on an end to collective bargaining, and were somewhat surprised to find themselves with public sympathy despite many complete network shutdowns.
To their dismay, however Britain did not seize up without trains.
Railfreight's new locomotive design made its debut.
The British-built Brush Class 60 will number at least a hundred examples, all with evocative names.
We learned for the second time that old London Underground trains never die: they are sold for another quarter-century's work on the Isle of Wight.
Like the 1920s stock before them, 1938-design vehicles were shipped over to the island to provide a moderately more comfortable service between Ryde and Shanklin.
It was good fortune for BR to be able to pick up the 1938 survivors — only retained into the 1980s to bail out the Northern Line from a vast increase in traffic.
West Coast up to date.
Willesden–based Class 90 No 90006 (new 9 September 1988) climbs Shap at Greenholme with the 14.30 Euston–Glasgow service on 10 May 1989.
Later Intercity examples received ‘Mainline’ livery.
Double–headed Class 37s Nos 37501 Teeside Steelmaster and 37502 British Steel Teeside haul the 10.47 British Steel Lackenby to Corby coil train through Cargo Fleet, Middlesborough on 15 November 1988.
Both locomotives were named at Thornaby in march 1987 37501 also received its ‘British Steel’ blue livery .
Wessex Electric.
A five–car Class 442 unit forms the 09.46 Poole and Bournemouth to Waterloo service passing through Pirbright, Surrey on 20 February 1989.
The Basingstoke Canal runs parallel with the railway in the background.
Recently modified Class 4718 (with extended–range fuel tanks) No 47818 heads to Holyhead to Carlisle charter train, Victoria Travel's Settle–Carlisle Express, through Baron wood on 6 May 1989.
East Coast contrasts.
Class 40 No 40124 hauling a Tyne Yard–Dringhouses, York vacuum–braked freight is overtaken by HST set No 254004 at Ouston Junction, Chester–le–Street on 16 May 1980.
The HST rake includes two catering vehicles (TRSB and TRUK) and is made up to nine cars by the addition of a Trailer Second.
End of an era.
No 55015 Tulyar having returned light engined from Edinburgh to York on 2 january 1982 became the last Deltic to be switched off by BR.
The locomotive was subsequently acquired by the Deltic Preservation Society .
The 14.20 King's Cross to Edinburgh parcels train is stabled overnight at Newcastle Central station on New Year's Eve 1981.
Motive power is provided by No 40092.
The 1 in 117 climb to Woodhead tunnel, past the empty Torside reservoir, is tackled by Class 76 locomotives Nos 76031 and 76033 with a train of MGR empties from Fiddles Ferry to Wath on 7 September 1980.
One of reasons for the survival of the Sinto the 1980s had been its ability to handle diverted WCML trains; this continued despite withdrawal of Intercity services in the winter 1982–3 timetable.
No 47472 approaches Garsdale with the rerouted 08.30 Glasgow–Euston on 18 April 1982.
Note the turntable (minus stockade), now installed on the Keithley &Worth Valley Railway.
One of the ubiquitous Metro–Cammell built–dmus (No 101339) leaves the fuelling point at Glasgow's Eastfield TMD on 29 May 1982. a quarter of the decade passed with little visible sign of change.
Electrification continued apace during the decade with the major investment on the East Coast main line and in East Anglia.
No 31246 heads an overhead mast foundation train between Haughley Junction and Stowmarket on 18 June 1984.
Preparations started in 1984 to return No 4468 Mallard to full working order for the fiftieth anniversary of its record–breaking run in 1988. 1986 saw the locomotive's return to steam in original streamlined condition.
It is seen here, in an now historic view of York station, waiting to depart with the Scarborough Spa Express on 9 July 1986 .
The introduction of Intercity's Nightrider service seems to have caused some difficulty in the publicity department.
late nights?
The spelling of Milton Keynes and stopping would suggest so.
REGIONS, SECTORS AND PTEs
Regions.
At the start of the 1980s the British Railways business was still run by five regions: the Eastern, Western, Southern, London Midland, and Scottish.
The whole of Great Britain was divided between them on a strictly geographical basis, and — subject to the general supervision of the British Railways Board and its chief officers in London — each region was completely responsible for the planning, working, and selling of all rail services in its area (except in the seven provincial centres where PTEs had been established).
In other words, the regions were both production and marketing organisations.
True, certain services for which duplication of provision would have been especially absurd (such as the Legal Department) were centrally provided.
True also that property questions had already been separated off from the main business, to be handled by the British Rail Property Board (also on a regional basis, but with somewhat different geographical areas from those used by the operating regions).
Nevertheless, essentially the regions ran the show.
This regional structure came about by accident rather than design.
Even before the 1923 Grouping some companies were strongly territorial, and several had working arrangements with one another within one geographical area.
The grouping formalised the situation by creating four essentially geographically based companies, even though they did stray into one another 's territories.
Nationalisation saw the basic pattern retained, although the Scottish elements of the London Midland &Scottish and the London &North Eastern Railways were hived off to form a Scottish Region, and the North East based on York also became a separate region.
Changes in the 1950s and early 1960s brought rationalised boundaries to create tighter geographical regions and eradicate penetrating lines and competition.
So the Southern lost its lines west of Salisbury to the Western, the Western gave up its lines in the West Midlands to the London Midland, the Eastern surrendered its access to Manchester, and the London Midland gave up to the Eastern and North Eastern its Yorkshire lines.
Massive structures remained, many attitudes and management at the beginning of the decade were very similar to those of long ago.
The regional general manager remained effectively the managing director of a large company.
His chief officers formed a board which had a very considerable measure of authority to determine its own ways (witness, for example, the Western Region's adventure with diesel-hydraulic locomotives when the remainder of British Railways was following the diesel-electric path, or  the Eastern Region's policy of civil engineering for speed).
An innovation in organisation sectorisation resulted in the regions losing their business roles and becoming purely the providers of services and facilities.
Within the regions there have also been big changes, notably first the creation of area management, then the abolition of the divisions.
The area manager is responsible for all aspects of the working railway in his patch, including operations, and his role in liaison with the sectors, which have only a limited presence away from headquarters, is crucial.
There must now be a real question-mark over the continuing existence of the regions.
They have been downgraded in areas like Tyneside and Manchester by the creation of the PTEs.
With sectorisation they have lost most of their planning, commercial, and marketing activities.
Their function now is to make a good job of delivering the railway services that the PTEs and sectors want to buy from them.
Is there any need in the future for an intermediate level between headquarters and the greatly enlarged areas?
Is there indeed a case for some form of national track authority in place of six regions?
Yet, long after the North East had lost its separate region, on 4 April 1988 East Anglia was given independence.
Anglia controls East Anglia lines of Network SouthEast serving the London commuter area more locally than they were being controlled by the Eastern at York.
Management where the job is actually being done may show the way forward in other ways, though the granting of extra power to Cornish Railways was a short-lived experiment.
One thing is certain: further changes in the 1990s will reflect the role of the railway as a business out there in a hard, competitive world.
The 1980s have been a period of considerable and long-overdue change.
PTEs.
All the present PTEs were already firmly established by the start of the 1980s, and they have survived the 1986 abolition of the metropolitan councils.
Their creation limited the powers of the Scottish, Eastern, and London Midland Regions in a number of major conurbations outside London.
The Western and Southern Regions have no PTEs in their areas.
The principal change in the 1980s has come with the creation of the sectors, in that the PTEs primarily talk business to the sectors these days, the region then delivering the agreed product.
The PTE decides on frequency, and it can even specify — within reason — the timings of the trains it wants.
It considers whether it wishes to invest further in rail, simply keep the rail services it has, replace rail with bus, or seek other solutions to local transport problems.
It sets fare levels.
(All the PTEs have done a great deal of work on the integration and simplification of fare-structures and the provision of interchangeable tickets.)
It can even buy rolling stock, and several PTEs have made extensive purchases of the new 1980s multiple-units.
Strathclyde and West Yorkshire, for example, both have their own Super Sprinters.
All have sponsored rail investment in one form or another and are continuing to do so.
Tyneside has its Metro, Liverpool its underground lines, Strathclyde a lavish electric system.
Manchester at first lost out very badly on rail investment, but now it has some compensation in the Windsor Link and is  going ahead with an advanced tram system that will take over a number of heavy rail routes.
Birmingham and Sheffield are making similar plans.
West Yorkshire, having presided over a massive expansion of rail traffic in recent years, is pushing for more electrification in the wake of the successful completion of InterCity's electrification to Leeds.
With the abolition of the metropolitan councils in 1986, responsibility for the supervision of the PTEs has passed to joint boards of delegates from each of the metropolitan boroughs.
Since they have lost their buses through bus deregulation they have become essentially planning and co-ordinating bodies for both rail and road modes.
So far, many of the improvements they brought about have survived, and the fragmented bus industry has not yet led to a breakdown of the integrated ticketing that marked such a step forward in British practice.
Sectors.
Sectors are of course the most significant creation of the 1980s.
In   the mid 1970s there was an abortive attempt to develop a new way of managing the industry in the Territories Plan (which would have given a structure very similar to that developed in Germany in much earlier years and still in use both on DB and DR), but this failed largely on account of union opposition.
Each territory would have been a complete business organisation in its own area, but because no territory would have been large enough to run a complete main line a great deal more co-operation would have been necessary than existed between the regions, and on a much more formal basis.
The basis for a different type of approach already existed.
Dr Beeching had drawn attention to the shortcomings of the railway's accounting practices.
Slowly better systems were introduced, making it possible to look more analytically at what was happening.
This made it possible to group together different types of service (InterCity's identity was first established on this basis) and look at their costs and revenues in a sensible manner.
The whole process was greatly helped by the much more widespread availability of computers.
And the remit of the railways was changed.
Government decided  that the whole of the railway freight business should pay its way.
Then a policy directive in 1977 reinforced by the new government in 1979, also insisted that InterCity should run commercially even if other parts of the passenger business were to receive grant-aid under the 1968 Act.
Under the chairmanship of Sir Peter Parker the concept of the commercial railway and the social railway was developed at the end of the 1970s and the start of the 1980s.
The first was to be run on strictly business lines, while the second needed financial support.
This emphasised not only the importance of the distinct types of business but the difference between the businesses and the operations.
So on 4 January 1982 the railway's commercial undertaking was divided into its separate elements.
Freight and parcels had always been seen as distinct entities, and these naturally formed two of the new sectors.
On the passenger side InterCity was taken out first; then all the London-commuter-belt services were grouped to form London &South East (later renamed Network SouthEast); finally, everything left over formed Other Provincial Services (later renamed Provincial).
The last two were the social railway, requiring continuing support in grant-aid for the provision of socially essential services  in the capital, in the great conurbations, and in rural areas.
British Rail's accounts have charted financial progress.
InterCity turned in its first profit in 1988–9, only a year after transitional support was withdrawn.
Network SouthEast has improved its performance beyond what anyone could have dreamed might be possible.
And now that Provincial has sorted out its rag-bag inheritance into clear service-groups, it too can show great steps forward in many areas.
There is a need for close and on-going liaison with the regions and PTEs, but at the end of the day it is the sector that calls the tune.
Each sector director looks at his business on a national level, ignoring regional boundaries, and has the power to deploy all his resources to the best commercial advantage.
The best example of this has been the deployment of the HST fleet.
This was first bought in the 1970s by the regions, but it has been deployed under sectorisation with singleminded determination to maximise earnings.
Yet while InterCity is supposed to be one business, offering consistent standards throughout Britain, many regional differences in what the traveller actually experiences die slowly.
It is now the sectors which sponsor investment in track and signalling as well as rolling stock, that must deal with the modernisation of stations, and so on.
The decisions are commercial: what will earn the best return on the investment?
Questions that should have been asked long ago are now being asked — and, more importantly, answered.
In years to come the commercialisation of BR via sectorisation could well be seen by historians as important as grouping and nationalisation.
Scottish Region.
The extremely utilitarian front end of the Sprinters is displayed against the massive ironwork of the Forth Bridge by No 150284 as it heads south working the 13.40 Dundee to Edinburgh train on 29 August 1988.
Anglian memories.
Class 47 No 47580 County of Essex pulls away form the elegant Norwich Thrope station with the 15.20 to Liverpool Street on 22 June 1984 .
Invaluable service.
Severe winter conditions create much hardship for the isolated Settle–Carlisle line and the railway provides the only reliable form of transport at such times.
No 31410 leaves Blea Morr tunnel with the 08.57 Leeds–Carlisle train on February 1983.
Cardiff–based single–car unit No 55032 carrying the dragon and red ‘V’ of Provincial's Welsh ‘Valley Lines’is seen near Porth at the head of a Barry Island to Treherbert train on 15 August 1985.
Two–car diesel parcels unit (No 55972 and 55982) passes the fine North Staffordshire ‘Jacobean’ gables of Stone station en route to Birmingham.
The Class 127 units were modified (for Parcels sector use) after their eventual replacement by emus on the St Pancras–Bedford route.
EXPRESSES EVER FASTER
THE 1980s will be remembered as the decade in which far-reaching changes were initiated on Britain's InterCity network.
But at its start there were two great threats: the economic recession and the Thatcher Government's attitude to nationalised industry spending limits and investment criteria.
Despite the immediate success of the new fleet of 125mph trains which brought new standards of safety and on-board comfort firstly on the Western Region services out of London (Paddington) and then on the East Coast main line from London (King's Cross), so much of what had been gained in the late 1970s was lost as the economic recession started to bite.
The impact was twofold.
The sharp decline in business activity severely reduced the volume of full-fare first-class ticket sales while the increase in unemployment and interest rates curtailed to a drastic degree levels of disposable income available for leisure purposes such as optional standard-class rail journeys.
This loss of optional travel was also exacerbated by the intensified competition from longdistance coaches following the liberalisation of route licensing in the 1980 Transport Act.
Given the choice in such circumstances, many of InterCity's customers on low or fixed incomes — in particular students and senior citizens — preferred the cheaper but slower coach option.
Faced with such a quick and potentially damaging erosion of its business base, BR tackled the situation on two fronts — reduction of costs and a headon response to the coach operators with bargain fare offers.
A 10 per cent cut in loaded train miles was phased between June 1981 and October 1982.
Skilfully applied, these cuts were made in such a way as to protect the sectors' long-term business-base stability.
With relatively little loss of traffic or even complaints, InterCity was able to phase out many of its old life-expired Mk 1 coaches.
Meeting the coach competition necessitated a more risky strategy: head-on confrontation at the low-price end of the market.
By introducing bargain-level fares —‘Savers’— BR's aim was to generate sufficient extra passengers to achieve a net revenue gain.
The tactics succeeded and the erosion of optional business was stopped.
Train loadings were increased and unit costs reduced.
It was the creation of the bargain-priced Saver which paved the way for an airline-style market segmentation which has subsequently played such an important part in InterCity's move into profit which was achieved towards the end of the decade.
The first indications of the new 1979 Conservative Government's attitude to investment became apparent when BR sought approval to build an  additional seven HST sets to cope with the first flush of growth following the launch of 125mph services on the East Coast main line the previous year.
After much haggling, approval was only obtained for those four out of the seven sets which could meet the much higher rate of return which would henceforth be applied to BR investment.
If BR could not make a case for seven trains for one of its most profitable routes, it was clear that plans for a second tranche of HSTs for the Cross Country group of services would not satisfy the new criteria.
These were the circumstances which led BR to terminate HST building with a fleet of ninety-five operational trains.
It is a matter of history that as the 1980s drew to a close, a few extra HSTs to cope with the unprecedented levels of business by now on offer would have been very welcome.
Running a national business as complicated as a railway network is in all circumstances a daunting task, but the challenge is even more difficult when the government of the day can effectively veto any major decision.
For the past forty or so years since the railways passed into public ownership, the issue of social support — that is the extent to which unremunerative routes should be directly subsidised by the taxpayer — has never been entirely clear.
For example, in 1976 a White Paper on transport policy issued by the then Labour Government, stated that inter-urban passenger transport in Britain should not be subsidised.
Unequivocal though that statement was, it was not until the
1979 Conservative Government got into its stride that this tenet was raised from aspirational status to a specific directive that InterCity must operate as a self-financing business.
How to cope with the separate issues of the economic recession, the need for major investment such as the electrification of the East Coast main line and identification of those parts of the network or services which needed direct government subsidy, was the overriding concern of the BR Board at that was the problem.
It was more a matter of how BR's organisation should be adapted to cope with a much tighter (but more specific) set of government directives.
The story of how the traditional management through the regions has been transformed into a marketing one based on the sectors is told elsewhere.
So Far as InterCity is concerned sector management has brought two major benefits: overall responsibility for deployment of its rolling stock fleet, and the building of a national range of express train products.
The first example of equipment redeployment came in 1982 when the then director (Cyril Bleasdale), faced with a serious downturn on Great Western sub-sector services out of Paddington, decided to move ten HSTs to the Midland main line so that a badly needed improvement could be implemented on this potentially profitable and much neglected route.
Under the previous organisation it would have taken months of internal wrangling to resolve the conflicting aspirations of regionally based management.
Transfer of all Anglo-Scottish sleeping car services from the East to the West Coast main line from May 1988 was a similar decision based on a corporate rather than a regional viewpoint.
An important feature of the 1980s which has contributed to InterCity's financial turnround is market segmentation and pricing — or the shaping of products to meet the needs of customer groupings.
Essentially this concept is not new — from the early days our railways were providing first-,second and even third-class accommodation and the excursion ticket was quickly used to sell spare capacity.
What is new is the much greater degree of sophistication which is now necessary to produce the maximum revenue yield from each and every InterCity journey.
Today's equipment — trains and track — is very expensive to provide and maintain; to cover its basic costs it has to be in service providing revenue for up to say sixteen hours per day.
But, as we know, demand for seats is not evenly spread.
Monday-to-Friday peak-hour trains — the 07.25 from Manchester to Euston and the 16.30 back to Manchester are cases in point — will always load well, but the stock providing these two services will also make two midday trips for which custom may be sparse.
Market segmentation and pricing has provided the answer.
InterCity now has a range of offers — first class, standard and the Saver ticket — the purpose of which is, by offering varying fares to channel demand   so that it can spread the load over existing capacity.
To many it has complicated the process of selling InterCity travel, but — like the airlines who face similar problems — it is a necessary tool to maximise the earning potential of high-cost equipment.
By the second half of the 1980s InterCity was well on its way towards selfsufficiency and genuine operating profits.
A greatly reduced fleet of locomotives and coaches along with better overall control and increased patronage (especially in long-distance commuting) resulted in a sharp recovery.
In 1984–5 the sector returned a loss of £157million; in one of the most dramatic business turnrounds in recent years this has become a £24million profit in 1988–9.
From such an unpromising start in 1980, BR has become the first railway in the world to provide a long-distance passengerrailway service without subsidy.
West Coast Main Line.
One of the ironies of the 1980s is that while the East Coast main line started to take delivery of its second-generation 125mph equipment, the maximum speed of West Coast trains had only moved from 100 to 110mph.
This sorry state of affairs follows from the failure of the Advanced Passenger Train (APT) prototype to achieve sufficient reliability to justify the ordering of an operational fleet which could exploit the ‘tilting’ train concept on BR's long-haul routes.
Space precludes a full account of the APT saga, but briefly stated the purpose of the tilting train is to run through speed-restricted curves in complete safety and without loss of passenger comfort at much higher speeds than can be achieved with conventional rolling stock, enabling journey times to be reduced without recourse to realigning and upgrading existing tracks at prohibitive cost.
As BR looked towards the 1970s and into the 1980s, it was realised that if InterCity was to survive the growing threat posed by the airlines and the rapid extension of motorways, train speeds would have to be lifted beyond the prevailing norm of 80mph start-to-stop between main business centres.
While a good proportion of the West Coast route could be raised from 100 to l25mph at reasonable cost, there are many locations where it is necessary to impose speed restrictions because of curvature and track geometry.
As the APT was so ideally suited to the needs of the West Coast main line and offered the possibility of major train service improvements, BR — regrettably as matters transpired — became wedded to the project to the extent that no other traction possibility was considered.
It is now a matter of history that — notwithstanding an outlay of £150million at current prices on research and development and prototype trains — the technical potential of the train was never achieved and in 1983 the entire project was abandoned.
Had BR had more time and more funding, had the government been more sympathetic towards the railway investment and had there been no recession, the APT might have eventually been successful — but that is another story.
(By 1988 the Italian Railways had produced a tilting train — the Pendolino — which  appears to be successful.)
Not only was the non-fulfilment of the APT an enormous financial loss but since its rapid adoption in ‘squadron service’ had been presumed there were no alternative plans for either trains or track.
As the depression began to affect West Coast loadings it soon became clear that it was no longer possible to sustain the level of service provided in the 1974 Glasgow electric timetable.
The hourly off-peak service from Euston to Liverpool and Manchester was an early casualty when the service was cut back to a ninety-minute headway, but the most far-reaching change concerned the Anglo-Scottish services between Euston and Glasgow.
Historically, Scotland was always perceived as the premier West Coast market on which the case for electrification from Weaver Junction to Glasgow (Motherwell) was made.
But by 1985 the sad reality had to be faced that — so far as InterCity was concerned — the market had changed, probably for ever.
Business people — no longer prepared to spend five hours or more on a daytime Euston-Glasgow journey — had switched to air, while leisure travellers had been lured away by the bargain-priced coaches.
To offset the loss of Glasgow business, extra stops were added to the daytime service which was revamped to serve towns such as Warrington, Wigan, Lancaster, Oxenholme and Penrith which offered greater business prospects.
Only the Royal Scot remained as a viable Euston-Glasgow train but with a schedule fifteen minutes slower than the five-hour norm established in the 1974 timetable.
At one stage the average time of the five daytime trains between Euston and Glasgow was over five and a half hours.
However the long-term decline of the West Coast main line was not a prospect that InterCity was prepared to accept.
As a first stage towards  reviving the route's viability plans were made to accelerate certain key Glasgow services by raising the line speeds from 100 to 110mph; the second stage was to prepare an investment case for new equipment to fill the gap which would otherwise have been covered by APT.
Raising the maximum speed from 100 to 110mph was relatively easy.
While the fleet of Class 87 locomotives and Mk 3 stock was capable of 110mph, the only guards' vans on the route were old Mk 1 cars restricted to 100mph.
An agreement was obtained to run a small dedicated number of these at the higher speed.
Broadly speaking the curvature and signalling on most of the l00mph sections were also fit for 110mph.
The only added cost was the need for a second driver when running in excess of 100mph, but this was subsequently rescinded to 110mph.
Two 110mph trains in each direction were introduced from May 1984 and the entire service was upgraded in the following year.
Subsequently, while the total number of 110mph trains was retained some were withdrawn from the Glasgow service in favour of key Manchester and Liverpool business trains.
In some respects the long-awaited authority for new West Coast locomotives proved to be something of a disappointment.
Instead of the 125mph Class 89 prototype, an order was placed in January 1986 for twenty-nine Class 90 locomotives but they only have a potential of 110mph.
To go with the new Class 90s an order was placed for twenty-nine Driving Van Trailers (DVTs) to replace the old Mk 1 guards' van.
By the close of the 1980s the West Coast had started to regain some of its old vitality and was emerging as the most utilised and profitable part of the  InterCity network.
Although no plans exist at present for 125mph train speeds, a more general extension of 110mph services is likely to start in 1990.
East Coast Main Line.
Probably because it started the 1980s with a fleet of new 125mph HSTs which had made a major impact on its market, the East Coast main line was far better placed to withstand the rigours of the recession than its West Coast neighbour.
While train mileage cuts were implemented in 1980/1, these were mainly marginal services covered by 100mph dieselhauled trains the loss of which was of little long-term consequence.
Indeed, for a time it enabled the service to become an all HST operation so that some places actually had a better service.
There were four major East Coast developments in the 1980s: the significant increase in HST productivity so that sets could be more extensively deployed to provide service to Inverness, Glasgow Queen Street, Hull and Cleethorpes; electrification of the route from Hitchin to Leeds with only minor interference to train services; introduction of a new track-maintenance strategy and transfer of overnight Anglo-Scottish sleeping-car services to the West Coast main line.
Although the original HST plans provided for two daily return journeys between King's Cross and Aberdeen, by judicious programming of the sets (plus some extra sets transferred from the Western region) it was possible to add on some extra trips to existing rosters.
This enabled InterCity to introduce additional HSTs to Aberdeen, a pair of business services to Hull and Cleethorpes and an entirely new service The Highland Chieftain between King's Cross and Inverness with a journey time of seven hours.
Because of the need to refuel the two power cars, the practical operating range of an HST set is about 1,100 miles after which the unit must visit the depot to replenish its tanks.
Needless to say such a constraint does not apply with electric locomotives.
For several years BR had been trying to persuade the government to authorise the East Coast main line electrification; after considerable discussion this was eventually agreed in July 1984.
The cost is £302million.
The project entailed wiring from Hitchin to Leeds, Newcastle and Edinburgh, a total of 400 route miles.
To work the new service a fleet of thirty-one Class 91 140mph locomotives and matching set of Mk 4 stock have been ordered.
Intensive road testing of the first ten Class 91s started in the spring of 1988 and the first public services with the new Mk 4 stock started between King's Cross and Leeds in October 1989.
Electric service at Edinburgh will start in May 1991.
The fastest time between King's Cross and Edinburgh by HST in the 1980s was 4 hours and 23 minutes, with one stop at Newcastle; this will be cut to 4 hours from May 1991.
In mainland Europe the spacing between tracks and reversible signalling enables engineers to work on one track in complete safety while traffic continues to pass on the other.
Here the engineers have to carry out most of their work on Sundays when traffic is light, but this often entails diversions and extended journey times followed by temporary speed restrictions for a few further days at the beginning of each week.
To compensate for these  temporary speed restrictions additional ‘recovery’ time is added to daytime schedules.
Following studies by Eastern Region's engineers, a new tracklaying strategy was introduced in 1987 whereby — with the use of a new machine called the Dynamic Track Stabiliser — tracks could be handed back by 06.00 on Monday morning at the full 125mph line speed, eliminating the need for a temporary speed restriction and associated recovery time allowance.
Removal of these recovery allowances made possible a general acceleration of East Coast 125mph services from May 1987.
Overnight services for sleeping cars are a long-standing feature of BR's Anglo-Scottish routes, but this market has also changed.
With a much smaller baseload of night traffic it was no longer viable to retain separate services to Scotland on both the East and West Coast routes.
With the exception of the Newcastle service which was withdrawn, all East Coast Anglo-Scottish overnight services were transferred to the West Coast route from May 1988, making substantial economies.
Great Western.
As was the case with the West Coast main line, the Great Western sub-sector was also badly affected by recession, but the decline at the start of the decade was matched by a spectacular recovery which started from the second half of the 1980s.
The strength of the recovery was such that the Great Western was the first part of InterCity to move into profit.
It was the service between Paddington, Bristol and South Wales which felt the full impact of the recession.
Things were made tougher by the completion of the M4 paralleling Brunel's main line to the Bristol area and across the Severn Bridge to Newport and Cardiff.
It was perfect for low-fare express coach services.
Loss of passengers led to dramatic train service cuts, enabling the sub-sector to release seven HSTs for the Midland main line.
Fortunately not only did growth return but on a scale far exceeding expectations.
This was partly due to the economy's revival, but a major factor was the growth of long-distance commuting.
With 125mph trains it was now possible to travel from places like Swindon, where house prices were lower, to London in less than an hour.
Between 1985–6 journeys from Swindon to Paddington increased by 16 per cent, from Bath to Paddington by 12 per cent and from Bristol to Paddington by 20 per cent .
By 1988 the morning-peak load was such as to necessitate a fifteen-minute clockface interval service from Swindon to Paddington between 06.30 and 09.00; additionally two services passed through Swindon without stopping.
To cope with its new level of business the Great Western has a fleet of thirty-one supplemented by some sets of locomotive-hauled stock.
In 1988/9 unit availability had risen by 87 per cent and the average daily miles per operational set was 844.
Originally the Great Western HST fleet consisted of 2 + 7 (two power cars with seven trailers) but in 1983 ten sets were given an additional trailer to work on the West of England line and to cover the prime business services.
By May 1990 — after delivery of the first ten sets of the new Mk 4 stock for the East Coast main line — the Great Western will receive an additional HST set and sufficient trailers to make all HST formations 2 + 8.
Midland Main Line.
Despite its importance as a trunk route linking London with Leicester, Nottingham, Derby, Chesterfield and Sheffield, until 1982 the Midland had Cinderella status.
While it had received some decent Mk 2 air-conditioned stock, the maximum speed of its fleet of diesel locomotives was 90/95mph; average city-to-city speeds compared unfavourably with other parts of the InterCity network, and initially BR replied to local pleas that HSTs could not provide the answer, implying stagnation until perhaps the route was electrified and received APTs that could take the curvatures in their stride.
However, when some of the Great Western HST sets became surplus to requirements an obvious option for redeployment was the Midland.
Although the curvature and track geometry precludes speeds much in excess of 100mph (except by upgrading at unacceptable costs) the power: weight ratio, acceleration and braking of the HSTs immediately demonstrated their worth and have made it possible to introduce some very useful cuts in journey times.
A package of accelerations, improved peak-hour services and upgrading of the Master Cutler to Pullman status has generated new business.
To provide some much-needed improvement the InterCity director decided to transfer ten HSTs to the Midland — five from the Great Western, two from the East Coast main line plus three which were part of the build for the Cross Country (North East-South West) routes.
A completely new Midland timetable was introduced in two stages in October 1982 and May 1983.
By the end of the decade, the Midland's outlook had been transformed.
In 1990 it is planned to introduce a new Pullman service from Nottingham, an hourly off-peak service to both Nottingham and Sheffield and, by upgrading certain sections of the route for 110mph, a further general acceleration of all trains — unthinkable at the decade's start.
While the Midland main line is now a fully fledged HST route, it does not have its own depot.
Its HSTs are provided from a combined pool of trains based at Neville Hill Depot (Leeds) used for both the Midland and East Coast main line services.
Cross Country.
Comprising originally the North East/North West to South West/South East network of trains which were routed to run through Birmingham New Street (where they made a series of interchanges) the Cross Country InterCity sub-sector is now responsible for all services which do not use a London terminus.
At one stage the Birmingham New Street interchange was an integral part of the West Coast electrified service and was based on an hourly sequence of arrivals/departures from the LMR electrified area and to the North East via Sheffield.
As well as the series of long-distance trains which still run through Birmingham, the sub-sector now includes those few trains from the North West to Dover which run through Kensington Olympia in London, and the service between Manchester and Scotland via Preston and the West Coast main line.
In the late 1970s plans were prepared for a fleet of HSTs to operate the North East-South West (Newcastle/Leeds-Cardiff/Plymouth) route and these were introduced from 1982.
As already mentioned, many plans had to be  changed in the light of the recession and these included reduction of the number of Cross Country HSTs.
Plans to upgrade parts of Cross Country routes for higher speeds were also deferred.
However, although the Cross Country route has not emerged as a high-speed line per se, it now features a number of useful long-distance trains mainly aimed at the leisure market.
They make some of the longest journeys on the BR network.
Examples include the Wessex Scot (Glasgow/Edinburgh-Poole), the Devon Scot (Aberdeen/Glasgow-Plymouth) and the Sussex Scot (Glasgow/Edinburgh-Brighton) and there is also — an entirely new innovation — an overnight sleeping-car service between Poole and Glasgow, linking with the Plymouth-Edinburgh/Glasgow sleeper at Birmingham.
All of these services are electrically hauled between Glasgow (Carstairs in the case of the Edinburgh trains) and Birmingham New Street where diesel locomotives take over.
One of the innovations of the decade, introduced in 1987, is the series of cross-country trains from the North West to the South Coast via Kensington Olympia.
Not particularly successful, their number has been reduced.
In 1989 came the opening of the Windsor Link connection in the Manchester area.
This short section of the new railway has enabled through running from Preston and Bolton to Manchester Oxford Road and the through platforms at Manchester Piccadilly.
Four daily InterCity services in each direction now take this route.
Anglia.
After many years of indecision, in December 1981 BR obtained approval for the electrification of the main line from Colchester to Ipswich and Norwich and also the Harwich branch.
The project was completed in May 1987, bringing new life both to the railway and the region it serves.
There has been a particularly sharp increase in long-distance commuting.
The Anglia services are worked by Class 86 locomotives and long rakes of Mk 2 air-conditioned stock.
Gatwick.
Finally, the Gatwick Express service between London (Victoria) and Gatwick Airport was launched by InterCity in May 1984 and has been a great success.
Introduction of the project followed a major upgrading of the tracks in the Croydon area and new signalling permitting 90mph speeds.
The trains, running non stop every fifteen minutes, were formed from Mk 2 airconditioned coaches made available following the changeover to HST operations on the Midland main line; the locomotives are Class 73s.
The superior quality of the trains as well as their speed has both created new commuter business and extracted some traffic from the EMU service.
Mk4 DVT No 82203 with Mk4 stock and No 91009 providing rear power race through Potters Bar on 4 November 1989 on a proving run prior to entering service.
Beginning of the decade on WCML.
No 86247 (named Abraham Darby in 1981) speeds through the Lune Gorge with an up ‘Electric scot’ service on 22 March 1980.
The train make–up is typical of the time with air–conditioned Mk2 stock supported by Mk1 braking coaches .
Discontinued ECML sleeper service.
The Night Scotsman, 23.40 King's Cross to Edinburgh, is hauled north at Bournmouth behind No 47525 on 23 July 1983.
The train was running approximately two hours late due to a broken rail at Northallerton.
Note the Motor Rail vans at the rear.
The corporate identity image has been slow to disappear, with the old standard liveries lingering even on Intercity services.
Here No 50034 Furious,which has subsequently been painted in NSE livery, heads the 13.40 Paddington to Penzance train under Taunton's west signal gantry on 11 April 1986.
The GWR semaphores were replaced a weeks after this, losing the character of a much older ‘corporate identity ’.
An aerial view of the approaches to Liverpool St station on 4 February 1989.
Passing Class 86/2s Nos 86242 James Kennedy and 86221 BBC Look East,which are stabled prior to hauling one of the hourly InterCity services to Norwich, is Class 315 emu No 315850 forming the 11.42 form Southend Victoria .
The May 1986 timetable saw the introduction of a new cross–London service from North West England to the South East.
On the second day of the new service, 13 May 1986, No 47446 arrives at Kensington Olympia with the 17.45 Dover to Manchester train.
The trains to Brighton over this route brought echoes of the old Sunny South Express.
Class 73 Electro–diesel No 73120 leaves Gatwick propelling the 15.50 Express service to Victoria on 22 September 1986.
Horely station is in the background.
SPECIAL AND CHARTER TRAINS
IN the glass-enclosed rear section of the elegantly furnished 1892 Caledonian Railway observation car, the guests on the Royal Scotsman gathered to sip pre-dinner cocktails, nibble fresh foie gras canapÉs, and engage in polite rapport about their day's visit to Achnacarry Castle, the stately home of Sir Donald and Lady Cameron of Lochiel.
In the growing queue for the buffet on the Cheshire Cheese , the passengers moved one place nearer the long-awaited ham and tomato sandwich in stony silence.
If anyone spoke, it was usually only to voice condemnation of British Rail for the time it took to get served.
These were the opposite ends of the British special-train scene of the 1980s, on either side of a conscious divide where the key words were price and profit.
Six days of luxury on the Royal Scotsman (which included some steam haulage and as many glasses of Domaine des Berthiers as the liver would stand) at the end of the decade meant writing a cheque for £2,880.
For the afternoon round trip from Crewe via Chester and Shrewsbury on the steam-hauled Cheshire Cheese (buy your own coffee), fifteen pounds was seeing you home and dry.
The illustration shows how the special-train business developed in these ten years.
In 1980, luxury trains like the Royal Scotsman and the Venice Simplon Orient Express did not exist.
In 1989 they accounted for more than a quarter of BR's total charter-train revenue — and the trend is ever upwards.
In the 1970s the word was excursion, even then hardly fashionable, conveying an image of day trips to Blackpool and kiss-me-quick hats, of FA Cup tie specials (when football supporters swung rattles instead of knives), and of the classical BR Sunday Mystery Tour, when for ten and sixpence, you could be pretty certain of finishing up at Barry Island (again).
The age of the bucket-and-spade seaside special was all but dead by 1980, so what filled the void?
In the absence of any corporate direction, BR's excursion trains then were not much more than a mishmash of bright and not so bright ideas by divisional and area managers, which lost as much money as they made.
Pied Piper and Merrymaker outings, locally organised specials, and a profusion of enthusiast-orientated railtours were run with little or no coordination between the regions, with the result that there was remarkable disparity in standards and even the level of fares.
It was not until sectorisation in 1983 and the creation by the then InterCity director Cyril Bleasdale of a special department to co-ordinate and develop charter-train operation, that BR began to get its act together.
The man Bleasdale picked to head up its new Charter Train Unit was David Ward, who since 1976 had been responsible for co-ordinating main-line steam operations in conjunction with the Steam Locomotive Owners Association (SLOA).
One of the unit's first initiatives was to commission the London Business School to undertake detailed research into BR's existing excursion business.
The LBS report was uncompromising; it showed that even with full trains, there was little or no money at the bottom end of the market, whereas with first-class and full-dining trains, there was considerable profit potential.
So the man on the street ceased to be the prime target of charter-train salesmen.
Specials organised by InterCity became geared towards smaller numbers of passengers paying premium fares for VIP treatment in Pullman standard coaches with catering of comparable quality.
Under the old regional arrangements, the entrepreneurial independent tour organisers had been able to profit handsomely; especially those who catered for the insatiable demand by railway enthusiasts to travel ‘new’ lines behind favourite or unusual diesel types.
Now there were hard times.
Only operators able to fill their trains could expect to make a reasonable profit.
Traditionally operators with insufficient passengers simply cancelled; BR now insisted that 10 per cent of the train hire charge — in some cases as much as £500 — be paid as a non-returnable deposit.
Since previously only about one in three advertised charter trains actually ran (there were indeed up to a hundred independent rail tour operators), the new regime immediately brought a crop of casualties, including in 1985 the Rail Tour Operators Association, the very organisation which had been established at Ward's insistence to negotiate train hire on behalf of all independents.
(It must be said that the RTOA also contributed to its own downfall, by failing to get a grip on in-fighting among its own members.)
Another development during the first half of the 1980s hastened the decline in ordinary charter-train operation: the wholesale withdrawal of ageing steamheated 90mph Mk 1 coaching stock from which such trains were usually formed.
The victims were not just the established railway enthusiast tour operators (all but a handful of which had already been squeezed out) but organisations such as the women's institutes and working men's clubs, whose annual train trips had been a tradition.
Now they were told ‘Sorry — no spare vehicles’.
The only beneficiaries of the stock withdrawals were Britain's independent steam lines, who eagerly snapped up ready-to-run coaches from around £1,000 a time.
At an early stage in the proceedings, SLOA recognised that, with the phasing out of Mk 1 stock, main-line steam operation (successfully revived in 1971) was in jeopardy.
Steam's incompatibility with modern, air-braked, electrically heated Mk 2 and Mk 3 stock, was absolute.
Thoughts of acquiring a complete rake of steam-compatible Mk 1s from BR were aired for the first time in 1977.
The announcement in April 1981 that SLOA had bought a rake of eight Pullman cars, mounted on 100mph Commonwealth bogies and fitted with dual steam/electric heating, seemed to be the answer to a prayer.
They came complete with David Ward's recommendation, and an assurance that the price, though never publicly disclosed, was ‘generous’.
The set was to be maintained by BR at Carlisle Upperby depot under contract.
It had a total seating capacity of 378.
In BR's blue-and-grey standard coach livery, later to be repainted in classic Pullman umber and cream, the Pullmans made their SLOA debut behind ‘Back Five’ No 5407 on the Carlisle-Hellifield Cumbrian Mountain Pullman on 2 May 1981.
Yet even before that special had run, SLOA secretary Bernard Staite was announcing that the Pullmans would form the basis of a new series of special charter trains, operating during the summer months with diesel and electric haulage, under the title Pullman Scenic Land Cruises.
This was the first time the phrase Scenic Land Cruise had been used by a train operator — but it certainly was not the last.
If the move up-market started anywhere, it was on Saturday 4 July 1981, when SLOA ran the first PSLC over the Settle &Carlisle and down the Appleby-Warcop branch, for what now seems a very modest fare of £15 first class, £12  second class from London (Euston), together with a tray meal at £2!
By 1983 the SLOA Pullman Scenic Land Cruise had become a series of oneand two-day charter trains with overnight hotel accommodation, embracing a variety of destinations — but most significantly, the Scottish rail routes to Mallaig, Oban, Inverness and Kyle of Lochalsh.
Despite what was then described as the worst financial recession for fifty years, the Mallaig train sold out in just nine days, there being no shortage of takers for seats which by now were creeping up towards the £40 mark, and beyond the pockets of the traditional excursion-train traveller.
As a special train, the Land Cruise was a cut above its immediate predecessors, and in the ensuing years its profile and format have been further refined into a series of repeat itinerary three-day tours which, although still plying the scenic Scottish routes, now do so as part of InterCity's charter operation utilising specially refurbished first-class stock and Mk 3 sleepers in lieu of the Pullmans.
But in terms of luxury, elegance and sophistication, the Land Cruise was (and is) poles apart from the Venice Simplon Orient Express unleashed on an unsuspecting world in May 1982.
Back came all the romance of train travel that had not been seen for fifty years.
Reviving the classical grandeur of the railway carriage of Edwardian days, with all its silver-plated, lacetableclothed dining-car finery and mahogany-panelled parlour-car ambience, on the long-established route from London to Paris and Venice, the Orient Express was the brainchild of James Sherwood, head of the Sea Containers Group.
Sherwood's idea was to start his all-Pullman train from London's Victoria station, and run to Folkestone where passengers would disembark, make the cross-Channel sailing to Boulogne, and continue their journey by rail to Venice via Paris and Milan.
That the classical wooden-bodied Pullman cars of earlier days had long since been split up and sold or scrapped was no deterrent.
Where others would have dismissed the idea as impractical, Sherwood set about locating those vehicles which had survived intact.
Nine Pullmans were restored to their former splendour (but with modern air braking) at Carnforth in a remarkable £3 million project.
Late in 1989 a tenth Pullman was undergoing ‘the treatment’ at an expected cost of £400,000.
Across the Channel, Sherwood had indulged in a similar restoration exercise with a variety of former Wagons-Lits coaches, arranging the professional refurbishment of the sleeping cars, diners, day cars and staff vehicles by the Wagon-Lits shops at Ostende, and the Bremer Waggonbau company at Bremen.
In eight years of operation, the VSOE charter train has not strayed far from its original concept.
The departures from London on Thursdays and Sundays between the end of February and mid-November (the return leg departs Venice on Wednesdays and Saturdays) have become well established in the BR timetable.
A natural target for tourists — Americans and Japanese are especially evident during the high season — the popularity of the VSOE has been spread by tourism agencies, word of mouth, and occasional advertising  in the up-market Sunday colour supplements — a clear indication of where VSOE Ltd sees its main market.
In 1989 passengers undertaking the full journey from London to Venice paid a one-way fare of £745 each for a double cabin with all meals included but drinks extra.
Combined train and air options have proved popular.
Anyone minded just to sample VSOE Pullman luxury on ‘the British bit’— and many do — could travel Victoria-Folkestone return, with champagne, lunch, a half-bottle of wine and afternoon cream tea thrown in, for £125.
Increased usage of the VSOE Pullman train for repeat itinerary charter work on days when it is not required for the Folkestone run, has given prospective passengers some further options.
In 1989 a luncheon-train round trip of the Kent coast from Victoria via Canterbury and Ashford at £110, alternated on Fridays with a ‘day out to Salisbury’ charter special for the cathedral.
Similarly, VSOE deployed the Pullmans on Wednesdays, their destination alternating between Bristol/Bath and Goodwood House/Arundel Castle.
Also in demand for private and company charter hire such as conference and product launches, the one-time roadside diner and spring company board room accumulated some 400,000 miles in the eight years of operation since their ‘second coming’ in 1982.
Yet the title of ‘the world's most luxurious train' was snatched away in 1985 by a still more exclusive charter operation introduced to British metals by a company which owned none of its own locomotives or coaching stock.
The six-day Royal Scotsman promoted by the L &R Leisure Group under the trading name The Great Scottish &Western Railway Company, was either a remarkable piece of opportunism, or a very shrewd example of business judgement.
Or both.
The nine-coach train carrying just twenty-eight passengers each paying around £2,600 a time, was billed as ‘the highest point yet reached in luxury train travel’, its on-train cuisine described as ‘simply the best on any train anywhere in the world’.
Originating at Edinburgh Waverley the Royal Scotsman set out to make stately progress through the mountains and glens of the Scottish Highlands, with a package of sightseeing visits to ancient castles and gardens, country houses and distilleries in store for its well-heeled patrons.
Despite its somewhat unmatched look, the stock formation included some pearls of the Victorian railway era, such as an 1891 ex-LNWR dining saloon, and a Caledonian observation car originally built in 1892, together with a varnished teak Great Northern family saloon of 1912.
Sleeping cars with en-suite bathroom, shower and toilet were barely recognisable as the BR Mk 1 vehicles from which they had been skilfully converted.
This is truly a ‘cruise train' with all facilities on board as on a luxury liner.
The whole train, attired in the plum-and-spilt-milk livery of the LNWR and Caledonian Railways, had been assembled together by Rick Edmondson, then chairman of Rotherham diesel locomotive manufacturers Thomas Hill, and leased to the Great Scottish &Western Railway Company, under a fiveyear agreement.
One of the principal highlights of the Royal Scotsman was steam haulage over the superbly scenic forty-one-mile section between Fort  William and Mallaig — the romantic ‘Road to the Isles’— using one of the two locomotives stabled at Fort William for BR's own summer excursion trains; and from 1986 over the independent Strathspey Railway's five-mile line between Aviemore and Boat of Garten as well.
The durability of the Royal Scotsman over five long seasons of operation, with the top tour price now only a short step away from £3,000 was proven by 1989, but even as this book was being prepared for press, there were changes in the wind which may prove to be a sterner test of the depth of the elitist train-tour market.
Both the Great Scottish &Western Railway Co and independently of each other in 1990!
Taking British Rail itself into the VIP train market was an altogether different matter.
There was no easy route.
In 1984, when the InterCity Charter Unit was first set up, it had at its disposal some twenty sets of Mk 1 stock — principally second-class tourist open vehicles — but nothing which  could credibly be described as suitable for the VIP trains it was seeking to introduce.
Progressively reducing the twenty Mk 1 sets by half, and acquiring from regular service stock a fleet of Mk 1 first open coaches, Ward put in hand a programme of vehicle refurbishment involving re-upholstering, recarpeting and curtain replacement and the fitting of individual table lamps, with the aim of restoring a level of respectability to coaches which had seen better days.
During the second half of the eighties, InterCity could at last boast five complete ten-coach VIP train sets all based and serviced at London's Bounds Green depot.
They comprised four Mk 1 FO sets, each made up of seven FO saloons, two kitchen cars and a BFK brake vehicle, plus the former Manchester Pullman set of seven parlour cars, two parlour  kitchen cars and a parlour brake.
All were outshopped in standard InterCity ‘raspberry ripple’ coach livery but distinguished from ordinary service stock by having white-painted roofs.
For up-market small-party charter hire, InterCity also procured the former London Midland Region general manager's saloon No 6320 — something of a hybrid, comprising a special body on a Mk 1 underframe and B4 bogies, which had been converted for dual braking and electric train heating.
In addition, there is a single HST Mk 3 saloon, which, since special refitting to include a lounge and dining area, has seen use by both the Queen and the Prime Minister.
The Charter Unit's second-class sets, or more correctly standard class sets as BR now prefers to describe them, also underwent refurbishment during the tail end of the 1980s with twenty-four of the Mk 1 TSOs being smartened up and fitted for air braking during 1988, and a further twelve earmarked for the same treatment during the early part of 1990.
Because BR is reluctant to talk about profits, it is difficult to gauge accurately how successful InterCity's forage into the top end of the charter-train market has been, or how much the total earnings from charter traffic contribute to the sector's overall profitability.
But there is little doubt that charter-train profit can be read in seven-figure sums rather than six and that as a business venture, InterCity has not done badly at all.
Nevertheless InterCity cheerfully reveals that the VIP/first-class/full-dining trains contribute by far the largest share of the special-trains earnings — 50 per cent— compared with the 23 per cent from private charters, 18 per cent by standardclass charters, and 5 per cent by the steam market.
Exhibition-train revenue makes up the final 4 per cent.
The aces in the pack are undoubtedly high quality business charters and the three-day Scenic Land Cruise trains.
The latter became InterCity property in 1986, following a long and complicated sequence of events which began near the end of 1983 with the enforced withdrawal of the SLOA Pullman set, following the discovery that the potentially dangerous blue asbestos coach body insulation had become exposed.
Unable to meet the huge cost of the highly specialised asbestos de-contamination work then demanded of the entire Pullman set, SLOA agreed to sell the Pullmans to industrialist Sir William McAlpine (better known to railway enthusiasts as the owner of Flying Scotsman)and to hire them back for steam-charter use once the asbestos stripping work was complete.
Under McAlpine's ‘Pullman Rail’ banner, the Pullmans returned to railtour duties in September 1984 — but by now Pullman Rail, with former SLOA secretary Bernard Staite as managing director, had also acquired from BR a second full rake of coaches — Mk 1 first opens, ostensibly for steam railtour work.
The Pullmans, it was announced, would be kept more or less exclusively for Pullman Rail's newly created non-steamcharter haul business.
After four months back in traffic however, the discovery of further traces of blue asbestos on parts of the Pullman underframes, caused the set to be impounded again…at which point InterCity took the initiative to run its own refurbished VIP stock on the Scenic Land Cruise trains, albeit with Pullman Rail contracted to continue  booking the trains.
In January 1988, the name Pullman Rail was dropped by McAlpine, in favour of‘Flying Scotsman Services,.
As the 1980s were drawing to their close,The West Highlander — not to be confused with the BR-promoted summer steam service of the same name running between Fort William and Mallaig — emerged as the Charter Unit's most successful train, achieving an average load factor of 87 per cent.
With 156 passengers representing a full trainload, and high-season tickets (end of May — end of July) selling at £320, one does not have to be a brilliant mathematician to get a grasp of the kind of revenue being earned.
The inclusion in the Land Cruise trainset of seven first-class sleeping cars, coupled to InterCity's insistence that every passenger should have a window seat, stretched the West Highlander formation to sixteen vehicles — too long for the platforms at King's Cross which could cope with only fourteen — so by default the Friday evening departure was written down to St Pancras, picking up at St Albans and Derby.
By way of example, the highlights of the 1989 train itinerary looked something like this:
Friday: Depart St Pancras.
Dinner served on train.
Overnight berth at Stirling.
Saturday: Depart Stirling for Oban.
Passenger ferry to Craignure on the Isle of Mull for a tour not only of Mull but a visit to Iona.
Overnight hotel at Fort William.
Sunday: Depart Fort William for Mallaig, with a cruise on Loch Nevis followed by a stop for Glenfinnan Monument visit.
Depart Fort William for overnight berth at Stirling.
Monday: Depart Stirling for Edinburgh.
Three-hour visit for shopping.
Lunch served on train to include Haggis and Neeps, Cock-a-Leekie soup, Noisettes of Lamb or Poached Scotch Salmon, Pineapple Pavlova.
Arrive St Pancras.
A far cry from the £2 tray meal handed out on the first of the Scenic Land Cruise trains eight years earlier, in a decade of special-train running where sophistication got its chance — and left behind many ordinary folk for whom the railway ‘excursion’ is now but a fading memory.
Black Five duo.
No 4767 George Stephenson and No 5407 double head the mountain Express over the Sviaduct at Smardale, near Kirby Stephen in April 1981 .
Maunsell N15 4–6–0 No 777 Sir Lamiel pounds up to Harbury tunnel with the up Shakespeare Limited for Marylebone in July 1986.
This is one of BR's regular steam hauled Sunday dining trains .
SLOA special the West Highlander is caught near Crianlarich on 1 June 1985.
Motive power for the King's Cross to Mallaig train is provided by Nos 37081 Loch Long and 37111 Loch Eil Outward Bound over the West Highland section.
The train is now run by BR and originates from St Pancras .
N 47487 hauls a King's Cross to Chester–le–Street charter near Stonebridge, Durham on 27 June 1985.
The stock is mostly refurbished InterCity Mk1 vehicles.
Traditional roast dinner is served in one of InterCity's refurbished Mk1 open coaches.
Note the table lamps.
NETWORK SOUTHEAST
NOWHERE did the 1980s have a greater impact than on the services which at sectorisation became Network SouthEast (NSE).
At the decade's start everything was gloom and doom, cutbacks the order of the day since in 1979 the number of commuters going into London dropped for the tenth successive year.
By 1989 the problems were of growth and too buoyant demand stretching the resources though those had been considerably augmented.
Not merely was the transformation great in itself but, of course, on the largest commuter network under single ownership in the world — equating to the complete Dutch or Belgian railways, carrying two million passengers daily and accounting for 41 per cent of all commuters into central London.
When reading this chapter, remember that not merely is NSE the largest of BR's  businesses but in 1989 ranked as the 106th largest business of every kind in Britain.
Briefly to record the miserable 1970s, London's rail commuters faced fare increases of 40 per cent between June 1974 and May 1975.
BR could not avoid passing its dramatically increased costs following the oil crisis on to its customers, especially London commuters, and as they reduced in number (demand falling at 1 per cent a year) services, stock and facilities were reduced to ‘match demand’, inevitably causing poor morale.
Even the ever-ebullient Sir Peter Parker saw parts of the commuter system ‘rattling into decline’, and nobody was surprised when in 1979 the government referred the services to the Monopolies &Mergers Commission.
The Commission's report was perhaps the turning point, for while it paid respect to the management it found ‘to be totally dedicated to the railway with a high degree of pride in the service which came before financial reward in importance’, it made thought-provoking recommendations about management style and the need to set clearer financial objectives.
In particular BR were advised to create a new senior post at headquarters with special responsibility for London and the South East.
How did the transformation come about?
Like Caesar's Gaul, it can be described in three parts: continuing decline 1980–2; the London &South Eastern phase under David Kirby 1982–5; and the reign of Chris Green and the birth of Network SouthEast commencing with his appointment on 6 January 1986.
Just how great the change has been is perhaps best illustrated  by reference to the number of daily commuters into London.
The decline was finally arrested in 1984; in the next four years the losses of the previous fourteen were made good!
Let us look at it year by year.
1980, the year of Continuing Decline.
BR could claim that even before the Monopoly Commission report's comments on the need for a new rolling-stock policy it was moving towards the development of stock for use on all regions, having introduced Class 313 25kV AC/750V DC (dual voltage) inner-suburban stock in 1976 for the Great Northern electrification scheme followed in 1978 by Class 507 750V DC third-rail stock for Merseyrail (Midland Region); and Class 314 25kV AC stock in Scotland.
From 7 January 1980, Class 508 750V DC stock commenced all-day operation on the south-western division of Southern Region and later in the year Class 315 units were introduced on Great Eastern line services from Liverpool Street.
Albeit with differing electrical systems, these units were of similar external appearance and brought to the Southern Region for the first time (other than on the Waterloo &City line and the experimental PEP unit) sliding-door stock which might ultimately be suitable for one-person operation.
Elsewhere on Southern Region (where main-line passengers could see no prospect of new stock) 1980 saw the introduction of the first refurbished 4-CEP (Class 411) unit No 411506.
These main-line electric multiple units had been built between 1959 and 1963 for the Kent Coast electrification with a design life of approximately twenty-five years.
To all intents and purposes, the body shells of the old units were rebuilt above the solebar at Swindon Works and new (and considered by many less comfortable) seats with removable cushion covers, fluorescent lighting, double-glazed windows and a public address system were installed to extend their working lives into the twentyfirst century!
With their infamous riding qualities, the units compared ill with the air-conditioned delights of Mark 3 and HST stock being introduced on other regions.
But despite the still-falling demand, 1980 was not all gloom and doom.
It saw the signing of a contract worth £15.5million with Westinghouse Brake &Signal Company for the construction of a new power signalbox at Three Bridges as part of a £45million scheme for resignalling the whole of the Brighton main line.
The new box was to replace thirty-three existing signalboxes and to control the line between Norwood Junction and Brighton, including Gatwick Airport which, from May 1980, was to be the terminus of a new semi-fast cross-country service from Reading (via Guildford and Redhill).
11 June saw the reopening of a station closed thirty-five years previously and the opening of the first new inner-London station for very many years: Hackney Central and Hackney Wick on the ‘Cross Town Link Line’ between North Woolwich and Camden Road, a promise of greater things to come.
1981.
Quiet Consolidation.
Only one station was reopened, Kentish Town West on the North London line, on 5 October by Ken Livingstone, leader  of the GLC which had entirely funded the £400,000 rebuilding costs.
But on the Southern Region, ¾ mile Laverstock loop (last used in 1859) was reinstated at Salisbury linking the Basingstoke and Romsey lines as part of the £2million Salisbury resignalling scheme.
This scheme was relatively modest in comparison with many others such as the £7million scheme, for which contracts were this year placed to resignal fifty-six route miles from Cambridge to Royston, Bishop's Stortford, Fulbourne (on the line to Newmarket) and to a point just south of Ely.
But even more important for travellers in East Anglia was the announcement, just before Christmas, of the approval of part of the Anglian electrification scheme (to Norwich and Harwich).
On 12 January the Midland electrification between Luton and Bedford went live in preparation for driver-only training.
1982.
The Year of Dispute and Sectorisation.
That training (and the service that should have started with the Class 317 units at the beginning of the 1982 timetable) was stopped by an industrial dispute about bonus payments for driver-only operation.
It became entwined with the separate dispute with ASLEF over flexible rostering, which the board had announced would be introduced from July with or without agreement.
ASLEF called out its members on a strike, described by Sir Peter Parker as ‘deplorable and shameful’, from 3 July.
With government imposing pressure by withdrawing its PSO grant of £15.5million per week, and a mixed response from ASLEF members that enabled the board to run approximately 1,500 passenger trains and 150 freight trains each weekday, a peace formula was worked out and normal services were resumed on 19 July.
The disruption contributed to the still-declining commuter business.
But some positive things happened in 1982 like the opening of Milton Keynes Central at a cost of £4.5million; Watton-at-Stone between Stevenage and Hertford North; and of Watford Stadium on the Watford Junction-Croxley Green branch on 4 December.
And it was in 1982 that David Kirby was appointed director of the new London &South East sector.
But he remained general manager of the Southern Region, almost as it were being his own superior.
He was (in retrospect) surprisingly luke warm about the potential of cross-London links —‘show me the market’— although he was no doubt pleased to accept in this first year in office an offer from the GLC to fund the third-rail electrification over 8½ miles between Dalston and North Woolwich.
1983.
Turning the Corner.
The economy was improving, and evidence of increased confidence within Lcan be found in 1983 in the eventual introduction of electric one-person-operated trains between Moorgate, St Pancras and Bedford; the opening of no less than four new stations; and government approval for the long awaited electrification of the Tonbridge-Hastings line.
After its well publicised trials and tribulations, limited electric working from St Pancras commenced on 28 March and the electric service was officially inaugurated by the Secretary of State, Tom King, on 15 July.
A full service was introduced in the following year after various problems with  the new units had been resolved.
New stations opened during 1983 included Pinhoe (Devon) on the very edge of the Lboundary, Templecombe, and Dalston Kingsland on the Camden Road-North Woolwich Cross Town Link line.
The latter, built on the site of a station closed as long ago as 1865, was wholly funded by the GLC and the Department of Environment's urban programme grant.
There were also closures such as the short section of electrified line between Elmers End and Sanderstead (near Croydon), Coulsdon North to enable Brighton line resignalling works to proceed, and Broad Street as a prerequisite of the redevelopment of Liverpool Street.
Evidence that David Kirby was keen to show that Lwas no longer a region-based organisation is to be found in the launch of Awayday, entitling an adult, if accompanied by at least one child, to purchase up to four additional tickets for adults or children at a flat fare of £1 each for use anywhere within the sector area.
1984.
Take-off and Gatwick Express.
For the first time in fourteen years the peak-hour commuter figures show growth (a modest half per cent) but an  interview with David Kirby indicated that Lhad no inkling of what was to come.
Indeed, David Kirby stressed how the Lcall on the PSO grant would be limited by a continued reduction in fleet size (from 7,465 vehicles to 7,050 vehicles within two years) and by running fewer and shorter trains to adapt to ‘reduced demand’.
The only opportunity for a large increase in revenue was thought to lie in the Gatwick Express non-stop service introduced in May, featuring air-conditioned stock on the half-hour journey from Victoria to Gatwick every fifteen minutes (and powered on a push-pull basis by Class 73 electro-diesels).
One of the locomotives (No 73123) was named Gatwick Express and turned out in a new livery to match the refurbished Mark 2 stock.
(The successful service was transferred to InterCity in 1985.)
In July the Southern's south-east, central and south-west divisions were abolished, new passenger business manager posts created and a reduced number of area manager posts (but each with increased responsibility) set up.
This was part of a new drive, following criticism in the Serpell Report that the railway was too ‘production led’ to become more businesslike.
The joint BR/LRT Capitalcard for the following year was announced, along with plans to electrify from Bishop's Stortford to Cambridge, on the East Coast main line to Huntingdon, and between Romford and Upminster.
1985.
To Thameslink and Beyond.
In the light of its subsequent success, the most important event was the authorisation of a £54million scheme to link  the Midland and Southern electrified systems by reinstating the half-mile-long disused tunnel between Farringdon and Blackfriars.
Reopening of the tunnel, which had last seen regular passenger services in 1916 and goods traffic in 1969, had been considered in the London Rail Study in 1974 but rejected because the cost (including a new interchange station at West Hampstead) had been estimated at £30million.
A more realistic and simple proposal was investigated by the GLC who concluded that it might be possible to reopen the link for as little as £1million.
The £54million package now authorised included the cost of forty six four-car dual-voltage electric units, the introduction of which would enable a greater number of existing units to be withdrawn because of more efficient use.
Within months it became obvious that increased demand on the Midland electrified lines (at last free from industrial problems and stock defects) would make additional units necessary.
Fourteen additional units were authorised in May 1986, by which time traffic on the Midland electrified lines had increased by 50 per cent since electrification.
Electrification was announced over the eighteen-mile stretch between Sanderstead and East Grinstead (but excluding the Uckfield branch).
This scheme was justified by the withdrawal of asbestos-bearing diesel multiple units and by the more efficient use of the existing EMU fleet; the withdrawal of asbestos-bearing stock was also one of the grounds for the Bournemouth-Weymouth electrification scheme submitted during the year.
From 13 May electric operation actually commenced between Dalston and North Woolwich, and a new £440,000 station jointly funded by the GLC and the Department of the Environment opened at Homerton (between Hackney Wick and Hackney Central) on the site of a station closed in 1944.
In contrast, 5 July saw the end of the already very limited service between Stratford and Tottenham Hale via Lea Bridge, a line which may now return to passenger use following electrification at 25kV in 1989.
The image of LSE was enhanced by David Kirby's decision to introduce a new livery unique to LSE.
It was revealed when ‘Essex Express’ unit No 309605 was handed over on completion of refurbishment at Wolverton Works under a £17.5million contract in March.
The refurbished unit enjoyed a 26 per cent increase in seating capacity and was finished in a two-tone brown livery embellished with an orange band at waist level.
This ‘Jaffa cake’ scheme was soon also to be adopted for main-line Class 411 stock by the south-east sub-sector of Southern Region.
1986.
Network SouthEast.1986 saw the arrival of Chris Green as Sector director (on 6 January) and its dramatic re-launch six months later as Network SouthEast.
There was suitable razzamatazz at Waterloo on 10 June when the blue/white/red/grey livery was shown to the press on two Class 455 units and a Class 50 Howe hauling a short rake of Mark 2 coaches.
Lwent out with a bang rather than a whimper. 12 May was marked by the introduction of no less than four new electric services; on the Eastern Region branch lines between Wickford and Southminster and between  Romford and Upminster; on the Great Eastern main line between Manningtree and Harwich; and (at last) over the thirty-two miles between Tonbridge and Hastings.
The Hastings £20m scheme was celebrated by a successful ‘Gala Day’ on 27 April when unlimited travel over the line for only £1 was available and more formally on 6 May when the Queen Mother (Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports) travelled over the line in the Royal Train.
In preparation for electrification, sufficient Class 411 units had been repainted in ‘Jaffa cake’ livery and branded the ‘1066 Electrics’to give added impact.
Also on 12 May, and with financial assistance from Berkshire County Council and the developer of an adjoining industrial estate, a new station opened at Winnersh Triangle on the Southern Region line on the outskirts of Reading.
Another new station opened on 29 September at Welham Green (between Hatfield and Brookmans Park).
During David Kirby's period as head of L, the sector's call on the public service obligation grant had fallen by 36 per cent during three years, and Chris Green's task was to reduce (if not ultimately obviate the need for) the grant.
NSE's name, and livery, was chosen to give a new character and significance to the rail system in the south east, and to emphasise its unity as a system, no longer a series of independent lines owning loyalty not to London as a whole but to long-abolished independent railway companies.
He aimed to increase off-peak travel in particular by enhancing the quality of travel and station environment by ‘Operation Pride’, a name coined to launch the quality improvement drive, and by new and imaginative marketing exercises, one of the first of which was a ‘Network Day’ on 21 June when over 200,000 people took advantage of the special £3 ticket enabling them to travel all day anywhere.
So successful was the exercise, in both revenue and public relation terms, that a further ‘Network Day’ was held on 13 September.
The same 10 June also saw the launch of the one-day Capitalcard giving (after the morning peak) unlimited travel on BR, London Underground, London Buses and (in due course) Docklands Light Railway.
Within twelve months it had exceeded expectations and become a £40million growth product.
Further growth in leisure travel (which represents 29 per cent of NSE income) was planned to follow the introduction of the ‘Network Card’ on 29 September providing one-third discounts on off-peak travel.
Chris Green announced that NSE had a commitment to quality improvements on all fronts, but with full-blooded business direction aimed at maximising the high profile of the sector, to which his famous red lamp posts gave an immediate impact.
Longer term financial and quality improvements were to follow major station redevelopment schemes, including profitproducing office and retail elements, of which the redevelopment of Liverpool Street and for which new plans were announced in 1986 is a good example.
The redevelopment of Liverpool Street involved the closure of the much decayed ex-North London Railway terminus at Broad Street, and the diversion from 30 June of the remaining North London Line services to the City via the newly constructed Graham Road curve into Liverpool Street using dual-voltage Class 313 units.
In retrospect the most important event of 1986 may have been the conception of the new Networker train, filling a vital gap price and quality wise, at long last making it possible for NSE to plan systematic replacement of old EMUs.
1987.
The Year of Electrification.
On 19 January electric trains began operation between Bishop's Stortford and Cambridge, and within three months authority was received to electrify the nearby ten-mile gap from Royston to Shepreth Branch Junction (near Cambridge), the anticipated £2.5million costs being justified by savings in the use of rolling stock and lower maintenance costs.
Next month, full electric services commenced between Cambridge and Liverpool Street; between Norwich and Liverpool Street (partly sponsored by InterCity) and between Peterborough and King's Cross.
To celebrate its joining the electric network, Cambridge was visited on 23 March by the Minister of Transport (David Mitchell) on a recordbreaking (48 minute) trip from Liverpool Street.
The May timetable also saw the reintroduction of a limited and experimental passenger service between Oxford and Bicester Town (previously Bicester London Road before closure in January 1968), sponsored by Oxford City and County Councils, Cherwell District and Bicester Town Councils as a possible partial solution to traffic congestion in Oxford.
Subsequently, the Bicester service, although still indicated as experimental in the public timetable, has been enhanced and an intermediate station opened at Islip.
A month earlier, another experimental service reopened between Kettering and  Corby with as many as seventeen trains daily.
On the former GWR line to Bicester North a new station opened in October at Haddenham &Thame Parkway — the 150th new station opened by BR since the Beeching cuts of the 1960s.
A new station at Lake (near Shanklin) on the Isle of Wight showed NSE's commitment to retaining the railway on the island.
More passengers have of course benefitted from the electrification of the Oxted and East Grinstead lines, although railway euphoria was possibly dampened by the Minister of Transport who on 30 September took the opportunity of rejecting further recommendations by the Monopoly Commission that increased investment was necessary to provide a satisfactory quality of service on NSE.
The East Grinstead scheme had only been authorised because of the need to replace asbestos-infected elderly diesel multiple units and by demonstrating that no new rolling stock would be required.
New stock was of course required for the proposed Thameslink service, and Chris Green formally accepted the first Class 319 dual-voltage unit at BREL York on 2 September.
Also welcome was the Royal Assent to the Bill authorising the construction of spurs from the Liverpool Street-Cambridge line to serve Stansted Airport on which work is now substantially advanced.
1988.
Thameslink and Wessex Electrics.
The pace quickened, this year seeing the long-awaited introduction of the Thameslink service, the extension of electrification from Bournemouth to Weymouth and the delivery (albeit late) of Class 442 ‘Wessex Electrics’ units to give air-conditioned comfort to NSE passengers.
But 1988 ended with the disaster at Clapham discussed in the signalling chapter.
Given its success after only eighteen months, and the current plans to extend the Thameslink network, it now seems hard to believe that passengers have enjoyed the ability to cross London by regular electric BR services for  such a short time.
Success has been despite the somewhat confusing route plan initially imposed on the service south of the Thames by the necessity of incorporating the new service into an existing timetable without increasing mileage.
Thameslink was formally inaugurated by HRH The Princess Royal on 25 April, when she combined its formal launch with that of Save the Children Week and travelled with a number of children on unit 319036 to Crystal Palace.
The everyday Thameslink service commenced on 16 May.
The initial order for sixty Class 319 units was soon increased to eighty-six.
Later in 1988 these units began to be joined north of the Thames by similar (but AC current only) units of Class 321 for use on Cambridge and Northampton services for which sixty-eight units were authorised, together with a further five similar Class 322 units for the Stansted Airport link.
The Class 321 units (of which the first was delivered in September 1988), were an immediate success, but the same cannot be said of the Class 442 ‘Wessex Electrics’ of which twenty-four five-car units should have been delivered in time for the May 1988 timetable.
In fact, only four units were available in May.
Southern Region general manager Gordon Pettitt took a calculated gamble when he authorised a charity high-speed run to Weymouth on 14 April, when the special train completed the 142½ mile trip to Weymouth in seconds within two hours with a maximum speed of 109mph.
On the London Midland Region, electric trains of Class 313 commenced running, a year earlier than anticipated, between Watford Junction and St Albans Abbey on 11 July, on which line a further new station — How Wood — opened later in the year.
Class 313 units are also used on the suburban service between Euston and Watford Junction, to which service fell the honour of being the first line to be given a NSE total route refurbishment programme and branded ‘Harlequin'.
The programme included station and train refurbishment, new train information systems and full resignalling.
Experience on this line, as earlier on the Midland Suburban line and subsequently on the North London, has demonstrated the marketing advantages and associated traffic growth that follow such schemes.
It may well have contributed to the 1989 decision to introduce a policy of ‘Power to the Routes’ for the current decade.
Fifteen separate routes have been made the responsibility of managers whose chief aim is to satisfy their customers.
In the words of Chris Green: ‘Every problem will at last have an owner.’
The lot of the Great Northern manager was eased in November by the reopening of an additional suburban platform (No 11) at King's Cross.
The Minister of Transport initiated electrification of twenty-eight route miles in Hampshire between Portsmouth and Southampton and Eastleigh, to be finished in 1990.
To the east, management within NSE was assisted by the creation on 29 April of a new Anglia Region covering lines serving Liverpool Street and Fenchurch Street stations.
1989.
Looking to the Future.
Hot on the Clapham accident, five passengers were killed in a collision at Purley (south of Croydon), again involving two Southern Region electric multiple units.
Save for the opening of a further station, at Islip on the Oxford-Bicester Town line, it was a year of consolidation and planning.
Class 321 units continued to be delivered at the rate of two a week, and on the Isle of Wight ‘new’ 1938-built former London Underground trains began to be introduced to replace coaches dating from 1923.
Authority was obtained for the modernisation of the Chiltern line between Marylebone and Banbury via Bicester including resignalling and the provision of seventy-seven Class 165 Networker coaches, and in August the then new Minister of Transport, Cecil Parkinson, authorised the first hundred Networker four-car trains for the North Kent lines.
The decade could hardly have ended on a more optimistic note.
While it has to be obvious that current success has been built on foundations that were perhaps sounder than people generally thought ten years ago, the combination of a livelier economy and greater commercial drive (leading above all to more commonsense, usually more local management) has produced results far above the most rosy forecasts.
The pride taken not only by many staff but passengers in their more clearly identified ‘Lines’ is paying handsome dividends.
But four main factors are singled out by Chris Green for the currently greatly improved outlook: the record investment currently being made, at the end of 1989 amounting to an astonishing million pounds a day; the success of the Networker train whose carriages in 1989 were being delivered at the rate of one a day; the enormous level of London station development both enhancing the environment (who at the start of the 1980s would have thought of treating a terminus as a shopping precinct?) and producing revenue on the grand scale; and the steady introduction of Integrated Electronic Control Centres (discussed in detail in the signalling chapter).
As mentioned at the start of this chapter, forecasts made at the end of the 1970s now seem horribly pessimistic.
It is hard to envisage the total 1990s story, but the decade starts with greater confidence in the railways serving London and the South East than, perhaps since Victorian times.
Refurbished 4–Cep unit No 1585 in London an South East Express two–tone brown (jaffa cake) livery comes under the impressive signal–box at Canterbury West working as the 12.03 Margate to Charing Cross via Ashford on 23 September 1986.
The 11.20 ‘Bedpan’ service from St Pancras to Bedford departs the london terminus on 26 September 1986 formed of Class 317/0 emu No 317315.
No 5029 Renown approaches Exeter Central station with the 09.15 Waterloo to Exeter St David's on 17 August 1989.
The whole train is in NSE colours and includes Mk2A and B vehicles .
A unique view of Holborn Viaduct photographed from a well placed office window on 18 august 1989.
Class 319 No 319041 forms the 15.56 Luton–Brighton ‘Thameslink’ service emerging from Snow Hill tunnel while above Class 413/2 4–CAPS Nos 3206 (heading the 16.54 to Kent House) and 3207 (leading the 16.47 to Canterbury East) await their respective departure times.
The 11.02 Dartford–Charing Cross with 4–EPB No 5335 leading passes the new Eltham station under construction on 17 August 1984.
This station replaced Eltham Well Hall and Eltham Park.
Class 321 emu No 321307 takes the Cambridge line through the Bethnal Green station platforms on 10 January 1989 forming the 13.05 Liverpool Street–Cambridge train while, on the right, the 11.37 Harwich Town–Liverpool Street service is formed of Class 312/1 emus Nos 312793/784.
looking to the future!
Breaking the banner at Ryde Pier head to inaugurate the first run of the Eastleigh–refurbished ex–LT 1938 stock from Ryde Pier Head to Brading on 13 July 1989, Class 483 unit No 001 looks particularly smart in a neater version of NSE livery.
PROVINCIAL
WHO would have thought, back in 1980, that we would now be reading in the popular railway magazines a number of reports that British Rail's Provincial sector possesses some routes which are promising to become profitable?
Who indeed could have forecast that the Provincial sector would be announcing such an improvement in their financial situation resulting from rapid but targeted investment in new trains, with the prime objective of cost reduction?
Certainly, only eight years ago, when the other sectors were given clearly defined briefs, the lumping of unprofitable passenger services into a somewhat negatively titled ‘Other Provincial Services’ produced a kind of dustbin sector.
Provincial inherited a very wide range of types of route, train make-up, and service level.
It had very few jewels in its crown.
Possibly the Edinburgh-Glasgow push-pull trains represented the sector's highest quality product, being formed of Mark 3 stock and powered by smart and newly overhauled Class 47/7 locomotives.
Other internal Scottish Region expresses to Aberdeen and Inverness also became part of the Provincial empire, even though their carriages were still branded ‘InterCity’ for many years after sectorisation.
There was also the Liverpool-Newcastle service, which in other countries would have been given ‘InterCity’ status, and which shared tracks north of Leeds with InterCity trains, but which ran here with older stock, Mark 1 or early Mark 2, hauled by the heavy and increasingly unreliable 1Co-Col locomotives of Classes 40 or 46.
If those trains represented the top quality of Provincial's empire, there was much less to be excited about elsewhere.
Outside the large conurbations, which were the province of the locally financed Passenger Transport Executives, Provincial inherited a disparate collection of routes linking various centres or branching to less populous places.
Many routes could not be said to form a coherent network, other than as InterCity connections to whom they did not now belong, and a few (surprisingly few) were in the mould of the traditional country branch line.
Most of the secondary routes that survive are relatively long, run through sparsely populated land, and have no hope of making money.
In this category one can group the West Highland and Kyle lines, the Central Wales, the Cambrian and Cumbrian coast, and possibly the Suffolk coast line.
The rest are mainly either inter-urban routes like Portsmouth-Bristol, quite busy branch lines like the Cornish branches or the South Wales branches; or  they are former main lines from which InterCity has progressively withdrawn — like the Settle &Carlisle, the former Glasgow &South Western Glasgow route, Newport-Crewe, the trans-Pennine lines and some cross-country routes crossing England from east to west.
There are local stopping services which run on InterCity routes, such as the Birmingham-Rugby-Northampton electric trains, the Manchester-Blackpool trains, Edinburgh-Dunbar locals and stopping trains on the North Wales route.
The description of these services as ‘disparate’ surely applies also to the traction and rolling stock inherited by Provincial, the assets most responsible for the sector's cost base.
The only modern-design vehicles, apart from the Scottish air-conditioned stock, were possibly the Class 310 electric multiple units radiating from Rugby, and even these dated from the mid 1960s.
Everything else was either original or refurbished diesel multiple unit, or the popular but cost-ineffective combination of diesel locomotives and cast-off main line carriages.
For many lifetimes railway practice had been for locomotives and rolling stock to be downgraded or ‘cascaded’ from front line to secondary services.
No one expected otherwise than to get second- or third-hand stock on a train running between Weymouth and Bristol, or between Manchester Victoria and Leeds, or from Glasgow to Stranraer.
The same happened to stations.
The owning Regions had their priorities to maintain to reasonable standards the stations on main lines and which were the calling points for InterCity trains.
In the 1970s money just was not available to smarten up more than a handful of Provincial stations.
Those fortunate to be in the areas covered by the PTEs were another story.
Money or the lack of it is what had modelled the railwayman's thinking in the formative years of BR.
From Dr Beeching onwards, managers were trained in the science of work study, in the discipline of financial restraint, and in being able to manage on less, to cut out or just delay expenditure.
In a sector where the income from sales of tickets represented less than a quarter of total expenditure, there was little else one could expect.
Thus as the recession of the early 1980s drew to its close ‘condition of track’ speed restrictions of some severity were imposed: for example stretches of 35 to 50mph between Selby and Hull on the straightest railway in Britain.
How, then, do we now celebrate Provincial's success as the 1990s begin?
It is a fascinating story of a turnaround, of the value of sectorisation and of the quality of the managers who took up the challenge of ‘Other Provincial Services,.
As a loss maker, Provincial received the bulk of its income from grants from the PTEs, and from the government in the form of the Public Service Obligation (PSO).
Not surprisingly, the Department of Transport, and in consequence the British Railways Board, maintained a policy of aiming to reduce the PSO so as to reduce the demands on the taxpayer.
Nationalised industries were first set annual cash limits under a Labour administration, but the concept was in line with Conservative Government policy to cut direct  taxation and release cash so that people (voters) had a greater choice with what to do with their money.
John Welsby was appointed as the first Director, Provincial, and he set about evaluating the sources of the sector's costs.
Quite clearly, as costs were four times direct revenue, 10 per cent(for example ) saving in costs had much more effect on the balance than did a potential 20 per cent increase in revenue, so energy was at first concentrated on the cost base.
A significant feature was the realisation that BR's policy to refurbish and life-extend the ageing fleet of diesel multiple units involved an enormous additional expense in the sudden requirement to extract all their blue and white asbestos.
(The asbestos had been built into the carriages to act as sound and heat insulation, but had of course later been found to be a health hazard.)
The same work was also required in a large number of the early Mark 2 locomotive-hauled carriages, and in many long-life electric multiple units.
It emerged that across the very varied fleets the cost of asbestos removal would be £25,000 per vehicle, an investment producing no financial return.
The question had to be asked: could the purchase of new trains produce savings sufficient to cover the cost of servicing their capital costs as well as reducing the burden on the PSO?
In the 1970s there were only two types of potential replacement DMU being considered by BR's passenger marketing people and the engineers.
The Class 210 diesel-electric design of three-car or four-car unit had actually been produced to a business specification developed in conjunction with the board's passenger commercial managers.
It was intended as a high-performance set which could inherit the reliability associated with previous BR (SR) DEMUs, thus beating the older, inherently unreliable diesel-mechanical multiple units hands down.
Its problem, when analysed by the new Provincial sector was its price: it would cost too much to enable a financial case to be made for the 210 breed to replace existing DMUs even taking asbestos removal into account.
The other design in the offing was the two-axle railbus which had started life as a Research Division project aimed at combining high-speed freightvehicle technology with that of the standard Leyland road bus in order to produce a low cost diesel train.
This was certainly a cheap option, and there were some short- or medium-distance routes where such a basic vehicle was considered acceptable.
In particular the PTEs in West Yorkshire and Greater Manchester were interested in the railbus as a replacement for their ageing DMUs.
Experience with these trains, delivered as Classes 141 (West Yorkshire) and 142 (Greater Manchester and elsewhere) was encouraging.
Their promised availability and utilisation was such that one new vehicle was expected to replace two old ones, and thus considerable cost savings were  ensured.
More units (Classes 143 and 144) were delivered for services in Tyneside and West Yorkshire.
The problems with the gearboxes of the 141s, 142s and 143s were well publicised as the 1980s drew into their second half.
The supplying company could not keep up delivery of repaired gearboxes to match the rate at which they failed, and with low availability of their new fleet Provincial had to retain the DMUs it was supposed to replace for a couple or so more years.
It also turned out that the 142s in Cornwall, and indeed those in Manchester to a lesser extent, suffered high wheel wear.
This necessitated their removal from the West Country branches while those units working in the Northern conurbations needed their wheel treads reprofiling more frequently, causing another temporary source of low availability for there was a shortage of replacement wheels.
But the new two-axle units were actually responsible for part of the upsurge in traffic on their routes and were certainly no worse than the buses with which they were successfully competing.
Meanwhile, however, it had become clear that there had to be a replacement DMU which was placed midway in size and cost between the railbuses and the 210 units.
But, if underfloor engines and transmissions were to be used, they had to be in a different league of reliability and performance from the DMUs which BR had been running since the 1950s.
Fortunately, some experience had been building up on the European continent, in Holland in particular, with DMUs which had very reliable and  cost-effective engines and transmissions.
The Nederlands Railways 3100 and 3200 Class units employ Cummins diesel engines with Voith hydraulic transmission driving through permanently engaged final drives on the axles.
This combination was tried among others on four prototype three-car DMUs on BR, two from BREL being Class 150 and two from Metro-Cammell being eventually known as Class 152.
Thus was born the hardware of the BR Sprinter units, but their business environment needs discussing in depth because of the fundamental re-thinking which resulted from the need to maximise the potential of those trains.
When the first orders were placed the numbers of two-car units in the fleet were set by means of a number of calculations.
Availability was targeted at 85 per cent, a quantum leap from the 70–75 per cent being achieved at most BR DMU depots up until then, and typical of the radical thinking which accompanied Provincial's second director, John Edmonds.
High-density seating with many rows fixed in face-to-back mode, together with much more standing room, enabled trains which had previously been formed of three old DMU vehicles to be scheduled for two Sprinter vehicles.
Large tanks permitted the Sprinters to run longer (up to 1,000 miles) between the need to refuel, and maintenance visits to home depots were reduced from the two or three times weekly of older DMUs to fortnightly.
Thus was it possible for one new Sprinter vehicle to replace at least two old DMU coaches.
In service the targets were beaten from day one.
90 per cent availability is now the norm, and there have been weeks when the 150/ 2 series, arguably the most reliable diesel trains ever to have run in Britain, have attained 100 per cent availability during the daytime.
For not only is maintenance now much less frequent, all scheduled depot attention is given at night or at weekends or between peak diagrams.
Thus, Sprinter units working out of Derby depot, covering as they did stopping services on routes spread out as far as Leeds, Manchester, Cambridge, Aberystwyth, Pwllheli, Holyhead, Scarborough, Skegness and Cleethorpes, actually achieved annual mileages in excess of 100,000 miles per year, practically double that achieved by the older DMUs.
Through the late 1980s another force was at work which turned the Provincial sector's fortunes further round.
Increasing prosperity in the United Kingdom meant that people had more spare cash, and much of this was spent on an increase in personal travel.
The new trains on the Provincial routes therefore had a market with a degree of positive elasticity not previously enjoyed.
Inevitably the services which had been planned on the basis of high seat-load factors quickly became overcrowded.
Provincial had been bitten by its own success.
Rediagramming of units, and the retention of old DMUs for many years longer than originally planned in order to keep up the fleet size to meet this new demand, have enabled the worst of the overcrowding to be contained, though there are at the time of writing (1989) stili several tight spots to be dealt with in certain areas at peak times.
And at the very end of the decade, after this chapter had been written, Provincial announced that such was the     cost of retaining ageing DMUs that in 1990 some services would be temporarily reduced until more Sprinters come on stream.
If that all sounds like success, there is another, more amazing story which Provincial can now tell.
And another one is just round the corner as this book is published.
Following the success of the early Sprinters, which were basically of suburban body design and layout, later builds of Sprinter have been up-market, aimed at the longer-distance traveller.
The Classes 155 (Leyland, Workington) and 156 (Metro-Cammell) employ longer, 23m bodies with end doors so that the central passenger saloon in each vehicle has the maximum possible space in which to arrange the medium-density seats.
The  the units have an ambience of comfort which is well matched by the refreshment-trolley service which is becoming the norm on the services on which these Super-Sprinters run.
What is really amazing however is the routes which have been dreamed up for the Super-Sprinters, and which have taken off with growth factors unbelieved when first disclosed.
The process has evolved over the decade with the linking up of what used to be short runs into long, cross-country routes.
Norwich-Birmingham had already been tried, with locomotive-hauled stock, but putting together the services which previously had separately linked  Liverpool, Warrington Central, Manchester; Blackpool and Manchester; Sheffield via the Hope Valley line; Nottingham, Grantham, Peterborough, Ely and Ipswich/Norwich and Harwich Parkeston Quay, was a bold move from which has developed a popular route on which much new business is emerging.
Other new routes coming into fruition have included the welding together of the trans-Pennine services between Leeds and Manchester with those starting back at Newcastle, Scarborough, Hull and the main line to Liverpool, with connections to Chester and North Wales.
There is also a route from Newcastle through Carlisle to Stranraer and/or Glasgow via Kilmarnock, which results from the combination of previously separate services.
Most Super-Sprinter services are based on hourly or two-hourly clock-face timings, and a feature of their operation has been their reliability, much in the face of opposition from traditional railway operators who originally rejected out of hand the idea that end-on services could be linked up without transferring delays from one part of the system to another.
The next phase in the growth of the Provincial sector's services is the introduction of the new Class 158 units on the Sprinter Express routes.
The 158 is a 90mph, fully air-conditioned DMU of high quality customer ambience specification.
It is the nearest thing to a modern InterCity train, and yet has the flexibility and economy of the DMU.
The quality is good enough to enable the 158s to replace the Mark 3 push-pull trains in Scotland as well as the Mark 2s.
The 158s will revolutionise the trans-Pennine routes when they push the 156s away on to other lines.
The annual mileages to be run by the new units will be well in excess of 150,000!
Indeed, there is now a distinct possibility that the Provincial sector will create some profitable railway routes in its quest for efficiency and quality.
The Provincial story is still proceeding.
Its present director is Sidney Newey, a successful career railwayman who sees almost endless possibilities for new routes.
We shall have to wait until each is announced, but the possibility of reopening new routes — a far cry from bus substitution — raises a new image for the sector which ten years ago had been written off by some people as a collection of unremunerative passenger railways.
The key evidence of success is the financial results.
From a frightening ratio of expenditure to fares revenue of four to one, the ratio has improved to better than two and a half to one and it is stili improving.
The 1980s saw the extensive refurbishment of the aging Class 31 fleet and a need for the more eth fitted Class 31/4s.
Here two examples are seen at Gilberdyke.
No 31466 halts at the platform with 13.39 Lancaster to Hull service while No 31439 passes non–stop with the 15.50 Hull to Lancaster on 16 August 1985.
This section of line is now double track and the station platforms have been altered to serve the middle roads on this picture.
During the late 1980s the line to Doncaster was severed when the swing–bridge over the River Ouse are Goole was damaged by a Swedish freighter on 23 November 1988.
Expensive prototype.
The three–car version of the Class 210 dmu, set No 210002 departs form West Ealing with the 11.05 Paddington–slough service on 22 February 1984.
Note the main and relief lines ladder junction.
Climbing the Pennines.
Sprinter units Nos 150242 and 150230 pass the distant signal for Greenfield as they work the 10.03 Liverpool to Scarborough service on 31 August 1987.
Swindon Style.
Still carrying its Trans–Pennine branding, four–car Class 124 dmu forms the 12.00 Leeds–Morecambe service near Clapham on 22 May 1982.
These distinctive units were finally withdrawn in 1984.
Sprinter No 150279 — one of the 150/2 series built with gangwayed ends — in the Nantgarw Gap nearing Radyr on the Taff Vale main line.
Castle Coch, a folly built on the site of a 13th century ruin by the Marquess of Bute, rises out of the wooded background.
31 March 1988.
Class 45 1Co–Col No 45110 (withdrawn July 1988) shirts the Irish Sea near Penmaenmawr with an eight–coach Bangor–Newcastle train in august 196.
These services were brought in with the May 1983 timetable to improve the range the Trans–Pennine trains on offer.
First–class accommodation is provided by an air–conditioned Mk2 coach, the most modern vehicle in the rake, second from the rear.
The leading coach is a down–graded open first.
Note the rockslide shelter (above the locomotive) protection from the granite quarries on the headland.
The European at ow Gill on its long journey south to Harwich Parkeston Quay.
The motive power is provided by No 85013 as far as Preston, from where diesel traction will take over.
The date is 9 August 1983, the service had commenced on the introduction of the summer timetable.
ScotRail push–pull Class 47/7 No 47716 Duke of Edinburgh's Award (named July 1985) leaves Edinburgh Waverley with a shuttle service to Haymarket TMD for the ScotRail festival on 24 August 1985 .
CATERING
THE 1980s opened with British Transport Hotels (BTH) still running around thirty traditional railway hotels; with its Travellers-Fare wing sprucing up its portfolio of dull, old-fashioned refreshment rooms, and restaurant cars continuing to suffer declining patronage as journey times shortened and eating habits changed.
The HSTs had effected one major positive change: an increase in hot snacks in the age of the microwave.
The decade ended with the railway hotels not merely privatised but in many cases under second and third owners, generally poorer in standard and distinctly without the nation  having benefited (since they ran at a profit anyway), with Travellers-Fare privatised and healthier (both profitwise and in what they served), and with InterCity rethinking the role of the restaurant car and with many chefs still preparing meals on board.
It was in station catering, so long the Cinderella, that the changed order of the 1980s made its first mark.
The fast-food revolution arrived in style in October 1980 with the opening of the first Casey Jones restaurant at Waterloo.
Casey Jones, with its colourful, upbeat presentation, its production-line methods and its computer-controlled cooking, was light years away from anything seen before on British stations.
Passengers and passers-by alike found its wide, illuminated photographs of mouth-watering meals irresistible — though at a cost (in 1980) of nearly £½million, Casey Jones was obviously going to pay for himself only at the busiest venues.
Over the next five years the CJ chain grew to fourteen, including provincial cities such as Birmingham, Liverpool and Glasgow (Central and Queen Street), spawning meanwhile a revolution in approach throughout the business.
The staff had been recruited and trained with a new professionalism; and the new methods now began spreading into the rest of station catering, bringing to the name Travellers-Fare a new credibility and respect.
Marketing too underwent a revolution; old names — the ‘Tournament’ at Paddington, the ‘Golden Frame’at Sheffield — were out, while in came the snappy new ‘Quicksnack’or ‘Station Tavern’that proudly proclaimed a new image nationwide.
Everywhere, too, customers were finding much nicer things to eat.
Sandwiches — nearly 7 million sold on stations in 1985 — lost their ‘curly’ image; the new order was Tuna &Cucumber, Salami &Coleslaw, or BLT — bacon, lettuce and tomato.
The immediate success of these fillings, and the brown bread they came in, reflected John Bull's broadening palate.
As the 1980s progressed, seasoned travellers observed that the offerings of railway stations, airports and motorway service areas were growing more and more alike.
All three are — or, in the case of railways, have become — essentially light catering markets; and in such markets profitability, the watchword of the times, calls for selling made-up products like plate meals or filled rolls, rather than retail lines like chocolate bars where the scope for mark-up is obviously small.
It means, too, devoting as much space as possible to selling rather than seating.
All this had a dramatic effect on station catering's turnover, up from £33.1 million in 1978 to £62.8million seven years later.
This was as well; for from 1980, the BR Property Board began charging Travellers-Fare a percentage of turnover, as rental; and if another retailer, caterer or not, could offer a better return, Travellers-Fare might find itself out.
One of the new-look business's greatest successes proved to be its Food Courts, where up to five takeaway counters open on to a central, supervised seating area.
Euston, the first to open in July 1986, included ‘Le Croissant Shop’, a franchise business that at once complements and rivals Travellers-Fare.
Its ‘running powers’ over TF territory reflected the rising political pressure to dilute, and ultimately privatise, all public sector businesses.
Under this nostrum, the more successful station catering became, the more saleable it was; and in May 1986, the threat of sell-off moved dramatically closer, when British Rail split Travellers-Fare into its train and station counterparts, train catering becoming an integral part of InterCity, with station catering, continuing under the name Travellers-Fare, as a totally selfstanding business.
Travellers-Fare had first been split out of BTH from 1 January 1982 as a preliminary to privatising the hotels.
This further split between train and station catering was rigidly enforced and led to some extremes of rivalry.
One keen young steward on the Cannon Street-Hastings trains drummed up afternoon beer trade by operating his trolley on the platforms at Cannon Street.
While trains are exempt from the licensing laws, stations are not.
This was before the 1988 Licensing Act which brought all-day opening.
A quick telephone call from the station's duty catering manager resulted in the young unfortunate being escorted for questioning by the heavy hand of the police.
In 1988 BR decided to sell station catering outright.
That December, the Secretary of State for Transport announced the identity of the successful bidders: Travellers-Fare's own management.
There was widespread pleasure at this, justice had been done.
It had been a very different story with the earlier sell-off of the hotels where the managers' interest had not been shown proper respect.
No such satisfactory denouement came the way of the beleaguered train catering business.
Political hotheads were demanding a sell-off; but no wouldbe purchaser dared tangle with the horrendous staff rostering costs, the problems of management control, the antiquated working conditions, the  railway operating hazards that frustrate a crew's best efforts while landing them with the blame and, not least, the ever-lurking cynicism of the media.
Unlocking all these problems needed several different keys.
One of them was the mini-buffet, first introduced in 1980 on the Waterloo-Exeter run.
Designed as a low-cost replacement for the fleet of ‘miniature’ buffet cars, then twenty years old, these trolleys were (and are) pre-loaded, operating on board from behind a small fixed counter in an open saloon coach.
At any station en route the steward can speedily remove or exchange his trolley, or switch to another train.
This highly flexible system quickly spread to longdistance commuter runs, such as Liverpool Street to Cambridge or Clacton; and in turn gave fresh impetus to the old dream of establishing corridor trolley services throughout the length of trains.
The new, spacious Mk 3 rolling stock, with its luggage stowage space and automatic vestibule doors, was at last making these a practicality; and, despite some unofficial rearguard action, in 1984 the NUR ended opposition.
The resulting at-seat light refreshment services provided an ideal foothold for the private operators whose involvement in railway catering the government was urging.
The first of these now widespread services began, in the summer of 1984, between Chester and  Newport, run by Gylee Enterprises (whose ‘operating manager’ was a former Travellers-Fare station catering manageress).
The mini-buffets underlined anew the truism that if all food could somehow be prepared on terra firma, familiar restaurant-car hazards such as unreliable equipment and minuscule space would no longer matter.
And technology was now offering a key to this problem also.
Modern cook-chill processes, using liquid nitrogen, chill partly cooked food very rapidly to just above freezing point at which temperature it will keep perfectly for several days.
Heating in a simple convection oven is all that remains to do on board; and this system, coupled with a range of basically similar (‘modular’) trolleys formed the basis of ‘Cuisine 2000’ begun experimentally between Euston and Manchester in August 1985.
Modular catering cars retained an orthodox grill for that perennial favourite, the Great British Breakfast, which in 1987 accounted for 630,000 out of the total of 1.1 million main meals served.
Preparation of the food ‘on shore’ now offered private contractors a foothold in the core of the business, and this in turn led in 1987 to the highly symbolic step of privatising the railway sandwich.
Once the butt of musichall comics, the quality and range was further improved — and was an immediate success.
Soon InterCity were claiming that sales had doubled to 5 million a year.
Part of this somewhat free accounting was undoubtedly due to much better control: no longer could staff pass off a ‘do-it-yourself sandwich and pocket the proceeds; but much of the increase was real and deserved.
Cuisine 2000 itself, meanwhile, was enjoying a somewhat mixed reception.
Freed from railborne restrictions, the new menus could offer much greater sophistication.
Passengers now encountered ‘Duckling in Ginger and Shallot Sauce: an irresistible combination of seasoned roasted duck, off the bone, served with a sauce of shallots, ginger, honey and white wine.’
But such pretentious billing set up Cuisine 2000 for instant mockery whenever problems arose — as surely they did.
Private contractors, appointed both to supply the food and to staff and run the ‘shore’ depots, seriously underestimated problems such as the relentless, unforgiving intensity of the railway timetable — very different from their airline experience where there are far more carpets under which to sweep catering delays.
There were many complaints of altered menus, minuscule portions, and too often, of no food at all.
The running of Cuisine 2000 furthermore quickly proved very costly.
Expensive bought-in food and increased depot costs were largely to blame.
The forecast upsurge in takings did not happen.
The cost of train catering to its parent BR Sector, InterCity, almost doubled between 1983 and 1988.
A review completed in spring 1989 confirmed once again the truths of the business: that catering is an essential and integral part of InterCity travel; that (trolleys excepted) most train catering, modular or otherwise, will ever be a net cost; and that therefore, the catering budget can only emerge after the extent and level of services have been specified.
Setting a cost limit first, and then trying to tailor services to fit, causes only conflict and demoralisation.
So InterCity declared a policy for the 1990s of offering catering in some  form, on all their services.
Modular catering (though not necessarily Cuisine 2000) is expanding on to the Liverpool Street-Norwich run (using former West Coast vehicles), the East Coast main line (with Mk4 stock), and the Western Region, when the ex-ECML cars can be cascaded in 1991.
Food will be bought-in at various stages of pre-preparation; but the operation of shorebases by contractors is at an end.
Meal style and availability will vary, more than hitherto, with the journey length and passenger profile of each individual train.
Meantime BR's two other passenger sectors, Provincial and Network SouthEast, were left under the 1986 reorganisation without their own catering.
Subsidies are out; if no one can operate their on-train catering profitably, then no catering there will be.
Unlike at InterCity, little ticket revenue is considered at risk from taking this stance.
Proper buffet cars are economic on only a small handful of their routes, notably Waterloo-Bournemouth.
On many other routes, trolleys have provided an ideal lowcost solution and today's timetable shows a good variety of trains, including many of Provincial's Sprinter expresses.
Station Breakthrough: the first Casey Jones fast food restaurant, at Waterloo, seen here soon after its opening in October 1980.
‘Welcome Buffet’ was a marketing attempt to jazz up the merchandising in the old Mk1 buffet cars, patently unsuited to the 1980s.
Its success — unlike the public cynicism it generated — proved hard to identify.
The new dawn: Cuisine 2000 in its first month of service, August 1985, on to Euston–Manchester run.
Among the first private trolley operators on BR were Rightline Caterers of Rhyl, seen here working 17.40 chester–Rhyl service on a very cold 25 February 1986, when the well–known instant coffee, common to both private and public sectors, was extremely welcome.
Hot favourite: through the 1980s the Great British Breakfast took a larger and larger share of total main meals served.
Mk2 first–class open vehicles, like that shown here, gave way to the Mk3 build, and glass jars of Cooper's Oxford Marmalade to plastic portion-sized containers.
FREIGHT, EVER MORE SPECIALIST
AT the beginning of the 1980s BR's freight business retained many facets of the inefficient, labour-intensive system of yesteryear.
True, the ‘Beeching era’ of the 1960s had brought revolution in the form of Freightliner and unit trains, the latter represented above all by the highly successful ‘merry-goround’concept.
But such innovations were only applied to certain traffic flows, and the old order of vacuum-braked or unfitted wagons, sprawling marshalling yards and generally lavish siding provision was allowed to linger on.
It was only during the 1980s that it was finally laid to rest, enabling BR to run a fully modernised and streamlined freight system.
The most telling indicator of Railfreight's success in the 1980s was the unprecedented turnround in its financial performance.
From a massive deficit of £281mi1lion in 1984–5, the year of the miners' strike, the sector was able to recover quickly to break-even point and then achieve a handsome surplus of £69million in 1988–9.
In so doing Railfreight chalked up an achievement which would scarcely be considered feasible by any other European railway administration: only in Britain is the freight-carrying railway required to function without government subsidy.
Sectors and sub-sectors.
Sectorisation had especially far-reaching consequences for Railfreight.
Nothing has been allowed to stand in the way of the sector's progress towards profitability.
It is free from many of the constraints of timetabling, shared usage of stations and so on which limit the extent of true independence amongst the passenger and parcels sectors.
It has been able to shed its loss-making operations without the need for lengthy legal procedures such as those which normally accompany the proposal to close a branch passenger service.
The further division of Railfreight into five subsectors, namely Coal, Construction, Petroleum, Metals and Distribution, has exposed the strengths and weaknesses of individual traffic flows and kept the degree of cross-subsidy within the sector to a minimum.
All the way through Railfreight's emergence as a viable, forward-looking concern, the emphasis was on improving the service to the customer.
A bad reputation had resulted from years of unwieldy and sometimes inefficient management, coupled with the inherent un-reliability of the old wagonload system.
Under sectorisation individual managers have much more clearly defined responsibility, and the need to keep the customer informed about the whereabouts of his goods, for example, is now recognised as paramount.
An outward sign of Railfreight's resurgence was the brightly coloured livery  which made its debut in October 1987.
For locomotives there was now a livelier three-tone grey colour scheme with sub-sector logos and depot badges.
Other Railfreight assets from office buildings to headed notepaper also received the appropriate embellishments.
The Railfreight Infrastructure.
Railfreight is the sole user of numerous yards, sidings and terminals.
Most running lines used by Railfreight are shared with at least one other sector, though there is a not insignificant mileage which exists purely for the benefit of freight.
It is not surprising, then, that considerable rationalisation of yards, sidings, terminals and lines has taken place.
To say that every inch of siding space must earn its keep by virtue of the traffic it carries is not so very far from the truth.
A striking example of rationalisation was the wholesale closure of the Severn Tunnel Junction marshalling yard complex in November 1987.
The yard was a product of piecemeal development over many years and found an important role in the air-braked wagonload network (Speedlink) from the 1970s onwards.
It was a convenient gathering point for all non-trainload traffic to and from South Wales, and also became the gateway to south-west England with feeder services to Bristol, Exeter, Plymouth and so on.
Moreover it was not an under-used white elephant in the manner of Kingmoor yard in Carlisle; traffic levels remained comparatively healthy right up to the  end.
In their quest to reduce costs, however, the Railfreight managers were keen to explore every way of streamlining their operations, and in the case of Severn Tunnel Junction it was found that total closure would bring substantial savings for relatively little inconvenience.
Most of the work previously carried out at Severn Tunnel Junction was transferred to Gloucester, Cardiff Tidal and East Usk (Newport) yards, with Stoke Gifford (Bristol) playing a minor role.
Though in the early days there were capacity problems at Gloucester, by and large the new arrangements have worked well.
Many other yards throughout the BR network saw reductions in activity as a result of the continued trend towards unit or ‘block’ train working.
Toton was a pivotal Speedlink yard in 1980 but its status had been reduced to that of staging and storage sidings, plus a small amount of household coal shunting, by the end of the decade.
The importance of Healey Mills yard (West Yorkshire) has declined in a similar way, with most of its shunting duties transferred to Tinsley (Sheffield) and Doncaster.
But two entirely new yards were opened towards the end of the decade, showing that BR envisages at least some need for shunting for the foreseeable future!
These yards are both in South Wales, at Margam and Ebbw Vale.
Both were sponsored by  the Metals sub-sector for specific categories of traffic, rather than by Railfreight Distribution for general Speedlink work.
So far as terminals are concerned, the trend of the 1980s has been overwhelmingly towards the setting up of private distribution depots, so running down BR's own facilities.
The traditional railway goods depot, with its acres of sidings and its own cranage and cartage facilities, has declined almost to the point of extinction.
Some towns and cities are now devoid of any kind of public freight terminal, or even a suitable siding which could be used for a one-off consignment.
Where private enterprise has stepped in, the results have been variable.
Among the more successful privately owned terminals have been the Glaswegian trio of Deanside, Mossend and Law junction, all of which (but especially the first two) have attracted healthy quantities of regular traffic.
More specialised terminals, such as those handling chemicals or coal, have thrived in relation to the industry they serve, though the tendency has been to close lesser used depots whenever investment in new track or pointwork has become necessary.
Most of the new terminals commissioned during the 1980s were funded partly by the government by means of a ‘Section 8 Grant’, giving up to 60 per cent of the total cost.
As for running lines, the axe fell principally on two categories of ‘freight only’ railway: through lines where an adequate diversionary route existed; and branch lines which carried only small quantities of wagonload traffic.
Casualties in the first category included Walsall-Brownhilis, the Woodhead route, Northampton-Market Harborough, Warrington-Skelton, Bottesford-Newark and Airdrie-Bathgate.
Examples of the second category are Wymondham-Dereham/Ryburgh, Barnstaple-Torrington/Meeth, Grimsby-Louth, Perth-Forfar and Kinnaber-Brechin.
Where a rural freight branch has survived, this is only because of the presence of a major user, such as Blue Circle Cement at Eastgate, Associated Octel at Amlwch and Esso at Fawley.
Such branch lines are of course vulnerable to changes in output level or distribution policy of their users.
The Staffordshire branches to Caldon Low and Oakamoor were each carrying several trainloads of aggregates a week in the mid 1980s but their traffic was lost to road transport in 1988 and 1989 respectively.
Sometimes the closure of a through ‘freight only’ route and the consequent diversion of traffic fails to bring the desired results.
While the costs of maintaining the closed route will be saved, these may be offset by the need to deploy additional resources because of the extra time required to send trains via the diversionary route.
This phenomenon occurred twice in the 1980s: Dee Marsh-Mickle Trafford was closed in 1984 but reopened mainly for steel coil traffic in 1986, and Annbank-Mauchline closed in 1985 but came back into use as a Railfreight Coal asset in 1988.
In the case of Annbank-Mauchline, the reopening allowed an enhanced schedule of Knockshinnoch-Ayr coal trains to be covered by one pair of locomotives instead of two.
Bulk Traffic.
Four out of the five Railfreight sub-sectors deal mainly with bulk traffic which travels by the trainload rather than by the individual  wagonload.
Few would deny that the railway is admirably suited to carrying this type of traffic.
So as the 1980s drew to a close, the sub-sectors dubbed Coal, Construction, Petroleum and Metals were all in fine shape, and their outlook for the 1990s is promising.
Not that the eighties were without their problems: quite apart from the industrial recession of the early years, which affected all Railfreight's bulk traffics to some degree or other, there was the historic miners' strike of 1984–5, taking heavy toll of steel as well as coal carryings.
Happily the coal traffic was revived to the point where pre-strike tonnages were exceeded, although the number of individual collieries served was vastly reduced.
The ‘merry-go-round’ system which allows loading and discharge to take place while an entire train remains in motion has continued to form the mainstay of Railfreight Coal's operations, and it is difficult to imagine a more efficient alternative.
Railborne steel traffic suffered in proportion to the cutbacks in the steel industry itself, with complete withdrawal from one or two locations such as Consett in County Durham.
Interestingly, though, Railfreight also derived some benefit from the contraction of British Steel's steel-making activities.
The concentration of blast furnaces at a smaller number of plants meant that the rolling mills at Corby and Shotton, for example, would henceforth receive their raw steel from other parts of the country.
This provided Railfreight with valuable contracts for long-distance bulk coil traffic, traffic which would not have materialised if the steel industry had survived the 1980s unscathed.
Another area of growth within the Metals sub-sector has been finished ‘bright steel’ or cold reduced coil.
Almost non-existent at the beginning of the 1980s, rail carryings of this commodity had assumed significant proportions by the end of the decade, showing Railfreight both eager and able to adapt to new opportunities.
The Petroleum sub-sector began the decade in the doldrums, having lost much of its traffic due to reduced demand and surrendered further flows to long-distance pipelines.
An upturn in tonnages was recorded in the latter part of the decade, however, and the threat of at least one further pipeline receded when Total Oil renewed a major contract with BR in 1988.
As for Railfreight Construction, the transporting of bulk aggregates from quarries such as Merehead and Whatley has thrived unabated, particularly to London and the South East where the construction industry's appetite could no longer be satisfied from local sources.
A record quantity of 14 million tonnes was carried in 1987–8, of which over three-quarters were destined for the South East.
Twenty years previously this traffic had amounted to just two million tonnes per annum.
Also worthy of mention for the Construction sub-sector is the growth in domestic waste traffic.
By the late 1980s regular trainloads were being dispatched from purpose-built transfer terminals in Greater London, Manchester and Avon, and these would soon be joined by a new flow from Edinburgh.
The Distribution Problem.
Railfreight's success in the 1980s was clouded by one area of uncertainty.
That was the non-bulk wagonload operation, later  marketed as Railfreight Distribution.
The basic problem remained, as always, the cost of providing a service to a large number of individual freight terminals, many receiving only a handful of wagons each week.
On the positive side, a milestone was reached in 1984 when the old vacuum-braked wagonload network was finally abandoned and all worthwhile traffic transferred to the air-braked Speedlink system.
The principle of Speedlink is that train sections are exchanged at specified groups of sidings on the network, rather than individual wagons sorted at full-scale marshalling yards.
On certain routes Speedlink has served BR and its customers well, with many trunk trains running to capacity; but the economics of running three- or fourwagon feeder services at the periphery of the network have remained questionable.
Some worthwhile traffic gains were made during the 1980s, such as timber from the Scottish Highlands and drinks from several locations in the South West.
But equally notable were the losses, such as the once substantial Rowntrees traffic from York.
Nor was the Distribution balance sheet improved by the abstraction of most coal and steel traffic from Speedlink services, in 1986–7 and 1989 respectively, to form dedicated networks for these commodities.
Towards the end of the decade Railfreight Distribution was increasingly  setting its sights on traffic between Britain and mainland Europe as a major source of revenue.
Until 1987 there were two separate train ferry operations for through freight traffic between Britain and the continent, Dover-Dunkerque and Harwich-Zeebrugge.
This arrangement was, however, in many ways inefficient, and in January 1987 the Harwich-Zeebrugge service was withdrawn and all train ferry traffic routed via Dover.
In the short term this did result in a reduction in capacity, leading many observers to criticise BR for short-sightedness in view of the need to attract new traffic in readiness for the opening of the Channel Tunnel, but during 1988 the Dover-Dunkerque service received a boost when Railfreight Distribution commissioned a new high-capacity ferry, the Nord — Pas de Calais , to cater both for individual wagonload consignments and for trainload traffic on this route.
This enables Railfreight to cater for a modest increase in international traffic in the years leading up to the opening of the Channel Tunnel.
Another change which took place with the anticipated increase in continental traffic in mind was the merger of Railfreight Distribution with the former BRB subsidiary Freightliners Ltd in 1988.
This allowed BR to concentrate all its non-bulk freight activities under one organisation, and eliminated the counter-productive competition which might otherwise occur between Freightliner and the conventional wagonload (ie Speedlink) network.
By 1989 there was only one regular instance of Speedlink and Freightliner traffic sharing the same train, this being a service between Bristol and Coatbridge, but the organisation had already begun marketing its two products as complementary rather than competing systems, itself an important step forward in the history of Railfreight.
Traction Developments.
Now that all three passenger sectors prefer unit trains to the traditional combination of locomotive and coaches, the Railfreight sector is left as the prime user of diesel locomotives.
Mixed-traffic types such as the Brush Class 47 have fallen from favour since they inevitably entail a compromise between a high maximum speed for passenger working and a high tractive effort for freight haulage.
The only orders for new diesel locomotives placed during the 1970s and 1980s, were for locomotives designed specifically to haul freight.
First came the Class 56, superficially similar to the Class 47 but with a maximum speed of 80mph and no facility for train heating.
A fleet of 135 Class 56 locomotives was introduced between 1977 and 1984.
Next came the Class 58, functionally similar to the Class 56 but with a number of radical design features such as external walkways along the sides of each locomotive; a fleet of fifty entered service between 1984 and 1987.
And as the 1980s drew to a close, the first locomotives of Class 60 were rolling out of the Brush works at Loughborough, destined to become the standard Railfreight traction unit well into the early years of the twenty-first century.
Perhaps the most exciting new build of the 1980s, however, was the small fleet of Class 59 locomotives built for Foster Yeoman of Merehead in Somerset.
Not only were these the first privately owned diesels to regularly haul freight trains over BR main lines, but they were also remarkable in having originated at La Grange, Illinois.
So successful was the Class 59, perhaps embarrassingly so from the viewpoint of British manufacturers, that the initial order for four machines was followed up by orders for five more, comprising one for additional Foster Yeoman traffic and four for the neighbouring but rival firm ARC.
Existing traction resources were trimmed severely as the new, more efficient types entered service.
Less favoured designs such as Classes 25, 40 and 45 were withdrawn completely, and the Railfreight sector relinquished its claim on the costly Class 50.
A major life-extension programme was carried out on nearly half the Class 37 fleet, with a number of variants designed specifically for freight haulage and expected to survive into the next century.
Some important changes were made to maintenance arrangements, whereby locomotives became attached first and foremost to specific traffic flows rather than to a defined geographical area.
Many diesel depots ceased to carry out maintenance for the Railfreight sector, with some facing the axe such as Gateshead and others concentrating on work for other sectors such as Bristol Bath Road.
Out of the thirteen which still had a formal Railfreight allocation in 1989, many had become specialised bases for traction belonging to a particular sub-sector.
Toton and Tinsley are good examples of depots with specific sub-sector allegiances and covering a wide geographical area.
Toton took over responsibility for all Railfreight Coal traction used in the Midlands, North West, Yorkshire and North East districts, comprising some 250 locomotives of Classes 20, 56 and 58.
Tinsley became the base for over  150 locomotives used on Speedlink services throughout the BR network, comprising members of Classes 31, 37 and 47.
At the other end of the scale, Plymouth Laira gained a small fleet of Class 37s which rarely ventured away from the West Country china clay empire, although a new trainload working was introduced in 1989 which would take them twice a week up to Irvine in South West Scotland.
At some maintenance depots the establishment of specific sub-sector pools led to significant improvements to reliability, even though in many cases the locomotives concerned were travelling further from home than ever before.
The only Railfreight traction to retain common-user status was the AC electric fleet on the West Coast main line.
Wagons.
The number of wagons used on BR continued to shrink dramatically during the 1980s.
In 1979 there were over 150,000 vehicles authorised for main-line running, but by 1989 the total had fallen to around 40,000.
Over the same period BR's annual freight tonnage fell only marginally, from 169 million tonnes to 149 million tonnes, so the reduction in size of the wagon  fleet was a remarkable achievement.
The main casualties were railway-owned vehicles fitted with vacuum brakes or with no automatic brake at all.
Many such wagons spent long periods hidden away in marshalling yards or being used as storage containers on customers' premises, practices which the business-led Railfreight sector was understandably keen to eradicate.
The new vehicles built as replacements during the 1980s were generally of higher capacity, privately owned and fitted with air brakes.
Where a customer did not wish to purchase his own fleet of wagons, he was usually encouraged to hire or lease from firms such as Procor or Tiphook in preference to using railway-owned vehicles.
In the Construction sub-sector, for example, the use of railway-owned vehicles on aggregates traffic ceased altogether in 1989, following the withdrawal of a pool of 16.5 tonne opens based in the Peak District.
Almost half of the serviceable BR-owned wagon fleet in 1989 comprised ‘merry-go-round’ coal hoppers, with the remainder consisting largely of steel carriers, some vans and opens for general merchandise traffic, and — rather surprisingly and after much argument with the industry — the fleet of china clay carriers built to replace the venerable ‘clay hoods’in 1988.
Towards the end of the 1980s attention was being focussed on some interesting developments in wagon design.
The MiniLink and MaxiLink container systems, both of which appeared in 1987, incorporated some novel design features which enabled road-rail transfer without the need for separate lifting equipment.
An even more exciting development was TrailerTrain, comprising a specially profiled road trailer which could be loaded on to railway bogies, again without the need for fixed equipment at the transfer location.
Finally, one of the best kept secrets of the decade until its unveiling in 1988 was the Redland self-discharge aggregates train, a permanently coupled set of hopper wagons with a conveyor belt running underneath and a special unloading vehicle at one end.
Railfreight Petroleum's new image.
Refurbished Class 37/7 No 37888 Petrolea passes Stratford with the 09.22 Micheldever–Ripple Lane empty tank train on 3 November 1988.
The high–capacity wagons would be worked to one of the refineries at Thames Haven.
The North Thameside petroleum traffic was among the first to have its own train crew and dedicated fleet of locomotives .
Laira–based Class 37s.
No 37672 Freight Transport Association (in old Railfreight livery) and No 37673 (in two–tone grey) pass Cockwood Harbour, near Exeter, with the 15.45 St Blazy to Gloucester freight on 17 august 1989 .
Old style wagonload marshalling.
The down sorting sidings at Tees Yard are pictured from the hump control tower on 12 September 1980, with Class 08 pilot No 08770 in attendance.
The yard looks busy, but close examination reveals that very few wagons were carrying traffic.
The hump was closed in 1985 and all shunting carried out from the east end.
Railfreight's greatest success — Coal by merry–go–round.
Class 58 No 58026 approaches Moira West Junction on the freight–only Burton–Leicester line, with a rake of empty HAAs from Drakelow power station on 30 October 1986, bound for Bagworth opencast loading point.
The importance of the Leicestershire coalfield declined during the 1980s as seams gradually became worked out, but new opencast sites continued to provide useful revenue for BR.
Bulk freight in Wensleydale.
The twenty–three–mile branch line from Northallerton has survived only because of the Tarmac quarry terminal located at Redmire, supplying limestone for use as flux in the steel–making process.
class 47 No 47302 passes Ainderby with the 10.12 up train on 8 August 1896, hauling 900 tonnes of limestone in privately owned PGA wagons.
It is common practice nowadays to introduce guard–operated level crossings on rural freight–only lines.
Foster yeoman's 126 tonne Co–co Class 59 No 59004 Yeoman challenger passing West Ealing with the 10.05 Acton Yard to Merehead empty stone hoppers on 13 August 1988 .
Coal in the valleys.
The number of rail–served collieries in South Wales declined dramatically in the 1980s.
Class 37 No 37234 pulls forward through the disused station at Tondu on 15 April 1982, having just run round its train of MDVs carrying coal from Garw to Ogmore.
By 1989 the branches from Tondu to Garw and Ogmore had both closed, leaving only Maesteg as a source of traffic in this once thriving part of the Welsh coalfield.
No 37109 brings a freight off the Dundee line through platform No 1 at Perth station on 8 September 1987.
Pick–up goods on the Midland main line.
Class 25 No 25303 draws to a halt at Finedon Road, Wellingborough, with an up local trip working on 1 July 1981.
At this time BR's wagon fleet comprised an awkward mixture of vacuum–braked and air–braked vehicles, making the brake van an essential feature of many wagonload services.
The train has a vacuum–braked fitted head, one VVV van and two HTV hoppers, but the air–braked OBA wagons at the rear are running with their automatic brakes inoperative.
No 37011, with Ethel heating unit No 97251, hauls the overnight sleeper from London (Euston) near Torlundy on the last stage of its journey to Fort William.
The photograph is dated 24 April 1984 and shows the development of BR stock up o that date in the make–up of the rake.
The leading vehicle is a Mk1 open brake second fitted with a micro buffet area (B1 bogies) followed by Mk2 vehicles, bot early and later air–conditioned examples carried on B4 bogies, finally two Mk3A sleeping cars built in the early 1980s with BT10 bogies.
COACHES
AT the beginning of the 1980s passengers experienced great variances of comfort and style on InterCity and cross-country trains mainly according to whether they were travelling in one of the three basic designs that made up most of the fleet, one each from the fifties, sixties and seventies.
Features dating from before World War I were still commonly encountered, along with luxury wall-to-wall carpeting even in what today we call standard class.
Side corridors and composite vehicles (for example first and standard or first and guard's van) were still common.
They were the days when many passengers were afraid to enter a secondclass compartment believing (because of its quality) it must be a first, of a mixture of vacuum and air-braked stock, steam and electric heating, and continual development and changes with the design of bogies.
The Mark 2 coaches inaugurated in 1966 had generally set a new standard of comfort with for example better heating and ventilation but there were no Mark 2 catering or sleeping cars.
So a familiar sight of the early 1980s was a standard formation of Mark 2 vehicles with an obviously inferior Mark 1 catering vehicle squeezed in.
The production of Mark 3 vehicles, at first for the High Speed  Trains, began in 1975, but the proportion of even top-grade express trains composed of them in the early 1980s was stili small.
The HSTs were important from several points of view, not least because they marked the beginning of the end of the once strict division between locomotive-hauled and self-propelled stock.
The story of the HSTs powerwise does not belong here but from the point of view of passenger comfort we should note that while much was conventional there was also much that was new…
Though not so revolutionary as to require years of testing and modification (and run the risk of ultimate rejection as in the case of the Advanced Passenger Train).
The integral construction of bodies, new air-sprung bogies, air conditioning, excellent sound and heat insulation, and a high standard of luxury furnishing and decor for both second and first class, and above ali strength to resist compression and buckling forces in an accident to an extent never seen before, brought a new era to BR coach design and made the HSTs deservedly popular.
Even their automatically operated doors at their ends were widely appreciated.
A variation known as Mark 3A was produced for locomotive haulage, differing only in having side buffers available when necessary, and centre buck-eye couplers instead of the special couplers on the 125 sets, and electric wiring to suit the different needs of locomotive haulage.
The remarkable feature of the Mark 3 is the fact that only one basic bodyshell was produced so that standard-class coaches have exactly the same external dimensions, window spacing and appearance as the first class.
There is, though, one large disadvantage that became much discussed in the eighties: standard-class seats do not match the window spacing.
For every four windows on a Mark 3 standard-class coach there are four and a h–f bays of seats, only the end bays matching the windows and succeeding bays being more tightly spaced so that some passengers are seated against a blank wall.
But in riding, quietness, and general environment, Mark 3 coaches gliding through the countryside at speed owe little to even a decade ago.
Wall-to-wall carpeting, luggage racks running lengthways above the windows, supplemented by space for cases and bags between the seats, provide an uncluttered spaciousness to give a relaxed atmosphere on the longest of journeys.
At least that is what it should be like.
The upsurge in traffic in the 1980s has alas meant that passengers have often had to stand in the centre aisles, in the lobbies, and around the door vestibules.
With floor sensors operating the automatic sliding doors between the end vestibules and the passengers' saloons perpetually energised by standing passengers, travel in an overcrowded Mark 3 coach seems little better than its predecessors.
At the upper end of luxury the first-class Mark 3s have much more room with one-plus-two seating, like their earlier Mark 1 and 2 counterparts but all in open saloon accommodation, since the side-corridor coach was deemed to be a thing of the past.
Even Mrs Thatcher levelled criticism at the lack of compartment privacy, but the policy against compartments was now firmly established.
The 1980s ended very differently from their beginning.
For a start, each   of the sectors has its distinctive livery, though much of the old corporate blueand-grey still survived into 1990.
InterCity of course has its light and dark grey with a red band under the windows, while Scotrail established its own blue band instead of red.
Network South East has its patriotic red, white, and blue bands with grey thrown in for good measure.
The PTEs sport their own colour schemes on a variety of multiple units.
As for Provincial, if you were visiting an area in which you were not quite sure what to expect, you might find Mark 1 or 2 (the latter air conditioned or otherwise) locomotive-hauled rakes of various lengths and compositions, first-generation multiple units (anything from one to nine cars, riding roughly but still with forward and rear vision), or the latest Sprinters, plain, super or express, many with privately run buffet-trolley service on long cross-country journeys.
On the main line, the remorseless reduction in fleet sizes resulted in Mark 3 vehicles steadily being more predominant.
But at the end of 1989 Mark 2s were still well in evidence (particularly the air-conditioned types) and Mark 1 coaches will still be found on occasional reliefs or specials as well as some daily Network SouthEast locomotive-hauled services (especially out of Paddington) for some time to come.
During the decade new Mark 3 pattern sleeping cars were evolved at long last to replace the Mark ls.
They incorporated all the Mark 3 features of air conditioning, insulation and good riding.
But they were just at the design stage when early on a July morning in 1978 twelve passengers died in a fire on Mark 1 sleeping cars of the Penzance to Paddington overnight train.
As a  result the design was modified to include much greater fire resistance, adding £50,000 per car to the basic cost of £200,000 of the initial design.
So far it has not been put to the test in service.
But Mark 3 stock in its conventional form has been involved in accidents, and has been found to stand up with little crushing and buckling in potentially horrific situations where in older stock casualties might have been high.
Probably the most outstanding demonstration of their strength was in the 100mph Colwich collision in 1986 when despite coaches — some of them Mark 2s but largely Mark 3s — being piled on top of each other, or spreadeagled across the track, not a single passenger was killed.
Safe as the Mark 3 coaches have been, however, their designers have been responsible for actually causing one or two accidents because straps and fixings holding underfloor equipment were inadequate and worked loose, allowing major items to fall off.
The worst case was in July 1989 when an alternator set fell off at around 100mph at Harrow on the main line into Euston and caused a major derailment, fortunately with no more than a few injuries.
As the decade concluded the Mark 4 coach arrived (at first on the East Coast newly electrified service to Leeds).
A development of the Mark 3, it contains some APT features including a curved narrowing body profile which would allow the body to tilt like the APT but which feature is now unlikely to be used.
Like the Mark 3s, the Mark 4s have a lightweight steel body (but there is simpler framing for ease of construction).
The bogies are new: the BT4l evolved in Switzerland, to give good riding at the 140mph (225 km/hr) speeds for which these coaches have been designed.
From the passenger's viewpoint the first things that are different are the plug-type sliding doors, improved welcoming entrance vestibules and a seating layout with some facing pairs of seats in the standard class at tables for four, with others in twos having a face-to-back arrangement.
Like the Mark 3s with an identical window spacing for standard- and first-class coaches this gets over much, but not all, of the criticisms of seats alongside blank panels between windows.
The doors between end vestibules and saloons are now controlled by push buttons instead of floor sensors, but how do you press the button if both hands are carrying luggage or a tray meal from the buffet?
Decor and furnishing are for the 1990s styles, insulation is even better than the Mark 3s and passengers with special needs are catered for as, for example, mother and baby facilities and disabled toilets.
The first-class saloon is visually broken in two, less tube-like, the gangway's position changing half way through.
Plans evolved for new trains for the 1990s Channel Tunnel workings between British provincial centres and Paris, Brussels, and beyond being formed into eighteen coach trains with a power car at each end like an extended electric version of the InterCity 125 diesels, but with the capability to split into nine-coach trains push-pull style with a single power car, perhaps they are all things to all men.
Maybe the purely locomotive-hauled coach could be obsolete or at least an enthusiast's treasure by the end of the nineties.
Mk2a open second No E5259 as built at Derby in 1967.
The Mk2As featured integral construction and were fitted with air brake and dual heating facilities (steam now isolated).
The internal layout is similar to the Mk1 with two lavatories at the same end of the vehicle.
Mk3A (loco hauled) tourist open second No M1 2004 carried on BT10 bogies.
This coach received Provincial ScotRail livery during the 1980s and worked in Push–pull rakes from Edinburgh Craigentinny depot.
The standard Mk3 open second as built with tables for four apart from the twin face–to–back seats at the centre partition.
Because the second–class coaches use a common bodyshell with first–class coaches, seats do not always align with the windows.
Delivery of the Mk4s from Metro–Cammell commenced in 1989.
Initially for the East Coast route they include disabled and mother–and–baby facilities.
Marginally longer than the Mk3s at 23m over the body, the bodysides incline inwards slightly to allow for tilting on curves, a feature not fitted, but noticeable in this view of a standard–class interior.
CLOSURES AND OPENINGS
SUCH has been the scale of reopenings (not to mention survivals) of lines and stations in the 1980s that to put matters in perspective it is necessary to go back a bit in history.
Closures of railway lines had been taking place for many years, accelerated by the growing availability of cars in the 1950s.
The upsurgence of the motor car was forcibly rammed home when the cross-country holiday route, the Midland &Great Northern Joint line from Peterborough across Norfolk to Great Yarmouth Beach station was shut on 28 February 1959.
Dr Beeching's famous report of January 1963 then opened the floodgates  to closure proposals, battles by campaigners and, invariably, consent by the Conservative Government which, after all, was the architect behind Dr Beeching's appointment as Chairman charged with reducing losses.
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, line after line closed.
Many were main or arterial routes.
Some were duplicated by other routes, a legacy of the pre-Grouping days (1923) when companies competed for business.
(If ever there was a lesson to be learnt in today's world, competition definitely did not work!)
Giants like the Great Central Railway — in latter days known by its despairing appreciators as the Gone Completely Railway — and the Leeds Northern main line north of Harrogate, through Ripon, were two such casualties.
Scores of branch lines closed despite the economies of diesel traction.
Even the introduction of four-wheeled railbuses in the early 1960s failed to stem the closures.
By the time 1970 dawned, the closures were beginning to slow down.
Public opinion was becoming more concentrated.
Closure battles were more embittered and MPs had to take notice.
Closures had practically ceased by 1980 but a far greater force had by then begun to take effect.
The formation of the Metropolitan County Councils and their respective Passenger Transport Authorities would begin to have a far reaching effect on the future of many lines and stations.
With a background of socialism, these PTAs were not averse to spending public money on promoting public transport.
Rail began to benefit.
At first, it appeared an anachronism for BR to go to a council and say, ‘please give us some money to build a new station’ or, ‘we need a subsidy to keep this service going’.
Many councils were sceptical.
Some are to this day.
Many took the plunge and the great rail revival had started.
The seven PTAs — Sir Peter Parker called them ‘The Magnificent Seven’— have been the driving force behind scores of new initiatives to improve rail services by building new stations — often replacing ones closed by Dr Beeching — restoring passenger services to freight-only lines and, incredibly, in the case of the West Yorkshire PTA actually purchasing their own trains!
Yet at the end of the eighties the only government money paid to BR was the rapidly dwindling subsidy paid to Provincial and Network SouthEast sectors to support loss-making services and talk continued of ‘bustitution’, however ridiculed it was by professional transport executives.
The broader view based on cost benefit analysis (taking all costs and benefits into account) was still unacceptable to a government insisting on an 8 per cent direct investment return.
Thus, unless some sympathetic council contributes to a station or reopened line, improvements will not happen.
The classic example of the inequality faced by BR was at Dornoch on the line between Inverness and Wick/Thurso.
The new road bridge spanning the Dornoch Firth was suggested as having a dual role — carrying both road and rail, the rail section to be a new piece of line which would cut out a long detour and dramatically reduce the journey time to the Far North.
The cost of the rail link was a paltry £12million and all but three million pounds had been found elsewhere.
The Scottish Office  still refused to pay this £3million despite the astronomic sums spent on the parallel A9 road.
One area which saw a great revival in rail fortunes is South Wales where local and county councils invested public money — and reaped the rewards.
At the end of 1988, BR's Provincial sector announced that the Valley Lines had doubled their revenue in five years, the only Provincial services to do so!
The ultimate achievement, notwithstanding the numerous new stations opened in the area during the last five years, was the reopening to passenger traffic of the Cynon Valley line to Aberdare (closed in March 1964) with no less than eight new stations.
The new service started on 3 October 1988 and was immediately so successful that Mid Glamorgan County Council applied to the Secretary of State for Wales for a £600,000 grant to purchase a Sprinter unit to provide an hourly service.
The grant was blocked.
BR itself came to the rescue and offered to provide an additional DMU, albeit a first-generation unit, to provide a better service.
Even in South Wales, it is not ali enlightenment since while Mid and South Glamorgan are positively pro-rail neighbouring Gwent turns its back on rail projects, preferring to invest in roads.
Indeed the overall score of the 1980s has been very uneven.
For example, the early years of the decade saw numerous freight-only branches close  because in most cases only a handful of wagonload traffic was being conveyed — uneconomically.
The Lancashire branch to Rawtenstall closed on 4 December 1980, with the Wallingford branch from Cholsey following on 31 May 1981.
The same month saw the end of the Brechin line while in 1982 the Forfar service ceased in June.
A major closure took place on 27 November 1982 when the GNJoint line closed between March and Spalding, together with the avoiding lines at Sleaford and Lincoln.
Residual traffic was routed via Peterborough and this closure reflected the vastly changing freight scene as vacuum-braked freights gave way to air-braked company or block trains, precluding the necessity to marshal en route.
Much of the huge yard at Whitemoor, March, closed.
1983 witnessed the last rites on perhaps the most famous freight line in the country — to Consett.
The cessation of the steel plants sealed the fate of the line on which herculean battles took place daily in the haulage of loads of iron ore imported at Tyne Dock up the ferocious gradients to Consett.
Another historical line saw its last BR train on 26 September 1983 when the Cornish Wenford Bridge line was officially closed, its latter role being entirely devoted to the china clay traffic.
Meanwhile, on the passenger front, the four-mile Sanderstead-Elmers End line witnessed funereal acts on 13 May 1983.
Another Southern Region service  axed was that between Tunbridge Wells Central and Eridge which finished on 6 July 1985.
One day earlier, the Stratford to Tottenham Hale service in the east end of London bade farewell to passengers.
One closure — the Clayton West branch service which ran from Huddersfield — finally succumbed on 22 January 1983, because the West Yorkshire PTA declined to provide the subsidy.
A similar casualty was the Kilmacolm branch which ended on 8 January 1983, because the Strathclyde PTA would support it no longer.
The irony is that within five years, investigations started with a view to relaying part of the canal route to Kilmacolm as far as Paisley for a new passenger service!
Building on the trackbed precludes a new service from serving the whole of the former route.
1983 witnessed the opening on 16 May of the first stretch of new main line built for over half a century — the 23.5km Selby Diversion line, replacing the former main line via Selby which closed completely between York Chaloner's Whin Junction and Selby North Junction.
Since the introduction of the business sectors of BR, Railfreight has not been slow to totally eliminate certain freight-only routes where an alternative existed, albeit, invariably longer.
The Walsall-Lichfield, Manchester South Loop line and the Skelton-Arpley lines are cases in point.
With the drastic decline in the coalmining industry, numerous branches to mines have closed, some of them quite lengthy, such as the Cynheidre and Maerdy branches in South Wales.
Two 1989 closures were the Oakamoor and Caldon Low branches in the Stoke area which yielded their sand and stone traffic to road competition.
However, even in the world of freight, revival is taking place.
The Annbank-Mauchline line which closed in 1984 was never lifted but merely mothballed.
This prudent act paid off, for it reopened in 1988 to provide a shorter route for the coal traffic from Knockshinnoch to Ayr.
Likewise, the Mickle Trafford to Dee Marsh line reopened for business on 1 September 1986.
It originally closed to freight traffic on 14 May 1984.
One worrying aspect concerning the reopening of freight lines to passengers is that invariably where such revivals have taken place, BR has badly underestimated the level of business.
The line to Bathgate, reopened to passengers on 24 March 1986 (including two new stations at Uphall and Livingston) at a cost of £1.5million shared by six public bodies expected to see a top figure of 400,000 passengers annually.
This figure was rapidly exceeded and by 1989 was carrying one million passengers annually, necessitating lengthening platforms at several stations along its route at a cost of £60,000.
Worthy of mention in this review of closures and revivals is the widely applauded reprieve by Chris Green, director of Network SouthEast, of London's Marylebone station on 30 April 1986.
BR had proposed closure of this famous station, but the growth of the commuter traffic meant that London Underground would not be able to cope.
This station and line is now the subject of a multi-million pound investment scheme.
Mr Green was also behind the move to relay the track on the abandoned freight-only link  between Blackfriars and Faringdon, thereby linking the electric systems north and south of the Thames.
The new ‘Thameslink’ service started in May, 1987 and presently carries 20,000 passengers daily.
One famous London station did close.
We gave our regards to Broad Street on 27 June 1986 when the last train pulled out, the site required for redevelopment.
The 1980s cause célèbre was of course the battle of the Settle &Carlisle.
If ever there was proof needed that public opinion works, this is it.
This famous line's deliberate run-down, closure proposals (three in total), the unbelievable fight by the public, culminating in 35,000 objectors during the five-year fight, was an object lesson to BR and the government.
It was the latter who, unable to find a private buyer, announced on 11 April 1989 that BR must continue to operate the 72 mile route, a triumph for the three coordinating bodies — Transport 2000, The Settle &Carlisle Action Committee and the Friends of the Settle &Carlisle.
This mammoth battle vividly demonstrated how inextricably railways are tied to politics.
The reprieve of the S, besides marking the rightful conclusion to a tale of deceit and neglect, was also the first closure proposal vetoed by the Conservative Government under Mrs Thatcher.
The ever-changing railway saw several large marshalling yards close.
Severn Tunnel yard went in October 1987, and Margam Hump yard closed on 31 October 1988, being replaced by the new 18 road Knuckle yard to cater for the huge growth in steel business, most of which travels in block trams.
It was the same story which brought about the downfall of another huge yard — Tyne — in October 1989.
The virtual cessation of the local trip workings, coupled with the growth in company trains (affecting the payloads of Speedlink services) meant that the reduction of actual Speedlink services could not justify the retention of a separate yard at Tyne (opened in 1961)— much of which handled Railfreight's Metals sub-sector business.
Thus the healthy growth of a particular commodity — in this case steel — actually caused a closure.
The passenger scenario is more interesting.
There seems to be no let-up with the continuing rise in patronage, even in the Network SouthEast area where the August 1989 approval to spend £257million on Networker units will inevitably attract more passengers when they are introduced.
On the passenger side, interest in the 1990s will centre on Provincial's split between the highly successful Sprinter Express routes and the also-rans.
How do you privatise a business of numerous loss-makers?
With the roadorientated Department of Transport constantly pressurising British Rail to examine all its options on loss-making services, the spectre of ‘bustitution’ is never far away.
A test case was the proposed closure of the Gainsborough Central-Wrawby Junction, Barnetby, section of line used by Sheffield-Cleethorpes trains.
The separate announcement by BR in 1989 that it was proposing closure of the Doncaster-Gainsborough line was a surprise for there are many lines which lose more money than this with its nine daily trains.
No sooner   had the announcement been made than it was withdrawn, pending deliberations by Lincolnshire County Council as to whether subsidisation could be considered as a way of continuance.
Some sceptics have been quick to see that this could well be a familiar pointer to the future — suggest a service for closure in the hope that the relevant council will come up with the money to reprieve it.
This transfers the onus from government subsidy to the local people who, should the council refuse, will themselves be ‘blamed’ for the service closure.
In total one can only marvel at the numerous stations opened in the 1980s and it is pleasing to note that many more are in the pipeline.
The growth of BR stations in recent years is heartwarming for pro-rail supporters and the figures speak for themselves, 1986 = 2,526, 1987 = 2,530, 1988 = 2,554, 1989 = 2,561.
A list of specific openings follows.
Some ironically have been brought about by road congestion caused by the railway's erstwhile competitor, the private car.
Many of the reopenings were under the ‘Speller’ rule: Tony Speller's 1981 Bill made it possible for services to reopen experimentally without the need to go through the formal closure procedures in the event of failure.
Some were the direct result of campaigning by the Railway Development Society and the list is almost a tribute to it.
It should be added that though this book is about BR, the 1980s also saw the opening of the last section of the Tyne &Wear Metro in March 1984 and the launch of the stillexpanding Docklands Light Railway in July 1987.
Both produced passenger levels far greater than forecast and have encouraged more planning of urban light railways.
Closure and Opening.
Six–car Metro–Cammell dmu arrives at South Shields with a service from Newcastle in April 190.
The statio was closed to BR trains when it became part of Tyne &Wear Metro system.
the 8.00 Blackpool North–Euston train passes Milton Keynes Central station at speed on 6 October 1984 powered by Class 87/0 No 87010 King Arthur.
Hardly looking like a suburban station in the densely populated Croydon area of south London is Coombe road which closed at the end of the 1982/3 timetable with the ending of services on the Elmers End–Sanderstead line.
2–Epb unit No 5723 halts at the station while working the 17.30 Elmers End to Sanderstead on 15 april 1983.
Cardiff Cathays.
One of the many new stations opened with the help of local government finance.
This view, taken during the first month of operation, shows three–car unit No C312 entering the station working the 11.35 (sundays) Treherbert to Barry service on 30 October 1983.
Deltic No 55003 Meld leaves the now closed and lifted section of the East Coast main line via Selby at Chaloners Whin Junction while working the 14.05 King's Cross–york on 18 my 1980.
The diversion opened in 1983 .
the line between Eridge and Tunbridge Wells Central closed in July 1985.
Here a month before closure Class 207 dmu No 1306 leaves Eridge with the 14.35 from Uckfield, to Victoria, to be followed by unit No 1310 (in platform 1 on the right) forming the 14.59 to tonbridge via Tunbridge Wells.
A REVOLUTION IN MOTIVE POWER
BR's motive-power policy was rapidly turned on its head with the abandonment of two sacred principles: sectorisation saw the end of the common-user policy for locomotives and passenger multiple units: and no longer was it accepted that life-expired main-line cast-offs should spend their last days propping up secondary services.
The locomotive fleet may have become slimmer and generally older, but it still ended the decade in better overall shape thanks to this revised policy; new maintenance procedures, and heavy expenditure on refurbishment of key types, also helped.
The multiple-unit fleet was transformed virtually beyond recognition.
It was goodbye to the last vestiges of pre-war LMS and LNER designs, and even the slam-door concept that the Southern Railway bequeathed to its nationalised successor was displaced from many important commuter routes.
To the enthusiast, the loss of no less than fourteen locomotive designs was countered by the application of highly distinctive sector liveries, all the more interesting because of the number of attempts made before the final choices were made.
The apparent ‘if it moves, renumber it’ policy was also a major source of interest.
InterCity saw its future in push-pull electric traction, modernised High Speed Trains on non-electrified routes, and only a handful of diesellocomotive-hauled services on feeder and cross-country routes.
Provincial resisted InterCity's relatively modern but redundant 1960s coaching stock, and nailed its colours firmly to the mast of the Sprinter DMU.
The two-car diesel unit provided ultimate flexibility and low operating costs, plus the chance to attract new business with smart new stock operating on faster schedules.
The government accepted the argument, and approved the investment.
Network SouthEast, struggling to cope with its massive upsurge in business, proceeded with complete refurbishment of serviceable 1960s stock and started massive investment in new trains, notably its Networker.
Parcels was happy to operate with a small fleet of locomotives and hauled stock, plus a fleet of 1950s passenger DMUs converted for load carrying.
Railfreight is now by far the biggest user of locomotives.
The restructure of the coal, aggregates, Speedlink, petroleum and metals businesses made it relatively easy to identify and organise separate sub-sector fleets, increasingly recognised by the new grey livery decorated with esoteric fleet symbols and depot badges.
Finally, the departmental, engineering side also laid claim to its own clearly defined fleet of engines, which could be profitably loaned to the sectors at times of peak demand.
New Classes.
New locomotive classes of the eighties were just five, all highpower main liners.
After nearly thirty years, the first AC electric Co-Co locomotive arrived in 1986 in the shape of the prototype 5,850hp, 125mph Class 89, built under contract by BREL Crewe with electrical gear by Brush Traction.
After trials, it pioneered locomotive-hauled electric trains over the northern extension of East Coast main line electrification to Peterborough in 1988.
The Class 89 was notable for its lack of teething troubles, sadly not experienced by the two other new electric designs.
The first BREL/GEC Class 90, an updated version of the Class 87 Bo-Bo, emerged from Crewe in mid-1988, but it was many months before the state of the art electronics were mastered.
Delivery of the final members of the class was still taking place at the end of the decade, but the early members had by then settled into their routine of West Coast InterCity push-pull passenger duties with similarlooking new driving van trailers at the opposite end, plus freights from the North to the East Coast ports via the newly electrified North London link.
However, the new build highlight of the 1980s was undoubtedly the 6,000hp-plus, 140mph Class 91 intended for the full King's Cross-Leeds/ Edinburgh electrification in 1991.
GEC supplied the equipment for assembly at BREL Crewe, and although software problems delayed entry into service until the early part of 1989, the prototype batch of ten (another twenty-one are on order) were a regular sight on King's Cross-Peterborough commuter and some Leeds service by the end of the year.
The traction combination with an HST power car converted to a driving trailer and only seven HST coaches made mincemeat of conventional timings.
The heavy freight diesel replacement policy was a muddle from beginning to end.
First, BR curtailed the production line of the obsolete overcomplicated Class 56 Co-Cos in 1984 when the 135th example emerged from BREL Crewe.
This overlapped the appearance of the first modular construction Class 58 from Doncaster, mechanically similar but theoretically cheaper to maintain.
This so-called new standard machine found itself overtaken by new technology and failed to attract hoped-for export orders, only running to fifty examples.
Although they were all allocated to coal traffic in the East Midlands, their arrival coincided with the miners' strike, and in truth BR only tolerated the construction of so many because the components were already on order.
General Motors of America believed they had made a major breakthrough into the British market in 1985 when they persuaded Foster Yeoman to buy four specially constructed 3,300hp locomotives to haul heavy stone traffic  from their Merehead quarry to locations in the South East.
Rules were relaxed to allow the first privately owned locomotives unlimited access to the national rail network.
By now urgently needing at least 100 replacements for its geriatric locomotive fleet, Railfreight initially appeared to show deep interest in its own General Motors stud, but in the event the order went to Brush Traction of Loughborough.
The arrival of the first Class 60 Co-Cos in the autumn of 1989 would spell the wholesale demise of many thirty-year-old Class 20s, 31s, 33s and 47s.
Farewell.
Fourteen locomotive types were eliminated during the 1980s, although examples of all but five have been secured for preservation.
The most sadly missed type is undoubtedly the twenty-two English Electric Class 55 Deltics from the East Coast main line.
Their 1st runs at the end of 1981 were witnessed by scenes not seen since the end of steam when literally thousands either embarked on farewell trips or crowded platform ends for a last glimpse of the 3,300hp machines that were as popular as the LNER Gresley steam Pacifics they replaced.
Displaced by High Speed Trains, much of their final year was remarkably spent on new territory including York-Liverpool runs.
No less than six survive in preservation.
Almost equal euphoria was attracted by the English Electric Class 40s, the first large-volume design introduced after the 1955 Modernisation Plan.
Underpowered, overweight and outdated, the once 200 strong fleet, affectionately known as ‘Whistlers’ was in decline from the mid-1970s, and when major overhauls ceased at BREL Crewe in 1981 it was only a question of time before they disappeared first from top link Eastern Region duties, and finally in 1985 freight workings originating from the North West.
BR's own acknowledgement of the Class 40s' popularity, and therefore revenue potential, was the renovation of the 1958 pioneer locomotive D200 to working order, and original livery, for use on special trains for a full three years after the rest of the class had been retired.
It is now in the National Railway Museum, and another five were purchased privately.
Less fuss was created by the no less significant demise of two important products from the Derby Locomotive Works.
The ‘Peaks’ once numbered 193 of three similar types with twelve-cylinder Sulzer power units in heavy bodyshell on four-axle plate-frame bogies.
Withdrawal of the prototype Class 44 series of ten was completed in 1981, and a start was then made on the production Class 45 and 46 fleets.
Displaced first from the North East/South West corridor and East Coast services, they had largely disappeared from their traditional Midland main line haunts by the mid-1980s, and the arrival of Class 156 Sprinter DMUs displaced the last survivors from Trans-Pennine workings in the summer of 1988.
Although a handful have been preserved, BR's attempt to emulate the success of the D200 project was short-lived when the selected example suffered a terminal breakdown.
It is hard to imagine that there were once almost 600 Sulzer-engined Bo-Bo locomotives in the 1,160–1,250hp range, because a mere thirty-two  survived at the end of 1989.
The entire BR fleet of Classes 24 and 25 had gone by the beginning of 1978.
The Birmingham RCClass 27s disappeared soon afterwards (despite expensive overhauls only months before), leaving only the 1958/9 Birmingham-built Class 26 surviving on specialist duties in Southern Scotland.
The closure of the Manchester-Sheffield/Wath 1,500V DC freight route via Woodhead tunnel in 1982 spelt the inevitable end of the LNER-design Class 76 Bo-Bos, which although far from life-expired could not work anywhere else.
The London Midland Region also gave up with its older AC electric locomotives, first its troublesome contractor-built Classes 82, 83 and 84, and then with new designs coming along, Classes 81 and 85 were into their last days.
Almost unnoticed was the exit of the last 0-4-0 locomotive, latterly represented by the 204hp Andrew Barclay Class 06 dock shunter in Scotland (and departmental service in England), and the three curious Class 13 700hp hump shunters formed of two Class 08s in permanent formations.
Modifications.
Large-scale modifications were made to the BR locomotive fleet to both keep them running, and create a stop-gap before the arrival of new motive power for both passenger and freight use.
Two long-running conversion programmes reached their conclusion at last.
Barring a handful for specialist duties, every locomotive was equipped with air brakes.
This involved a massive conversion programme on Classes 08, 20, 26, 27, 31 and 37, often outside normal overhaul schedules.
Steam-heated hauled stock was also eradicated, and the response was the reclassification of more Class 31/4s and 47/4s, plus the first Class 37/4s.
Longer-term planning forced BR to embark upon life-extension programmes for several locomotive types expected to be needed until well into the 1990s, although they were halted in 1989 before being completed.
English Electric Class 37s in particular were subjected to near-total rebuilds, involving replacement of the main generator with an alternator, regeared CP7 bogies, and in some cases Ruston or Mirrlees power unit, electric-heat generator, or ballast weights added to provide extra adhesion for particular freight work.
Thus, one standard locomotive design evolved into six specialist types.
Many Brush-built Class 31s were equipped with ETH generators and given a major body overhaul, while some Class 47s were similarly treated.
The Class 50 refurbishment programme was completed, although they are destined for a short life, while limited work was also carried out on Class 20s, 26s and 33s to see them through to the arrival of new designs.
On reflection, costly mistakes were made with both the Class 27s and 45s, whose short careers could not possibly have justified the lavish life-extension work carried out on them.
High Speed Trains.
The eight-year High Speed Train power car production line came to an end at BREL Crewe works in August 1982 with the delivery  of the 198th and final example, although strengthening of the fixed coach rakes meant the final augmentation trailer did not appear until the spring of 1985.
Healthy business, and integration of the Midland main line into the HST network, saw most of the fixed rakes expanded to eight vehicles.
Opponents of the two locomotives for each train concept were vindicated by a series of stress defects and overheating of the Paxman Valenta 2,250hp power units, and it was agreed to re-engine four Western Region examples with Mirrlees units.
(It is the long-term plan to re-engine 140 more.)
Trailer-wise, complaints from guards about excessive noise in the guard's compartment at the rear of the power car saw an order for 101 second-class trailers hurriedly modified to include a small compartment for them.
Pullman units were created for prestige services to Newcastle, Leeds, Sheffield, Cardiff and the West of England, while most other trailer kitchen firsts (TKFs) were converted to hauled stock.
The original concept of separate kitchen/restaurants and buffets for HSTs was too ambitious given shorter journey times and changing eating habits.
Mid-life refurbishment with new first- and second-class seating has justifiably continued the HST's popularity.
Externally, the repainting from blue and grey to the new InterCity house style was practically complete as  1989 drew to a close.
As for embellishments, the people organising naming ceremonies seemed to be outnumbered by other policymakers whose desire was to see them progressively removed.
No one was really sure why.
Diesel Units.
The Sprinter DMU was one of BR's greatest success stories of the 1980s — though there were severe setbacks from late deliveries, unreliability of one design, and a near-disastrous flirtation with cheap-to-build railbuses.
The decision to press ahead with new builds on a large scale was based on Provincial's conviction that it could reduce its losses if given the freedom to operate cost-effective diesel-mechanical rolling stock, allowing shorter but more frequent trains, than having to take on InterCity's weary cast-off locos and hauled stock.
Added to that was the desire to eradicate all vehicles with asbestos insulation by 1988, a target not in fact achieved.
The truism that you get what you pay for was ably demonstrated by the decision in 1981 to replace ageing first-generation DMU fleets on non-electrified outer suburban lines and remote branches with low-cost bus-type bodies on four-wheeled underframes.
The prototype Leyland two-car Class 140 unit appeared in 1981, and other fleets quickly appeared from Leyland, BREL and Andrew Barclay as Classes 141, 142, 143 and 144.
By 1987, the honeymoon was over.
Large numbers were laid up with a multiplicity of gearbox, transmission, body and wheelset problems.
Old-generation units were patched up even further beyond their expected life span.
In one curious case, Cornish services inherited the units delivered there thirty years previously!
The Sprinter DMUs, conventionally engineered units built by BREL, Leyland and Metro-Cammell, Classes 150, 151, 154, 155, 156 and 158, were considerably more successful and by the end of the decade in charge of the mainstay of Provincial services literally from Wick to Penzance.
Although the first units were somewhat spartan, the later builds were well equipped and responsible for a sizeable upturn in passenger business on some routes.
Again, there was a slight hiccup when the entire Leyland Class 155 fleet were  withdrawn for almost a year with door troubles; they opened while the train was running.
It was goodbye therefore, albeit slower than planned, to large numbers of vintage units.
The asbestos-contaminated Cravens Class 105s, Gloucester Class 100s and Park Royal Class 103s were completely wiped out, while the advancing army of Sprinters began to make heavy inroads into the enormous numbers of Metro-Cammell and BR-built units.
The Southern Region's small domestic fleet of diesel-electric units was trimmed back thanks to the completion of the Tonbridge-Hastings and East Grinstead electrification.
By the end of the decade, new electrification projects meant the writing was on the wall for the surviving English Electric-engined Class 205 and 207 units.
AC Electric Units.
Commuting became fashionable again in the 1980s, and BR responded with new suburban electrification schemes, over a thousand new electric passenger vehicles and (when replacement finance was not available) 1950s units given the asbestos-removal treatment and a mid-life facelift.
By contrast to the erratic and often wasteful locomotive policy, BR seemed determined to extract maximum mileage out of its EMU fleet, sometimes moving entire fleets from one line to another.
Standardisation has reached such a level that there are now only five main types of AC unit, the pre-1960 Southern Region-inspired slam-door units (Classes 302–8), express (Class  309), modern slam-door (Classes 310/312), Scotland/Manchester suburban sliding door (Classes 303/31 1), inner suburban sliding door (Classes 313–315), and modern outer-suburban based on the Mark 3 coach bodyshell (Classes 317–21).
Only one class of AC unit, the pre-war design LNER Class 306 disappeared completely.
Network SouthEast provided its four showpiece routes north of London with new rolling stock, Bedford-St Pancras, King's Cross-Cambridge/ Peterborough, Liverpool Street-Cambridge, and Euston-Northampton.
First was the newly energised Bedford-St Pancras route which was the first home of forty-eight four-car Class 317s.
They entered traffic in 1982 after a series of teething troubles, and union resistance to one-man operation.
Their stay was brief however.
The integration of the Bed-Pan service with Thameslink operation from 1988 onwards, allowed dual voltage use of the similar, brand-new Class 319 units, dispatch of the 317s to the Great Northern and London Midland, and closure of the recently modernised Cricklewood maintenance depot into the bargain.
King's Cross-Cambridge/Peterborough outer suburban services, a bodged combination of electric units to Hitchin and Royston, and DMUs and HSTs over the non-electric gap, was brought together at the end of the decade, courtesy of two collections of four-car 317s, a purpose-built second batch of twenty-five units, and thirteen of the earlier series.
Class 313s continued to look after the inner suburban system, and the now non-standard 1977-series Class 312s were packed off to the Colchester line.
As GN business continued to grow, the solution was simply to obtain more slightly soiled Class 317s from somewhere or other.
Cambridge-line passengers, celebrating the establishment of an electric link to Bishop's Stortford and Liverpool Street, felt short-changed when the only trains BR could offer were facelifted 1960 built Class 305 slam-door stock, actually older than the hauled stock it replaced.
After a brief spell with ex-GN Class 312s, relief came in 1988 with brand-new Class 321s, sporting a smart exterior, but in truth little more than a Class 319 Thameslink unit without the end gangway connection.
Apart from seeing the replacement of LNER-design inner-suburban Class 306s, Colchester, Southend, Bishop's Stortford, Hertford and Chingford-line travellers will have to wait until the 1990s for their new stock.
In the meantime, most of the original Classes 302, 304, 305, 307, 308 have been turned into open saloons and given new seating and gangways.
The gap left by the withdrawal of the worst examples has been filled with Class 312s, and ex-London Midland 310s.
Now almost thirty years old, and arguably BR's best-ever buys, the Mark 1 based Class 309 ‘Clacton’ units, continued their relentless treks across the Essex countryside, now with new seating, a new livery, and with the extension of wires to Ipswich and Norwich, the chance to break out of their traditional operational straitjacket.
Euston-Northampton services, now recognised in their own right, jumped the queue in 1989 to receive new Class 321s with first-class facility.
It also       became clear that the 319/321 design would be built for some time yet.
Scotland's only new acquisitions during the decade were twenty-one Class 318s, three-car versions of the Class 317, to service the newly electrified Glasgow-Ayr/Largs routes, although 1989 also witnessed the first withdrawals proper (apart from accident victims or asbestos units) of the original Pressed Steel 1959 ‘Blue Train' Class 303s, whose unrefurbished examples are due for early replacement by 100mph Class 321-type Class 320s.
Greater Manchester, unable to finance its own units, was content to take up twelve redundant ex-Scottish Class 303s, at the same time reducing its fleet of equally geriatric slam-door Class 304s from four to three cars.
DC electric units.
Apart from an influx of long-awaited sliding-door stock for inner suburban units and a small batch of unpopular Weymouth-Waterloo stocks, the headlines for the Southern Region's vast DC electric fleet were disappointingly dull.
It was a long tale of low-cost facelifts, make do and mend, and cover up the cracks in a coat of Network SouthEast red, white and blue paint.
This was no more evident than on the Isle of Wight at the end of 1989, which seemed to be going backwards despite getting new stock.
The replacement units, renovated life-expired 1938 ex-Underground vehicles, were fifty-one years old to begin with.
It replaced 1923 stock, which was incidentally only forty-four years old at the time it was moved to the island!
South London commuters who have travelled practically all their working lives on dreary Bulleid-influenced 4-SUB and EPB units would have celebrated the arrival from York in 1981 of the first Class 455 four-car units, which, in three batches, eventually ran to 137.
Elsewhere, it was very much the same.
Eastleigh and Horwich shared a rebuilding programme for ninety-seven four-car units of 195 1 EPB stock, and two-car units followed before the scheme was halted in the face of more orders for new stock.
Kent Coast travellers saw their Mark 1 based Class 41 1 4-CEPS taken to BREL Swindon (the last major coach contract before the works closed) for a thorough facelift that also included new windows and double glazing.
The similar Class 421 4-CIGS, and unpopular Class 423 4-VEPS were also processed, but at lower cost.
Apart from the 4-SUBS, traffic levels meant there was little chance for stock to fall out of the bottom of the cascade.
This was reserved for those with asbestos, including most of the two-car express-geared but still unpleasantly cramped 4-HAPS.
The extension of electrification from Bournemouth to Weymouth, completed in 1988, saw the arrival of the new streamlined 100mph Class W2, fivecar buffet units with power-operated sliding doors, air conditioning, and the return of compartments for first-class travellers.
The traditional Southernwaste not, want not policy was perpetuated in the reuse of traction equipment from the Class 432 4-REPS they replaced.
InterCity's dedicated Victoria-Gatwick Express push-pull service launched in 1984 made little difference to domestic services, employing ex-LMR Mark 2f coaches formed into trailer sets with a 1959-type 2-HAP driving trailer  converted to a driving van at one end, and a Class 73 locomotive at the other.
More thorough stock control completed the changed Southern scene as virtually all EMU units were renumbered to allow the first two digits to match their fleet status.
The London Midland Region, the only operator of wholly DC units, cut its varieties to just three.
Conversion of the Manchester-Hadfield stub of the old Woodhead route from 1,500V DC operation to standard 25kV kissed goodbye to the eight 1954 Class 506s, ninety-two of which were used on Great Eastern services until 1982.
LMS influence disappeared from Merseyside's Southport and Wirral electric routes with the demise of the pre-war three-car sliding-door stock of Classes 502 and 503.
In their place came standard aluminium-bodied BR units, Class 507s brand new, and Class 508s second hand from the Southern.
In decline almost since they were built, the North London line's BR-design Class 501s peacefully passed into oblivion, replaced by Class 313 dual-voltage units borrowed from the Great Northern.
So, very little pre-nationalisation influence is left on our increasingly standardised system.
For the enthusiast there are two tiny pockets worth exploring however…
London's Waterloo &City tube line, where the 1940 vintage cars sport NSE livery on the outside and Southern Railway ventilator grilles on the inside, and the individualistic Manchester-Bury line, where Lancashire &Yorkshire influence still shines through with battered 1959 BR stock rattling up and down the short, but unique 1,200V DC side contact third rail complete with semaphore signals.
But not for much longer.
The 09.02 for Liverpool Lime Street leaves Euston on 10 July 1989 powered by Class 90 No 9000 Royal Show.
O the left, Class 87/0 No 87010 King Arthur awaits departure time with the 09.45 to Carlisle.
It is interesting to note that bullhead rail is still in evidence some forty years after the infant British Railways adopted flat-bottom rail as standard .
Propelling the 10.10 Leeds-King's Cross Intercity service, Class 91 No 91007 passes under the Wood Green flyover on the approaches to Alexandra park station on 23 September 1989.
Romanian-built Brush Class 56 No 56015 at Coalville on 11 June 1989.
It carries Railfreight coal sub-sector livery and is allocated to Toton(TO) depot.
The bodyshells of Class 60 Nos 60005 and 60006 under construction inside toe Procor Works at Horbury on 25 April 1989.
Class 60 No 60002 Capability Brown undergoes trials at Derby RTC on 9 October 1989 .
At the close of the decade there were only two examples of the Class 03 diesel mechanical shunter remaining in stock, both on the Isle of Wight.
Here No 03073 (since withdrawn) stands at Duke Street in Birkinhead Docks on 23 August 1988.
Class 26/0 No 26005, in old Railfreight grey, stands at Eastfield depot on 12 June 1988.
At the end of the decade all the remaining members of the class were based here.
(Opposite above) Given a new lease of life.
Rebuilt English electric Class 37 No 37372, now ETH fitted Class 37/4 No 37 4331 Sir Powys/County of Powys stands at Cardiff with 09.50 Swansea to Portsmouth train, 16 February 1988.
The Cardiff Catonbased locomotive was modified in 1986 .
(Opposite below)The first of the Class 47s — or Brush Type 4s as they were known when D1500 appeared in 1962 — still hard at work rom Gateshead depot in 1987. here No 47401, as it is now numbered and carrying the name North Eastern which it both received and lost during the 1980s, nears Greenfield on a Trans-Pennine service, the 17.03 Liverpool to Newcastle on 19 June 1987.
The train is made up of Mk2a and C stock in Provincial ‘Trans-Pennine’ colours with Mk1 full brake in blue and grey at the rear .
HST.
Nos 43119+43065 emerging from Calton Hill Tunnel at the start of the journey with the 09.35 Edinburgh-King's Cross service on Sunday 21 June 1987.
The leading power car is in the older Inter-city livery and has its number rather than a set number displayed on the front end.
This reflects a change in attitude, the power cars are now seen as separate locomotive units.
The visible Mk3 trailers are still in blue and grey.
Colourful is perhaps a polite way to describe this BRCW three-car dmu set P460 with 51317 the leading car.
It is painted in British Telecom yellow livery with blue lettering.
The unit is seen here leaving Plymouth working a shuttle service to Laira depot open day on 7 September 1985.
Class 142 Pacer diesel multiple unit No 142073 passes the Midland Railway signalbox at Hellifield South Junction while working the 11.33 Leeds to Morecambe service on 2 April 1988.
The signalbox controls the junction with the Blackburn line which diverges on the left of the picture.
The station is now an unstaffed halt.
The first Class 158 Provincial Express vehicle, No 158701, is unveiled at Derby Railway Technical Centre on 9 October 1989.
on delivery from BREL York to Ilford, new class 321 emu No 321334 is reflected in the waters of the River Ouse as it passes Offord Cluney, near Huntingdon, on 31 March 1989.
