What's BREWING
NEWSPAPER OF THE CAMPAIGN FOR REAL ALE
OCTOBER 1991
Bass dodges the draught
GIANT brewers Bass have sold 372 pubs to Enterprise Inns, a new pub-owning company based in Solihull, and have artfully dodged the government's ‘guest beer’ rule.
It is the biggest sale of pubs to a single company since the 1989 Monopolies Commission report on the brewing industry.
The new company's tied estate is centred on the West Midlands, but stretches from Sheffield to Worcester, and from Leicester to Telford.
Further acquisitions are planned once the company is fully established.
Enterprise Inns have signed a five year supply deal with Bass and all their pubs will continue to stock Bass beers.
This sparked immediate criticism that the MMC regulations requiring Bass to free pubs from the tie or sell them had been by-passed.
The Guardian commented that these sorts of deals ‘would simply prompt further government investigations into the industry, unless the pub owning company was seen to be genuinely independent of the brewer’.
Those publicans stocking a guest beer will lose their rights to do so, since Enterprise Inns is not considered to be part of Bass.
Even the Bass list of ‘in-house’ guest beers will not be available to Enterprise tenants.
Enterprise's managing director Ted Tuppen defended the supply deal, saying that it had not been a condition of the sale that Enterprise take its beers from Bass.
The group had considered all other brewers supplying their trading area before making a final decision, he added.
The supply deal could be terminated at three months' notice.
It was also non-exclusive, so Enterprise could take beers from other brewers if they chose.
‘We did a lot of research,’ Tuppen said.
‘Most tenants were very happy with their existing range, and their biggest fear was that we would stop supplying them with Bass beers.
‘There was very very strong brand loyalty.’
Only a small minority of tenants were taking guest beers and few of them were worried about losing them, Tuppen claimed.
Enterprise intends to make free supplies of Highgate Mild and MMild available so that pubs could try out a new Bass beer for their range.
Tenants would be consulted about Enterprise's list of approved beer suppliers.
Pubs will be placed on 21 year leases and they will be free of the tie on amusement machines and non-beer drinks.
‘Our biggest asset is the licensees,’ Tuppen said.
Enterprise Inns may be a new company but its board is predominantly from the industry.
The chairman is Michael Cottrell, former managing director of Courage and presently chairman of Taunton Cider.
Also on the board are David George, formerly of Manns &Norwich, and former Watney Truman tied trade director Chris Pitt.
Ted Tuppen, with a finance background, is the only ‘outsider’ on the board.
Giant's pub deal robs tenants of guest beer rights Report by Stephen Cox
Meet Jim, CAMRAman 30,000
CAMRA reached its highest ever membership last month when Jim Jordon became number 30,000 at the Ipswich Beer Festival.
Jim is an Ipswich resident of 15 years' standing.
He says: ‘I do like real beers, but I can't stand keg.
‘I can see what CAMRA has done from the local pubs.
It would be nice if there were pressure groups for other things that were as effective.’
CAMRA's membership has grown from under 20,000 to 30,000 in less than three years.
The Campaign now has more paid-up members than it did at the height of the 1970s real ale revival.
National Chairman John Cryne was at the festival to give Jim Jordon, on the left in the picture, an engraved tankard.
‘We set ourselves the 30,000 target for our 21st birthday — March 1992,’ John said.
‘Now we intend to carry on recruiting, towards 40,000 members, and beyond.
‘Real ale sales are growing, and there is increased interest in Britain's brewing heritage, but the threat to traditional pubs remains as severe as ever.
‘More than ever before the beer drinker and pubgoer needs a watchdog to protect their interests.’
Membership reaches all-time high
GBG heralds ‘key of the door’ birthday by Jeff Evans
Hot on the heels of the 1991 sell-out, the 1992 edition of the Good Beer Guide goes on sale at the end of this month as a prelude to CAMRA's 21st birthday year.
The Guide has long been seen as CAMRA's flagship, mixing solid campaigning points with entertaining features, the latest information from the brewing world and Britain's best pub guide.
This year's edition, once again generously sponsored by British Coal, is no exception.
The breweries section continues to expand, such is the growth in demand for real ale, and there are many new brews to whet the appetite.
More historical information on the breweries has been added and the tasting panels have once more been out and about finalising their tasting notes.
If you're a survivor of the Red Revolution — or was it a failed coup?— one feature you'll want to read is Brian Glover's nostalgic glance back at those dreadful keg beers.
Do you remember who claimed ‘It's what your right arm's for’?
On the other hand, if you fancy a night in, take a closer look at TV pubs with top critic Hilary Kingsley, while following Barrie Pepper's advice on what to drink at home.
Roger Protz welcomes with open arms the rebirth of stout and porter, and Michael Jackson chaperons drinkers who want ale, not lager, when abroad.
Campaigning points remain at the forefront: new long-leases for tenants, inter-brewery supply deals and the latest wave of brewery closures are all put under the spotlight.
And, of course, the Pub Section points the way to nearly 5,000 pubs that serve top-notch cask beer — there are more than 1,500 new entries from last year.
NEWS AND DIARY CAMRA joins election fray with manifesto
CAMRA has launched its own manifesto for the next General Election with policies to be presented to candidates of all parties for action in the next parliament.
Election fever rises and falls with the opinion polls but CAMRA is determined that issues affecting the pub and drinkers will be fully debated during the election, whenever it comes.
Two-thirds of adults use pubs, and one million people work in the drinks industry or licensed trade.
‘CAMRA's aim is that future generations should enjoy a variety of good beers, in a healthy and diverse mix of pubs,’ said Campaigns Manager Stephen Cox.
‘As a non-political organisation, we believe politicians of all parties will listen to our views.’
The manifesto defends the right to enjoy drinking in the British public house.
It says that health and social policies should accept that responsible drinking in pubs is a benefit to society.
CAMRA rejects tax policies seeking to make beer more expensive in real terms.
Britain already has one of the highest beer tax rates in Europe.
The Campaign attacks the carve-up of the brewing industry by vested interests, and the way that large companies are getting around legislation following the 1989 MMC Report.
CAMRA believes that many ‘independent’ retailers are in effect tied to brewers.
The manifesto calls for a ban on takeovers, greater controls over supply deals between brewers and pub owning chains, the extension of the guest beer to managed houses, and action on local monopolies.
CAMRA restates its support for the principle of the tied house.
It warns that unless the brewing industry gets its act together, the European Commission will impose sweeping changes on the industry.
On licensing issues CAMRA wants the right for pubs to open on Sunday afternoons and for children to be allowed into suitable pubs, reforms already introduced in Scotland.
CAMRA wants the right of licensing authorities to refuse new pub licences much more carefully defined.
The Campaign wants a major new right for pub customers: to be consulted over refurbishments to their locals.
Proposals should have to be advertised locally, the manifesto says, and customers should be given a right of audience before the licensing authorities to oppose unwelcome changes.
CAMRA supports tenants evicted so that pubs can be run by managers or who refuse to sign new leases on unfair terms.
CAMRA wants a sliding scale of excise duty, to promote competition by encouraging the retention of specialist breweries owned by larger concerns.
Finally, the Campaign seeks a ban on TV advertising of alcohol and laws requiring the listing of alcoholic drinks ingredients.
P. A. Newton
Ex-pat Scouse is top Twit
OUR chums at Twitbread once again wins the wooden spoon for naff PR.
The ‘brewing’(sic) group's might organ, Twitbread News, informs me that Twitters have made a special award to Paul McCartney as ‘Scouse Personality of the Year’.
Scouse?
Surely this term should be used to describe someone who lives and works — or draws the dole — in Scouserpool?
When last sighted, McCartney was living in the soft south, several hundred miles from his natal city.
He did, however, make a brief appearance in Scouseland this summer for the premiere, and so far only, performance of his ‘Oratorio’ in the Anglican cathedral, his first serious musical work since Rupert and the Frog Song.
Twitbread News further regales me with the information that McCartney was voted Scouseperson of the Year by ‘the people of his home city’.
Unlike serious pollsters, the brewer's flaccid organ fails to report the size of the sample of Scousers interviewed but it is believed to be adjacent to the number of fans at a Tranmere Rovers away match.
Personally, I would have voted for the lads at Cain's Brewery but Twitters may have got the jitters if the revamped Higson's had made the headlines.
But at least the Cain's mob would have made the lunch where the awards were announced.
McCartney sent his apologies.
Well, it's a long drive from Essex…
Canvas bagman
FEELING sorry for poor old George ‘Punchy’ Walker, so brutally deprived of his role as chairman and chief exec of Brent Walker by the rest of the board?
Re-programme your feelings, in that case.
The annual BW accounts, published last month, reveal that Gorgeous George voted himself a 17 per cent pay rise last year just as his company was plunging to the canvas with debts of £350 million.
The former boxer and founder of the Spud-U-Hate fast-food chain saw his salary rise from £515,000 a year to £606,000.
This is thought to be a mite higher than the brewery workers in Hartlepool will draw on the dole even if the management buyout of Cameron's Brewery is successful.
Commenting on the Bent (sorry, this is a printing error)Walker figures, accountants Peat Marwidk McLintock &Leigh Carr said: ‘We are unable to form an opinion as to whether the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company…’
Methinks a few thousand Hartlepudlians could form an opinion, especially where George ‘In the Red Corner’ Walker's salary rise is concerned.
Meanwhile, the Frivolous Crime Squad continues to investigate the company's accounts.
Upchuck Downunder
I AM indebted to the worthy journal Australian Hotelier for this nauseous account of a court case involving the major Oz brewers, Tooheys.
Appearing before Mr Justice Beaumount in the New South Wales Federal Court, Tooheys had to answer a charge of misleading the public and of deceptive advertising.
The group had claimed that drinkers would have to consume a ‘not insignificant amount’ of their 2.2 light beer before reaching the .05 blood alcohol limit set for drivers in NSW.
No less than 66 people — mugs in Australian parlance — volunteered to drink up to eight ‘middies’(285ml) of the kangaroo's by-product in an hour.
The end result was that Tooheys won the day, with most of the drinkers still under the limit after an hour's soaking.
But the case left a few unfortunates in its wake.
Two of the volunteers ran up the white flag and couldn't stay the court.
Four more drinkers produced violent Technicolored Yawns long before reaching the eighth glass.
As M'lud Beaumont intoned, drinking that amount of 2.2 is an ‘uncomfortable process’.
Pass the sick bag, Alice Springs.
Crouch v. crutches
I AM pleased to bring the glad tidings that the British Guild of Beer Writers cricket team have at last won a match.
Thrashed mercilessly two years running by the Crouch Vale Brewery Ensemble in Essex, the BGBW geriatrics got their revenge last month by trouncing the brewers by eight wickets.
It would have been nine wickets, but Lewis Eckett, editor of Club Horror, was Absent Without Leave.
The age of the BGBW tyros, who included Chris Hutt, Iain Dobson and R. ‘Stumper’ Protz, did cause some concern.
At one stage the scorer called out: ‘What is the name of the grey-haired player?’
Back came the riposte: ‘Which one?’
Weeny one
ONCE again baseless charges of lewdness and indecency in this column make it impossible for me to report the following headline in the newsletter of Wolverhampton and Dudley Breweries: ‘What's Five Inches Long — and Worth £200?’
I didn't know you could get it insured.
Chin, chin!
Tankard awards
THE closing date for entries in the 1991 Tankard Awards competition organised by the British Guild of Beer Writers and sponsored by Bass is 1 November.
Entries — from part-time writers as well as professionals — should be sent to Mike Ripley, Brewers' Society, 42 Portman Square, London W1H 0BB.
New bed guide
A NEW edition of Beer, Bed and Breakfast, CAMRA's guide to pub accommodation, will be published in spring 1992.
Members with suggestions for new entries should send them without delay to Roger Protz at CAMRA HQ.
NEWS Wonderful summer for Wood's
THE summer was a scorcher for Wood's, the family-owned Shropshire brewery.
While many brewers are bemoaning over-capacity and falling sales, Wood's are trading 33 per cent up on last year's summer figures on their Parish, Special and Wonderful brews.
Reaction to their two recently-rescued Sam Powell ales, formerly brewed by the Sam Powell Brewery in Newtown, Powys, is also very encouraging, with repeat orders coming in at a good rate.
The brewery at Wistanstow, Craven Arms, is nearing brewing capacity and Wood's are bringing forward plans to extend their premises and work should start this Autumn.
And the business boom has been matched by accolades awarded to Wood's Wonderful, at 1050°OG the most heady of their five regular beers.
The brew has been listed as one of the UK's top 100 by a multimillion circulation national magazine.
It has won its way into CAMRA's Heart of England Beer Festival finals.
And Wood's Wonderful beer mats have taken second place in the British Beermat Collectors' Society annual popularity poll.
* Winners of the Beermat Collectors awards were: set of mats — Burton Bridge (1), Guernsey Brewery (2) and Cotleigh Brewery (3).
Individual mats — Jolly Roger (1), Wood's (2) and Otter Brewery (3).
Jolly Roger backs both sides in war re-run
A VITAL battle in the English Civil War was re-enacted in Worcester last month — with help from the city's Jolly Roger Brewery.
The brewery was asked by the Civil War Centre to sponsor two of the key events in the pageant — the entry of King Charles and his Scottish army into Worcester in 1651 and his escape from the city when Cromwell's forces routed his troops.
When the Royalist army arrived at Worcester's oldest pub, the Cardinal's Hat, they were refreshed with pints of a special 1042° gravity beer, ‘His Majesty's Royal Celebration Ale’, brewed by Jolly Roger.
When the Cromwell forces arrived, the pumpclips in the Cardinal's Hat were rapidly changed to read ‘Parliamentarians Premium Ale’.
The Jolly Roger Quaffers raised more than £400 for charity, which will be used to take a party of under-privileged children to Drayton Manor park and zoo.
The Worcester Evening News picture shows troops outside the Cardinal's Hat.
Scome clean on Brown clips
SCOTTISH &Newcastle will relabel all Matthew Brown beers.
Sclosed the Matthew Brown brewery in April and transferred brewing to Home in Nottingham.
But point of sale material, in particular fonts, referred to Matthew Brown as a ‘brewer of fine Lancashire ales’.
Paul Riley, CAMRA's liaison officer with Matthew Brown, commented: ‘Brown isn't a brewer of anything.
And Nottingham isn't in Lancashire.’
CAMRA complained to the local trading standards officers, who have agreed that the fonts were misleading.
Victory as Tories give in on labels by Iain Loe
AFTER years of lobbying, it looks as if the Government will bring in legislation to force brewers to list the ingredients in their beers.
The Food Advisory Committee's latest review of labelling legislation has recommended that all alcoholic drinks should be subject to the same legislation that governs all other foodstuffs.
The Government is believed to be willing to accept the recommendation.
If you go into a pub today and buy a pint of beer, a coke, a low alcohol lager and a packet of crisps, you have a right to know what is in all those products except the beer.
‘That is nonsense,’ says CAMRA's Campaigns Manager Stephen Cox.
‘A more health conscious consumer wants to know what he is drinking.’
Now, at long last, the brewers will have to step in line.
It is not surprising, since it is almost certain that the European Commission will shortly propose that labelling of ingredients for alcoholic drinks should become law throughout the community.
Recently, thanks to legislation from the EC, all drinkers have to state their alcoholic strength by volume (ABV).
CAMRA, in conjunction with fellow beer consumer organisations in the European Beer Consumers Union, have produced a ‘Euro-Beer Label’ setting out exactly what beer drinkers would like to see declared.
The demands include ingredients, place of brewing, date of bottling or racking, and whether or not it is cask or brewery conditioned, bottle conditioned or pasteurised.
* Just to show the brewers how it should be done, CAMRA is producing a bottle-conditioned beer to celebrate 21 years of the Campaign.
The beer will have labels giving all the information it is felt the beer consumer needs.
The bottled beer will be available early in 1992.
Oxon brewer cuts prices
OXFORD independent Morrells has announced small price cuts for some of their beers.
The brewery is reducing wholesale prices of Morrells Bitter and lager by about one pence a pint.
This follows six years where wholesale prices have risen less than inflation, according to the brewery.
Morrells hopes to hold the price of cask mild for a further 12 months.
Other price rises will be less than the rate of inflation.
Managing Director Charles Eld sees this as part of a package to preserve traditional local pubs.
‘We want our tenants to be able to offer good beers at the right price,’ he said.
‘We're leaving big managed pubs to other companies.’
PUB OPINION
Guest Beer Writer Dave Goodwin
As the leaves fall where can I take my kids?
‘MANY as are the virtues of the Moon under Water I think that the garden is the best feature, because it allows whole families to go there instead of Mum having to stay at home and mind baby while Dad goes out alone.
‘And though, strictly speaking, they are only allowed in the garden, the children tend to seep into the pub and even to fetch drinks for their parents.
This, I believe, is against the law, but it is a law that deserves to be broken, for it is the puritanical nonsense of excluding children — and therefore to some extent, women — from pubs that has turned these places into mere boozing-shops instead of the family gathering-places that they ought to be.’
(George Orwell, London Evening Standard, February 1946).
THINGS haven't changed much in 45 years.
As autumn approaches, those of us with children have to leave the relaxed, informal and often cold and damp atmosphere of the pub garden in search of those few pubs which admit children somewhere within their four walls.
The present laws, except in Scotland, prevent the under-14s being admitted to bars or licensed premises.
I understand the definition of a bar is somewhere used principally for the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Strictly a child could be excluded from a pub garden if it is used principally as a drinking area.
Even the ‘family room’ may not be strictly legal.
Everything is open to interpretation, usually by the police, and the poor, hard-pressed licensee and his customers are so confused that the usual solution is to avoid the problem and not let children into the pub at all.
While we must support family rooms in those pubs which have the space and can provide suitable amusement for the little angels, this cannot remain the only answer to the problem.
Family rooms are useful to let the less well-behaved and noisier children run riot but they are frequently cold and characterless and, no matter how good the facilities may be, you often feel excluded from the main atmosphere of the pub.
I WOULD rather take my children into the main bar or lounge of a pub and expect them to sit sensibly and reasonably quietly so that we can all relax, drink, talk and eat in a proper pub atmosphere.
What is needed is a relaxation of the law as it now stands to allow the controlled admission of children to certain pubs at certain times of day.
I am not proposing a free-for-all, but the admission of children to certain pubs on the application of the licensee and the approval of the local licensing bench.
Assuming licensees and magistrates act sensibly in seeking and granting approval, I cannot see any strong objection to this.
The attitude of many who object to children in pubs is not dissimilar to those who objected to women in men-only bars and pubs in the early 1970s.
‘I work with women all day and I go to the pub to get away from them’…
‘I go to the pub to get away from the wife’…
‘The pub is a place for men, not women’…
‘It's not a suitable place for women’.
For women or wife substitute children.
Just who are we trying to protect with these archaic attitudes?
The pub as an institution is struggling to survive.
Pubs needs all the custom they can get.
If we continued to exclude children, we are effectively excluding many women, we are excluding families and in many ways the men as well.
Everyone then gets out of the habit of going to the pub and goes to the ever-increasing competition such as McDonald's or other fast food establishments.
There is also a great benefit in allowing children into pubs from an early age.
If young people get used to the idea of the pub being a centre of the community, a place for sensible conversation and for sensible drinking, they are less likely to abuse the pub and its facilities when they become young adults.
And for those who say that some pubs are unsuitable for children because they might have some evil influence, then isn't it about time those pubs were cleaned up?
What is needed is an active campaign to change the law to allow children, accompanied by a responsible adult, into a public house, or certain specified rooms within that public house, at specified times of the day, the rooms and times being agreed by the licensing justices following application from the licensee.
The way things are moving, my daughters will be grown up with families of their own before any change occurs.
And who knows how many years will then have passed since George Orwell wrote about his ideal pub?
Dave Goodwin, CAMRA's Finance Director, is married with two daughters.
COMMENT
Leases are threat to pub heritage
THE treatment of pub tenants by the national brewers is a disgrace.
The headlong rush by the brewers to switch tenants to long leases is creating misery and hardship.
The brewers are moving over to leases not to improve the running of their pubs or to offer better service to customers but simply to avoid new government legislation aimed at giving tenants greater protection.
One of the few recommendations of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission report of 1989 into the supply of beer that was adopted by the government was to bring tenants under the protection of the Landlord and Tenant Act.
The national brewers, whose attitude to staff and tenants would bring a blush to the face of the average Victorian mill owner, object to new legislation that would deprive them of the right to evict tenants and their families at a moment's notice.
And so the long lease was dreamt up by Grand Metropolitan and taken up with enthusiasm by the rest of the national pub owners and brewers.
In some cases, the leases include absurd barrelage targets that leaseholders find impossible to meet and have to pay heavy fines as a result.
Tenants who refuse to accept leases are given notice to quit and find themselves on the streets after years of loyal service.
As we show on page 10, brewers are refusing to pay for urgent repairs to their tenanted pubs which they have earmarked for conversion to leases because new leaseholders will have to carry that burden when they take over.
The outlook is grim for tenants and consumers.
A new breed of publican is being created who has no long-term interest in the pub trade but who sees the lease as the quick route to a fast profit.
Logic and experience suggest that, on the contrary, leases in the hands of the inexperienced and short-sighted will lead to bankruptcies and wholesale closure of pubs.
As the present government, despite its ‘hands off, free market’ attitudes, is involving itself in the workings of the pub trade, then it must shoulder the responsibility for the present state of affairs and insist that arbitration on rents must be genuinely independent and not loaded in favour of the brewers.
And Secretary of State Peter Lilley should also demand that the brewers pay adequate compensation to tenants who refuse to take leases.
If Bass &Co had to fork out £20,000 per tenant their enthusiasm for leases would swiftly fade.
NEWS Ryburn bounces back with mild brew
THE re-opened Ryburn Brewery in Halifax has started brewing a new mild, Ambleton.
The new beer is being brewed for the Stanley Arms in Stockport.
The brewery had to shut down between March and June due to problems with its boilers.
The beer is flowing again, thanks to help from Clark's Brewery, Wakefield.
‘The head brewer at Clark's has helped out a lot,’ said Ryburn's owner, Harold Coburn.
‘Although small brewers are competitors there's a lot of camaraderie.’
Harold started Ryburn in July 1990 after being made redundant.
He used his pay-off money to buy the five barrel capacity plant.
‘I used to do a lot of home brewing and going round beer festivals gave me the idea of doing it for a living.
It's been a hard struggle but we're getting through,’ he said.
Although he has had a good response from his three other beers, production is still only two barrels a week.
The other beers are the hoppy Best Bitter, the more malty Rydale and the powerful and fruity Stabbers.
All the beers are full mash.
The new mild (1033°OG, 3.2 per cent ABV) is made without caramel from mild malt, chocolate malt and roasted barley.
Suffolk's Tolly puts some pride back in Ipswich by Andrew Sangster
SUFFOLK brewers Tolly Cobbold celebrated the first anniversary of their ‘rebirth’ by launching Ipswich Pride on draught at the town's beer festival.
The brewery was closed by Brent Walker in 1989 but a management team bought the site and restarted brewing a year later.
The team, led by Brian Cowie and Bob Wales, were able to buy the brewery from their employers, Brent Walker, after Ipswich council had slapped a planning order on the brewery site, stopping BW's redevelopment plans.
CAMRA were at the forefront of the fight to rescue the brewery.
A Tolly Cobbold Action Group collected more than 3,000 signatures against the closure and picketed Brent Walker's London offices.
Brian Cowie said: ‘It was the Ipswich branch of CAMRA which mounted a publicity campaign to save the brewery and so it seemed appropriate that the launch of Pride should be at the festival.’
The new beer was launched in a bottled version last January.
It was the first of a range of ‘year beers’.
The beer (1048° OG, 4.6 per cent ABV) will be available on draught initially for only two weeks.
Prices driving away pub trade
PRICE rises are keeping customers away from pubs, according to a report by City analysts SG Warburg.
Drinkers are resorting to off-licences and clubs instead, it claims.
Further damage was caused by the way price rises were introduced, the report says.
Big brewers traditionally stagger rises, introducing increases in certain trading areas and certain types of pubs first, such as their tenanted estate before managed pubs.
The authors of the report, John Spicer and Philip Morrisey, say the result is that customers perceive beer prices as rising continuously, Beer is no longer considered good value for money.
The price freezes introduced by many regional brewers further damaged the reputation of the big brewers, they add.
‘Tesco's, with its recent price promotion, has highlighted the price difference between home consumption and that in a pub,’ state the report.
It also warns that the legislation that followed the Monopolies and Mergers Commission report in 1989 has been a flop.
There is now no more choice, competition or lower prices.
The likelihood of further government investigation when the beer orders are reviewed in 1983/4 is reckoned to be ‘very high’.
* Beer prices were raised by two big companies in Wales and East Anglia last month.
Leaders of pub tenants and local CAMRA activists condemned the increases.
Allied subsidiary Ansells put up prices by six to eight pence in Wales.
GrandMet raised the cost of a pint in their managed houses by eight pence in East Anglia.
Curfew slapped on Tyne beer fest
TYNEMOUTH beer festival had a curfew imposed on it last month by local magistrates.
Residents near the Tynemouth Metro station venue had originally lobbied for it to be cancelled.
The festival organisers, the local CAMRA branch and Tynemouth Round Table, planned to open from 11am to 10.30pm on Friday and Saturday in the first week of September but were forced to close at 9pm instead.
North Shields magistrates clipped 90 minutes off the hours after hearing complaints that Tynemouth already suffered enough from drunkenness.
After the hearing in the court Alison Draper, who lives near the station, said: ‘Nearly all the people here are against the festival because of the trouble we had to put up with last year.
‘There were people throwing glasses around and men urinating in our gardens.
CAMRA promised us there would be security men but there were none to be seen.’
Anne Whittaker of CAMRA's Tyneside and Northumberland branch denied there was any problem last year.
She also pointed out that a considerable sum is raised for charity by the festival.
‘We had a very successful festival last year in the same place and many local people came and enjoyed themselves.
‘People pay a £2 deposit for their glass and are unlikely to throw it away,’ she said.
Top barley in decline
MARIS OTTER, once the most popular of malting barleys, continues to decline according to a survey.
The Home-Grown Cereals Authority Planting Survey shows that the variety contributes only 2.5 per cent of total area of Barley under cultivation in the Eastern Counties (down from 6 per cent in 1990), 0.5 per cent in the South and South West (down from 0.8 per cent) and 0.5 per cent in the Midlands down from 1.4 per cent .
Maris Otter was first listed as an approved variety by the Barley Committee of the Institute of Brewing 26 years ago and is still used by brewers such as Youngs, Brakspear and Eldridge Pope.
In Scotland, the long time spring barley favourite, Golden Promise, has been delisted by the Committee after more than two decades.
GERMANY'S WHEAT BEERS Bavaria's best advice is — try the Weiss
ANYONE who appreciates a good ale is enjoying a fruity complexity of flavours.
This derives not so much from the basic raw material — barley that has been malted — or the seasoning of hop flowers, as it does from the top-fermenting yeasts used in the making of ales (as opposed to the bottom type employed in lagers).
If, though, the barley is augmented, with wheat, that raw material will impart a fruitiness right from the start.
Wheat beers also use top-fermenting yeasts (they are not lagers, contrary to widespread belief), and this renders them doubly fruity.
Some taste apple-like, and others are reminiscent of plums, or even bananas.
There may be more complexities, too.
There is a distinct style to the wheat beers made in South Germany, especially the state of Bavaria, and notably the region to the east of Munich.
The combination of malted wheat and the type of yeasts used by this region's brewers can sometimes make for a spicy, clove-like character.
In Bavaria I have been served the paler, lighter type of wheat beer as a refreshingly tart, acidic, Champagne-like summer refresher, or even as a dessert beer, with elderberry fritters (how about apple pie with cinnamon and cloves?), but there are also darker and stronger versions more suited to autumn and winter.
I have been banging on about South German wheat beers for years, and I am delighted to see that they are becoming more easily available in Britain.
The most visible examples are perhaps those from the Erdinger Weissbräu brewery.
Erding is an attractive country town near Munich.
The town was originally a ducal seat.
It was founded in the late 700s, but most of its present buildings (pastel-coloured and timbered, and punctuated with onion-dome towers) date from the reconstruction in the late 1600s and 1700s, after the 30 years war.
The easiest way to make the journey, of just over 20 miles from Munich, is by the suburban railway (S-Bahn), one of whose lines ends at Erding.
I went this year, during the town's autumn festival, which always starts on the last Friday of August and lasts for 10 days.
The festival is held on parkland conveniently next to the railway station.
Behind the fairground attractions stands the customary tent, capable of holding 3,500 people, served by waitresses capable of holding ten litre-sized steins of Erdinger Weissbräu's Festbier.
(For the brewery's other wheat beers, it is necessary to walk into the town).
Weisse , meaning ‘white’, is one designation often applied to wheat beers.
In the days when most types of beer were dark, wheat brews were seen as being relatively pale and often cloudy.
The term Weissbier may be used.
Or, in the Munich area, the colloquialism Weises .
Or the label may bear the similarsounding word Weizen , meaning ‘wheat’.
The same brewer may use both terms: sometimes Weissbier on his pale, or cloudy (unfiltered) version and Weizen on the darker interpretation, but the terms are interchangeable.
‘Dark white beer’ sounds contradictory but some brewers, including Erdinger, use that form.
Some brewers feel that Weissbier sounds more traditional, because it is an older term; others argue that Weizenbier is more precise.
A Munich brewer told me derisively that Weissbier was a local term from Swabia (to the west).
Another said Weizenbier was a term used by ignorant Franconians (to the north).
I have also heard it argued that the term Weizenbier offers a better guarantee that the beer was made according to the convention that specifies a minimum of 50 per cent wheat.
It is necessary to use some barley both for its natural enzymes and its husks, which form a filter in the mash tun.
Erdinger says it uses more than 50 per cent wheat, but declines to be more specific.
I will guess 50–60 per cent.
The brewery was founded in 1853, started to make wheat beers in the 1890s, and has produced nothing else since it came into its present ownership, the Brombach family, in 1935.
At the time, it was making 3,500 hectolitres a year.
WHEN I first encountered South German wheat beers, in the early to mid 1960s, they were regarded as an old-fashioned, rustic style, favoured by old ladies with large hats.
The beer was at that time customarily garnished with a slice of lemon.
People have told me the lemon was to mask the taste of the uneven products made at that time by unscientific country brewers; I do not believe that.
Some of the wilder wheat beers might taste odd to the uninitiated, but not to people who grew up with them.
I have also heard it said that the lemon reduced the foam to manageable proportions, but why would anyone want to flatten a naturally sparkling drink?
I believe the lemon accentuated the tart, refreshing character of the beer, and I am sorry that it is so rarely seen in Germany today.
Apparently the green movement is worried that the rind may carry pesticides; a new generation of beer purists dislike the lemon; and it does not go so well with the heavily sedimented style currently favoured.
In the early 1960s, wheat beers had only 1 or 2 per ent of the Bavarian market, or at most 2 or 3, reckons Erdinger's second generation owner, Werner Brombach.
At the time, his brewery was making 20,000 hectolitres a year.
In the late 1960s, the cloudy, rustic version began to be replaced by the filtered type, sometimes identified as Kristall .
This ‘Champagne’ image helped it recover.
then, in the 1970s, the pendulum of style swung back to the cloudy, sedimented type, which is seen as a more natural product by today's young audience.
If the cloudy type is made in the traditional way, as Erdinger is, the sediment is yeast left during a secondary fermentation in the bottle.
Some examples from non-specialist brewers are simply sedimented with the residual protein that would normally be removed after brewing.
The latest trend has been towards the darker types, still usually sedimented, and today wheat beer has a good 25 per cent of the Bavarian market.
Brombach confesses he gulped when he found it necessary in 1983 to invest 45 million marks to make a quantum leap to a capacity of a million hectolitres, at a new brewery on the edge of town.
The brewhouse he installed then is now being replicated in mirror image to double that capacity.
Both are spectacular ‘show’ brewhouses, in matt stainless steel, with vessels of traditional shapes though in more singular, stylised renditions.
Erdinger is by far the biggest wheat-beer producer in Germany (about twice the size of the other famous specialist, Schneider Weisse).
Erdinger contracts with local farmers to grow some of its barley and all of its wheat, and provides them with seed.
All the barley is of two-row, summer varieties.
Two varieties of wheat are used.
A double decoration mash is employed.
There are three hop additions, using Perle, Hallertau and Tetnanger, with the accent on aroma.
(Hop bitterness does not sit well with the wheat beers' particular style of fruitiness.
A top-fermenting yeast is used in primary fermentation.
The brewery has only horizontal tanks, in which the fermenting wort is a mere 2.8 metres high.
‘People in Bavaria say it is crazy not to have tall cylindro-conicals in a wholly ultra-modern brewery,’ says Brombach, ‘but I think that kind of vessel sets up a convection that makes for dirty beer.’
CLEAN beer is something of an obsession at Erdinger, which works to tolerances of a tenth of a degree of temperature, from mashing to fermentation, and is coy about revealing the details of either.
The filtered beer is tank conditioned, but the greater part of output has a secondary fermentation in the bottle.
For this purpose, it is primed with wort, and pre-yeasted with a bottom culture.
This beer then spends from two to four weeks of warm conditioning at temperatures of up to 15°C.
I was shown a conditioning warehouse that can hold 15 million bottles and in which pallets are moved by ‘robot’ lifts than run on tracks.
It was the most advanced warehousing I have ever seen, even in Japan.
The popularity of Erdinger's products is no doubt partly due to their clean, easy, drinkability — and to a slight residual sweetness that is an intentional house characteristic.
For a systematic tasting, I went back to Erdinger Weissbräu's original premises, a 1537 house that is still the brewery tap, at Number One on the ‘High Street’, Lange Zeile.
First, there were two bottled beers at around 1050°: the filtered Erdinger Kristall, sweetish, with a hint of vanilla; and the sedimented Erdinger Mit Hefe (‘with yeast’), which has a fruitier (apple-like) character.
The Erdinger Weissbier Dunkel (‘dark’), at 1050–52°, had a spicier character.
This is a style of wheat beer that I especially enjoy, with its teasing counterpoint of tartness and chocolate-malt sweetness.
Finally, the strong version of the dark: Pinkantus Weizenbock, at 1070°, smooth and liquorice-tasting.
THERE was also the Festbier in the tent: just a marginally fuller version of the regular brew.
Erdinger Weissbräu also has a recent stake in the town's other, much smaller, brewery.
This is called Erdinger Stiftungs (the second word means foundation).
At the risk of seeming ungracious to my hosts, I must record that I found the Stiftungs beer more complex in character and traditional in style.
From an extensive range at the Stiftungs brewery tap (built in 1698, reconstructed in 1816, at the corner of Haager and Munchen streets), I greatly enjoyed the Weisse (good clove character); the Dunkelweizen (dates? anise?
Victory V tablets?); and the Bavarian Weizenbock (warming, soothing, linctus-like).
There was also a delicious Helles (‘pale’) lager in the malty Bavarian style, a toffeeish Dunkles (‘dark’) lager and a wonderfully mouth-coating Bock.
I earnestly hope that Erdinger Weissbräu does nothing to interfere with the Stiftungs products, by either culling the wheat beers or ‘cleaning up’ their palates.
When Weissbräu has finally mopped up the market for popular, easily-drinkable wheat beers, it will be glad to have such tasty, characterful brews as a specialist line.
* Bottled versions of Erdinger's wheat beers are available from specialist beer shops in Britain.
The Beer Hunter Michael Jackson
THE Belgian ‘Beer Year Book’ I mentioned last month is available from CAMRA member Richard Larkin complete with an English-language glossary (the book itself is in Flemish).
If you already have the book, and want the glossary, send two firstclass stamps to Richard, at 42 Mansfield Road, London NW3 2HT.
Black beer from east
BITBURGER, one of Germany's biggest brewers, has bought a second brewery in East Germany and may sell its jet-black beer in Britain in 1992.
The brewery in Bad Köstritz in the Thüringen region brews two Pils-type beers but it is the speciality Schwarzbier — Black Beer — that caught Bitburger's attention.
The Köstritz beer is 3.5 per cent alcohol by volume.
At present the beer is bottom-fermenting in the lager style but Bitburger are considering turning it into a top-fermenting beer.
LONDON'S FORGOTTEN BREWERIES How East Enders lost their pig's ear*
THERE never was a Joe Bloggs — there's no such surname.
But there was a Bill Blogg, brewer of Bansbury.
Blogg's brewery was making ales in Roman Road, Barnsbury, in the East End of London around the turn of the century.
Perhaps it was seeing signs advertising ‘Blogg's Beer’ that led East Enders to immortalise the name Bloggs as the Cockney equivalent of Mr Everyman.
William Blogg, whose brewery disappeared just before the First World War, is one of a whole host of East End brewers whose names live on, even if they no longer brew.
The East End once boasted the biggest brewery in the world, and it gave birth to some of the most famous names in British brewing history.
Indeed East Enders can claim to have invented two of the bestknown English styles of beer.
Everybody knows that porter was first brewed, according to legend, by Ralph Harwood of the Bell brewhouse in Shoreditch in 1722.
The East End was also the place where India Pale Ale was invented.
Docklands historians say it was first shipped out to thirsty expats in the Far East from Hodgson's brewery in Bow in 1734.
Hodgson's brewery, whose tap room in the Bow Road bore the name Bombay Grab, remained pre-eminent in the India beer trade until at least the 1820s.
But the Hodgsons seem to have over-extended themselves and lost their monopoly on exporting beer to India, which was subsequently picked up by such upstarts as Bass.
The brewery itself eventually became, some time around 1847, Smith Garrett and Company.
This merged in 1927 with fellow East End brewers Taylor Walker of Limehouse.
Taylor Walker's Thameside Barley Mow brewery was one of the landmarks of the river east of Tower Bridge.
It started out in Stepney as Salmon and Hare in 1730, with Taylor joining the firm in 1796 and Walker in 1816.
As the brewery expanded it was rebuilt, taking in first of all, in 1889, the old Lambeth Workhouse, and later the old Lambeth Town Hall.
The Barley Mow brewery was among the very last to still brew draught London porter, which it made until the late 1930s, and even in the 1950s it was famous for another dark beer, its Main Line mild.
The company made at least one take-over of another East End brewery before the First World War, John Furze and Co's St George brewery, Church Lane, Whitechapel, in 1901.
IT GREW rapidly in the 1920s and 1930s, its most famous acquisitions being the Cannon Brewery company in Clerkenwell, EC1 in 1930 (which itself had acquired Holt's Marine brewery in Ratcliffe Road, E7).
This proved invaluable in March 1941 when the Barley Mow brewery was knocked out of action by German bombers and the Cannon brewery had to fill in production for 18 months.
Eventually, however, Taylor Walker fell victim of Ind Coope in 1959, closing two years later.
The name was later revived by Allied Breweries for its London operation, but using the Cannon Brewery trademark.
The oldest-established of the Thames-side breweries was Hoare and Company's Red Lion brewery.
This traced itself back to John Merchant, a Fleming given a permit almost 100 years earlier, in 1492, to export 50 tuns of ‘ale called berre’ to the Low Countries.
The brewery passed through several hands in the next few centuries, becoming one of several East End specialists in the production of porter.
Oliver Goldsmith praised one owner, Sir John Parsons, as the brewer of ‘Parsons' black champagne’.
The Hoares, a banking family, bought into the concern in 1802.
As competition for tied houses became hotter from 1905, with licensing magistrates actively closing down pubs and beerhouses, Hoare's began grabbing up other brewery firms where they could.
Around 14 or 15 different concerns were taken over up to 1930, from Tottenham to Brighton.
Those in the East End included a half-share in Chandler's Wiltshire Brewery in the Hackney Road, Bethnal Green (via the Lion brewery, Lambeth, the brewery that gave us the South Bank lion); some of the pubs belonging to the Commercial Brewery Co in Commercial Road, Stepney, in 1927 (the rest went to Hammerton's brewery, Stockwell); and West and Co, of the Three Crowns brewery, Hackney Road, Bethnal Green, with 60 pubs, in 1929.
Then in 1933 Hoare's — and its Toby jug trademark — was itself taken over by an East End brewer, Charrington and Co of the Anchor brewery, Mile End Road.
The Anchor brewery had been built in 1757 by a couple of brewers from Bethnal Green called Wastfield and Moss, at a time when the district was so quiet and un-built-up you could still see ships passing on the Thames from the brewery windows.
John Charrington, the son of a Hertfordshire vicar, bought a third share in the brewery in 1766, and by 1783 the Charrington family was in sole control.
Theirs was one of the few ale-only breweries in London at this time, most of the others producing huge amounts of porter for a voraciously thirsty market.
Not until 1833, when the Anchor brewery took over Steward and Head's brewery in neighbouring Stratford, did Charrington's start brewing porter and stout.
This was just about the time when pale ales from Burton were starting to grow in popularity.
In 1871 Charrington's bought the Abbey brewery in Burton-on-Trent to brew Burton pale ales for itself.
The company which sold the Abbey brewery to Charrington's was the London and Burton Brewery Co of Stepney, which carried on brewing in Stepney until its own takeover by Watney's in 1929.
BEFORE the acquisition of Hoare's, Charrington's had bought several other East End brewers; the other half of the Wiltshire brewery in Bethnal Green; Savill Brothers' Stratford Brewery, Maryland Point in 1925, the year it closed its Burton brewery; and two years later Tilney's Alma brewery, Spelman Street, Whitechapel, founded in 1854.
All the same, the takeover of Hoare's doubled the size of the Anchor brewery's tied estate, and gave Charrington's one-third of all the pubs in the City of London and a fair proportion of those in the East End.
This was to prove unfortunate when the Second World War came — Charrington's suffered more than any other brewery from the effects of bomb damage on its tied estate, with one-eighth of all its houses destroyed or damaged.
After a rush of taker-overs in the 1950s and 1960s, from Yeovil to Walsall, Charrington merged with the northern-based United Breweries.
In 1967 it merged with Bass in the Midlands to form Bass Charrington.
This bought another East End brewery into the family tree, the Wenlock Brewery, in Wenlock Road, Shoreditch, just off the City Road, which had been taken over by Bass in 1961 and closed the following year.
Charrington's kept going for longer, but in 1975, after 218 years, brewing ceased at the Anchor brewery.
Just a short distance away, where the Whitechapel Road has turned into the Mild End Road, was another East End concern whose name had become part of a company with national interests — Mann Crossman and Paulin of the Albion brewery.
This was started next to the Blind Beggar pub in 1808, and by 1809 it was being leased to a man called John Hoffman.
After 10 years, however, Hoffman was bankrupt, and the brewery was bought for just £2,420 by Philip Betts Blake and James Mann, partners in a brewery in Lambeth.
The two soon concentrated their business at the Albion brewery.
Eventually, in 1826, Blake left the business, which continued under James Mann and his sons until 1846, when James Mann died.
Richard Crossman, manager of the Border brewery, Berwick, joined Mann's as a partner, being joined a few months later by a friend from Berwick, Thomas Paulin.
Mann's best-selling brew was its ‘entire’, or porter, but like other East End brewers it was facing growing competition from Burton-brewed pale ales.
In 1875 Mann Crossman and Paulin opened its own purpose-built pale ale brewery in Burton-on-Trent, costing £77,000, to beat brewers such as Bass and Allsopp at their own brew.
Eventually, however, in 1896, Mann's sold its Burton brewery.
Mann's remained famous for stouts and brown ales, and many other brewers sold its bottled brown ale, first introduced in 1899.
The brewery used horse-drawn drays for beer deliveries in and around the East End, and during the Second World War it was hit hard when a German land mine damaged the brewery stables, killing and injuring many of the horses.
BUT even in 1963 the brewery still had 25 heavy horses delivering beer in London.
Before that, however, in 1958, the year the Albion brewery celebrated its 150th anniversary, Mann Crossman and Paulin had been taken over by Watney's.
The Red Barrell company was losing its own Stag brewery, near Victoria Station, to redevelopment, and decided it was easier to buy another London brewery than build one.
It did keep the Albion brewery open for another 20 years, but brewing finally stopped in Mild End in 1978.
There was still one more big brewery left in the East End, however, the biggest the East End ever saw — Truman Hanbury and Buxton of Brick Lane.
Joseph Truman, ‘based on papers now lost’, is said to have set up business as a brewer in 1666, the year of the Great Fire of London.
However, he is not definitely found as a brewer in any records that survive today until 1683, when he appears in the register of St Dunstan's, Stepney, as a ‘brewer of Brick Lane’.
One of Joseph Truman's nine children, Benjamin, born about 1700, became a partner in the brewery in 1722.
By the end of the 1730s Truman's Brewery had getting on for 300 publicans on the books, though less than a tenth were tied houses actually owned by the brewery.
It seems highly likely that most if not all the beer produced in Brick Lane by now was porter.
Benjamin Truman, who was knighted in 1761, died in 1780, and the brewery passed to his grandsons, William and Henry Truman Read.
However the brewery, which by 1786 was the second-biggest in London, was run by Sir Benjamin's old head clerk, James Grant.
When Grant died in 1789 his share in the brewery was bought by Sampson Hanbury, aged 30, a member of a family of Quaker bankers.
He was joined in 1808 by his nephew, another Quaker, 25-yearold Thomas Fowell Buxton.
Two more Quakers, the Pryor brothers, Thomas and Robert, who had been leasing Proctor's brewery, joined the concern in 1816.
For the next 138 years the Brick Lane brewery was to be run exclusively by members of these three families, the Hanburys, Buxtons and Pryors.
By the late 1850s the Brick Lane brewery was selling 400,000 barrels of beer a year, a quarter of it now ale rather than porter.
The whole operation covered nearly six acres.
Black Eagle Street had been swallowed completely, surviving only as the dray walk, where casks were loaded.
The brewery employed 65 coopers, used 130 horses to move the beer out to publicans, and consumed 500,000 barrels of water a year from its own artesian wells.
It even had its own Thamesside wharf, Black Eagle Wharf, near St Katherine's Dock.
Even though by 1873 it was proclaimed the biggest brewing company in the world, Truman's too found itself under pressure from the growing popularity of Burton ales.
That year Truman's bought the Phillips brewery in Burton.
Unlike its East End rivals, however, Truman's never stopped brewing at Burton, and its Black Eagle brewery there only finally closed in 1970.
For this reason many old Truman's pubs still say ‘brewers of London and Burton’ on the front.
By the mid-1960s Truman's had 1,300 pubs, concentrated mainly in the South-East.
By 1971 it was down to 980 tied houses.
But profits were low, and predators were around.
On July 1 that year Maxwell Joseph's Grand Metropolitan Hotels chain, which also owned the Berni Inns and Chef and Brewer setups, made a surprise offer of £34 million for Truman's.
It was certainly a surprise to Watney's, which for the previous four months had been planning its own takeover bid for Truman's, so that it could close the high-cost Mann's site.
Watney's came in with its own offer a week after Joseph and £4 million higher than his.
Joseph replied with a renewed bid, this time of £43 million, Watney's came back again with £47 million, and so the battle swayed from one side to the other for eight weeks.
Eventually Watney's waved the white flag, and Maxwell Joseph had acquired the brewery he wanted.
The last big East End brewery had lost its independence.
A short while later Joseph had his revenge on Watney's.
In March 1972 he made a £360 million offer for the Red Barrel brewer, winning control three months later.
EVEN after GrandMet brought its two breweries together in 1973 as Watney Mann and Truman Holdings, the Brick Lane brewery's pubs still kept their own identity and beers.
But as the 1980s progressed, the Brick Lane site was becoming more valuable as a potential development area than as a brewery.
In January 1989 it was finally announced that the Brick Lane brewery was to close.
The last of the old East End brewers was gone.
* Martyn Cornell is a member of the Brewery History Society.
As the Docklands beer festival fades from view,Martyn Cornell looks back at the sad demise of brewing in the Cockney heartland
Grand Met drop a Brick
THE HOPFIELDS REPORT It's ‘perfick’ ale with Larkin's hops
I CAUGHT Bob Dockerty on the hop last month.
He was brewing beer and getting the harvest in as well as organising the picking of his Goldings.
Larkins Farm at Chiddingstone in Kent is up a narrow, highhedged lane and over two bridges from the Tonbridge road.
The brewery, surprisingly spacious, is in a converted cow shed.
Across the road there are two handsome oast houses, those familiar symbols of the hop fields with their wonky, cowled roofs.
But, in keeping with the decline of the Kentish hop industry, they have been turned into weekend retreats for green-wellied Londoners driving trendy 4×4 jeeps.
Larkin's own oast house is not so good to look at.
It lost much of its roof during the great storm of 1987 which devastated large parts of Kent and turned Sevenoaks into Oneoak.
It is still used for its original purpose.
As I arrived a tractor pulled up with sacks of freshly-picked hops that would be carried up to the main floor of the building to be dried.
Larkins started life in 1986 on the site of the old Royal Tunbridge Wells Brewery.
Bob, a keen home brewer, took over from his parents when the plant moved to the farm in 1989.
Bob brews 25 barrels a week of Traditional Bitter (1035° gravity), Sovereign (1040°) and Best Bitter (1045°).
But the 10-barrel John Hickey plant can knock out more when the occasion demands.
‘July was very good,’ Bob said.
‘And this week [early September]I'm brewing 40 barrels.
That takes three days and I'm also getting the combining done.’
Trade has increased because of the general revival of cask ale and the pickings to be made from the ‘guest beer’ policy.
In a region dominated by Whitbread (aka Fremlins) and Allied (aka Friary Meux), who both prefer to supply their own guest beers to tenants, getting into the pubs is no easy matter for a micro.
Bob, who hides a sparky humour, behind a grizzled exterior, said tenants who were taking his beers were doing it on a ‘belligerent, sod-the-brewer basis’.
Pride
The brewhouse has an eight-barrel mash tun, a second and larger tun bought from Peter Austin, founder of the Ringwood Brewery in Hampshire, which is used for Bob's main seller, the 1035° bitter, and two fermenters.
His pride and joy is the splendid wood-lined copper which he bought from Brendan Dobbin at the West Coast Brewery in Manchester.
‘I installed a hop-back in the copper,’ Bob said.
‘Brendan designed it for hop pellets but I only use whole hops.’
The copper is fired at the base by roaring gas flames.
Bob tips in a portion of hops at the start of the boil and adds more at the end for aroma.
When the boil is over, the spent hops settle on the floor of the hop back, acting as a strainer for the wort.
‘I don't use any copper finings,’ Bob said.
‘I like to build up a good bed of hops.
You mustn't take too much protein out of the wort or there'll be no head on the finished beer.’
He is careful, too, not to remove all the amino acids from the hops: ‘The yeast thrives on it.’
If he bought compressed pellet hops he would have to use only half the amount compared to whole hops.
But Bob is a great believer in using the plant as nature intended.
Know
‘With whole hops you know the year,’ he said.
‘You can see if there's any disease from browning of the plant and you can see how well they've been dried — they mustn't be crusty round the edges.
‘If you see anything wrong, then take 'em out and don't use 'em.
‘You have to rub the hops to get the nose or aroma.
Once a hop's lost its ‘rub’ then it's no use for brewing — it must have an oily stickiness.’
The Dockerty family have been growing hops since Tudor times and know a thing or two about them.
They now grow Whitbread Goldings Variety, developed to be more resistant to wilt than the traditional East Kent type.
After years of knockabout abuse in this paper, lets give two muted cheers for Whitbread and their hops.
Bob uses hops in the classic British bitter fashion: Fuggles for bitterness and Goldings, added late in the boil, for aroma.
He gets his Fuggles from a leading grower named Tony Redsell at the splendidly-named Mockbeggar Farm near Faversham.
Bob has a further good reason for preferring whole hops: pesticides.
‘It's the stalks and the leaves of the hops that carry the sprays, not the cones,’ he said.
‘If they all go through the pelleting machines, the residues will remain.’
Bob is not keen on the hop oils and essences now being used by some national and regional brewers.
‘CO; extract hops are expensive but they do give a good hop nose when they're added in the conditioning tank.
‘But we'd never do that at Larkins.
You can tell when you're drinking if beers have been ‘spammed up’.
‘My beers are certainly bitter but you can drink several pints — and you can't say that for many big brewers' beers.’
Bob is certainly generous with his hops.
He puts 3.3 kilos in at the start of the copper boil for Best Bitter and an additional 1.5 kilos at the end.
He doesn't find it necessary to ‘dry hop’ the beer — that is adding hops to each finished cask.
All his beers have a tempting hop resin aroma, balanced by pale and crystal malts, with a tiny proportion of chocolate malt.
The yeast, which gives the beers a rich fruitiness, is a strain developed by Ridleys of Chelmsford and further cultured by Crouch Vale in Essex.
By European standards the beers are extremely bitter, rating 40 EBUs (European Bitterness Units) for traditional bitter, 36 for Sovereign, 45 for Best Bitter and 60 for a Porter Bob brews in the winter months.
Across the yard in the oast house, hops fresh from this year's harvest are placed in a kiln for 12 to 14 hours and heated by electric fans at temperatures starting at 90 degrees F and rising to 140°.
From the kiln they are laid out and raked on the pressing floor and packed into the tall sacks with Mickey Mouse ears known in the trade as pockets.
Rates
Bob rates other beers by their hop character.
His favourite is Bass's bottle-conditioned Worthington White Shield as a result of its fine hoppiness.
As the sells his beers to the free trade and to national brewers' pubs he has noticed both the swingeing price increases imposed by the brewing giants and the reaction among their tenants.
‘I can sell my 1040° bitter cheaper than a 1035° bitter from a national brewery,’ he said.
‘They're only putting prices up in tenanted pubs because they want to frighten tenants out.’
He fears the impact on the traditional character of pubs if the brewers have their way and turn many of them over the leaseholders.
But he witnesses a growing determination among some tenants to fight back against their landlords' dubious practices.
‘There's a lot of uncertainty in the trade but some tenants are getting Bolshie.
They won't take beers from their breweries.
‘Others take my beers even if they're warned not to — they sometimes put them on the bar without pump clips.’
From the oast house we wandered back to the brewhouse where the copper boil was progressing satisfactorily and the previous days' brews were frothing cheerfully away in their tall, cylindrical fermenters.
In the temperature controlled sample room, where Bob keeps his hops as well as batches of ale, we savoured examples of Sovereign and Best Bitter.
‘I haven't got any Traditional Bitter — I've sold it all,’ Bob said.
So we just had to pop down to the Castle in Chiddingstone for a pint or two.
The sacrifices you have to make in this job…
As the cask beer revival brings life back to English hops What's Brewing writers survey ancient and modern trends
Cones, pellets or essence…
MANY years ago a renowned brewer claimed that his brews outshone others because he squeezed his hops ‘until the oil ran dry’.
Similar confidence in hops extraction is currently running high in today's brewing industry as the range of hop products and their application increases.
Fondlers of fresh hops will be acquainted with the sticky oils and resins released from the lipulin glands on hand rubbing.
The typical character of fresh hops is pungently rich in floral, spicy and citrus aromas.
During normal brewing with leaf hops these flavours are released rapidly into the hot wort and are often appreciated in the vicinity of the brewery during boiling.
In addition hops provide bitterness as well as flavour.
Bitterness is contributed by chemicals called iso- a acids.
These do not exist in the hops and must be converted from precursor a acids which are present by an extended period of boiling.
Hops thus contain both flavour and bittering components making them valuable ingredients in brewing.
Unfortunately releasing these into the wort requires mutually incompatable conditions.
Flavours rapidly evaporate from hot wort while bitterness requires up to an hour to fully develop.
Brewers have been aware of this issue for centuries and have developed the practice of adding ‘copper’ hops early in the boil to provide bitterness and ‘aroma’or ‘late’hops towards the end of the boil for flavour.
While whole hops are repeatedly claimed to produce the best hop character in a beer, problems may be encountered.
First is the liability of hops to deterioration by oxygen in the air.
As might be expected this is accelerated by heat, making cold storage essential.
Oxidation of hops causes a loss and alteration of flavours.
Catty and stale aromas may develop and taint the beer.
In addition a acids oxidise and the bitter character is altered.
A second major problem is the loss of bitterness due to precipitation in boiling and in fermentation.
This loss in boiling and fermentation occurs because the a acids absorb to yeast and to trub deposits.
Up to 75 per cent of hop bitterness may be lost during standard brewing.
Such losses can be overcome by using a larger charge of hops.
In spite of accounting for only 0.2 per cent of a beer's cost, this is naturally felt to be wasteful and undesirable.
A greater difficulty of using whole hops is the effect on consistency.
Loss of bitterness depends on the boiling conditions, on the degree, type and time of trub formation and on the yeast action in fermentation.
All of these may vary from brew to brew, leading to beers with variable bitterness.
This may not worry a small brewer unduly since other effects offer greater potential for variability but it is anathema to bulk production which must couple closely to marketing and customer perception.
To overcome such effects brews are increasingly turning to preprepared hop extracts of one form or another.
A range of these exist from simple compressed hop pellets to Pre-Isomerised Kettle Extracts, more affectionately known as PIKE.
Compressed hops have a number of advantages, including reduced liability for oxidation, reduced storage volume and ease of handling.
An extension to simple compression is to crush the hops and pelletise the powder produced.
The resulting pellets are termed Type 90 reflecting the high percentage of hop material present compared to water and foreign matters.
Enriched hop powder pellets are also possible by sieving the powder at — 35°C to remove coarser non a acid material and by blending with liquid extracts to further enhance the a acid content.
Pellets may also be ‘stabilised’ by the inclusion of vitamin C (ascorbic acid) to reduce oxidation.
Calcium and magnesium salts may then be added to partly catalyse conversion of a acids so pre-empting the boiling reactions.
Losses of a acid may be reduced from 75 per cent to 50 per cent by these means.
Even greater efficiency of a acid utilisation is obtained using chemical extracts of hops.
Many years ago it was found that a variety of solvents extracted a acids and refinements have continued to perfect the process.
Early solvents included ethanol, hexane and methylene chloride.
More recently liquid CO; has been used and found to achieve a better extract with no risk of solvent contamination.
Moreover the extraction leaves undesirable chemicals such as pesticides behind.
Carbon dioxide also offers the flexibility to separate the hop components into bitter and flavour fractions.
This advantage is considerable since the bitter fraction may then be chemically manipulated to produce bitter iso a acids from the a acids and so provide a PIKE product which may be added towards the end of the boil or even afterwards.
Near 100 per cent utilisation of the hop a acid is possible by this process.
Flavours may also be separated in the hop extract and can be fractionated.
Chemical analysis has indicated which compounds are associated with different hop flavours.
Copper hop, late hop and dry hop extracts are available, each emphasising the flavour associated with that particular procedure.
Brewers may thus formulate a character and emphasis it in the beer.
Dry hop flavour is an interesting application since the use of a liquid extract allows a more accurate and consistent flavour to be produced.
Moreover whole hops used for dry hopping take seven to 10 days for the character to be extracted and then slowly decline.
Dry hop extract provides immediate character which lasts longer and reduces the possibility of infection being added from whole hops or, more likely, from a dirty hand.
Because of the degree of processing involved, hop extracts are not necessarily cheaper than using whole hops.
Per unit of bitterness they are roughly as costly.
Instead their attraction lies in their flexibility to ensure greater consistency in both bitterness and flavour, in avoiding the effects of oxidation and in being easier to handle and more suitable for bulk brewing procedures.
A major question is, of course, whether such products provide a better, or at least no worse, hop character than whole hops.
If beers brewed with hop oils are compared to beers brewed with stale, out of season hops of unknown history then hop oils will be superior.
A comparison of new season whole hops to hop oils, is, however, less clear cut.
The criticism that extracts are leading the brewers into the same realms of flavouring technology as the food industry is to some degree unfair since the extracts are modifications of existing ingredients.
However, promoting extracts for efficiency and ease of use is not guaranteed to preserve the subtlety of whole hop flavour which reflects the many hundreds of compounds and derivatives present.
Traditional producers proudly maintain their commitment to traditional methods and whole hops.
The continued success of their beers justifies such an approach but it will be of considerable interest to chart the viability of other beers as the drinking public reacts unconsciously to the character of extracts.
Keith Thomas
THE HOPFIELDS REPORT Liberated growers wage war on the randy male
IT'S NOT just in Eastern Europe that major upheavals are taking place.
There has been a political revolution in Paddock Wood in Kent, though it has got marginally less press coverage than the fall of the Berlin Wall or the failed Russian coup.
For 50 years the Hops Marketing Board was a governmentregulated body that laid down the price of hops and how many each grower should produce on an annual basis.
It also acted as a central store and clearing house for hops, organising the supply to the brewers.
Even those in the Britain of the 1980s who would have liked to privatise the last municipal loo weren't too bothered about the Hops Marketing Board.
But it ran foul of the European Community.
From Brussels and Strasbourg came the stern warning: ‘This constitutes a monopoly — get rid of it!’
And so the Hops Marketing Board, like free school milk and NHS orange juice, disappeared into the black hole of British social history.
In fact its name still adorns the large office block in Paddock Wood — they're waiting for the Friends of Felix Dhjerzinsky to come and remove it — but below is enscribed the new and politically squeaky-clean name of ‘English Hops’.
‘We're now a growers' co-operative,’ David Gardner explained.
‘Because of contracts and forward planning, there had to be an orderly change from government monopoly to co-op.’
The problem with the old board was that it did not innovate and did not concern itself with exporting English hops.
‘There is a direct parallel with the command economies of Eastern Europe,’ David Gardner said.
‘Market forces did not operate.
‘Lagers brewed under franchise in Britain needed special hops, often German varieties.
Within eight to nine years production of hops had halved in the UK.’
All brewers use the female hop but lager brewers want seedless ones while ale producers need fertilised varieties with their more robust and earthy bitterness.
English Hops is now busily developing the export trade and is helping growers to produce seedless varieties — which means waging war on the hapless and horny male hop.
‘YOU'VE got to get rid of the males,’ David Gardner said with such fierce determination that he conjured up an image of concentration camps for male hops in remote parts of Kent.
‘It's no good one neighbour trying to grow seedless if next door his neighbour has seeded hops blowing pollen over the fence.’
But before you rush to form the Male Hop Liberation Front, the little devil is still much in demand.
The revival of cask ale has created a growing need for traditional English hop varieties and, thanks to a good summer — wet at first and then hot and sunny — there will be a bumper harvest this year.
There is even a small but important market for English seeded hops in Belgium, and the United States with its burgeoning microbrewing industry.
English Hops works closely with the hop research centre at Wye Valley and with the British Brewing Foundation in Surrey to develop new varieties of hops and to test them in brewing conditions.
Our old chums, the Fuggle and the Golding, are remarkably prone to attack by pests and disease, which is why varieties such as Challenger and Target — more resistant to aphids and wilt but less subtle in aroma and flavour — have been developed.
It is when you get on to the more high tech aspects of English Hops' work that small and muted alarm bells begin to ring.
The co-operative sells more cone and pellet hops than any other form.
But 20 per cent of its hops are now in the form of oils and essences and it is a growing sector.
It may well be there is nothing wrong with hops in this form except that I find that brewers who use them, such as Whitbread and Charles Wells, produce beers with a bitterness that is a shade too harsh for my liking.
And David Gardner's defence of processed hops does remind the listener powerfully of the arguments advanced by the brewers in the 1960s when they were replacing cask ale with keg beer.
‘In the 1950s and 60s there were superb beers — if you caught them on the right day.
But they could be vinegar the next day,’ he said.
‘The new mega brewers introduced new techniques and they were conscious of the raw materials handled in the brewery.
‘And the supermarkets, when they moved into beer, demanded reliability.
The brewers had to match their customers' demands.’
With whole hops, he added, there is a vast decline in aroma volatiles over two years.
There is no such decline with extracts.
‘Within 30 years the brewing industry has gone from a cottage industry to high tech.’
English Hops began their development of hop oils by looking at the ‘dry hopping’ end of the brewing process, when a handful of whole or pellet hops are added to casks of beer.
‘There can be problems of infection at this stage,’ David Gardner said.
‘With hop oils you can get the best from the hops, the essential oils and essences that can replicate the aroma and bitterness of two such disparate varieties as a Fuggle and a Golding.
‘In the early days alcohol, methanol, even benzine were used to extract hops oils,’ David Gardner said.
‘But since 1980 we have used liquid carbon dioxide.
‘The essential components — alpha acids for bitterness and the volatile oils — are both soluble in liquid CO;.’
HE admits that the end product has been improved at the expense of character but quotes the co-op's slogan: ‘Consistently better, consistently bitter’.
‘We're removing the variables.
Processed hope aren't cheaper but brewers are more concerned with quality than shaving the price of a pint.’
If a slight loss of quality and taste is the downside of English Hop's work, the upside is that oils and essences have opened new markets for growers.
‘They're more transportable and sustainable,’ David Gardner said.
‘A large brewery in Nigeria can't use coned hops — they need hops that will last and won't be too costly to transport.’
English Hops now use merchants throughout the world to sell their products.
When David Gardner speaks of his oils and essences having ‘a longer shelf life’ he raises the spectre of Worthington E, Double Diamond and Watney's Red.
But hop oils from Paddock Wood are, at present, made mainly for export.
The whole cone and the pellet, fertilised by that raunchy green devil of a male, are still the preferred versions at home.
And, as the bumper harvest comes in, there are in David Gardner's words ‘No longer long faces among English hop growers.’
Roger Protz 
THE PUB CHAINS Snooty ale houses that want to keep the! *? * out
KEEPING prices high keeps the shite out,’ says Tony Willis, the new director of Allied's up-market Nicholson's pub chain in London.
The remark popped out at the end of an extended tour of Nicholson's pubs.
It was made more in jest than seriousness but it does convey the nature of the Nicholson's operation.
Nicholson's are emphatically not backstreet boozers populated by men in cloth caps talking about their ferrets.
The 35 pubs in the chain are split between the West End and the City.
Pubs around the City have a booming lunchtime and early evening trade but usually close around eight or nine at night.
The clientele are bankers, brokers and lawyers.
Without a pinstripe, you'd be underdressed.
Of what interest to CAMRA members, I hear you cry, are pubs that cater for Gswilling executives?
Has CAMRA somewhat belatedly decided to join the yuppie set?
Maybe the mobile phones at the Docklands beer festival were no mere accident.
The answer is that the City gents are surprisingly fond of their beer.
Jim Stevens, licensee of the Red Lion in Lombard Court, EC3, reckons to sell 25 kilderkins (18 gallon casks) of real ale a week.
This is despite a tiny cellar which means deliveries are made up to five times a week.
There is a double stillage with casks marked with the time as well as the date.
‘Our punters, although very much the suit and tie brigade, do like a good pint.
Many of them live out in the provinces so we keep a good range of beers that include some from their part of the world,’ explained Jim.
‘We stock six different beers at any one time from a list that includes Arkells, Adnams, Marston's, Greene King, Youngs and Bass.’
Since Nicholson's is an Allied operation it is not surprising that Tetley's is a fixture in its pubs and Burton Ale can usually be found.
There is even the exclusive Nicholson's Bitter, the chain's own session beer which was launched earlier this year.
The 1035° gravity, 3.5 per cent ABV beer, is brewed at Burton.
The beer was soon selling well.
At the Red Lion, for example, Jim Stevens says that two barrels a week are pulled through his handpumps.
The popularity is put down to a good flavour — with its tight creamy head it's similar to Tetley's — the lack of any other light bitters in Nicholson's range that compete with it and a slight price advantage of around five pence.
I disputed the latter with Tony who conceded that the differential existed more because it was ‘expected’ by customers than in any attempt to persuade them to buy the beer in preference to another.
Nicholson's customers are not price sensitive explains Tony, although he stresses that this is different to not expecting value for money.
He said: ‘Our strengths are the freehouse image, the quality of our property and the standards set by our managers.
If we get these areas right then price is not particularly relevant.’
People will pay a premium price for a premium product, he feels.
Pub customers do not just buy their beer.
The ambience of the pub is equally important.
In part this is created by the building and decor of the pub.
Nicholson's are blessed with a range of pubs that are magnificent buildings.
They include the Black Friar, opposite the railway station of the same name, which is a favourite for tourists.
Built in 1903 it has bronze and marble panels in an Art Nouveau style depicting the friars from the monastery that used to be on the site.
Although much of Nicholson's business is centred on the Square Mile, around half of their pubs fall outside this range.
The trade here is of a more usual nature with the pubs open to 11 at night.
The pubs themselves are no less impressive, however.
For example the Barley Mow in Dorset Street, W1, is an expawnbrokers.
The wooden booths where people would bring in their items to pawn for cash, or more likely beer, still exist.
What all Nicholson's pubs share is a commitment to quality service, achieved through careful recruitment and training of staff.
Tony Willis said: ‘If I was going to leave a message it would be ‘people management’.
Our properties were here 30 years ago, the impact we have now comes from our staff.’
He was speaking in the Punch Tavern, the only pub to have a national magazine named after it.
I asked him to explain his pricing policy.
He pointed across the road to another pub.
‘By raising our prices slightly we get a certain sort of customer.
They are prepared to pay a little more for a better quality of service.
‘Prices are used as a barrier so that the sort of people we don't want go over the road,’ he said.
The price charged in any one particular Nicholson's pub is unimportant, considers Tony.
A base price is set according to the area.
The size of barrier needed is set against the need to maintain volumes.
This pricing philosophy owes little to that sacred cow, free market economics.
Tony admits that the price is calculated according to what the market will bear, not, as Adam Smith and his fan club would like, by examining his costs and fixing a price which allowed a modest profit.
He denies there is any profiteering.
He claims: ‘If we charged less, we'd be unable to maintain the same standards.
‘The price reflects what else is available in the pub.
The food operation, for example, is not viable on its own.’
Nicholson's customers certainly don't complain about prices.
The recession has led only to a ‘period of consolidation’— in Tony's words — but expansion is not too far away.
There will be no move out of the core business in the City or West End, simply a push for greater market share.
In the long term there may even be Nicholson's pubs appearing in the business centres of other cities.
The hardest part about expanding will be finding pub stock up to the Nicholson's standards.
They have won more awards in CAMRA's pub design competition than any other company, most notably for their careful refurbishments.
There will be no hasty purchases, as Tony is determined to keep a focus on the chain's niche market, which he describes as the top end of the traditional ale market.
‘Nicholson's is known for its high standards.
We charge a little more but our customers receive the highest quality service, excellent food and a wide choice of quality beers,’ Tony said.
If you're in London, take a look for yourself.
But take a tie and plenty of cash.
Old inn under threat
THE New Inn at Coln St Aldwyns, Gloucestershire, is under threat again.
The pub, built around 1600, was bought by a developer in 1988, who wanted to turn it into housing.
The Coln St Aldwyns Society was formed to fight the closure.
The developer was eventually defeated through the planning system, where it was decided that the pub amounted to an important social amenity.
The pub was then sold as a going concern and refurbished.
Now new owner Chris Knight is reported to be in financial difficulties.
He is looking for a partner to retain the pub as a viable business.
But creditors are threatening to wind up the business unless six figure debts are paid.
‘I am making every effort to avoid the inn being sold,’ he said.
‘I would be a very unwilling seller, that is the last resort as far as I am concerned.’
The Coln St Aldwyns Society still want the pub retained as a village inn and would support any buyer willing to keep it open.
PUB NEWS Giant brewers agree to talk on rents
BASS, Allied and Whitbread have agreed to independent arbitration of rents when introducing new leases.
If tenants and brewers cannot agree terms then some form of outside arbitration will occur.
This has been a major demand by the National Licensed Victuallers Association, who hailed the decision as a victory for their campaign.
Secretary of State Peter Lilley MP has met representatives of the national brewers.
Their main concern was that independent arbitration would drag out negotiations and prevent them complying with the MMC proposals to free pubs from the tie by the deadline of November 1992.
Peter Lilley told the brewers that no action would be taken in the particular instance where a pub had not yet been freed because independent arbitration of rents was still taking place.
Some scepticism has been expressed by tenants as to whether independently judged rents will be significantly lower than those asked by brewers.
Grant Metropolitan's Inntrepreneur lease already provides for independent arbitration but rents are still considered excessive by many tenant leaders.
In other commercial sectors, rents are being slashed to find leaseholders, with the first five years of many office leases offered rent free.
The contrast with the brewing industry is striking.
A sad tenant quits his pub as Benskins demand lease
JOHN WELLS, the longest-serving publican in St Albans, Herts, said a sad farewell to his pub last month.
A tenant for 16 years, John refused the offer of a lease from Allied Breweries, and, with his wife Maureen, he packed his bags and left.
He is not bitter.
He says Benskins, Allied's Watford-based subsidiary, have not been unpleasant.
But he feels let-down and disappointed that all his years of effort in building trade in the Harrow, a city-centre pub, count for nothing.
‘The company has changed in the last four to five years,’ John said.
‘They must have known that leases were in the pipeline but no one said anything to me.’
Vital repairs have not been carried out.
At present they are the responsibility of thr brewery but a future leaseholder will have to look after them.
‘The roof has leaked for a year,’ John said, ‘and I had to cover over the electrics to protect them from the rain.
‘The swinging signboard fell down and was left in the garden for 14 months.
‘The saloon bar door is rotten and the hallway is soaked when it rains.
But Benskins said that none of these things was important.’
Benskins increased his rent by £6,000 last year and John is convinced they must have known then that leases policy.
This year Benskins came back with a demand for a £5,000 a year increase that would have taken John's annual rent to £23,000 plus £100 a week for the business rate.
‘I decided it was time to say goodbye, but before I could give notice Sam Hall, the Benskin's area manager, phoned me to say the company was going to turn the Harrow into a managed house.
‘I said it would never work — there are too many sports teams that use the pub and they need the contact of a regular tenant.
I also told Sam that I didn't think the main Benskin's board would approve the switch to management.’
John and Maureen took their first-ever fortnight's holiday in their 16 years in the Harrow and returned to be told the Benskin's board had rejected the plan to turn the pub over to management.
‘Sam Hall told me they wanted me to stay on — but I would have to accept a lease,’ John said.
‘It would be a 10-year lease, index-linked to inflation for the first five years and I would have to do all the repairs the brewery hadn't done.’
On top of those repairs, John faced a bill for £18,000 to replace all the doors and windows in the pub and a further charge of £5,000 to improve the kitchen.
‘I was not prepared to use my own savings to pay for that,’ John said.
‘It would have been a different story if the brewery had done the earlier repairs.’
John and Maureen decided to call it a day.
John admits they are in a better position than most tenants, for they have their own house to move in to and are not dependent on the pub's accommodation.
He fears for the future of the pub if leases become widespread.
‘They are the quickest route to bankruptcy.
‘People used to queue up to get a pub but that's all stopped now.
The only people who will go for a pub will be those who have been made redundant from their jobs and will consider taking leases.
‘But they will have no experience of running pubs and I know from talking to the local bench that licensing magistrates are concerned at the standard of new licensees.’
John thinks the character of pubs will change.
‘Leaseholders won't hang around for 16 years in a pub, because leases can be sold on.
‘And they will forget the bread and butter customer who drinks three to four pints a day, seven days a week.’
Leaving the Harrow was a moving experience in many ways for John and Maureen.
On their last day they were overwhelmed by farewell messages and gifts.
‘I'm a pretty tough sort of bloke — you have to be to run a pub,’ John said, ‘but I've had tears in my eyes today.’
Roger Protz
Black Country inn faces axe from bureaucrats
WOLVERHAMPTON'S famous Great Western pub is under threat from a compulsory purchase order.
The Black Country Development Corporation has begun proceedings to buy the pub but it has made no public statement giving its reasons.
Regulars and local councillors fear the Great Western will be demolished to allow better access for lorries in the area.
The Great Western was CAMRA's West Midlands Pub of the Year in 1989.
Owners Holdens oppose the purchase.
The pub is sited by Wolverhampton's Low Level Station, scene of local CAMRA festivals, and is a regular Good Beer Guide entry.
Regulars at the Great Western have launched a petition to save the pub.
The purchase order is vigorously opposed by the Wolverhampton branch of CAMRA.
Jim Laws, Wolverhampton Pub Preservation Officer, says the intentions of the corporation are surrounded by mystery.
‘What do they want the pub for?’ he asked.
‘What do they intend to do with it?’
All the corporation has suggested so far is a vague road and landscaping scheme that would affect only part of the pub garden and car park.
The local council also opposes the compulsory purchase order.
Councillor Gill Walton called the thriving pub ‘a great asset to the town.’
The Black Country Development Corporation is appointed by the Secretary of State and is not accountable to local opinion.
Letters of protest should be sent to Sir William Francis, Chairman, Black Country Development Corporation, Black County House, Rounds Green Rd, Oldbury B69 2DG.
Wedding ale
A SPECIAL brew was produced by Moorhouse's of Burnley last month for the wedding of the company's sales manager Carolynne Brammer to Barrie Pepper chairman of the British Guild of Beer Writers.
Pepper's Wedding Ale is a hoppy premium bitter with a gravity of 1041°.
It will be available for a limited period in a number of pubs including the City of Mabgate and the Grove Inn in Leeds, the Marine Hall in Fleetwood, Cooky's Devonshire Arms in Bradford.
Sack for tenants as Marstons switches Hants pubs
MARSTONS of Burton-on-Trent is taking six of its tenanted pubs in Winchester back into management.
Four of these are Good Beer Guide listed.
The tenants have been given a year's notice to quit and they face the loss of their livelihood and homes.
The local CAMRA branch have condemned the move.
They say it is unjust for the publicans and bad for the pubs.
‘Marstons must realise that it is the skills and enterprise of the licensees that have made these pubs so popular,’ said branch spokesman Robert Whatley.
‘To treat them in this way is disgraceful.’
He has written to Marstons managing director Michael Hurdle, asking for a meeting to express the branch's concern.
The local Licensed Victuallers Association have pointed out that all six pubs have gardens and car parks, suggesting that they will be converted to plastic ‘eating houses’.
The LVA claim that pubs converted to management in Winchester in the past have seen a rapid turnover of staff and a substantial decline in trade.
Clubs and societies, such as darts and crib teams, have been wound up in pubs converted to management.
Robert Whatley agrees.
‘Good tenants are an asset for the brewery,’ he said.
‘Marstons seem to be doing its best to get rid of them.’
GBG Deadline
Survey formrs for the 1993 Good beer Guide will be dispatched to branches in late October.
They must be returned by branches to regional Directors no later than Friday march 13, 199.
FOOD AND ALE TRAIL Going green with down town Berko's bard of beer
Chimay Red puts me to bed
It's like a friendly aunt
Have a jar, you won't get far
The reason is you can't.
The Trappist monks
Don't leave their bunks
When supping these fine brews.
Chimay boasts four splendid ales
Isn't that good news!
JUST a little ditty penned by beer poet laureate Rex Tyler, a prolific rhymster with an entire anthology of odes for all the 70 bottled beers sold in his extraordinary store.
‘I've been to something like two dozen breweries in Belgium.
I'm as keen a beer hunter as Michael Jackson — only he's famous and I'm not,’ says Rex.
He does indeed go to great lengths to check the credentials of everything on sale at his deli-cum-restaurant-cum off-licence in Berkhamsted, Herts,(‘Berko’ to the locals) celebrating its 10th anniversary this month.
There are 80 organic wines on his list (‘no chemicals so less chance of a hangover’) and he's been to loads of vineyards to make sure production is as natural as possible without actually treading the grapes.
They are mainly from France, Germany and Italy but do include a couple from Down Under.
‘I've visited Australia's one and only organic wine producer at Mudgee where he's been growing organically for 30 years.
He's got various types of grapes and environments; for instance, some he grows using green manures and he's experimenting all the time.
‘I can't say it was a particularly pleasant experience — it's a bit hairy wandering through waist high vines that could be full of black and brown snakes!’
From there comes a wine with hairs on its chest, a Shiraz from the 1985 vintage described by Rex as ‘a big, strong red, 14 to 15 per cent alcohol.’
He has sold organic wines for the past five years, ever since he got a licence.
But beers are his real passion and around two years ago he began filling his shelves with an ever-increasing selection.
For a store which is totally uncompromising in the wholefood and vegan pedigree of all products and meals on sale, where Rex waxes eloquently about macrobiotics and the ying and yang of food, it's comforting to note that genuine beers fulfill his criteria quite easily.
‘I like the concept of people who produce beer using the natural hops and malts and even, in some cases, wild yeast,’ he says.
BEERS in bottles all shapes and sizes — some look at least two pints — now fill a whole corner of the store, their colourful labels firing your tastebuds.
‘Try this Jade,’ says Rex hospitably, pouring from a bottle with a wire-secured cork, ‘it's a pleasant, light summer drink.’
Its label tells you in French that it is guaranteed unpasteurised and made using malt ‘d'orge de culture biologique’.
Of these six dozen beers 10 are organic as well as being naturally conditioned.
In Rex's terms that means the malt and hops are organic and finings have not been used in the production; not that finings affect the organic status of the brew, but Rex objects on vegetarian grounds.
Most of his organic beers are brewed in the UK including Scottish Golden Promise from Edinburgh's Caledonian Brewery, Clifton Dark Ale, Hartcliffe Bitter and Saxon Ale flavoured with borage and honey from Ross in Bristol, and Bottle Green Organic Porter.
‘I'd like to help the small beer producers of Britain more, I've made a start with cider — I'm stocking Dunkerton's cider from Herefordshire; Ivor really is a man after my own heart, full organic status from the Soil Association.’
But the bulk of his beers come from Belgium, where some of Rex's happiest moments have been passed in breweries, sometimes following in the footsteps of Michael Jackson, who has graced the Cook's Delight annual beer tasting.
‘De Dolle Brewery in Essen is one of my favourites.
They have a similar principle to me — they only brew on Saturdays and Sundays!
‘And it's absolutely spotless, you could eat your meals off the floor.
Their laboratory is tiny and that's always the mark of a good brewery.’
From there comes Oer, which Rex describes as a primitive beer; a dry-hopped Ara; Boscuen which means rabbit of the forest, a dry beer and one he particularly enjoys.
For some time Rex has been conducting a correspondence with one of the brewers entirely in verse.
He corresponds frequently in rhyming couplets.
An anniversary poem went to the Queen, and many MPs have been recipients of his comments couched in rhyme on subjects from food irradiation (he's an opponent) to saving the Antarctic.
Neil Kinnock has been sent three Tyler missives and responded, albeit in plain prose.
Rex is a man of strong opinions unflaggingly put into practice.
‘It has been really hard.
When we stopped serving white meat and seafood to become totally vegetarian there is no doubt we lost a lot of customers but you have to stick to your guns.
‘If you believe that what you are doing is right then you can't compromise.’
It was really Rex's wife who launched the business, initially with her brother in-law, in a little shop in a Victorian terrace on the edge of Berkhamsted.
KHAI Eng is from Malaysia and an architect by profession but loved cooking and was often asked to create dinner parties for her clients.
Their enterprise began as a wholefood store —‘we had very little stock but all those years ago we did manage to get organic Basmati rice’— with a little tearoom at the back and a Malaysian feast once a week.
‘I don't know of any Chinese girl who can't cook, and Malaysian girls inherit a cocktail of cultures which leads to some fantastic recipes,’ Rex said.
‘We have moved along so we are not simply cooking Malaysian food but using the best possible organic vegetables, proteins and grains to create various meals.’
It is difficult to see how anyone could notice the absence of white meat or fish with such an unending variety of tastes set before them.
Rex was employed as a toy importer but had also been in wine importation before he joined Khai Eng full-time towards the end of the first year.
They took over the wool shop next door to expand their stock and the surprisingly large upstairs restaurant, now spread over both stores, has attracted well-known food critics to this outof-the-way location.
‘We are famous for our soups, and we don't use any oil in them, vegetable or otherwise.
Nor do we use any stocks.
They are simply made on the day from fresh organic vegetables.’
They include pumpkin, lentil, onion, parsnip, beetroot, pea, fennel and the redoubtable Buddhist Monk of mung beans with cashew nuts and coconut added towards the end; ‘a tropical soup,’ says Rex.
The restaurant opens four times a week for pre-booked dinners only.
On Thursday and Friday nights and Sunday lunchtimes you can enjoy Malaysian or Indonesian curries, perhaps a Cambodian-style casserole of sweet potatoes, pumpkins and yams with fresh coriander, or the very popular macrobiotic platter, an assortment of tastes sometimes including arame, one of 10 different sea vegetables they prepare.
Ingredients such as wheat, barley, lentils, seitan, daikon, miso, quinoa and tempeh are all used with so many different fresh herbs and spices that an astonishing kaleidoscope of tastes is achieved.
On Saturday nights around 30 people sit down to a four-course SE Asian banquet.
‘These are dishes we have adapted over the years to be vegan but are also the authentic tastes of, chiefly, Malaysia but Vietnam, Cambodia and Singapore as well,’ Rex said.
All the diners eat the same feast which takes Khai Eng and Rex a day and a half to prepare.
They get the ingredients ready but don't cook until the last minute, preparing the second course while the first is being eaten.
And here is a place where nice need not mean too naughty — the creamless syllabub is made with Tofu, the dandelion coffee mousse contains agar agar, and the all-time favourite is a gravity defying lemon meringue pie.
‘I think professional cooks have a responsibility to their customers.
If people want to kill themselves, that's their affair, but when they come here I want to give them food which will do them food rather than harm.
‘There is a doctor near here specialising in candida sufferers who sends his patients to eat here,’ said Rex.
And if all that sounds a bit pious, I've created the wrong impression.
The food certainly does not wear a hair shirt, and nor does Rex, ebullient and gregarious, ensuring a meal at his place is a sort of crazy party with himself as the slightly eccentric host.
‘IT really is a friendly and fun restaurant; not a place for a tête à tête.
If it's your birthday then I write a song or an ode and you share it with the whole restaurant — everyone joins in.’
And as Rex and Khai Eng, still thriving in an area which has seen plenty of other vegetarian establishments come and go, get ready to enter their second decade, perhaps we'll leave the last word to Rex:
The highland fling is not a Scotsman standing on a
rock
Tossing piping haggis from a great height in a loch
No, it is the sale Scots make for all the girls and boys
Of Belgium who appreciate it's one of life's great joys.
An old man, sporran dragging along the dusty ground
Spoke to me of ‘Nessie’ his theory did expound
A glass of Gordons and the sword dance seemed an easy task
It kind of built his confidence with each successive flask
…
* Cook's Delight, 360–364 High Street, Berkhamsted, Herts. (0442 863584).
READER'S LETTERS
Geordie's brew is the best pint
I HAVE been a free trader for eight years, with no brewery ties whatsoever.
During this time my Theakston's Best Bitter has been brewed in Carlisle, Workington and Newcastle upon Tyne.
I have tried the Theakston's brewed at the Masham brewery in recent weeks, and can only comment that I prefer the Gallowgate product.
The only significant difference that I have observed in the Best Bitter from Newcastle is that it has a much higher level of secondary fermentation in the cellar.
In other words it is more of a true ‘real ale’ than that from other sources.
I also sell vast amounts of Draught Bass, which sometimes comes from Burton-on-Trent and at other times from Tadcaster.
Either way the taste is the same…excellent!
Perhaps Sshould advertise their Theakston's ales as being brewed ‘from an original Yorkshire recipe’.
At the end of the day, the best Theakston's ever brewed is made by Geordies!
And the upswing in Theakston's sales is proof of the pudding.
— HUGH PRICE, Tynemouth Lodge Hotel, Tynemouth.
Honest policy
AS CAMRA's Brewery Liaison Officer for Newcastle Breweries I have followed the discussions in these columns concerning the origin of Theakston's beers with interest.
This is not a new issue and I have spoken to the Tyne Brewery and its counterpart at Masham on several occasions in the past and tried to argue that ‘brewed in Newcastle and Masham’ would indeed be a more honest alternative to their current advertising policy.
Unless forced to do so by law, I can see no way that Swill change their practices.
CAMRA's attitude must be:
1.
That no beer can be replicated and brewed miles from its original home without altering the character of the brew and
2.
That in the interests of consumer awareness, advertisers should not be allowed to imply that beers are brewed at locations other than true point of origin.
Without this attitude, and given the inventiveness of many beer advertisements, we can forget about our greatest asset, the local and traditional character of British brewing.
Sargue they have kept Theakstons open and, presumably, would not have been so keen to do so if they couldn't use the name and local appeal of the brand to advertise their Tyne Brewery beers.
There is validity in this point.
They could have filled the cellars of Masham with McEwans 80/ and Youngers No. 3 from Edinburgh or with the new Theakstons-on-Tyne which the locals declare is a far inferior brew.
They could have turned Theakstons of Masham into a museum alive or dead.
Sdid not buy a beer, they bought a name and the price of Masham's survival has been the marketing of this name.
Masham can never supply the whole Sestate so extra capacity in Newcastle is used for this purpose.
The more traditional local is used on the advertising.
It is not a practice we can condone but it is preferable to brewery closure.
Yes, I would like to see this specious form of brewery advertising eradicated for all breweries by legislation but I would also like to see as much of our present brewing heritage as possible preserved intact.
In an ideal world I would also like to see the Campaign I support and represent cease to accept cash inducements from the institutions it attacks while paying lip service to valid campaigning issues.
— NICK WHITAKER, Tyneside &Northumberland Branch.
Destroyed
I LIVE in Deptford, south London, I work in Woolwich.
Both of these places are within walking distance of Docklands but I did not go to the Great British Beer Festival.
I did go to the beer festivals in Camden, Battersea, Greenwich, Stratford (and the Cider and Perry Exhibition) and many others.
One of my favourite festivals is the small winter ale festival in Exeter.
In fact, if I can time my travel to be in a place when a beer festival is on, I attend it.
But I did not go to the Great British Beer Festival.
I don't know how many breweries or pubs were knocked down during the redevelopment of Docklands.
My only knowledge is the pubs that still remain but are boarded up.
As you come out of the Blackwall Tunnel, right by the new Financial Times building, there are at least two shut and boarded up pubs.
They are not alone.
The redevelopment of Docklands ignored the local culture and destroyed the local pubs.
For CAMRA to hold its biggest beer festival there is a disgrace.
— CHRIS WHEAL, London SE8.
Belly ache
I ATTENDED four of the evening sessions of this year's Great British Beer Festival and had a great time — my thanks to all those who worked so hard to make it such a success.
However, on three occasions I was witness to CAMRA members complaining loudly that they should not have to queue as long as non-members to get in, or that only CAMRA members should be allowed to attend.
As a long time drinker of real ale, who has only joined CAMRA in the last year, I found this belly-aching very annoying.
As a professional campaigner I found its elitism deeply disturbing.
— PHIL RIMMER, London E13.
Half, please
AT LEAST Mrs Donaldson (September) doesn't have to ensure the bearded drinker's frequent first encounter on the glasses front, which is to find the barman reaching for a pint glass before a word's been said.
Does no one nowadays keep up the old precaution of when in a strange pub always starting with a half?— KEN REED, Sutton,Surrey .
Hots Czeched out
CZECH government official Mrs. Jana Halova checks out a pint of Holts Entire at a visit to the company's Station Road brewery in Oldbury.
Watched by landlord of the Holts Brewery Inn, Tony Stanton, she was joined on her visit by other representatives from Czechoslavkia and councillors and officials from Sandwell Borough Council.
Give us back our fizzy keg!
I RECENTLY spoke to one of your employees on the telephone about the Watney's Party Seven.
He informed me that CAMRA would not be part of any campaign to re-introduce the Party Seven, as the beer was ‘nasty’ and not real ale.
I would like to state that CAMRA has done a great deal for beer drinkers throughout the country.
However I know for a fact that is has done much more than just promote real draught ale.
Foreign lagers are welcomed by CAMRA, despite the fact that many of these are not real.
The Party Seven is a great British institution and its downfall merely a product of marketing mismanagement.
It is recognised universally as a free invitation to any party, and as a postmodern display of pop art in its most popular and utilitarian form.
Fizzy keg beer it may be, but that is no reason to dismiss it out of hand without considering its appeal as a true classic beer.
With the strength of CAMRA as a consumer movement, I welcome the return of the Party Seven into the off-sales world, which is one of the largest sections of the industry, as the large breweries are forcing the £2 pint upon tenant landlords and others, and people turn elsewhere to seek their alcoholic enjoyment.
— BEN BYRAM-WIGFIELD, Free the Watney's Party Seven, Campaign HQ, The Steps, Foley Terrace, Great Malvern, Worcs.
One small problem: Watneys don't brew any more!
Cool look at warm beer
KEITH Thomas's article on warm beer (September) highlights the main reason why I so rarely attend beer festivals these days.
The days are long gone when drinkers should put up with warm and often out-of-condition beer.
The beer awards given at GBBF must be moved to a cooler part of the year if they are to have any credibility.
I would hope that the vast majority of beer festival organisers take heed of Keith Thomas's article and try to ensure that quality comes before quantity at beer festivals, then I might be tempted to visit more beer festivals again.
— RICHARD SANDERS, Loughborough.
P.A. Newton fan club
As a recently joined member of CAMRA, I must say how appalled I was to read of the new rules for the Champion Beer of Britain Competition for 1992.
I seriously considered cancelling my subscription.
It was only when friends accused me of being a pompous, humourless prat that I realised it was meant as a joke.
Be that as it may, I don't think such frivolity helps CAMRA's cause.
Let's concentrate on the important, serious issues and spend less time worrying about such matters as the quality of the beer.
Mrs Donaldson, in last month's letters page, certainly seems to have the right idea.
I have adopted her splendid suggestion and now drink my excellent pint of Flowers IPA from only British made, top-quality tankards.
CAMRA needs more people like her.
It is surely no coincidence that while Mrs Donaldson proudly signs her own name, P A Newton sees fit to resort to the utterly immature tactic of hiding behind a transparently obvious alias.
— TONY SOPER, Highbridge, Somerset.
WHY have you stopped giving details of local real ale guides in What's Brewing?
Despite a vague assurance to the contrary last year, this useful list has not appeared since February.
Perhaps What's Brewing could feature an up-to-date list of local beer guides every other month, alternating with the painfully unfunny P.A. Newton column?— DAVE WHITE, Wigan.
FOLLOWING P.A. Newton's revelation that Scottish &Newcastle Breweries supplied quantities of Newcastle Brown and Tartan Keg to a pub adjacent to the Russian Parliament during the recent failed coup, I understand that the Morning Star, daily organ of British Communists, has started a campaign for Old Peculier to be supplied for the next coup attempt.
Shameful. — KEITH FLETT, London N17.
Letters for publication must be written on one side of the paper only.
If typed or word-processed, use double spacing.
If handwritten, write clearly and print your name.
Send to What's Brewing, CAMRA, 34 Alma Road, St Albans, Herts, AL1 3BW to arrive not later than the 15th of the month.
The editor reserves the right to shorten contributions.
BUSINESS NEWS The Loe Down
Iain Loe
Walker on the ropes as bankers lose patience
ARE we now into the final scene of the long-running Brent Walker City Saga?
By the time this column is read the curtain may have fallen on the empire created by George Walker, finally defeated by a £1.5bn debt burden.
The late appearance of Lonrho's Tony Rowland in the guide of Fairy Godmother — or is it the Wicked Witch?— offering to wave the magic wand and change the bulk of the debt into convertible preference shares could have offered a reprieve.
But Rowland's offer has been dismissed out of hand by Brent Walker and unless the bond holders, owed £102m in all, agree to the restructuring plan involving BW's 47 bankers it would appear that the directors will have no other alternative but to put the company into receivership.
If that happens Lonrho may be gambling on picking up the betting shop part of the operation for the proverbial song.
Meanwhile still waiting in the wings are the Cameron's management buy-out team and Sunderland brewers Vaux.
Both are more interested in the brewing side of the company.
While the banks and bond holders battle it out, the reorganisation of the company into two divisions, betting and pub retailing, goes on apace.
The tenanted side of the Pubmaster pub retailing division is to be called Threshold Inns and not Legend Inns as I reported last month.
One can only hope for all concerned with the pub estate that Threshold Inns are allowed the chance to prove themselves and become a legend in pub retailing.
Bruce may bid
HAVING disposed of their pubs and disco estate in Scotland to Scottish &Newcastle Breweries, Stakis are now looking to sell off the 14-strong Firkin pub chain bought from European Leisure only a year ago.
Among the expected bidders is David Bruce himself, founder of the Firkin concept and currently running two Hedgehog and Hogshead pubs in Hove and Southampton.
But David may find he has competition.
Allied Breweries' Taylor Walker subsidiary may consider the chain is just what they are looking for to increase their estate.
Although Allied have been working steadily to free or sell their required quota of pubs under government rules, few of the disposals have come from the 700-plus London estate of Taylor Walker.
In spite of recession and spiralling prices, trade at Taylor Walker's Central London pubs, and in particular their Nicholson's houses, have held up well.
With the economy predicted to be on the upturn it is perhaps the right time for Allied to invest in the Firkin chain and cash in early on the next consumer boom.
David Bruce and partner Paul Adams may find themselves once again deprived of the opportunity to regain control of their old company just as they were when Stakis paid European Leisure £9.7m last year.
I think the price this time might be lower but competition between rival bidders might mean that Stakis can get a sum close to £9m.
Bass off-loads
BASS, the UK's biggest brewer and pub owner, are now well on their way to meeting the November 1992 deadline for disposing or freeing half their pubs over the 2,000 limit.
They have found an ‘enterprising’ way of off-loading 372 of their Midlands-based pubs.
Just under £60m in cash is believed to have changed hands in the deal where the pub owning company Enterprise Inns, headed by Taunton Cider chairman Michael Cottrell, acquired the Bass outlets.
But the five year supply deal signed by Enterprise, by which Bass continue to provide the beers, must raise questions as to whether the letter, if not the spirit, of the Supply of Beer Orders are being broken.
Enterprise also plan to expand their estate by acquiring more pubs, aiming to double in size by 1996.
The deal is believed to have been financed with debt and equity funding arranged by ANZ Banking Group and County NatWest Ventures.
Bass have now disposed or freed more than 1,400 of their pubs and another 400 are in the pipeline, according to Bass Inns and Taverns boss Charles Darby.
A total of 2,680 houses have to be sold free of the tie by next November.
Going east
NEWS and rumours of Western brewers interested in acquiring stakes in Eastern plants continue apace.
Belgium giants Interbrew — Stella Artois to you and me — are negotiating in Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary and all the other normal suspects are also reported to be continuing talks east of the former iron curtain.
A little bird tells me that Scottish &Newcastle's private jet has been spotted in the neighbourhood of Pilsen.
It is unlikely, however, that any Western company will get more than a minority stake in Pilsner Urquell.
Cider wars
I'M still awaiting news about the eventual buyer of Showerings, the cider company put on the market by owner Allied.
Hereford cider producers Bulmers had been rumoured to be considering a bid but in the end have apparently not tendered an offer, fearing a referral by the Office of Fair Trading to the Monopolies Commission.
We should shortly know who the new owners of Showerings are and what plans they have for the company.
With the resurgence in the popularity of cider we could well see increased competition between the Big Three: Bulmers, Showerings and Taunton, the last named now under its new management buy-out ownership.
This time last year Bulmers shares were at 170p, today they are near to 260p.
With a good harvest in prospect and cider sales expected to stay steady the Hereford firm looks set fair to face any new challenges from Taunton and Showerings.
Hoskins gloom
LEICESTER brewers Hoskins held their annual general meeting last month and reported a £167,000 loss for the year to March.
The shares are currently at only a third of the 120p high they once reached.
The company's coffee shops have been identified as being one of the main causes for the poor performance and are to be sold.
Hoskin's chairman, Barry Hoar, is putting on a brave face and has told shareholders that ‘your directors view the future with confidence.’
Barry and brother and fellow co-director Robert will need all the confidence they can get because there could be troubled times ahead.
The company has promised much in the past but to date failed to perform up to the market's expectations.
The failure finally to secure 18 pubs from Bass, which would have boosted Hoskin's estate to 29, must have dented market confidence, a confidence that needs to be regained if they are not to be swallowed by one of the many new thrusting pub retailers actively seeking new acquisitions.
Up the kriek
THE guest beer market is not only a target for UK companies.
Belgium brewer Liefmans are making a big push with their draught kriek — cherry flavoured beer — the sales of which have increased by 45 per cent over recent months.
The company was acquired last year by the regional brewer Riva, best known for its Dentergens wheat beer.
Liefmans plan to impress potential customers with their products at this month's Innovate 91 exhibition in London where they will have a stand in the ‘Real Ale Village’.
Riva's move into the UK could well be just the vanguard of a friendly invasion of quality draught continental beers which may soon be competing on the bars of UK pubs with our own traditional ales.
Beer sales up
BEER production for July 1991 was 3,179,380 barrels, an increase of 3 per cent on the same month last year.
Adjusted production (production plus imports minus exports) was 3,364453 barrels, also an increase of 3 per cent on July 1990.
NEWS Top hall for '92 beer fest
by Christine Cryne
FOLLOWING this year's success at the London Arena, Docklands, the Great British Beer Festival will move to West London in 1992, taking over Olympia, Britain's most prestigious exhibition hall.
The festival, a key part of CAMRA's 21st birthday celebrations, will be held in Olympia's Grand Hall.
The hall was commissioned in 1884 by the National Agricultural Hall Company to provide an arena suitable for both agricultural shows and military pageants.
Current events include the annual Horse of the Year Show.
Not since Alexandra Palace in North London has the Great British Beer Festival been at a site with so much style and heritage.
It is also the biggest venue to date, with more than 150,000 square feet of space.
The vast arched glass ceiling adds to the sense of space and grandure.
The designer, Henry E. Coe, allowed for natural ventilation by arranging for the roof to part in the centre by the use of pulleys.
All being well, the skies will part once or twice during the festival — only the second time the event has been out in the open air.
Transport links are good.
The hall has its own station, Olympia, with Underground trains running every 15 minutes.
There are four other stations within 10–15 minutes walk — High Street Kensington, West Kensington, Barons Court and Hammersmith — as well as plenty of buses running along the road outside.
This is likely to be the biggest Great British Beer Festival for more than 10 years.
The dates are August 4–8.
Make a note in your new Letts/CAMRA diary and come and help celebrate our 21st birthday.
Lilley denies concession to giant brewers
TRADE Secretary Peter Lilley has not relaxed the deadline for compliance with the Beer Orders, a spokeswoman from the Department of Trade and Industry claimed last month.
It had been announced earlier that Lilley would not take action against the national brewers if they still controlled a few pubs in excess of the number allowed under the Beer Orders legislation.
The DTI statement was made after the brewers had agreed to arbitration for their tenants — see page 11 — and some commentators claimed that there had been a trade-off.
But the spokeswoman said the concession in no way gave the allclear for the brewers to delay action.
‘The Secretary of State made it quite clear earlier in the year that he would not extend the deadline,’ she said.
The current arrangement was announced in a letter sent to all MPs in mid-September.
It has been made after repeated lobbying by the big brewers for an extension to the deadline by which they must free from the tie half of their pubs above a ceiling of 2,000.
The brewers had met Lilley and Corporate Affairs Minister John Redwood in the summer.
Thousands of pub landlords had been given notices to quit and offered lease agreements with rents widely regarded as excessive.
It was thought at the time that the talks would result in some extension of the deadline.
The brewers argued that introducing arbitration would inevitably slow down the process of negotiating agreements.
Vaux join fight for Cameron's
by Andrew Sangster
THE fight for Cameron's brewery has taken another twist with the announcement by the Sunderland Vaux Group that they are prepared to buy the Hartlepool brewery.
Faux, who also own Ward's in Sheffield, told Cameron's owners, Brent Walker, of their interest in early September.
The proposed purchase would involve the Cameron's brewery, 300-plus pubs and associated assets and brands.
‘We strongly believe that a North-east merger of Vaux's and Brent Walker's northern brewing and pub operations would be in the best interests of all,’ said Vaux chairman Paul Nicholson.
But he warned that ‘some rationalisation’ would be necessary.
A merger, Nicholson added, is a more viable alternative to keeping the brewery open than the planned management buy-out.
The MBO team, heavily supported by CAMRA, is still negotiating a similar deal.
Although Brent Walker says the MBO is the preferred option, negotiations are complicated by Brent Walker's precarious financial position.
A restructuring plan, put forward by the 47 banks owed £1.5 billion by Brent Walker, needed the approval of 75 per cent of the company's bondholders.
Meanwhile the Serious Fraud Squad is continuing its investigations into the company's affairs.
Stout fellow feels the strain
PETER Mauldon (right), winner of the Champion Beer of Britain award, admitted when he received his plaque last month from CAMRA chairman John Cryne that his Suffolk brewery was ‘bulging at the seams’ as a result of demand for his Black Adder Stout.
‘We'll either be here next year — or we'll have gone under,’ he quipped at the awards ceremony in London on September 23.
All the winning breweries were represented at the ceremony held in Doggets Coat and Badge, Blackfriars.
Brians Dark won the Best Mild award, Cains Bitter the bitter category, Bathams Best Bitter won its class, Fuller's ESB came top in the Strong Bitter section and Theakston's Old Peculier the Old Ale and Barley Wine class.
Mauldon's Black Adder came top in the Stout and Porter category and Worthington White Shield was voted top bottle-conditioned beer.
Plug pulled on Bass pub loo plans
THE Good Beer Guide — listed Star Inn in Bath has been saved from the developers.
The pub has been largely unchanged for 100 years but owners Bass took advantage of development planned in the next door antiques market to announce a drastic redevelopment.
The brewers wanted to convert the landlord's accommodation into offices and turn the lounge into a toilet.
But, following complaints from locals and CAMRA branches, Bass have dropped the plans.
Landlord Allen Perrett says he is ‘over the moon’ and thanked all his regulars.
Cash crisis could close Hartlepool
THE financial crisis at Brent Walker now threatens the continued operation of Cameron's brewery and the Brent Walker tied estate.
Income from the pubs and brewery is being swallowed by the debt-ridden parent group, who are not paying the brewery's bills.
Suppliers are not being paid by Brent Walker head office and as a consequence are threatening to withhold their services.
The situation has been poor for some months, but press speculation about receivership has worried suppliers and customers of the brewery.
Brewery staff are concerned that brewing will not be able to continue once basic supplies such as malt are cut off.
Even the brewery social club has been threatened with closure.
Bills had not been paid, despite the fact that the club had already given money to Brent Walker to pay them.
Some smaller breweries are understood to have stopped supplying the Famous Firkin wholesale division, as they cannot afford the risk should it cease trading.
Staff at the brewery are bitter that a profitable business can be reduced to penury by the financial crisis in its parent group.
If the situation is not resolved within months, the rescue plan might cease to be viable.
See Loe Down, page 15.
Allied: takeover fever mounts
ALLIED-LYONS, Britain's third biggest brewer, was the subject of intense takeover rumours at the end of September.
Shares in the food and drinks conglomerate surged by 8 per cent in a week as speculation about a bid gathered momentum.
Three companies have been mentioned as possible bidders: Philip Morris, the US-based food and tobacco concern and owners of Miller Brewing, Anheuser Busch of the US, the world's number one brewer, and Hanson, the acquisitive UK company that once owned Courage.
Analysts were divided on the likelihood of any takeover.
Many reckon the enormous cost, estimated to be as much as £10 billion, is too great for most of the players in the current economic climate.
But the 15 per cent fall in Allied's pre-tax profits, mostly a result of disastrous dabbling in foreign exchange markets which lost £150 million, leaves the company vulnerable.
The company was forced to replace both its chairman and its chief executive after the losses were announced.
AGM '91
NOTICE is hereby given to all members of the Campaign for Real Ale Limited that the 1992 Annual General Meeting will be held at Bristol University, on Saturday April 11 and Sunday April 12, 1992.
Business 
1.
To receive and adopt the accounts for the year to December 31, 1991 and the reports of the Directors and Auditors.
2.
To elect members to the National Executive (Board of Directors).
3.
To re-appoint the Auditors and to authorise the Directors to fix their remuneration.
4.
To receive reports of campaigning activity during 1991.
5.
To consider and, if thought fit, to pass Special Resolutions and to debate motions.
Members, branches, action groups, etc who intend to propose motions for debate, are asked to make sure that these are received at HQ in St Albans by first post on FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 1992.
Nominations 
Candidates for election to the National Executive should note that nominations should also be received at HQ by FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 7, 1992.
Each nomination must be proposed and seconded by two members of the Campaign and be accompanied by a signed declaration from the candidate that he or she is willing to stand.
Iain W. Dobson Company Secretary 
