Climber &Hill Walker August 1991 £1.60 Gimmer Crack A quality climb French limestone A guide for middle graders Mountain walking In Africa and the Yorkshire Dales  Volume XXX No.8 August 1991
CONTENTS
FEATURES
8
Quality climbs — Gimmer Crack on the Lakes, By Bill Birkett
12
Castaway Climbs — Bob Reid visits the small island of Cara off the west coast of Scotland
16
Monarch Of The Dales — Ingleborough tops them all, says Jerry Rawson
20
Hooked On The Fish — Roger Everett uses old fashioned cunning on the Dolomites
26
On The Rock — Jim Perrin pays tribute to botanist and climber Evan Roberts
30
Kenya's Other Mountains — There's much more than just Mount Kenya, as David Else discovers
34
French Without Tears — You don't need E-grades to enjoy Verdon, says David Pickup
38
Europe's Icy Crown — Kev Reynolds tests glasnost on Mount Elbrus
NEWS
4
Compass — News from all corners of the climbing world
46
Reports — Our correspondents in Scotland, the Lakes, the Peak and Wales
COMMENT
2
Rescue!
— Climber editor Peter Evans joins the growing roll of wounded writers
REGULARS
10
Off Belay — Ed Douglas explores the Environment Myth
50
Books — Nepal, Rockgear, Lakes pioneers and much more
52
Mail — Season tickets on sandstone?
— no thanks!
64
Back Page — Pete Livesey feels some guidebooks are sinking towards Zero Credibility
EQUIPMENT
42
Backpacks — We test four big packs in the 60-litre plus range
Climbline Weather Forecasting Service
Climbline offer up to the minute weather and hill conditions for the major mountain areas of Britain.
In addition it offers the latest avalanche conditions in Scotland as supplied by the Scottish Mountain Safety Group, and winter climbing conditions in the major Scottish centres.
Calls cost 34p/minute cheap rate and 45p/minute all other times.
East Highlands 0898 654 668
West Highlands 0898 654 669
Lake District 0898 654 691
Snowdonia 0898 654 692
War memorial in Mt Elbrus on the Caucasus (see page 38).
Photo by Kev Reynolds
Cover shot Ben Nevis and the Mamores from Aonack Dubh, Glencoe, by Robert Lees.
Comment
It's open season for broken feet: our own Jim Perrin and Pat Littlejohn to name but two.
‘Climber’ editor Peter Evans decided he couldn't be left out…
Mid afternoon and I was climbing on the Ben.
By midnight I was in an operating theatre in Inverness having an ankle fixed.
I pondered on these things and felt that it was not good…
…
The right hand pulling on a not very positive lay-off and the left gripping a tenuous pinch, I moved up, expecting friction on the slab above to take me to a small shelf.
Two good pieces of gear had encouraged me to make the move, but once started there was nothing for 15 feet.
Chalk on the lay-off indicated this was probably the right line, though it looked tricky for HVS.
Once on the slab my boots failed to bite.
Maybe I was on some damp lichen.
Shifting my weight left on the layoff to get a better grip I pulled again.
Still no purchase and it was beginning to look like all or nothing.
Desperate now, I pulled a third time, and a third time the boots slipped.
The inevitable happened and I was off, dangling upside down on the end of the rope seconds later, 30 feet below, parallel to my climbing companions.
The Serendipity Variation on Minus One Direct had claimed a victim.
The gear had held and I hung there for a moment, taking stock.
Blood was spouting from cuts on my right hand, and my left foot ached a bit and felt strange — no more.
I righted myself and pain shot up my right leg as I put weight on it.
The cuts in the hand were superficial and there seemed to be nothing else wrong.
We took stock.
With four of us, climbing the route in two parties of two, and four 50 metre ropes to play with, retreat would be relatively straightforward to the snow at the foot of the route.
My descent could be protected by a safety rope.
Two hopping abseils later — I'm an expert at them now — and I was on the snow.
Necessity being the mother of invention (and ingenuity), the foam mat from the back of my rucksack served as a seat for sliding down the snow, protected from behind by a rope and with an ice-axe to help control.
One member of the party went to summon the rescue team and the helicopter appeared as we neared the CIC hut.
We had reached level ground so winching was relatively easy.
A few minutes later and I was getting into the rescue ambulance for a short ride to the Belford Hospital in Fort William.
A tall Irish doctor in shirt, tie and shorts greeted me.
His size belied the touch of a new born babe and he gently coaxed the life back into the cold toes on my injured foot as a nurse cleaned up the cut hand.
The X-ray showed clean breaks on both sides of my ankle, as if someone had miraculously scythed the pieces of bone off with a knife.
‘It'll mean an operation to pin them back into place,’ came the lilting Irishman's prognosis.
His voice was reassuring, but I was worried.
This meant the knife; bones were broken: what about my prospects of finally climbing Minus One Direct?
Ambulance to Raigmore Hospital, Inverness and a few hours later I was talking to the consultant.
He would do the operation that night.
Full mobility would return to the foot eventually and I'd be climbing again.
And so to sleep — perchance not to dream at all.
Pain, boredom and badgering of some very kind nurses bring me to a steam-age typewriter in the hospital's occupational therapy department.
There really is life outside the ward, and I'm going home tomorrow, complete with crutches and instructions from a zealous physio on how to use them.
Progress over the next two months or so should take me back to climbing.
But here's a toast to all those who played a part in this fall of a climbing journalist: my climbing friends, the helicopter rescue team, the doctors and nurses and our superb National Health Service (coming from Ebbw Vale I knew one day I'd have cause to be thankful to Aneurin Bevan).
My grateful thanks to you all for your kindness and consideration.
Now — how the hell do you get up the Serendipity Variation?
Compass
Compiled by David Rose, Peter Beaumont &Ed Douglas
Bouldering competitors pose dilemma for BMC
The British Mountaineering Council face a difficult decision over what action to take against those who participated in June's bouldering competition held at Crookrise in Yorkshire.
The event was won by Ben Moon, and despite attempts by the organisers to keep details of those participating secret, the BMC quickly learnt of Moon's involvement.
While the majority view among climbers and many of those within the BMC is that the competition, organised by Jerry Peel and Mick Johnstone, was a largely social affair, the BMC will find it difficult to overlook the matter.
The principal reason the council became involved in competitions in 1988 was to control them and to prevent events taking place outdoors.
The BMC have sought clarification from the organisers and from Ben Moon; as we went to press no reply had been received.
The matter was due to be reviewed at meetings of the Competition Committee and the Management Committee, where any ban would be ratified.
BMC General Secretary Derek Walker would not speculate on the outcome of these meetings, adding: ‘It would be wrong for me to pre-empt any decision of the Management Committee.
There will be one group within the BMC and climbing that will say it wasn't really a competition and that the rule was invented for television spectaculars.
The other view is that we've got a rule and we've got to stick to it.’
Yet the BMC will feel uncomfortable whichever option they follow.
They will not wish to devalue their authority by failing to apply a ban, but they will also wish to avoid alienating competition climbers.
Sources suggest that if Moon, who is currently considering his position, were to indicate to the BMC that he had not fully understood the consequences of taking part, then a compromise could be worked out.
However, with further events of a similar nature planned for this year, such a compromise would be difficult to arrange.
And with one of the country's top competition climbers banned by his own governing body, the situation could deteriorate.
Heseltine urged to buy Mar Lodge for nation
The British Mountaineering Council have written to Environment Secretary Michael Heseltine urging him to consider buying Mar Lodge Estate in the Cairngorms as a matter of ‘necessity’.
The BMC move comes as part of a wider campaign to persuade the Government to intervene and secure the estate, described as one of Europe's most important conservation and winter mountaineering areas, for the nation.
Other groups that have written in support of the Save the Cairngorms-led initiative include the Mountaineering Council for Scotland, the Ramblers' Association, North East Mountain Trust, Friends of the Earth, RSPB and the World Wide Fund for Nature.
The move follows the offer by a coalition of larger conservation groups, led by the World Wide Fund for Nature, to raise £5 million for the estate, for which its billionaire American owner, John Kluge, is asking £10 million.
The groups are urging both the Scottish Office and Department of the Environment to match their offer.
The future of Mar Lodge, which includes three of Britain's five highest mountains, was also raised in an adjournment debate in the House of Commons by Labour MP Tam Dalyell.
In the debate, Mr Dalyell compared the estate with Brazil's rainforest, a comparison that was echoed by Kenny Taylor, chairman of the Save the Cairngorms Campaign.
He said: ‘It is a priceless national asset and like the rainforest, faces imminent destruction.
Allowing it to become an executive toy of yet another millionaire would drive the final nail in the coffin of the Government's green credentials — both at home and abroad.’
However, prospects of a change in the Government's attitude over Mar Lodge seem unlikely after Scottish Office Minister Lord James Douglas-Hamilton said during the adjournment debate that the existing system would be adequate to safeguard the estate.
The latest moves followed the collapse of Prince Charles's initiative to persuade the Crown Estate to purchase Mar Lodge.
The bid failed because the estate's value was considered to be less than the ‘knockdown price’ of £10 million at which the Prince had persuaded Mr Kluge to offer it to the nation, with some assessments valuing the estate at between £2 and £7 million.
Problems over parking
The farmers who own the land around Pot Scar are getting increasingly agitated over the way climbers using the crag are parking their cars.
The BMC is therefore asking people to park their cars at Feizor Hamlet and walk — please!
Access problems are also emerging at Heptonstall Quarry where the bowling and social club have complained about climbers using their car park.
While this was the parking area recommended in the new Yorkshire Gritstone guidebook, the BMC are now asking climbers to ignore it, park in the village and walk the extra quarter of a mile.
Estcourt Award goes to Hispar team
The annual Nick Estcourt Award of £1000, granted to small expeditions in pursuit of challenging mountain objectives, goes this year to the British Makrong Chhish expedition which will attempt the first ascent of the mountain.
Makrong Chhish (6808m) dominates the south side of the Hispar glacier in the Karakoram and has not been previously attempted.
Expedition members Steve Hillen (24), Dave Tyson (23), Dave Lister (23) and Mike Penlington all have extensive climbing experience in Britain and the Alps.
Two members of the team have trekked widely in the Hispar area and Hillen, Tyson and Lister had six months high-altitude mountaineering experience in the Andes during two successful expeditions in 1989.
The trustees of the award, which is aimed at young and relatively unknown mountaineers, are anxious to encourage more applications, so get weaving.
Details are available from: The Secretary, Nick Estcourt Award, 24 Grange Road, Bowdon, Altrincham, WA14 3EE.
Forms should be returned by November 30.
Drummond's dream of a climb for the world
Poet and visionary climber Edwin Drummond is about to achieve his ambition of a United Nations Climb for the World, now sponsored by the Sheffield firm Fretwell-Downing Datasystems.
The big event is scheduled for 21–22 September, its object the raising of funds for environmental projects worldwide.
The main climb by several parties on the North Face, West Flank, Mittellegi Ridge and South Ridge of the Eiger will see the meeting of an international team on the summit, televised live.
Participants, who will carry symbolic lanterns and a ‘flag of flags,’ include a blind person, a Czech grandmother, a black South African archaeologist, a Siberian and an Argentinian model.
The Eiger, Drummond hopes, having been claimed by Hitler after the Nordwand climb of 1936, will thus become a world mountain.
Supporters across the globe will take part in fundraising support climbs on their local hills, and their money will go to provide fresh water for the village of Askole on the way to K2, where infant mortality is 50%, and other schemes on every continent.
The list of supporters is most impressive, among them Vaclav Havel, Neil Kinnock, the Aga Khan, UN secretary-general Perez de Cuellar and BBC TV's Blue Peter.
Those who want to organise local support climbs should contact the project's office at Brincliffe House, 861 Eccleshall Rd, Sheffield S11 7AE, tel 0742 663869.
Anger at outdoor centre's ‘vandalism’ of Gritstone Crag
The BMC's ability to negotiate access agreements for the whole climbing community and to enforce their controversial bolting policy has been thrown into stark relief over a small and obscure gritstone crag in the Derbyshire Peak.
They said it could never happen, but in an act many will regard as nothing short of vandalism, an outdoor centre has negotiated privately with the owners of Brock Holes quarry in the Peak to place up to 50 bolts to secure a rope handrail across the rock.
The quarry, which rises to around 80 feet in height, has 18 routes ranging in difficulty from Severe to E3, with a starred E3 and the two-star route Rock Around the Brock — mostly concentrated on the left hand side of the crag.
The bolts have been placed on the broken right wall of the crag to furnish a zigzagging handrail across about 100 feet of rock.
The placement of the bolts by the Crowden Outdoor Centre, which is based just below the quarry, follows private negotiations between the landowner, North West Water, and Crowden Outdoor Centre, which is run by Peter Noble.
This action is, of course, in direct contravention of the BMC's much vaunted policy on where and how bolts may be placed, which places an absolute ban on bolting on any gritstone crag.
While many of the bolts were placed prior to the issue of the BMC policy document, they still break the tradition against placing bolts or pegs on grit for any reason.
In this case it appears that the bolts have been placed, not for the purpose of protection, but to create an artificial gangway.
Equally worrying to the BMC is that the centre negotiated its own private access agreement without consulting or even informing the council or its access officer Bill Wright.
The BMC's management committee, faced with what appears to be a fait accompli, must now decide what action, if any, can be taken.
They will be writing to the centre to demand an explanation and if possible an undertaking to remove the bolts, although this seems unlikely.
Bill Wright said: ‘We are dealing with two issues here.
The bolting is clearly against the BMC's policy and I think it is extremely unlikely that the BMC's committee of management will accept any kind of amendment to that policy.
‘We are also concerned about arrangements made by individuals or organisations like outdoor centres negotiating their own arrangements for their own benefit.
The BMC have a whole range of policy considerations for the negotiation of agreements.
Individual negotiations are inevitably led by the benefits that they give an individual.’
Amongst those who have been appalled by the bolting is local activist Malcolm Baxter.
‘It is a good little crag with one or two modern routes, and it's in the centre of a nature reserve.
At the very least this bolting goes against the spirit of the bolting and access agreements.
It looks as though this may be the price for privatising the water companies that everyone feared.’
Peter Noble is unmoved by the row that is blowing up around him.
‘The quarry is really a grotty little place with little to interest climbers.
We asked North West Water, more as a matter of courtesy than a private arrangement, whether we could place the bolts and I don't see that our arrangement undermines BMC policy.’
Joss's charity challenge
Last year, at the age of 54, the great fell-runner Joss Naylor ran from Pooley Bridge to Wasdale, only setting foot on tarmac as he crossed Kirkstone Pass and Dunmail Raise — a total distance of 47 miles with 16,200ft of ascent.
He was accompanied by son-in-law Colin Dulson and was raising money for Age Concern.
Joss is now offering inscribed and signed pewter tankards to the first twenty over-50s who complete the route.
Over-50s have a time allowance of 12 hours, over-60s have 18 hours and over-65s have 24 hours.
They must, however, raise at least £100 for their chosen charity.
The full route is described below.
All you have to do is send a signed statement from your pacer(s) together with a receipt from the charity, and Joss will send you a tankard.
Those under 50, and over-50s who complete the traverse after the tankards have been won, will get a signed certificate.
Naylor's Lakeland Challenge — The Route:
Section One: Pooley Bridge, Barton Fell, Arthur Pike, Loadpot Hill, Wether Hill, Red Crag, Raven Howe, High Raise, Kidsty Pike just off the ridge , Rampsgill Head, High Street, Thornthwaite Beacon, Stoney Cove Pike, Pike How, Kirkstone Pass.
Section Two: Red Screes, Hart Crag, Fairfield, Seat Sandal, Dunmail Raise.
Section Three: Steel Fell, High Raise, Rossett Pike, Bowfell, Esk Pike, Great End, Great Gable, Kirkfell, Pillar, Scoat Fell, Steeple, Haycock, Seatallan, Middle Fell, finishing at the bridge at Greendale (GR 143056).
Joss covered the route in 11 hours 30 minutes on a day of heavy rain and strong SW winds.
Successful challengers should contact Joss Naylor MBE, Bowdendale, Wasdale, Seascale, Cumbria CA20 1ES.
Crumbling climbs
The following limestone routes have been listed missing in despatches, so don't come crying to us if you can't find them.
In Mother Carey's Kitchen in Pembroke, a large rockfall has demolished the top pitches of Wraith, Nimrod and Necrepolis.
Wraith can now be finished by way of a new arete at a grade of E2 5c courtesy of Andy Blakeley and Sue Logan, unless anyone knows to the contrary.
Andy reports that the top of the area above Necrepolis now features some loose rock — so beware.
At Symond's Yat in the Wye Valley, part of the Longstone Pinnacle is reported to have parted company, although which routes have been affected is not clear.
Meanwhile, at Exmonsworthy on the North Devon Coast, the Catburglar area has plummeted precipitously downwards, leaving plenty of scope for new routebaggers with a penchant for the crumbly bits left behind.
Cooking with gas on the Ben
Climbers should have no problems keeping warm on the Ben — for the next couple of years, anyway.
British Gas have supplied and installed a new cast-iron Jotul stove in the CIC Hut, and have provided enough bottled gas for two years into the bargain.
The stove was installed in June by climbing gas-fitter Kevin Wilson, whose ascents include the Eiger and Ama Dablam.
The highest stove in Britain will no doubt see plenty of use in the months ahead.
Forbidden treats
Climbing from London can be a frustrating and time-consuming business.
Dedicated souls have, in the last few years, congregated at the Mile End wall in east London — a trip that takes your correspondent half an hour; a length of time that sees most Sheffielders halfway to their first route at Stanage.
And so news of a new addition to the facilities at the Sobell wall in Holloway caused much excitement.
The Bendcrete competition structure used at the British Open at Olympia last year had been set up in all its over-hanging glory next to the existing facilities.
However, the capitals' sports-climbers were dismayed to discover that because of an agreement between Bendcrete and the Sobell to share profits from any organised competitions, a special sports licence was required for insurance purposes: a licence which the sports centre lacked.
The opening ceremony, set for last May, was cancelled, and local activists had to remain on the original walls while gazing up in wonder at the spectacular treat they were being denied.
The irony being, of course, that climbing on the new wall would be considerably safer than soloing on the existing facilities.
Dateline Ultar
Aficionados of the prose of Victor Saunders, who won the Boardman-Tasker award for his book Elusive Summits , will be able to follow the further adventures of Slipper Vic, Fowler — the climbing tax collector — and friends on their expedition to climb Ultar, the highest unclimbed peak in the Karakoram.
Saunders has been commissioned to file reports on the expedition's progress which will appear in The Observer throughout August.
Herts Wall
A new bid DR wall has been opened in Hertfordshire, as the Phasels Wood scout camp, open 10 am to 10 pm, admission £2.
It boasts a height of 11 metres, a 36 metre traverse, a competition style overhanging section, aretes, chimneys and a slab.
In fact, as the press release says, ‘almost every rock climbing feature you could expect to find in the mountain environment.’
‘This obviously bogus claim should be hotly contested.
But it does open up a vista for the future.
Coming soon: the super duper version with a glacier, loose rock, sudden electric storms and sheep with bells round their necks.
Quality climbs
by Bill Birkett
Gimmer crack
Known historically as The Crack, the distinctive corner rift up the north-west face of Gimmer was one of the most remarkable first ascents of the 1920s.
George Bower first examined its possibilities and lowered from the top to a distinctive ledge beneath the steepest section.
He was top-roped out to report that the difficulties were considerable.
His exposed starting point for the ascent was the strategically positioned rock ledge now named the Bower.
Reynolds attempted it next and reached the Bower climbing from the bottom — alas only to be benighted and top-rope rescued.
Undaunted, he returned a week later and made the first clean ascent.
In fact The Crack is a much more interesting climb than the name would suggest.
At least a third of the route takes the steep open wall to the left of the corner and the climb as a whole demands a wide range of climbing technique.
Even the first pitch, escaping left from the steep corner, demands positive commitment and the ability to confidently tackle technical wall climbing.
The next pitch, stepping from the exposed top of the pinnacle block, is again a bold exercise, one immediately followed by a forced mantleshelf move to gain a horizontal weakness in the smooth wall.
Above, a steep rib requires a ridiculously long reach before an easy traverse leads back into the corner.
The moves up to gain the famous Bower ledge are nothing less than brutal with the corner crack first expanding to chimney-like proportions then closing again to slim finger-crack holds.
During the first ascent a precariously jammed flake provided a valuable aid to progress.
Unfortunately this fell out on the third ascent.
It was noted that it bounced only once before exploding in the gully below!
Once reached, the Bower forms a solid haven from which to tackle the final, most demanding, section of the crack.
Impressively placed and considerably exposed, it hangs on the vertical right wall of the corner with a straight drop to North-West Gully, an uninterrupted 150ft (45m) below.
I remember my father giving me specific advice on just how he climbed the crux section of the corner crack above; ‘When you get to the steep bit — you'll know it when you get there — just face right and use the square cut holds on the edge.
Like little dominoes they're small but quite positive.
An amazing lead for the ‘20s.
Whatever method is employed to make height at the overlap, some 40ft (12m) up the final corner, there is still a long reach to be made to find the hold in the crack above.
Fortunately, it's a tremendously generous jug, enabling a secure launch to be made over the bulge into the easier crack above.
Tradition, line, length, fine climbing, difficulty; The Crack must surely be The Classic of the classics.
Information
Gimmer Crack:
240ft (73m), Very Severe (4c).
First Ascent:
A.B.
Reynolds, G.G. Macphee, 5th May 1928.
Location:
North-west face, Gimmer Crag, Great Langdale.
Guidebooks:
Rock Climbing in the Lake District by Birkett, Cram, Eilbeck and Roper.
Great Langdale (FRCC Guide) by M.G. Mortimer.
Classic Rock Climbs in the Lake District by Bill Birkett.
Rock and Protection:
Rough mountain rhyolite.
The climb will take a full rack from small to large Rocks and Friends; a large tape sling is also useful.
Access:
From either the New or Old Dungeon Ghyll Hotels.
New: Take the path leftwards to cross Dungeon Ghyll and follow the steeply rising, zigzagging path until it levels off.
Continue until just after it starts to take up the steep fellside again, where a small path branches off left.
This leads to the south-east face of Gimmer (1 hour).
Old: Take the steep path leading up through a re-plantation scheme until it is possible to exit from its left-hand top corner to gain steep scree.
Trudge up this to find a well-defined narrow path which eventually leads to the south-east face of the crag.
Alternatively, ascend Middlefell Buttress and continue directly up the hillside above to intercept the level path that originates from the New Dungeon Ghyll Hotel (1 hour).
On reaching the face drop down to the toe of the rocks then climb steeply back up the other side until North West Gully is reached (15 minutes).
Observations:
The reddish-grey rock of Gimmer is outstandingly clean, hard and compact.
This and its position, perched on steep ground yet effectively sheltered by the hillside behind, make it one of Lakeland's finest climbing crags.
It dries quickly and the north-west face gets the afternoon and evening sunshine.
Descent:
Into North Gully via Junipall Gully — an awkward, steep descent, or to the south-east face via South-East Gully — easier but still steep.
Gimmer Crag forms a head separated from the steep hillside by these two obvious gullies, which both start at the same point.
South-East Gully can be entered from a lower point, so dispensing with a few feet of scrambling above the climbs.
Finding the point is not easy, and the gully walls are vertical elsewhere, so if in doubt continue up and back to the source of the gullies.
The Route:
Soon after the path scrambles up North-West Gully a prominent corner crack can be found.
Start beneath this.
1.
85ft (26m),(4b).
Enter the steepening corner crack and climb it until it is possible to move delicately left out across the wall.
A groove is gained and followed to a ledge and large pinnacle block below.
2.
85ft (26m),(4b).
From the top of the pinnacle step onto the wall and, using the thin cracks, effect a mantleshelf move into the horizontal break.
Move across, up and left to a rock ledge.
Climb the steep rib, a long reach being a distinct advantage, until a traverse leads right back into the corner crack.
A few feet of awkward ascent lead to an open rock ledge — the Bower.
3.
70ft (21m),(4c).
Continue directly up the crack to the small overhang.
It is arguably best to face right to make height to surmount it.
Keep in the corner crack, passing a ledge, all the way to the top.
Off belay
The environment myth
As an environmental issue, bolting pales into insignificance beside other activities which are a far greater threat, argues Ed Douglas
I catch the eye of a knifeblade.
Mine is glittering and blue and rather fearful; the pin's is brown and disinterested.
One hundred feet below the English Channel plucks forcefully at the base of the crag.
If I shift in my harness and lean nervously backwards I can see my partner creeping nearer on a wall of loosely compacted rubble, brushing and blowing the sand from the holds as he swings upwards.
But then I return to the knifeblade, flexing gently under my weight as I try to shift my centre of gravity as far as possible over my feet to protect the belay.
There is other gear: another pin, from which I pick out chunky flakes with my little finger, a zero Flexible Friend behind an expanding flake which, when I leave this stance an hour later, I will rip from its placement, and a wire which rattles uselessly in a flared crack.
And so I am pasted to this leaning morass, observing the simplest of equations.
If that pin comes out, both I and my partner, who is now commenting on how all his holds are loose, will be in deep doodoo.
I mention all this because it's been in my mind a lot recently.
The incident made a considerable impression.
The route in question was at Swanage and not at all difficult — getting its HVS grade for the seriousness of the climbing and not its difficulty and I've certainly done harder in the last month.
But the demands it made upon my timid psyche gave it a quality and significance its components: loose rock, repetitive moves and so forth, wouldn't immediately suggest.
Climbing is really about levels of safety.
Once each of us has progressed beyond the initial terror that being on a vertical plane high above the ground induces, once we feel comfortable above the ground, then a new awareness develops.
We learn that climbing is about tenuous niches in the horizontal rather than scaling a ‘sheer cliff’, as the journalese has it.
It's about oases of control where there should be none.
It should come as no surprise then, that some of those who see bolting as fundamentally reducing the experience I've outlined above, and which is our common heritage, should cast around for some solid arguments to counter its spread.
Hence the great cry has gone up: ‘Leave the environment alone!’
What are a few bolts beside the environmental devastation caused by a large quarry?
People opposed to bolts have, variously, cited planning controls and conservation designations and by implication, or overtly, have accused those who drill placements as being somehow anti-environment and those opposed to their activities as being defenders of a wholesome tradition.
These regular outbursts have inevitably had an effect beyond that intended.
If you start writing to councillors and start complaining that Sites of Special Scientific Interest are being damaged then broader interests are going to become involved.
Controversy and argument attract notoriety.
In the spring a story appeared in The Observer under the headline ‘Power-drill rock climbers accused of vandalism’, of how a minority were threatening the relationship between landowners and climbers as a whole.
The strapline above the story included the phrase ‘mountaineering's image on slide’.
The story enshrined the belief that has developed in recent years that people who place bolts are villains who have no place on British soil.
I am never fond of watching people blast away with both barrels at their feet, but when climbing is engaged in such a destructive pastime, it becomes doubly worrying.
Over the next decade and beyond land use and access will become an even more central issue than it is now.
And with the numbers of climbers increasing by a significant margin each year our relevance within the broader public sphere will also increase.
So a swift injection of logic might just save us embarrassing ourselves any more.
Take, for instance, the issue of protecting SSSIs.
The Government's infamous £12 billion road-building programme will, if it goes ahead (and it may not following the intervention of the European Commission), gobble up SSSIs.
Agriculture accounts for 50% of the long-term damage inflicted on these areas.
The Council for the Protection of Rural England have warned that if current destruction rates continue then by the year 2025, 50% of the 5000 SSSIs will be irrevocably damaged.
Recreational damage is cited by the CPRE as being short-term and minimal.
Chunks of the Peak District are being gobbled up and we're worried about the environmental implication of drilling a few tiny holes.
And as for damage to an historic monument, to wit Dumbarton Rock, and the subject of the piece in The Observer , the photograph that appeared alongside it gives the lie to this self-generated argument.
The climber is centre-frame, his offending bolts invisible, but in one corner and easily legible is a mess of graffiti!
Think about this scenario for a moment.
A climber jumps in his car, burns precious fossil fuels on a stretch of tarmac that has eaten acres of countryside to arrive at an undeveloped crag.
He raps down his prospective lines using webbing and rope made from non-renewable resources and starts stripping vegetation from the cracks and ledges on the route.
He doesn't know what species of flora are being removed, isn't sure that there are no birds being disturbed.
Perhaps he even drops a Kit-Kat wrapper.
He then drives home and writes to a climbing magazine detailing his new routes.
The monstrous irony is that as long as he doesn't place bolts nobody will bother accusing him of environmental vandalism.
There are enough access difficulties already in existence for us to worry us.
The Peak Park's restrictions to moorland in the last three years have caused far more disruption to climbing than bolts ever have, and these were bans imposed by people who are sympathetic to our cause.
Access problems caused by bolting will be the products of our own paranoia and not because landowners are ethically minded.
There are plenty of reasons why they should ban us.
The levels of litter we leave behind for example— or the aggressive treatment we hand out to sensitive individuals as occurred at Craig-y-Forwyn.
These really are environmental concerns worth bothering about.
It is a curious thing but those who are most vociferous in their criticism of bolting are often those who have gardened crags heavily.
This whiff of hypocrisy can only cause resentment.
If there had been a bolt on my belay at Swanage it would not have been an environmental disaster.
It would just have altered my level of safety and I would have forgotten the route completely by now.
Bolting is a purely ethical consideration, no more, no less.
It is simply a question of what sort of world we wish to inhabit — one of predictability, or one where the outcome is unknown to us and thus includes an element of self-exploration.
Castaway climbs
The islands of Scotland hold unimagined potential for new routes.
Bob Reid hired a boat and went exploring on Cara, off the west coast of Kintyre
Harry leant against the boathouse and puffed on his pipe.
In his blue Guernsey sweater he looked every bit an old sea dog.
His Gemini was ready, outboard fuelled, and Graham and I bundled our bags on board.
One was exceptionally heavy, laden as it was with all manner of climbing ironmongery, wire brushes and ropes.
I hoped it would be put to use, though there was a chance it might be just ballast for the journey.
The October sun dipped into the Atlantic, silhouetting the Paps of Jura as we shoved off into the sound toward Harry's Island.
He twisted the throttle, 20 knots or more, skimming across the waves, while I clung tightly to the gunwhale, and Graham sheltered his daughter, Abigail, from the spray.
You could hardly ask for a more exhilarating way to kick off the week's traces.
The rocker switch on the side of my head clicked…work off, weekend on…stress off, mellow on…and sea air crackled static through my stale brain.
A ‘Brownie’ or friendly spirit haunts the island, and his consent to land is normally sought.
I scoffed at such nonsense, and leapt up the beach, lanyard in hand, only to fall flat in the surf, as the waves turned sand from firm to quick.
‘Okay, okay.
Permission to come ashore?’
The others hooted with laughter.
Evening drew in while we carried the weekend's provisions ashore.
There is a discernible, almost romantic frisson about a sea crossing, no matter how short.
We seemed to have left the world behind.
Harry had rebuilt the tackman's house.
The very house that had sheltered the entire community during the great storm in 1756, when waves spumed right across the island and lightning struck the Mull, causing a massive rockfall, and the steep cliffs.
‘Of course, there was a whole community living here then,’ Harry told us, ‘but I suppose I'm all that's left.’
He lifted another log onto the fire as we mused about climbing possibilities, and poured another round of rather large drinks.
‘Malt whisky!’ our Bacchanalian host proclaimed.
Harry had designed a malt whiskey distillery in his final year as a student of architecture.
‘Nobody south of Perth had heard of malt whisky in those days,’ he said, ‘so I took a bottle and six glasses into my final crit.
Glenlivet, of course.
Twelve year old.
All my classmates and tutors said I'd never get away with it.
The examiners finished the bottle and I got a distinction.’
In the morning, after an early breakfast of freshly picked mushrooms, Graham, myself and our hangovers ventured to the south side of the Mull.
A hint of hatching on an early map, and the mysterious name of ‘Brownie's Chair’ were enough to suggest possibilities.
And even from the mainland there appeared to be a distinctly vertiginous southern edge to the island.
There, to our delight were the most beautiful cliffs, set above a grassy platform, above the sea.
Not more than one pitch, but all untouched.
‘Just look at that crack,’ Graham plotted.
‘Aye, but that ramp to its right,’ I schemed.
Ambitions soon melted under an unseasonally hot sun.
Graham led a lovely rib, slabby and clean, though it didn't test our mettle too severely.
Indeed the heat and glare were taking a heavier toll, and my head was buzzing.
We inspected several more lines, but they looked hard and in need of a clean.
So Harry's cliffs had a couple of their lines manicured.
Bits of unkempt Atlantic debris were removed, and lichenous excesses trimmed.
The abseils hung free though, and only deflated our drive even further.
Everything seemed to overhang.
We retreated to the house, with confessions of lost-bottle and do-better vows for the morrow.
Saturday night and a more mellow sort  of relaxation was in order.
Work was now a day's climbing, as well as a sea crossing away and all but forgotten.
Adventures past, or planned filled the fireside chatter as Harry kept the fire roaring with bellows made from a converted siren, whose reed had fortunately been removed.
He cranked the handle and breathy rush of air made strange coloured flames leap from sea marinated flotsam.
‘I'll listen to Alastair Cook and join you later,’ Harry told us in the morning, obviously intent on his Sunday ritual.
Graham and I had risen early, thinking to creep out and leave our host in peace, but he was a difficult man to steal a march on.
He'd been up since six trying to fix his motorbike.
It was cooler and grey, and a brisk sou'wester spiked with a salty drizzle met us at the crag.
Graham stormed up the corner he had cleaned.
It reminded me of Cenotaph, except the right wall overhung.
‘This is a bit worrying,’ I thought as I followed, huffing and puffing.
The sharp miniature flakes that covered the rock like fish scales cut into my finger tips and felt as though they would break as soon as I placed a toe on them.
A manic grin leered down at me as I struggled to bridge the crux.
My belayer has a leg span at least 18 inches wider than mine, so I was forced to cling to the merely vertical left wall.
Honours weren't even and though time was getting on, I needed to climb a route.
That's why we'd come, after all.
The line I had designs upon looked unlikely.
Obvious cracks soared to the left and right, reminiscent of Fairhead in Antrim, but I craved subtlety after the brutal corner we'd just climbed.
‘Watch me, Graham,’ I insisted, as I tried the move for the third time.
He laughed, because I was still to get off the ground.
But then the crag was undercut, and my first move was a leftwards traverse above a 20 foot drop.
‘Help, this is one way…irreversible…layaways…finger tips…wrong way,’ I shuffled and chalked, ‘bloody hell that foothold's too far away, way, way…done it.’
My arched body had moved gingerly toward the only hold, and once there I stood upright and whooped knowing that nothing would stop me now.
I had the Brownie's wings.
I had doubted whether the traverse, my tiger traverse, would go.
But now I was euphoric.
‘That was hard,’ I told Graham, forgetting that he'd probably just step across using his stilt-like limbs.
The climb kept unfolding in front of me, the weirdest sequence of moves, each one different, each one technical, and each one etched forever in my brain, like the steps of a dance.
A beautiful, once in a lifetime waltz, choreographed by the rock.
Later, we shuddered back across the waves toward a weary homeward haul.
The sea crossing served only to emphasise the idyll we left behind.
Harry invited us back though, and told us, ‘The crack was good,’ and Graham just smiled.
Graham Little taking advantage of the sunshine by soloing Rubha Rib, photos by Bob Reid.
Bob Reid following Cara Corner, E2 5b, photo Harry Teggin
Above: The impressive crack and corner lines on the main face of Carraig Mhor.
Below: Graham Little nearing the top of Rubha Rib, VS 4c.
Monarch of the dales
Jerry Rawson revisits the dramatic limestone landscape around Ingleborough
Ingleborough — the ‘Monarch of the Dales’— is a noble hill, especially when seen from Whernside's Twistleton Scars across the deep trench of Chapel-le-Dale to the west, with its features etched against a clear, blue sky; then it looks as fine a peak as any in the country.
From the surrounding dales, Ingleborough's finer parts are often hidden by the billowing folds of its foothills, but from a distance the stepped profile is easily recognisable, and dominates the countryside of West Craven.
Its steep sides and contrasting summit plateau high above the surrounding moors combine to make Ingleborough one of the most distinctive and popular peaks in the Pennines.
However, Ingleborough has much more than just an impressive outline; geologically it is a fascinating place.
Layers of impervious shales and grits on a pedestal of Great Scar Limestone, which in turn rests upon impervious Silurian rocks, have created a varied landscape of crags, gorges with fine waterfalls, limestone pavements, streams vanishing and resurfacing and a array of caves second to none in Britain.
In Gaping Gill Ingleborough has the deepest shaft, biggest cave and the highest waterfall in Britain — some pedigree!
Ingleborough's many tops, pavements and moors occupy a large complex area which takes many visits to really get to know.
Whatever the season, Ingleborough has something to offer the keen fell walker.
There is a web of exhilarating approaches — from Ribblehead; Crummackdale; Ingleton via Crina Bottom House and Hill Inn in Chapel-le-Dale; but a particular favourite is a circular route that starts from the charming hamlet of Clapham and visits the most fascinating parts of the area.
It had been some time since I had visited Ingleborough, so last summer I went back with a couple of friends to rediscover some of its hidden treasures.
It was a calm, windless and hazy morning as we left Clapham and headed up through two dark tunnels along the old Drove Road of Thwaite Lane, a continuation of the medieval monastic highway that crossed the Dales, linking the lands of Fountains Abbey.
After about a mile we quit the lane for pastureland below Robin Proctor's Scar, beyond which lies the famous Norber Erratics field — a geologist's paradise.
Here are scattered numerous slate boulders which have been carried by glacier action and dumped on a limestone shelf.
Many of the dark rocks stand on limestone pedestals, the surrounding rocks having been eroded away.
Once through the boulder field, a grassy sward high above picturesque Crummack Dale led steadily up to a broad plateau near Long Scar, from where we had our first view of the distant and brooding Ingleborough rising from a vast array of moor and limestone pavements, shimmering in the summer heat like a huge field of cotton grass.
These pavements, the bare bones of the Dales, stripped of soil during the last Ice Age, seemed to stretch for miles, their surface fretted by grikes and clints and scoured and bleached by rain and winds that sweep these fells.
We couldn't drag Phil away.
A keen botanist, he was in his element identifying the ferns, plants and shrubs which inhabit the miniature ecosystems in the cracks and fissures, adding a welcome touch of colour to this primeval landscape.
A few stunted rowan trees reinforced the feeling of desolation.
This is a confusing area, and in mist and rain, navigation can often be awkward as you slip and slide your way across the greasy limestone.
In winter, the pavements become miniature glaciers with hidden crevasses!
Today they had become a real sun-trap and it was a relief to swop the white, rocky desert for the subdued greens and browns of heather and grass which sweep across The Allotment up towards Simon Fell, its flanks scarred by the pale slash of Ingleborough's eastern approach track.
Before continuing we slaked thirsts with warm water from our own bottles — we couldn't find any streams.
In fact there is little natural water hereabouts; what there is usually disappears down cracks and fissures, tumbling down sunless waterfalls and on through subterranean channels to reappear some distance lower down in the valleys.
In the heat of the midday sun we reached Ingleborough's companion top of Simon Fell, deserted except for a few inquisitive Swaledale sheep.
By contrast there were lots of walkers on our next top which beckoned beyond the shallow, peaty col that separates the two hills.
The final sweaty pull up the eroded rocky path to the summit plateau of Ingleborough was warm work and it was a relief to lie back on the dry grass, rucksack for a pillow.
The huge, gently tilting summit plateau is vast and it is easy to believe that locals held horse races here last century.
The splendid open aspect in all directions probably accounts for the building of Britain's highest Iron Age hill fort whose ramparts encircled the plateau.
Outlines of hut circles, still visible, suggest there was a permanent Brigante settlement here, supposedly one of the last strongholds against the Romans.
The summit itself is crowned by a trig pillar, a huge cairn, and a walled shelter along with the remains of a celebratory tower built in 1838 to commemorate Victoria's Coronation, but wrecked by revelling locals after the opening — there were problems with vandals even in those days!
Ingleborough's steep sides always manage to give the impression that the top of the hill has been sliced off; when it's cloaked in a mist cap, you can almost imagine a cone-shaped summit.
Maybe it was wishful thinking that made Thomas Jeffrey show the hill on his 18th Century map with a height of 5,280 feet — the second highest mountain in Britain, its neighbour Whernside supposedly being highest.
At least he got the order right!
We tried to identify distant hills, but in the dense heat haze that now hung about us, we could only just see Whernside and Penyghent.
If you do pick a clear day, tops from Scafell to Pendle Hill can be picked out and, beyond the glint of Morecambe Bay, Snaefell on the Isle of Man is sometimes visible more than 80 miles away.
Leaving the summit sun-bathers, we  scrambled down crags and loose stones to join the track for the long descent to Little Ingleborough.
Obvious efforts are being made here to reduce the damage, which was much worse than I remembered it from a previous visit.
Other walkers were struggling up the dusty track, sweating and wheezing their way to the high plateau.
‘Is it far to the top?’
harassed father of one group enquired.
‘About another 20 minutes,’ I responded, trying to sound encouraging.
The smile disappeared, his head fell and, as he set off to catch up with his children and dog who were racing ahead.
A track leads down the open fellside to join Fell Beck, whose peaty waters eventually tumble into the fern-hung swallow hole of Gaping Gill.
The first thing I noticed as we arrived at the famous pot was a fixed caving rope leading down into the dark abyss, and I couldn't resist scrambling across to peer in.
Despite the small entrance hole I could sense the presence of the huge chamber below, up which faint voices were drifting.
From the vibration on the rope it felt like somebody was jumaring up the 300 tiring feet back into sunshine — some prussik!
Fortunately there was only a trickle of water entering the opening.
A much easier alternative is to come here on a summer bank holiday weekend, join the queue and be winched down in a bosun's chair courtesy of various caving clubs.
A Frenchman, E.A. Martel, made the first descent of Gaping Gill nearly a hundred years ago in 23 minutes using caving ladders; the petrol-driven winch drops visitors in less than 90 seconds!
For non-troglodytes, with a penchant for the unusual, the trip can provide a memorable experience.
From Gaping Gill a path leads through a grassy dry valley which soon narrows at the boulderchoked entrance to Trow Gill, a small but imposing limestone gorge — possibly caused by a collapsed cave — through which Clapham Beck once tumbled before being swallowed up by Gaping Gill.
Its overhanging walls provide a number of hard rock climbs.
Once through the gorge you are into the valley of Clapdale with its tourist trappings of grottoes, nature trails and Ingleborough Cave which Walter White, in his 1858 book,A Month in Yorkshire , referred to as a ‘Glittering Fairy Palace’.
Today it was closed but the delightfully cold ice-cream from the small shop at the entrance went down a treat.
After its underground journey through the Gaping Gill/Ingleborough system, Clapham Beck resurfaces nearby and the gentle, bubbling stream continues along its way through delightful landscaped woodlands in lower Clapdale.
Being tight-fisted individuals we by-passed the fee-paying nature trail through the woods and crossed the beck to join a Green Lane that led pleasantly back to Clapham and the end of a fine day's trek through Yorkshire's classic karst and pavement country.
Main picture: Crossing the limestone pavements below Simon Fell, photos Jerry Rawson.
Above: A Norber erratic on its limestone pedestal.
Right: Brightly clothed cavers gearing up to descend Gaping Gill.
Hooked on the fish
Tackling a modern rock wall in the Dolomites requires more than technical ability.
In fact, old fashioned cunning and the ability to suspend belief are just as important, as Roger Everett found out.
Twenty feet.
The pockets in the perfect grey limestone became smaller and more spaced, the footholds doubtful, sloping smears.
Nervously I left the safety of a good peg and did a few free moves towards the next one, 20 feet away on the blank left wall.
With the two crux pitches of VII apparently behind us, it seemed reasonable to expect some hidden jugs, as the guide promised moves of VI-.
Fifteen feet.
Perhaps it was a tiredness resulting from the previous 14 pitches, but I could see no way of free climbing it at less than E5, and I wasn't good enough for that, not now.
I fixed a poor nut in a flared pocket, and although it seemed unlikely to hold, attached a sling and stood in it.
Ten feet.
There seemed no hope now, nothing to go for except a curiously marked pocket which fitted two finger tips.
But surely this was just an aberration?
If I could reach the peg perhaps we could complete this amazing alpine climb?
I moved out of the slings onto smears and reached a one finger vertical slot.
Perhaps another nut?
Two feet.
The nut went in, but slid.
I think I knew it wouldn't hold, but I was so close.
Perhaps a quick pull and a dyno clip?
Only two feet.
Perhaps a slow, gentle easing up with as little weight on it as possible?
With no decision made, suddenly no decision was possible.
Forty feet.
‘Down?’
asked Mick.
Down.
Our first encounter with ‘The way through the Fish’, a modern classic of the Marmalada South Face in the Italian Dolomites had ended with us well beaten and rather incomprehendingly abseiling down during a perfect alpine evening.
I looked back up the wall in wonder and doubt.
Yes, we had clearly failed on a hard pitch, but that bulging wall above, rising blank and massive into the sky, surely couldn't be climbed at the grade given in the guide?
It was a wall straight out of Verdon, with the same perfect grey rock, interspersed with pockets.
But unlike the modern crags, this wall had no bolts and the major difficulties ended only after pitch 23.
A return seemed unlikely, but at the same time there was this intriguing question: just what would it be like to be up there, 20 pitches out, on a wall as hard as many a belted route, but with no bolts?
While I sulked in the tent, nursing my wounds and recovering from the thorough sandbagging, Mick was hatching a plan.
The two feet would shrink with a cheating stick, and perhaps we could avoid some of the easier but time-consuming lower pitches by sneaking in along the first terrace from an easier route.
We spent a day driving round the villages, asking for information, suspecting that we were missing something vital.
‘Skyhooks’ the man said.
Suddenly it was all clear.
That curiously marked pocket, that brief hint in an article in Mountain , so that's how you climb a wall like that without protection bolts!
We bought one (a mistake, we should have got two) to supplement an old ladle-handle type of thing dug out from my past, and a hammer and a few pegs to be on the safe side.
Mick even found a modern Italian guide.
Although we couldn't speak the language, there were enough ‘…issimos’ attached to the adjectives to give a good idea of what the locals thought of the route, and the frequent appearance of numbers like VIII, VII+, A4 and A3 on the topo seemed more in keeping with our previous experience than the more modest gradings given by Ron James.
Armed with the right gear and correct information, we were in business.
Once again we set out in the pre-dawn walk through the forest, the amble across the alpine pastures, and the short struggle up the screes to the foot of the wall.
The weather was not too promising, but we made good time and were soon at the first terrace.
At this point the difficulties gradually increase, culminating on the upper wall above the giant, whale-shaped niche which gives the route its name.
At first the climb follows grooves with good cracks giving regular nut and Friend protection.
Then it breaks out over an overlap onto the characteristic smooth slabs and walls which at the same time tempt and intimidate, attract but repel.
‘It's brilliant, a Verdon for bumblies’ I had joyfully called down to Mick, on climbing the first of these pitches during an earlier attempt.
This time we knew better.
The pockets became smaller and further apart, as did the protection.
Now that we knew the line, we  progressed quickly into the wild world of the seemingly blank walls and hanging stances that made up the meat of the route.
The two pitches of VII, which we had innocently expected to be the crux, were rapidly overcome with the confidence that comes from prior knowledge.
And there we were again, at the foot of the pitch of our failure, two pitches from the Fish.
We had a short stop for refreshment, got out the pegs and the skyhook and secured an open krab onto the end of a three foot cheating stick (which we had carefully hauled up all the way from the woods).
Since it was his turn at the sharp end, Mick set out on what we thought would be the crux of the route.
On reaching the peg which had stopped my fall, he made a few trial attempts with the skyhook, just to find out how it worked.
Twenty feet.
He placed a peg.
Fifteen feet.
He cleaned out a pocket and tapped in a nut.
Ten feet.
He placed the hook in the worn pocket and stood in a sling.
Five feet.
He got out the cheating stick and clipped the peg, swarming up in a daisy chain of quick-draws.
It's much easier when you're properly equipped!
The remainder of the pitch gave brilliant, bold climbing up spaced but adequate pockets to yet another hanging belay.
As I seconded past the scene of shredded clothes and fingers I cursed my lack of imagination; the peg pointed skywards.
I could have lassoed it!
But it became obvious on the next pitch that even had I been so inspired we would not have progressed much further.
For us, the traverse to the Fish niche required a linked series of skyhook moves (which isn't easy when you've only got one).
On reaching the Fish I let out a cry of triumph, overjoyed to have got there while conveniently forgetting the Verdon-like wall which lay above.
Five pitches to go to the break at the end of the difficulties, four hours of daylight left.
Tired, indecisive, we watched the swirling clouds.
The Fish seemed amply big enough to bivouac in (it even sported the route's only bolts) and the walls above looked…well, not an evening stroll.
The bold gesture is often the one that brings success, but on this occasion our lazy decision to eat and try to sleep was justified.
Soon the evening storm was crashing about us, the whole wall a waterfall, cascading like a curtain across the mouth of the Fish, just beyond our feet.
It was an apt time for the old dilemma of trying to forget where you were (while being excited by the position) and trying not to think about the uncertainties of the morrow (while looking forward to them).
Sleep is the only cure for such turbulence, but it's difficult to achieve, and Mick was hardly rested by the time it was his turn to lead in the dampness of the new morning.
The climb continued in its honest way.
It looked hard and did not disappoint.
The first moves of the day were unprotected, thin, blind, difficult.
Mick disappeared from sight while the rope slowly crept out.
A hook solved the initial problem, then a long, unprotected traverse (great fun seconding!) led to more blank wall and what must have been some truly desperate leading.
We learnt why seconds frequently jumar on this wall.
The stance consisted of a couple of sprouting pegs but little else; Mick's home while it was my turn to try to link unlikely sequences of free and aided moves up the next 40 metres.
After some tricky aid above the pegs, a section of typically marvellous free climbing, on pockets and depressions with target features reasonably near at hand, took me to the edge of the abyss — a blank wall with a piece of tat weaving, taunting, 40 feet above.
With no obvious footholds, no reliable gear and no tempting jugs this was a free-climbing land for which I was simply not equipped.
Slowly I aided upwards, thinking only of getting to the sling; the rest would be a later worry.
Marginal nut followed marginal  nut, carefully cammed into unlikely positions in sloping pockets.
A flurry of pleasure as my favourite, stacked nuts, came to the rescue and then the sling was just a few feet away.
A skyhook, then an unbelieving lunge and there I was, like a shipwrecked sailor washed up on the shore of an uninhabitable island, safe for the moment but by no means home.
Across to the right a group of pegs promised a slight ledge and a belay, but in between lay an apparently blank wall, clearly a two hook job at the very least.
But we had only one serviceable skyhook.
A tiny, flared, inverted flake suggested a micronut.
Then the stance would only be ten feet away and perhaps there would be a hook placement?
Well, three nuts spat me out and I can honestly say that the first time I fell, headfirst, facing outwards, above the wall we had just climbed, I really did see stars.
I looked down to Mick.
Could I give up, here?
No.
Perhaps I could have freeclimbed it, but the problem was that I couldn't predict the pockets and I wouldn't have found out until it was too late to avoid a monster fall.
So it was back to the hooks in the faith that something must turn up.
And it did, after another couple of false starts, a hook placement that worked.
A gentle step into a short sling and then the real miracle, a tiny hole, just right for my ancient ladle handle, revived from the days when Drummond briefly made them almost respectable.
No doubt there are modern adepts who might scoff at our amateur efforts, but that's just what we were, amateurs struggling in a land for the E6 leader or the A3 and A4 aider, without being able to do either.
My relief on gaining the stance was matched only by the strength of my desire to finish the route.
We had tried so hard, we had to succeed.
The angle eased, and Mick smeared up to a high peg from which the guide suggested a rope move.
The goal was another peg, some 30 feet and almost horizontally leftwards across yet another blank wall.
Mich eventually resorted to placing a hook on tension, then continuing to tension from the hook to reach the first real crack line for ten pitches.
Even this was no pushover as he laybacked up towards a line of large intimidating roofs.
But our luck was in, the roofs sported an undercut crack and the mere VI + underclinging across on the next pitch was an exhilarating holiday with guaranteed holds and gear.
To our right a diedre soared into the sky, menacing with its overhangs, but promising the end of the major difficulties above.
The wall was relenting now, there was another continuous crack in the corner.
Perhaps our predecessors felt like us, as suddenly the pegs multiplied to fill the crack available and it was a simple job to follow the line to easier ground.
It had taken us seven hours to climb five pitches.
Perhaps the mark of a great climb is its posing of difficult questions right to the end.
We were not at the end.
There were 18 pitches to go and six hours of daylight left.
Could we climb that fast, even allowing for the more modest grading of most of it?
And what if we were caught in the exit chimneys in a storm like the one the day before, stranded without head torches?
The 20 foot roof above our heads provided perfect shelter for all eventualities, so we decided to share our last scraps of food in another bivouac after fixing the ropes on the first two pitches above the terrace.
I slept.
I lay out, warm in the cloudy air, oblivious to the rain and hail which lashed the mountain and left its edges white.
Mick was less fortunate, and when I awoke in the depressing gloom of dawn, he reported that the weather was very much better than it had been for a long time.
Patches of blue sky appeared; it was time to go, to aim for the top, to get word to Dairena and Morag who must be wondering, waiting, worrying.
The top-rope on the first two pitches made them possible, and then we worked upwards, forcing tired bodies to perform and tired minds to keep them safe.
Slabs, grooves, the odd bulge, then chimneys; I mentally crossed off each successfully negotiated landmark as the cloud built up.
Slowly the tension eased as we realised that we were going to make it; we exchanged jokes, we moved with greater confidence.
It is pure irony that after a climb involving some of the most sustained smooth rock that I'd ever encountered, the finish involved a traverse of wire cable attached to a telepherique station, a swing down and across metal laddering and a hand-traverse of the spars which guide the telepherique into its housing.
We had emerged from a private wall into the crazy world of summer skiers, no doubt fresh from their BMWs in the car park below, and bemused by the intrusion of this odd, dilapidated pair of chastened alpinists.
One of them, a guide, asked what route we'd done.
‘The Fish!’
I offered.
‘Strong, strong’ he replied.
I didn't feel it.
But I'm going to buy another skyhook.
Above: Marmalada South Face.
The Fish takes a line just right at the dark shadow in the centre, leading direct to the telepherique station.
The face is about 1000m high; photo D. Gaffney, other photos R. Everett.
Right: Mick Harris starting pitch 21, the last pitch below the major terrace.
Note the perfect rock!
Mick Harris contemplating the swing across the blank wall near the top of the second pitch on the second day.
The tension traverse with the skyhook on pitch 19 at the start of the second day.
‘And Our Paths Through Flowers’
Jim Perrin pays tribute to Evan Roberts, botanist and climber
You know the way it is — someone dies whose example was meaningful to you, who was significant in your mind's evolution, though you may have had only the most fleeting personal acquaintance with them.
So you wish to mark their passing with some action of respect to their memory.
That was the way I felt recently.
The rain sheaved down and Snowdon was wreathed in cloud.
It was June the fifteenth, and would have been Evan Roberts' 85th birthday, but he died a month before.
So I went to visit the plants for him, went to check, in his memory who can do so no longer, whether the recurrent spring miracle of the Welsh mountains was still taking place now that the man who had seemed almost to stand for its yearly renewal had gone.
I'll tell you about Evan Roberts later, and there's plenty to tell even to those who buy a magazine simply because it says Climber on the cover.
But firstly, I'll tell you where I went, and why.
I went to Clogwyn Du'r Arddu, which was ‘humidis et densis nubibus circumdati’— enveloped in wet and dense clouds.
Why in Latin?
Because that 's the description Thomas Johnson gave of the place when he came here in 1639, and this was the self-same weather he experienced, and here's the point.
The Welsh mountains weren't first explored by alpenstocked Victorians after the glories of recorded ascents, nor, most certainly, by Lycra-clad gymnasts in pursuit of same.
No — their secrets were first revealed to curious scientific men, to apothecaries and simples-collectors, to people who could now be called botanists, and such was Evan Roberts.
Have you ever been up to Clogwyn Du'r Arddu in the pouring rain and the vilest weather?
Its atmosphere at those times is utterly special.
The trolled and gargoyled buttresses wheel around you through rifts in the cloud; they stretch, soar, disappear, solidify again suddenly out of the vapour then drift impossibly far up into the mist until your senses reel at the evanescent dynamism of the scene.
The only climber I know who goes there regularly at times like this is that perverse little bugger Joe Brown, who is clearly captivated by the magic of the place, though he'd never let you know as much in words.
He's climbed here often on such days, and so have I, and you never see or hear another soul.
It's not silent — there's the train on the ridge, the soughing of wind around the great buttresses above, lake-water lapping on the shingle shore where I was standing.
This is where the ‘wake-up-a-poet-or-a-madman’ legend is properly located — it was Mrs Hemans, I think, who transposed it from Maen Du'r Arddu to Llyn Cau.
But in a place like this you're more likely to turn from grand vacuous profundities to the rich detail around you — to the thriving, rare colony of alpine chickweed, for example, the lacy white delicacy of which brings this grey June landscape alive to the attentive eye.
I won't linger on the shingle flats, for I'd come to climb, and the route of my choice was the first to be recorded in Wales.
Here's the first ascent description:
‘A clergyman of the neighbourhood, who was so obliging as to accompany me in this and several other rambles amongst these mountains, formed the wild idea of attempting to climb apparently up the face of the precipice, and I, eager in my pursuit, did not object to the adventure.
We began our laborious task without once reflecting on the many dangers that might attend it.
For a short time we got on without much difficulty, but we were soon obliged to have recourse to our hands and knees, and clamber thus from one crag to another.
Every step now required the greatest care, for even the mere laying hold of a loose stone might have proved fatal.
I had once taken hold of a piece of rock, and was about to trust my whole weight upon, it, when it loosened from its bed, and I should have been sent headlong to the bottom had I not instinctively snatched hold of a tuft of grass, which grew close by it, and was so firm as to save me.
‘When we had ascended a little more than half-way, I was much afraid we should have been doomed to return, on account of the masses of rock, over which we had to climb, beginning to increase in size; we knew, however, that a descent would have been attended with infinite danger, and being urged on partly by eagerness in our pursuit, but more from a desire to be at the top, we determined to brave every difficulty.
This we did, for in about an hour and a quarter from the time of our beginning the ascent, we found ourselves on the top of this dreadful precipice, and in possession of some very uncommon plants…’
The author is William Bingley, the date of the event was 1798, and the ‘wild idea’ was dreamed up by Peter Bailey Williams, a 35-year-old Welsh clergyman who was rector of Llanrug.
He impresses me enormously.
There's a portrait of him in Llanberis vicarage in which he looks as irrepressible and intelligent as this action implies.
Look at the Eastern Terrace without a climber's eye and the rocks pile up around it.
Who knows how hard they might be along this slash through the fiercest mountain crag in Wales?
But who knows also the beauty which lies in wait hereabouts, which led Williams and Bingley to make the climb?
I suspect that our generation, with so few and such honourable exceptions, knows less than theirs did.
How many E6 leaders each year pass by the ledge of Lloydia Serotina — rarest of British plants — which is only yards from the path, and fail to bestow a second glance on its nodding, purple-veined understatedness?
Or as they descend the Eastern Terrace after climbing Psycho-Killer or MND, which of them notices the flowering profusion at the back of the terrace — the stonecrops, campion, roseroot and saxifrages?
Evan Roberts noticed them, and as I touched them, felt their cool cleanliness and the slight resilient weight on the backs of my fingers.
I thought of the example of Evan's life.
He was an ecologist of international significance, widely acknowledged — indeed revered — as the pre-eminent British field botanist of his time, and his prowess was the more remarkable given that he was born, blind in one eye, into a poor Welsh family, that he left school at 14, and that he spent the first 33 years of his working life as a North Wales quarryman.
He came into contact with our world of climbing early, delivering telegrams from the post office on his bike to Mr Winthrop Young and Mr Mallory at Pen y Pass, or to Mr Carr at Beddgelert.
But he, whose contribution to the history of these mountains now matches theirs, could not then mingle with them as an equal.
He was born in Capel Curig in 1906, and in that village he spent his whole life.
His first job, in 1920, was in the Rhos Slate Quarry high on the shoulder of Moel Siabod.
It was hard, perilous work which, by rockfall or dust, killed most of the men employed in it before their retirement age, and it left Evan with the gasping lungs of the silicosis-sufferer.
The bleakness, however, was not the whole picture.
‘Bywyd gwar mown byd gerwin’ runs the cynghanedd —‘a civilised life in a harsh world’.
This was work with a tradition of culture and self-improvement.
The quarry caban served as an extempore intellectual debating society.
It was the quarrymen's subscribed pennies which set up the University College of North Wales in Bangor at the turn of the century.
Amongst the dust and waste, characters who might have stepped straight out of the pages of Dickens or Mrs Gaskell bloomed.
Not that Evan in his youth was one of these.
His early infatuation was with motor-cycles, and he was a successful trials rider.
The financial stringencies which accompany marriage and child-rearing caused this interest to be set aside, and once it had gone, the cultural tradition asserted itself to remarkable effect.
Evan loved to tell you that it began with a minor domestic row.
His wife Mable scolded him out of the house on a bright May Saturday afternoon in the late 1920s.
In his chagrin he wandered up on to Moel Siabod above his home, where a clump of purple flowers amongst the grey rocks of the mountain caught his eye, just as they might that of some solitary wanderer today.
Evan didn't know what they were, determined to find out, and so began one of the great sagas of self-instruction.
The flowers were saxifraga oppositifolia , the purple saxifrage.
They were the gate by which he entered on to the path which led ultimately to his acceptance as the authority on the distribution of arctic-alpine flora in Britain.
I've often wondered about the origin of Evan's encyclopaedic knowledge on this topic.
It is an area of study with a strong academic bias, the foundations of which were nonetheless in local exploration.
This takes back to Thomas Jefferson and William Bingley, who were guided by natives of the region to plants whose efficacy and potency, in the view prevalent at the time, derived from the grandeur of their settlings.
(Johnson was an apothecary in search of medicinal plants, and Welsh plant names often reflect their medicinal usage.)
The fact of these men's having been guided argues a body of local botanical knowledge as early as the first part of the 17th century.
How did it come down?
Botanical guides had their heyday during the Victorian mania for fern-collection, which stripped the mountains bare of many of the rarest species — go and look at the grave of ‘Wil Boots’ in Nant Peris churchyard for the story of this in miniature.
Evan's grandfather was one repository of this local knowledge, and his fern-book came down to his grandson.
(The biography of Evan published in Welsh in 1987 appeared under the title Llyfr Rhodyn ei Daid —‘His grandfather's fern book’.)
But whereas this in all probability had previously been secret lore imparted through oral tradition, with Evan it was willingly shared and brought into the public domain.
His communication of it in precise, accessible detail was inspirational.
The students — and their professors — beat a path to his door.
And as if to make amends for the rapacity of his Victorian forebears and their employers, he re-discovered species — notably the holly fern — long thought extinct in Snowdonia.
But access to the sites where arctic-alpines grew often demands considerable rock-climbing expertise, so Evan touches upon our world again.
Major Bradley of the Bryn Tyrch Hotel in Capel Curig helped the local man to acquire the skills of protective ropework, and Evan spent the Second World War training the Commandos and the Lovat Scouts to climb.
After the war he was the first Welshman to become an accredited guide of the British Mountaineering Council.
Rhos Quarry closed in 1953 — a godsend to Evan's health as well as his career — and after working briefly in the forestry plantations he was taken on as the first National  Nature Reserve Warden of the newly-formed Nature Conservancy Council.
His special preserve was Cwm Idwal, and to be shown round that magnificent place, to have its intimacies and grand structure both explained and revealed to you by this gentle, wise old quarryman was one of life's great pleasures, to be stored and cherished in memory.
Evan's botanical records, kept meticulously for three decades, were placed immediately at the NCC's disposal and still underpin its botanical data base.
He worked for the NCC for 18 years, until his retirement (as Chief Warden for North Wales) in 1978.
Honours flowed: an honorary M.Sc in 1956 from the University of Wales; the MBE in 1964; and highest accolade of all, he was made a member of Bards in 1975.
Retirement allowed him the time to pursue his botanical interest, often in company with his children and grandchildren, between whom and Evan the devotion was mutual.
One typically frenetic four-day jaunt took him to Pontresino in the Alps to find Eritrichium nanum , ‘King of the Alps’(on the way home Evan's chauffeur, the Snowdonia Park Head Warden John Ellis Reports, had to navigate by road-signs and instinct, Evan having filled the road atlas with pressed flower-heads of more common species).
As a septuagenarian, he made the trip to Ireland on the back of his son Eon's motor-bike to find the Killarney Fern — long since believed gone from its single recorded site on Moel Hebog in Snowdonia.
Evan continued to lecture and lead students to locations in the mountains right into his eighties.
He liked young women students, and they responded with delight to him.
I suppose you could call him something of a gear freak.
His child-like enjoyment of the new equipment and gadgetry he came to be able to afford in later life gave warmly affectionate amusement to his friends especially when they found him camping in his own front garden in the latest tent and sleeping bag, or were asked to take him, when he was stone-blind from glaucoma, to the locations of his favourite plants to photograph them with an auto-focus camera.
Before the darkness came, you might have come across him at times pushing a pramful of camping equipment, perhaps with a grandson straggling at his side, on some remote road through Eigiau, Abergeirw or Pennant Lliw.
If that's to be counted eccentricity, then Evan was an eccentric.
He was never a man to be deprived of the sun and the soft wind in his face.
After his death, the local paper carried a simple headline in Welsh, ‘Mae Taid wedi mynd’— Grandfather's gone.
That was the measure of affection and esteem in which he was held.
Which is why, for this On the Rock, I climbed Eastern Terrace alone in the rain, and with every bright flower glowing out through the dismal weather in that majestic place, as I struggled to identify it, in my memory Evan was there behind me, as he always will be now, nodding with that peculiar wise grace of his, smiling, showing the way, ‘…as when our days were a joy, and our paths through flowers.’
Left: Snowdon from Penllyn, with Clogwyn Du'r Arddu prominent.
Below: Thrift was one of the surprises which greeted Thomas Johnson when he visited the Devil's Kitchen in 1639.
Photos by Jim Perrin.
The shingle flats of Llyn Du'r Arddu are home to a spectacular colony of alpine chickweed, first recorded here by Edward Lhoyd ub 1682.
A century later, Peter Bayley Williams and William Bingley made their historic climb of Eastern Terrace.
Evan Roberts
Mountain Walking
Kenya's other mountains
There's much more to walking in Africa than Mount Kenya, as David Else discovered with a group of walkers from Sheffield
‘Quiet!’ said the guide, and we all stood still, listening.
From the bushes came a low snort and the scraping of branches.
It was a buffalo, one of Africa's most unpredictable and dangerous animals, out of sight but just a few feet away from where we were standing.
Suddenly, Snowdonia and the Lakes seemed a million miles away.
We were all keen walkers, and enjoyed the challenge of remote places, but nothing in Britain could have prepared us for this close encounter of the furry kind.
This was Africa at its wildest!
Our guide was from the Samburu tribe; he was tall and muscular, with painted skin and dyed hair, dressed only in loin cloth and a thick, red robe.
He signalled us to keep still as he stood upright, tightening the grip on his spear.
A strange feeling of expectation mixed with our fear as we became caught up in the thrill of the hunt.
Were these our primeval human instincts emerging?
Was there some kindred spirit that linked this Samburu tribesman with a group of walkers from Sheffield?
Slowly, the guide bent down, as if to steel himself for the fight.
Instead, he picked up a stone and threw it into the bushes, then made a noise that sounded suspiciously like ‘shoo, shoo’.
There was another rustle of branches as the buffalo ran off without so much as another snort.
So much for a daring display of primitive combat!
Feeling somehow cheated, but also extremely relieved, we carried on along the trail…
We were in Kenya, and our buffalo encounter was in the Leroghi Hills, a small range to the south of Lake Turkana, the ‘Jade Sea’ of John Hillaby's book.
The main objective of our visit was to climb Mount Kenya, Africa's second highest mountain, but walking in the Leroghis formed an important part of our preparation.
Before leaving Britain we'd learnt that the hike up to Mount Kenya's ‘walkers summit’, Point Lenana, was not too demanding, and that the climbing route up to the twin summits of Batian and Nelion was graded mainly Diff, with a few patches of Severe, so we weren't expecting any technical problems.
But Mount Kenya is over 17,000ft (5100m) and we'd also learnt that many walkers and climbers fail to reach the top simply because of altitude sickness.
So, instead of going straight for the big one, we decided to build up our acclimatisation by first visiting some of Kenya's other mountains.
The Leroghi Hills are near the town of Maralal, about 250 miles north of Nairobi, part of the homeland of the Samburu, a semi-nomadic, cattle-rearing people.
As we walked through the hills we saw several large herds of long-horned cattle, guarded by warriors called morani who were stern but not unfriendly, and brightly decorated, like our guide, with their faces painted and hair thick with ochre.
We camped at a hostel near Maralal, run by a local company Yare Safaris.
In the Samburu language ‘yare’ means ‘quest’, so it seemed an appropriate place to stay.
The hostel staff advised us about the best areas for walking, and also arranged for the essential guide, to keep us on the right path and to protect us from the buffalo.
One of our walks took us to the top of a huge escarpment at a place called Losiolo, or World's View.
It was well named: this was the edge of the Great Rift Valley, a gigantic dyke which cuts across the entire continent of Africa from the Red Sea to Mozambique, and from our vantage point the ground fell away, almost sheer, to the flat valley floor, some 2,000 feet below.
We followed a narrow path that snaked precariously down the escarpment side.
As we descended it became increasingly hot, and in the space of two hours we had dropped from rolling grassy hills to a sandy, semi-desert plain.
In these lower, drier areas the Samburu keep camels, introduced from neighbouring Somalia, to use as beasts of burden.
The hostel even had its own fleet of camels on its regular Hillaby-style treks, used them to carry supplies or provide a mount for weary walkers.
It sounded an ideal way to explore some of the remoter parts of this region, but our time was limited and we wanted to move on to the higher mountains.
Above: Richly robed, the Samburu tribesman who acted as guide to the party.
Left: On Mount Elgon, looking towards Koitobos Peak (Photos by the author).
So we travelled west from Maralal to the Cheranganis — a large range of mountains which include Nakugen Peak (11,580ft. /350m), the fourth highest mountain in Kenya.
The Cherangani range is home to the Pokot and Marakwet tribes, who are skilled cultivators and have cleared areas of natural forest for farmland.
There were a few villages in the lower hills and, further up, small groups of round mud-huts, each housing a couple of families, were dotted across the fields.
These mountains were not as wild as the area around Maralal.
In these pleasant surroundings, we ‘bagged’ several of the main peaks, but the most interesting and spectacular walk was to the summit of a mountain called Koh, in the far north of the range.
The walk began by following a track which climbed steeply up a narrow, twisting valley.
On the valley floor was a fast-flowing river and, wherever space could be found, the earth had been levelled to form terraces.
The most common crops were maize (corn on the cob), the local staple, and large, bushy plants that looked like spinach.
At the head of the valley we reached a tiny settlement and stopped to ask the way.
We were taken to the chief who instructed four young boys to show us the path up to the top.
The boys asked if we could pay them some ‘small money’ to buy pens for schools.
Impressed by their studiousness, we carefully counted out some coins, making sure each boy got the same amount.
After thanking the chief, we continued up the mountain with the boys leading the way.
As the path climbed higher it got increasingly steep and narrow.
In some places the topsoil had been eroded and we had to zigzag up on loose scree.
Despite their bare feet, our young guides strolled nonchalantly across these sections, apparently unconcerned that a single slip could send them plummeting down the mountainside.
Nearer the top, all the soil and loose stones had been completely eroded away, leaving a huge dome of smooth grey rock.
It was steep and exposed but solid, and the final push for the summit involved some exhilarating scrambling.
As we sat on the top, recovering from the steep walk and admiring the view down into the valley and out to the plains beyond, the boys produced a rather crushed packet of cigarettes and all four of them puffed away merrily.
We wondered about the pen money, but said nothing.
Back at the village we were invited to join the chief and some of the older men for a drink of maize beer.
This was a brown, evil-looking brew, topped by grey scum, with the taste and texture of fine silt.
It was also fairly strong.
Traditionally, African beer is drunk from a large cup, passed round the groups of drinkers, but in this village they had a different technique: they brewed the stuff in an old oil drum and served it up in buckets.
Not wanting to appear rude we ploughed our way through a bucket between us and then left while we could still walk.
Needless to say, the rest of the day passed in a pleasant haze.
After the fun and games of the Cheranganis it was time for something a bit more serious, so we headed for Mount Elgon, in the far west of the country, straddling the border between Kenya and Uganda.
The highest point on Elgon is over 14,000ft (4,300m), making it the second highest mountain in Kenya.
Like Mount Kenya, Elgon is the remains of an ancient volcano, and rises as a gigantic dome high above the surrounding plains.
At the crest of the dome is a large crater (more correctly called caldera), with its rim surmounted by a circle of large, steep-sided, flat-topped peaks.
The highest of these peaks, Wagagai (14,177ft/4321m), is in Ugandan territory and officially out of bounds, but our map showed the international boundary passing through the summit of the second highest peak (just 20 metres lower than Wagagai), called Lower Elgon, so we decided to stay legal and aim for that instead.
Part of Mount Elgon is a national park, a protected area for several species of animals, including elephant and buffalo.
Remembering the close encounter near Maralal, we arranged for an armed park ranger to accompany us, so that we would also be protected in case of emergency.
A narrow track wound steeply up the lower slopes through dense forest, and then areas of bamboo and giant heather.
We kept a sharp lookout for animals and saw several waterbuck — timid, deer-like creatures — and colobus monkeys, with shaggy black and white coats, but there was no sign of anything large, grey and dangerous.
At about 10,000ft (3300m) we broke out of the trees into an area of grassland that looked vaguely like a Scottish moor and decided to camp for the night.
As we were pitching the tents, a herd of buffalo wandered by, this time plainly visible, less than 500 yards away.
They seemed unconcerned  by our presence, and the ranger said they were probably deliberately moving out of our way, but once again we were reminded that, even though this part of Elgon might look like Scotland, we were still most definitely in Africa.
Next day we followed a faint path that continued up a steep-sided valley towards the crater.
At several points the route was unclear, where the buffalo and other animals had churned the grass into a mass of muddy trails, so we trended upwards, away from the boggy sections and towards the crest of a broad ridge that formed one side of the river valley.
Along the crest of this ridge the rock had been exposed in several places, and eroded into a line of towers and pinnacles.
After a few hours' walking along the ridge we could clearly see Koitobos, one of the peaks surrounding the crater rim — a long, flat-topped buttress with a steep cone at one end, composed of large, dark brown, vertical columns.
To the left of this peak was Koitobos Col, a low gap in the crater rim, and we aimed straight across the top of the valley towards it.
We passed through the col, with the main peak of Koitobos towering up to our right, and then suddenly we were right on the edge of the rim with the giant bowl of the crater itself spread out below us.
The view was doubly breath-taking firstly because we were now at 13,000ft (4000m) and, after a long morning's walk were beginning to feel the effects of the thin air; and secondly because the vista before us was absolutely astounding.
The crater was about two miles across, almost perfectly circular, with several steep-sided peaks evenly placed around the rim.
The floor was undulating, covered in grass and a few patches of exposed rock.
A large stream, fed by several smaller tributaries, flowed across it, escaping through a cleft in the rim which formed a deep gorge.
On the far side of the crater, faint plumes of steam from a hot spring drifted into the air, and dotted across the grass were weird plants called groundsels, looking like dried cabbages on poles, and clumps of bright flowers, with red poker-shaped buds.
We established a ‘base-camp’ and spent the next two days exploring this bizarre landscape.
First we circled round the crater, walking across fine, open grassland or weaving our way through dense patches of groundsel, to bag Lower Elgon Peak, our highest point in Kenya so far.
Then, on the second day, we dropped down into the lowest part of the crater to reach the hot springs.
These were deep enough to bathe in and, after three days of sweaty walking, this open-air jacuzzi was most welcome!
During the four days we spent on Elgon we saw no other people and only one solitary gazelle.
Although the walking on the other ranges had been enjoyable, it was particularly pleasing to be in this wild and seldom-visited area, and to enjoy the unique feelings of solitude and peace that only mountains can inspire.
After Elgon we felt fit, strong and fully acclimatised.
So we left the remote mountains of the north and west and headed back towards the central highlands and Mount Kenya, the main objective of our visit.
The precaution paid off and we had no problems with the altitude, enjoying seven excellent days of walking and climbing.
Information
Mountain Walking in Kenya by David Else, published by Robertson McCarta (071 278 8276).
For flights to Kenya, or information about walking and camel trekking safaris, contact the Africa Travel Centre in London (071 387 1211).
In the Cherangani mountains, looking towards Sondhang, one of the highest peaks in the range.
Middle grade limestone
French without tears
You don't have to be climbing in the high E-grades to enjoy a visit to the south of France.
David Pickup offers some encouragement
Reading climbing magazines can be disheartening — almost a disincentive to going climbing, in fact!
It's bad enough looking through the new sections and the main articles and seeing nothing mentioned less than E4, 6b.
What can finish you off is reading about crags which ‘also contain worthwhile medium grade routes at E2, 5c.’
You think of the glow of pride that still lingers from your last HVS triumph with embarrassment and try to console yourself with the mitigating circumstances of age, heavy work responsibilities, duty to family, your back problem…
Don't be bullied into making excuses for yourself.
Obviously things have changed: not that long ago ‘medium grade’ meant VS and the centre of gravity has certainly moved up from there — but I bet the majority of climbers are still performing regularly at ‘only’HVS/E1.
This article suggests that there masses of superb routes in the VS to E1 range on the crags of Southern France — even on the most illustrious and intimidating of them.
Excellent climbing can be combined with a family holiday in beautiful surroundings, with a virtual guarantee of sunshine.
Remember these routes are all on limestone, which rarely gives good routes at less than VS, but a line of bolts, ending at a firmly anchored chain, up dry and solid rock, means that a much bolder approach can be adopted than on the polished, easier routes of Stoney or the vertical scree of Swanage.
Climbing outside the usual circuit of The Pass, The Lakes, Stanage etc can be a real boost to your enjoyment and, I think, to your performance.
It is difficult to equate French and British grades.
The received wisdom is that you knock off two letters from the French; so 5c becomes British 5a.
That's OK as a rough guide but I think that, at this level anyway, the routes are easier than this would suggest.
I have yet to find a French 5c as hard or as scary as Kipling Groove!
I will use the French system for the numerical grades from now on, since they will be used in topos and in conversation with continental climbers.
Let's jump in at the deep end — literally.
Verdon.
This has to be the most spectacular and atmospheric rock climbing area in Europe, outside the Alps.
It is well worth visiting just as a tourist or to do the five-hour walk along the bottom of the gorge.
But there are many routes at VS to E1, which are approached by one abseil from the rim.
This is the mental adjustment that has to be made at Verdon — you start your route with several hundred metres already below you, but once you rationalise this it's just a steep, very solid crag!
Most climbers park at the Belvedere de la Carelle , a viewing point on the loop road that follows the rim of the gorge and ends at the little village of La Palud.
A steep slab at right angles to the viewing balcony gives several routes at about VS and is a poseur's paradise as you have a continuous battery of video cameras pointing at you.
The problem here is that having so easy access and the largest concentration of easy routes, it is very crowded at holiday time.
A growing menace in Verdon is the determination of many climbers to lower down a pitch and then be top-roped up it.
Groups can monopolise a route for hours like this, or, worse still, drop someone on your head while you're trying to lead it!
Below and just to the right of the balcony are several one pitch climbs: Delirium très mince (6a) is probably the hardest.
A short walk from this belvedere takes you to a wonderful steep wall which at its outer edge is taken by the final pitches of some famous harder routes like Spitophage Pervers and Dingomaniaque.
It is covered with jugs and pockets and several HVS routes start at a ledge one abseil down, of which Triongle (5c) is typical.
A two-pitch 6a also comes up here — Arabe Dément.
The second pitch is often climbed as a single pitch and is a lot easier than it looks from the top.
This is a good place to abseil down the face without committing yourself to a hard route out again.
Four abseils down the corner (the first chain is on the path) will take you to Le Jardin , a hanging terrace complete with mini-forest.
From here Dalles Grises takes six pitched of VS worthwhile for the feeding of doing a longer route in such an impressive place.
Next to it goes a soft touch 6a, Cocoluche, which has an easily avoidable 6b section.
Another 6a is Afin que nul ne meure, which goes up a very dramatic section of cliff to the right of the famous Pichenibule.
It is never harder than HVS and highly recommended.
The best way of escaping from the top-ropers is to go on one of the long classics.
The longest, and easiest, is La Demande, which climbs the whole 500 metres of the face and gives a unique day's adventure.
You walk to it along the foot of the gorge, through tunnels at one point, and then climb about twelve pitches that are never harder than HVS.
The bolts have recently been renewed but traditional protection is also necessary.
There can be no other climb at this standard which gives such a big-wall feel.
I thoroughly recommend it but it is a long route, so take a water bottle and a good look at the weather.
It is perhaps worth mentioning a recently developed crag which is just off the Moustiers road, about four kilometres outside La Palud.
It is ideal for people who want to relax from the exposure of the gorge, or have children who want to do some climbing.
It is a low cliff, approached by a path, and can be done in all the beauty of the Verdon scenery but with none of the problems of the big cliffs.
You turn off the road into a wooded parked area opposite the first house on the right after leaving the village.
It is called the Falaise d'Ayen .
The other most famous crag in Provence is Buoux.
It has to be said that there are no easy routes here; even the 5cs would probably be a 6a anywhere else.
The older climbs often take steep cracks so gritstone aficionados should feel more at home.
Many of them are only followed for the first pitch, either because they finish up easier slabs (which might well suit some people) or become much harder.
The first pitch of Pilier des Formis (5c) is a good, steep bridging and jamming corner.
Near this is Les Barouilles (6a) whose crux is a thuggish jamming crack over a bulge.
A less strenuous 5c in this area is Gougousse.
The old test-piece Pepsicomane, a hard 6b, locates the sector which contains many classics  of 5c/6a: Franco-Belge, Marabunta, Touloum and others.
Although, as I've said, you cannot expect to find anything easy here, it is worth a visit.
It's a beautiful valley and if nothing else you can get a close look at some ridiculous overhanging walls decorated with lean supermen (and women) swinging around on one finger.
The cautionary phase here is watch where you're putting your feet.
There is plentiful evidence of the emetic of the climbing!
For sheer enjoyment of climbing at this standard the routes on the Clapis sector the Dentelles de Montmirail take some beating.
This is set in the hillside below the actual Dentelles — a line of rock blades which run like a dragon's spine along the top of the hill above the wine village of Gigondas, near Carpentras.
The Clapis area is reached by taking the road to the Col du Cayron, just before Gigondas, then a forestry road which goes right at the col and contours round the hill.
Park at the layby on the left just before the stone gateway to a vineyard about five kilometres along this road.
A pleasant 15-minute walk brings you to the first two faces, which contain dozens of routes at VS to E1.
There's no point picking out individual climbs — they're all good.
Whilst belaying you can look across a sweeping valley covered by vineyards and broken up by lines of cyprus trees.
It's a very beautiful place where the friendly feel of the climbs reflects the gentle scenery.
Not far away is the village of Buis les Baronnies, dominated by a steep hill topped by a spectacular blade of rock similar to those of the Dentelles.
The south face of this crag has many three and four pitch routes at 5b to 6a.
Many pitches are on steep slabs with wonderful ‘letter-box’ holds you can sink your whole hand in!
Here you gaze across the terraced vineyards and orchards to the bare limestone summit of Mont Vertoux.
Do Pilier Gris, La Rampe, Tourniayre, Bouscade, Voie des Trous and especially Bibus, which has to be one of the best HVS's in France!
For those too old, lazy or hungover to face the 15-minute slog up this hill, a crag has been developed just outside the village right beside the D546 road to Sederon.
It has many one-pitch routes, few of which are more than 6a.
There are two recently developed areas which are perfect for lesser mortals.
Orpiere, reached by turning west off the N75 Grenoble road about 25km north of Sisteron, is a little village which lies at the foot of a cirque of crags.
Looking up from the village — you can park next to the graveyard!
— there are three obvious sectors.
Those to the left (The Château and opposite (The Belleric) contain the majority of routes.
There are masses at 4c to 5c, the rock is sound and the protection excellent.
The sector to the right (The Quiquillon) has only a few hard climbs, but its other side, hidden from the village and approached from a parking place reached by driving through a housing estate just before the village, has many fine, steep routes, often with three pitches, at all standards.
There is one section on this face specially for beginners, so although the climbs are steep and 4c to 5b they are very well protected.
Again, this is a very friendly area ideal for building up muscles and confidence.
Among many, recommended are: Think Punk (5b), Racines du Ciel (6a), Moulinette Endimanché (6a), Tropique du Capricorne (5a), Violence and Passion (5b), Amour Toujours (6a), La Grotte (4c/5c/5b+), N'Importe où hors du Monde (5c/6a) and Bas les Pattes (5c+/6a).
The other similar development is at Orgon, near Cavaillon.
Another cirque of crags is riddled with excellently protected routes of VS to E1.
The sector called Le Mur du Six can be blitzed; apart from two or three 6b's virtually everything is 5c/6a, with a few even easier.
Crowds can be problem here too, especially at Easter.
There are many less well known, but very worthwhile places, which I suppose need to be dealt with in another article.
I have not included The Calanques.
By the time you've booby-trapped your car, or hired an armed guard for it, walked miles, found the crag and avoided the most polished routes you might not consider it worth the hassle.
This is obviously a wildly prejudiced view, but if you are keen to climb on sea cliffs, go to Cornwall or Pembroke!
A word about guidebooks.
They are expensive, specific to individual crags and often just lists of names and dotted lines up a very crude drawing of a face.
Unless you are spending a long time somewhere I suggest you simply turn up at a crag and scrounge a look at someone else's.
There'll always be someone around at the places described here and the grumpiness that seems to infect so many British crags these days hasn't spread here yet.
Most climbers, French or whatever, are very happy to swop information and generally be helpful.
Also, many names are painted on the bottom of the routes — ecologically unsound, but convenient!
Let the argument rage about the ethics of bolting.
These crags are already equipped, and there's nothing you can do about it except enjoy the security.
When in Rome etc.
Unless you are thinking of doing La Demande, put away your chocks and Friends and just take about a dozen quick-draws.
So, lay in a good stock of chalk, get your ear pierced and head for the sun.
There's no need to let E numbers damage your health!
Climbers on the first pitch of Pilier Gris, Buis les Baronnies (Photo Tom Prentice).
Louis Carraz (aged 12) on Empire du Soleil (5c) at Mur du Six, Orgon.
(Photo David Pickup).
Mountaineering Eastern Europe
Europe's Ice Crown
The demolition of the Iron Curtain has made the Caucasus much more accessible to western mountaineers.
Kev Reynolds tested the strength of Russian glasnost
When asked to name the highest mountain in Europe most people, I imagine, would nominate Mont Blanc.
But they'd be wrong.
Far to the east, on the very borders of Europe and Asia between the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea, a range of mountains of great beauty and ultra-alpine dimensions holds a central knot of peaks 1,000 metres higher than almost anything in the Alps.
This is, of course, the Caucasus, a landscape jewel in the crown of the USSR, until recently little known to Westerners other than a few privileged mountaineers lucky enough to be invited to climb there.
Historically, though, it was mountaineers from Britain who opened up the central part of the range in the heyday of Victorian adventure.
As Victor Saunders points out in his chapter on the Caucasus in The Mountains of Europe (Oxford Illustrated Press), of the ten highest summits, nine received their first ascent from members of the Alpine Club — admittedly including honorary member Vittorio Sella who was Italian, not British.
However, once the Revolution closed much of the USSR behind its invisible Iron Curtain, both bureaucratic difficulties and high expense effectively put these mountains out of reach to all but a few fortunate climbers.
Now, thanks to glasnost , the Caucasus range is being made more accessible, with some beautiful valleys headed by powerful and impressive peaks available for exploration.
The mountains have an undisputed lure, the Russian people a warmth and generosity that will come as a very pleasant surprise to all who arrive with an open mind and a readiness to respond with a smile.
With this new-found relaxation in official attitudes and an encouragingly open-hearted welcome from Russian climbers extending to visitors from the West, I travelled to the USSR on behalf of Sherpa Expeditions to see just what the Caucasus held in store.
It was to be a memorable trip in so many different ways.
So what is the highest mountain in Europe?
It is, of course, Elbrus, a huge dormant volcano with two summits at 5642 metres (18,510ft) and 5621m, the Western top being more than 800 metres higher than that of Mont Blanc.
And all around it rise some of the most shapely and challenging mountains in Europe: Ushba, Schkelda, Dykhtau, Koshtan Tau, the great block of Dongus Orun and countless others crying out for attention.
The Baskan Valley rises at the foot of Elbrus, with its subsidiary valleys of Cheget, Adyl Su and Adyr Su leading to some of the most spectacular climbing available.
In the upper Baskan accommodation is in multistorey hotels lively with the comings and goings of mountaineers of all nationalities.
Buses trundle up and down the valley easing the walk-in, and Elbrus even has cable-car access to the snowline and a mountain refuge, Priut, an hour or so above it.
It's almost like being in the Alps — but not quite.
Many of the peaks have routes on them that can be described as forming a midway point between hard Alpine and Himalayan standard — long ridge routes that take several days to accomplish; big face routes on rock and ice.
Others, like Schkelda and Ushba, have been partially developed but still have plenty of scope for new routes.
Yet the highest of them all, Elbrus, has a route that would be accessible to many a mountaineer with only one of two alpine seasons behind him; a route that demands no real technical expertise, but an ability to adapt to altitude, and a fair degree of stamina.
It's a long day out, but a most rewarding one, as I was to discover.
I began by taking the cable-car and the chairlift beyond it, then wandered up the lower glacier to the hut.
This came as something of a surprise, for nothing Victor Saunders had told me about the Priut refuge quite prepared me for my first sight of this three-storey silver sausage — an amazing futuristic construction with a dining room that looks out on a wonderland of peaks, and with some four-bedded dormitories which, if you're lucky enough to be allocated one, ensures a degree of comfort far different from alpine-style overcrowding.
Busy, yes, but since everything is strictly  regulated, there's bed-space for nearly everyone.
The hut stands at 4157 metres, which still leaves nearly 1500 metres to climb.
That's quite enough for one day at altitude, there and back.
I joined a small group of three Germans, a Dutchman and an American who, with a young interpreter and a terrifyingly fit-looking guide from Kiev, set out for Europe's icy crown at four o'clock one morning last July.
Before we'd gone far from the hut we had lost one of the Germans with sickness, and an hour later the Dutchman had to turn back when he had trouble with his crampons.
Two down, six to go.
It was cold that early in the morning, with a sliver of moon hanging among the stars.
But the stars soon lost their sheen and went out as the first strain of light eased away the darkness.
Then jagged peaks came out of cloud-filled valleys to steal all colouring from the sky and day flooded the glacier ahead, painting it with a palette of new-formed pastel shades.
We made it to the Pastukhov rocks without a break and steered left where the slope steepened considerably.
It was then we lost our guide, who was called to help a Bulgarian who'd had an accident.
Instead of accompanying us, he carried the Bulgarian bodily down to the refuge.
Three down, five to go.
In truth, a guide wasn't really necessary for our party that good-weather day.
The route was obvious, we were all experienced and we were not exactly alone.
But it was still comforting to have with us little Liena, our 19-year-old interpreter who was a very competent rock climber and all-round mountaineer, for she had climbed Elbrus in the past and could give assurance that we were on the right course.
She held the lead and quietly plodded upward through the crisp snow that covered the long Baskan Glacier.
In a way, climbing Elbrus is a bit like climbing Mont Blanc, for you'll seldom be alone.
So I was particularly pleased to find at one point, when I'd indulged in a lengthy photo session, that the rest of the party had gone over the brow and out of sight and I was left for a while with the world to myself.
It was a world of pristine beauty and breathless calm — all the wind was beyond the ridge — and I revelled in it.
On and upward, slow now with the altitude telling on legs and lungs alike, the route was measured in numbers of steps before a rest was needed.
And with every rest so the views increased.
They demanded attention, more photography, and the remainder of the party drew further away.
It didn't matter.
There was time.
Time to reach the top, and time to enjoy the way there.
Time, in fact, had ceased to have meaning.
Only now mattered, for the present moment was so filled with beauty that it smothered the effort of climbing, and with every gasp of breath came a physical response to the glory of the day.
Weariness was almost an essential part of it.
One had to earn the wonder of that morning.
The slope eased, and I came over what had seemed from below like a ridge, but in fact was merely the folding of ice from a long saddle that ran like a narrow valley between west and east summits.
Ahead I could see the rest of my party plodding towards the final slope that leads to the west (main) summit.
That summit was partially hidden, however, for when you get to the top of the final slope there's a level stretch that takes you just out of view.
It all looked so close, so welcoming, so immediate.
I'd meet up with the others again on top and we'd descend together.
Or so I thought.
But as I ploughed through the trough in the snow, a lone figure came weaving drunkenly towards me.
As we drew closer I recognised Liena, our interpreter.
As we met she slumped in the snow.
The altitude had suddenly hit her and she was feeling rough.
Not for her the summit this day; she'd left the others to it.
Four down, four to go.
I sat with her, gave her my drink bottle, stuffed her with glucose and encouraged her to rest for a while.
In half an hour she felt a lot better, but I knew now it would be my job to see her safely down to the hut.
I couldn't leave her to descend alone.
But then when she realised this, she offered to go to the east summit with me.
It would not be the main top, but a consolation prize.
‘You sure you're up to it?’
‘I think so,’ she said.
‘Then we'll take it very slowly’.
There was a good ice slope leading up to rime of rocks that would take us to this secondary top.
I went at it with pleasure, front-pointing happily and resting on my ski poles, watching Liena's progress with concern.
Fifty metres or so up the slope, she began to waver and looked ready to collapse again.
That was it.
The altitude was really affecting her and it was important to get her down now.
Five down, three to go!
We turned and descended slowly to the tracks we had made on the ascent earlier that morning, then sloughed our way down.
Twenty minutes later we met our guide, seated in the snow making radio contact with the hut.
Having delivered the injured Bulgarian to safety we had then returned to the ascent, hoping to catch our party.
He and Liena conversed for a while before he announced his decision to wait there for the return of Tony and Ferdy (the Germans), and Dave the American, asking me to take care of Liena on the way down.
It was a magnificent descent.
As we lost height, just the two of us in a landscape of dazzling white, so Liena regained strength and interest in the day, and we would stop every now and then to sit on our rucksacks in the snow that coated the glacier and gaze in awe at the beauty of the scene.
There were peaks in view that reminded me to the Matterhorn, of Ober Gabelhorn and Wellenkuppe.
There were others with stark walls that invited, with summit domes of brushed snow that gleamed in the sunshine; others with fish-tail crests or long ribs topped with cornices to remind me of scenes from the Himalaya.
But it was pointless trying to compare or liken these mountains to others, they had individual stature and grace, they rose with their own majesty from valleys I could only dream about.
We gazed at glaciers and icefalls, at clouds spiralling from far-off valleys, at soft blue shadows and crests of ice and dark, barren faces of rock.
I gave thanks that I had time and energy to simply enjoy and absorb.
Not for one moment — not then or since — did I regret being denied the summit.
For that very denial had, in fact, given me far more.
It had given me a world of wonder and time to draw it all in.
It was one of the finest mountain panoramas and one of the finest of mountain days.
It was a day to remember, to savour.
It was one of the very best I've spent in 30 years of climbing round the world.
Which just goes to prove, the summit is not all.
The icy crown of Europe is surrounded by jewels more lasting than diamonds.
Information
The Caucasus Mountains are partly in the state of Russia, partly in Georgia.
The border line between the two states runs across the summit of Elbrus.
There are several other peaks, apart from Elbrus, that are accessible to mountaineers of modest abilities.
One or two seasons of alpine experience on snow and ice should be sufficient background to tackle them.
Altitude sickness is probably the most common cause of failure to reach a summit.
No technical climbing skills are required, but double boots and crampions, ice axe or ski sticks, a good duvet and thermal gloves and overmitts are essential.
In 1991 Sherpa Expeditions are mounting trips to the Caucasus (Elbrus and elsewhere).
Details of these and other treks worldwide are also available from: Sherpa Expeditions, 131a Heston Road, Hounslow, Middlesex TW5 ORD.
The Caucasus contains Europe's highest mountain — Elbrus, over 18,500 feet high and surrounded by shapely, challenging peaks.
Above are two of them: Ushba and Dongus Orun (Photo Kev Reynolds).
Equipment
Backpacks
A wide range of backpacking sacks are available on the market.
Our reviewers selected four 60 litre plus models and weren't disappointed.
PULSAR 60 BC PLUS
Berghaus Approx retail: £107
This was the first Berghaus sack to incorporate ‘exploding sidepockets.’
Well, they don't literally explode, but they are gusseted and expand dramatically, taking the sack from 60 to 75 litres.
On a backpacking trip side pockets are a great benefit, allowing on-the-road brews, by giving easy access to water bottle, billies, stove and food.
These pockets are so voluminous that you can get a whole lot in besides — suntan lotion, midge repellent, etc.
Packing the side pockets requires some skill to balance the weight on either side, or the sack can feel uncomfortably lopsided.
Both pockets have two retaining straps with quick release buckles and this does mean a lot of excess strapping when the pockets aren't full.
Otherwise this a comfortable two-compartment sack with well padded hipbelt and shoulder straps.
The Pulsar range is only available in one size, adjustable over a limited range, unlike the Laser and Cyclops which will fit more sizes.
I'm about 5'7’ and found it fitted me fine, although as with all sacks, it took a couple of days of walking to get the best adjustment.
Walking 90 miles of the Pyrennean High Route with your house on your back is a fair test of any sack.
I have few comments to make, except that the sack survived very well, save for some sections of the Advent material used for the back and inside the shoulder straps, which were eaten by salt-seeking grasshoppers!
However, this is unusual and was fully repaired by Berghaus without quibble in double-quick time.
Tom Prentice 
BIG PACK XR TOP 70
UK distributor Ardblair Sports Approx retail: £130
This is indeed a big pack.
With a top capacity of some 75 litres it's large enough for a week's backpacking, or even extended expedition use, although I do have some doubts as to whether it could stand up to the rigours of expedition life.
When I first loaded up the pack I really thought it would be a bit top heavy — it's a longer and slimmer pack than most British models — but I was delighted to discover that my fears were unfounded.
Loaded up with about 45 pounds the carry was excellent, largely due to the very comfortable hipbelt and harness system.
Over several weekends I humped big loads, all over 40 pounds, and actually became very fond of this pack.
A lower compartment with a curved zipper offers easy and quick access to things like waterproofs or extra sweaters, and the main bag itself has a zip-out divider, which I found to be quite useful.
I tend to be rather disorganised when packing gear, so anything that helps me keep things in the right place has got to be a bonus.
Unlike most modern packs, the Big Top has an adjustable hip belt instead of an adjustable shoulder harness.
Unfortunately there are only three positions, so adjustability is limited, especially if you are tall or short.
The adjustment system is not particularly good, something of a nut-and-bolt operation, and looks as though it could well be vulnerable to failure as the bolt wears through the covering fabric.
On the plus side the harness and especially the hip belt is extremely comfortable, its extra wide shape wrapping round the hips with more than a hint of luxury.
All in all this is a very good pack for the price; made from 1000D Cordura, with two main compartments and four pockets, three in the lid and one in the front.
The top lid is detachable, and the main pack extends quite easily.
I was also attracted by the weight, only 1.9kg, which is uncharacteristically light among today's generally heavy packs.
Cameron McNeish 
Top: Berghaus 60 BC Plus with ‘exploding’ pockets.
Above: Backpack XR 70 Top.
CONDOR 60–80
Karrimor Approx retail: £170
The Condor combines Karrimor's sophisticated and fully adjustible SA back system with a cavernous internal space, just right for long expeditions and long distance backpacking.
A correctly fitting sack is essential to enjoyable walking, especially when carrying a heavy load and the SA harness and hip belt on the Condor have been beefed up a bit from the Jaguar and Panther models.
The SA system allows the shoulder straps to be adjusted up and down aluminium struts and held in place with straps and buckles, while the lumber support pad and hip belt remain stationary.
A smaller SA system is available for people with smaller backs, but unfortunately not on the Condor.
Size is quickly adjusted with compression straps and full-length zipped gussets, although this system all adds to the sack's 2.4kg.
Pockets, attached via Karrimor's Klasp system, boost capacity to a massive 100 litres.
This is a two compartment sack, the lower section accessed by a curved zip, with a drawcord divider designed to allow tent poles to run the whole length of the sack with the divider closed.
The lid has a large top pocket accessed by a two way zip.
I found this an extremely comfortable sack for lugging climbing equipment, tent and food into some of the more remote Scottish crags for a weekend's sport.
The sack won an award from the Design Council and comes with a number of extras including an eternal document wallet.
A couple of hooks in the main compartment allow the wallet to be hung inside.
Tom Prentice 
Lowe Alpamayo
UK distributor Europa Sport Approx retail: £136
Latest in a long line of internal frame alpine packs from Lowe, the Alpamayo has an easy-to-use stepless and lockable Wedge Adjustment back systems which makes achieving a good fit simple.
The shoulder straps, hipbelt and lumbar pad are all well padded and a chest strap is fitted as standard.
The packbag has two compartments with a zip-out dividing shelf.
A curved zip gives easy access to the lower compartment.
The lid is extendible and removable and has two zipped pockets, one inside, one out.
The pack also has side compression straps to which side pockets can be attached, wand pockets, two ice-axe loops and straps on the front of the lid from crampons or foam pad.
The material is Cordura.
Basic capacity is 70 litres but this can be increased by 20 litres using the extendible lid; side pockets add another 10 litres to give a maximum of 100 litres.
I've used the Alpamayo for backpacking and Nordic ski touring and found it very stable.
The pack is very comfortable with heavy loads (23+kg), due in the main to the excellent hipbelt which spreads the weight over the hips without causing the sore spots that occur with some belts.
The only flaw I can find with the Alpamayo is that the hipbelt won't fit small waists (those much below 80cm).
There is a Lady Almayo available, but the capacity is only 49 litres.
Otherwise I can't fault this pack.
Even the price is, these days, quite reasonable for a quality pack.
Chris Townsend 
Camming devices
Clog Quattros, HB Fix, Flexible Friend 3 and Lowe ball-nuts reviewed 
CLOG QUATTRO
Wild Country Approx. retail: £29 to £31
Considering the success of Flexible Friends, its a bit strange that Wild Country say they need to develop a twin wire camming device.
One can only presume that another, more competitive product was needed to counter the twin stem camming devices made by Hugh Banner and Faces.
Furthermore, twin stem devices are very popular in the USA and that's a big market.
The Quattro uses Friend cams with the twin stem giving a narrower profile, helping the device to fit in cracks and pockets too restricted for a Friend.
The stems are roll swaged to the wires in the same way as Flexible Friends.
Moulded nylon is used for the free-floating trigger bar which can be used with one or two fingers, inside or out.
I quite like the design of the Quattro, the trigger mechanism is very smooth and easy, although the thick thumbed may have trouble getting it past the tape loop.
If this is the case the end of the U-wire is broad enough to sit comfortably in the palm of the hand.
Sizes range from 1/2 to 2–1/2.
Tom Prentice 
THE FIX
hb Climbing Equipment Approx retail: £23.50 to £28.70
While camming devices with flexible stems give the most secure placements in awkward and horizontal placements, even they won't take repeated loading over an edge.
The Fix is a rigid camming device, with a specially forged alloy stem, designed to give a higher level of strength to the stem.
In practical terms this means The Fix can be placed in a horizontal crack with a large proportion of the stem sticking out and fallen on in the knowledge that the device has been specifically designed to give an increased safety margin.
As well as strengthening the stem The Fix has a new trigger mechanism for retracting the cams.
A finger lever on each side is hinged in the middle and allows greater control of individual sets of cams, particularly useful when trying to extract the unit.
To finish off, there's a small and neat Spectra sling in a wide eye designed to allow easy movement of the sling and reduce walking.
They come in sizes 1 to 3.8.
Tom Prentice 
FLEXIBLE FRIEND 3
Wild Country Approx retail £36
‘They’ said it couldn't be done.
‘They’ said the head would be so big it would be unwieldy.
In fact ‘they’ said a lot of things when Wild Country decided to make a Flexible Friend 3.
Most of it has been proved wrong.
On the face of it, the Friend 3 seems the model least likely to benefit from flexibility — the thick stem interferes little with the working of the cams, both designs have the same strength rating and there's only a few grams difference in weight between them.
Yet a flexible stem makes such a difference; horizontal placements, angled placements, pockets, all gobbled up by its voracious cams.
Certainly my wire is yet to get bent and distorted with use — the real durability test of any flexible camming device.
But, having used a number of different twin stem units I've found the single wire stem much more versatile, although sometimes a little harder to remove from stubborn placements.
Tom Prentice 
LOWE BALL 1–3
UK distributor Allcord Approx retail: £25.50
Mechanical, sliding nut devices never seem to have become that popular in Britain.
Perhaps it's just that we don't have enough of those long, thin granite cracks.
Yet climbers appear willing to put an inordinate amount of faith in a long line of brass nuts and then show surprise when they pull like a hot knife through butter.
Lowe ball-nuts have been around for a while and they are one of the best devices of this  sort that I have used so far.
The principle is a simple one.
A semi-circular wedge is moved up and down an inclined groove in an aluminium nut, with a trigger.
The wedge is retracted when the device is placed and then released.
When fallen on, the wedge is retained in the groove and forced against the nut and up the incline.
But, the width of the crack prevents this and the nut remains solid.
The wires are soldered into the nut and the device appears well engineered.
One benefit of this over similar units is that the groove retains the semi-circular wedge, so it is hard to separate this moveable part from the nut.
On some units this can be done by rotating and will cause total failure.
Ball-nuts fit in all sorts of parallel sided, finger-tip cracks.
Deeper cracks are undoubtedly the best — this isn't a unit for marginal placements or pockets.
Potentially a life-saver.
Tom Prentice 
Top: HB Fix 2-1-2 extra strength stem for horizontal placements.
Above: Clog Quattros 1/2 and 1 1/2.
Above: Flexible Friend 3.
Above: Lowe ball-nut placed in a horizontal finger-tip crack.
Below: Lowe Ball-nut showing working parts
Reports
LAKES
By Bill Birkett
Langdale bolt wrangle
Dave Birkett, following toprope practice and utilising two poor pegs for protection, led Daws Rides The Shovelhead.
This a direct finish to Centrefold on Raven Crag Langdale (the one above the Old Dungeon Ghyll Hotel).
While only offering about 20ft of new climbing, it solves the main challenge of the capping roof: a formidable test piece with potentially fatal consequences in the event of a fall.
He graded it an unlikely E7 6c — unlikely in that it is, in all probability, much harder.
Having done the climb in this manner, Dave thought the route unjustified in this state, feeling that as the pegs deteriorated with age no-one would repeat it.
Presumably this was important to him (it always was to me and I can fully understand this) for he wrote the route up in the new routes books asking how others would feel if he subsequently went back and placed a single bolt runner to protect the route.
Of the climbers who made written comment, the majority were in favour of a bolt placement.
It should also be said that people of influence, who haven't put it in writing, also openly agreed with the placing of a bolt.
Discussing the matter with me, Dave (my nephew) put forward his convictions regarding the bolt and sought my feelings.
These were mixed.
I was sad and angry that he should want to place a bolt and go so radically against the grain; sympathetic with Dave's strong conviction; peeved that my own route — Centrefold — had been usurped.
While acknowledging his argument for the bolt placement, I advised that he had done the route; if others thought a bolt should be placed, let someone else go ahead and place it.
Shortly afterwards Dave placed a protection bolt in the roof just above the pegs.
The blatant placing of a bolt in a Lakeland mountain crag produced considerable reaction throughout the rock climbing fraternity.
Removal squads descended on the Lakes, threatening and verbally abusing and the bolt has now been hacksawed through, leaving a useless stump.
Personal reflections
My gut reaction has always been against the placing of bolts, and I've never used them.
For the last few years I have sat on the sidelines watching bolt-protected climbing mushrooming throughout the USA, Europe and, not least, Britain: in quarries, but also, let's be completely truthful, on natural crags.
Scotland, Yorkshire, the Peak District, Wales, the South West and so on.
But not in the Lake District — the last bastion.
My own personal statement was to refrain from the practice and to convey my anti feelings in print whenever possible (see my book Modern Rock and Ice Climbing , chapter 7 — Ethics).
Then it started on Cumbrian limestone, blossomed to Lakeland quarries and so, finally, to Raven Crag.
And when the perpetrator was my own nephew, it couldn't have hit any harder.
Dave is very much his own man — young and impulsive and finally the arbiter of his own convictions.
Yet virtually the first time we climbed together, hadn't we spent nigh on a month clipping bolts in France and loving it?
So inevitably, I feel at least partly responsible.
Forced to examine the situation anew, I have come to the following conclusions:
•
It really must be the cutting edge of the climbing fraternity that decides the ethics — those who are active at the forefront of climbing development.
Influence depends upon respect.
•
Sawing through the bolt on Raven is an act of stupid vandalism.
As an anti-bolt statement it fails for a number of important reasons:
1)
The anonymous person who did it does not have the respect of the locals currently active on the scene and the bolt will, in all probability, be replaced.
2)
It makes no ethical statement whatsoever.
A route must be led, on sight, without clipping the bolt, to make an ethical statement.
Only then can it be deemed unnecessary and removed.
3)
From an environmental point of view a bolt (galvanised or stainless steel) causes less impact than a peg.
All pegs that are placed damage the cracks (look at The Nose on El Cap for the ultimate statement on the process).
All regular steel pegs rot and become unsafe and then unusable in a relatively short space of time.
In conclusion
After first leading the route without the bolt, Dave certainly has the respect of his Lakeland contemporaries.
If anyone had the right to place the bolt it was him.
Having done this, after carefully considering his actions, he has made a statement which may well become the accepted ethic of Lakeland/British climbing.
Many will say ‘About time’.
My main fear, I think, is that bolt ladders will appear on beautiful, clean stretches of rock.
This is precisely what has happened at Malham (and though I find it visually offensive I still climb there, as do hundreds of others).
Analysing the situation on Lakeland rhyolite more closely, I think this has probably been a false fear.
The placing of bolts should be self-regulating.
Anyone capable of sight-leading a route protected by bolts without clipping them has the right to remove them (a regular bolt hole closed by a rock dust/epoxy mix is virtually undetectable, and no meaningful harm will have been done to the crag environment).
No bolts should be placed where removable ‘natural’ gear (nuts, Friends etc) can be placed.
No retro-bolting should take place without a common consensus of opinion, including that of the first ascentionists.
I have not reached these conclusions easily; they involved much discussion and soul-searching.
Really it's a case of head versus heart.
I say that because I think it's the logical way free rock climbing will progress.
I find it hard to accept.
I would rather have no bolts and the romantic ethic — leave it for the next generation if it requires a bolt.
But it looks like the next generation is here.
PEAK
by Graeme Alderson
Cheedale, as ever, still yields a few goodies on its more open crags.
On Two Tier, Simon Cundy claimed his ‘Reward’ by climbing the wall right of The Tier Drop Explodes past the girdle break to a BB.
On the same crag Speedmetal Bedmoshin at E1 5c, which takes the wall right of Big Jesus Trashcan, is the work of the Honda works team Tony Coutts and J. Dunlop.
Over the river on Riverside Buttress, Chris Wright had his morning cup of Maxwellhouse (ingredients: flavour enhancer E6 5b and preservative 2BR) on the wall right of the Max Museum.
At t'other end (and t'other side) of t'Dale, Chee Torr has a rare addition, with the wall between Changeling and Doggone Groove done: Doggy Style at E3/4 6b.
Tideswell Dale has also seen some activity.
On Junction Buttress, Malc Taylor put All my Pegs in one Basket and then left them in the obvious overhanging crack, which is now E7 6c.
A little bit further up (or is it down?) the valley on Freda's Buttress, M. Evans and A. Thornton have been ‘Frolic’ ing around on the rightward starting corner at the lefthand end of the buttress, the result being E5 4c.
Over on the brown stuff, Andy Barker has been seeking out those remaining gems.
Partnered by Martin Veale and the Famous Chris Ellis, he crowned himself the King o'Crookrise at E36a, attempting to usurp Chris's crown, up the arete left of the Cioch LeftHand.
At Wharncliffe, Andy added a direct finish to Ca ne Fait Rien to give Well Now It Is at E26a.
At Banford Quarry, the evergreen pair of Stu Bolton and Sebastian Grieve had their Big Excellent Adventure on the obvious arete at E5 6b, before moving across to Staffordshire for more excellent adventures on Never Never Land, pair of them making 2nd and 3rd ascents of this nasty E6 6b.
Back on the white(ish) stuff, John Welford made the second ascent of Simon Nadin's 1987 testpiece Gonads giving it F8a+, and then red-pointed Out of my Tree at Raven Tor as a warm down.
John, who is a full time shift worker, has been polishing off most the Peak's F8a+ in good time, having also recently red-pointed Boat Boys, Chimes of Freedom as well as making the 6th ascent of Zeke the Freak (F8b).
One little snippet from Down Under, where Peak raider Robin Barker sneaked the 3rd (and first Sheffield ie British!) ascent of Stefan Glowacz's Lord of the Rings, one of Australia's two grade 32's (F8b or E8 6c).
They may beat us at cricket and bike racing, but we are better on crags!
That other well known Peak raider, Ben Moon, the real king o'Crookrise, has just repeated Jerry Moffatt's testpiece of last year, Liquid Amber at L.P.T, confirming grade and quality.
Ben has also been giving those Yorkshire boys a good seeing-to with an on-sight flash of Kleptomanis (F8a) at the Holywood Bowl, a one-day ascent of the Yorkshire Ripper (F8b) at Kilnsey, and he got Magnetic Fields (F8a/8a+) first red-point.
All of this and he's not even recovering from any broken bones (Ben's specialty over the last few years has been to break a bone and then come back and do or repeat the world's hardest route!)
Maybe he'd better go and buy himself a new bike, that's always a good way to break bits of the human body.
Wales
by Andy Newton
Although at the time of writing the weather has reverted to the usual Icelandic summer, there was considerable new route activity in April and May.
Not too much has been done in the mountains, hardly surprising given the length of time they have been dry, but Dai Lampard snatched a great ascent with Mother of Mercy E5 6a.
This lies on Craig Yr Ysfa, taking the groove between Amadeus and Agrippa and was climbed with N. Bonnet and C. Fletcher.
Rather lower down, a new crag was discovered by Niget and Dave Carson — Craig y Frank Carson — which lies parallel to, but behind, Carreg Hyll Drem.
The discoverers added a number of routes, the best of which seem to be Cookie Monster E7 6b, and the most popular Wagtail E3 5b.
Ben Pritchard added Sad Cow E7 6b, and Gwion Hughes and Ann Bierd contributed Caleb E2 5b.
George Smith, aided and abetted by Martin Crook, unearthed Big-Fin-Reef-Squid E5 6b on the left of Hyll Drem itself before going on to tackle the fins of rock between Primus and Burner, resulting in Of All the Bars in All the World, E6 6b; apparently every other move involves a knee-bar, but probably only if you're as tall as George — the rest of us should merely levitate.
Pat Littlejohn and P. Judge made Craig Y Dynewydd a little more worthy of the walk with Skyline E2 5c and End of an Era E4 6a, which disappointed a couple of ole cronies who had designs on those lines!
Steve Meyers claimed one of the very few good problems left at Tremadog when he found a way through the steep ground right of Erebus, providing No Holds Barred E6 6c.
Gogarth has also seen action from Meyers, who braved the wall right of Hunger to provide Extinction E7/8 6b — an obviously scary number.
Paul and Ben Pritchard fared slightly more amenably with Food, E6 6b which takes a direct line on Graduation Ceremony and was climbed with CT's Speed Feed in Holyhead in mind!
On North Stack Wall The Wrath of Deadly Lampshades E5 6b was a contribution to the real bad route names competition from Alistair Hopkins and George Smith.
The route takes cracks left of Le Bon Sauveur to surely fill the last remaining square metre of unclimbed rock on this wall.
Thunderbird Zawn has also been the scene of recent activity with routes from The Wraith, Steve Haston and your correspondent.
It seems that there is always someone around to make life difficult: sometime this spring the New Routes book was stolen from Pete's Eats.
This not only gives guidebook compilers a hard time but also stops new lines getting repeated while the weather's good.
If you wrote up a route between September 1990 and April 1991 it would be helpful if you repeated the description in the new book.
Information on the whereabouts of the old book would also be welcome!
Scotland
by Rick Campbell
He made such a fine job of the earth, the sea and the hills; He made an equally fine job of the creatures, large and small that run around on the land; He even gave us the best crags in the world…
So why did He make such a pig's ear of the climate?
Throughout this miserable summer, Scottish climbers have been forced to climb in places like Malham Cove: hardly the place to nourish the soul (and the routes are a bit hard!).
However, some new routes have been climbed by various intrepid amphibians.
On the Etive slabs Rab and Chris Anderson climbed three lines on the section of slab some 70m right of the Coffin Stone, and gave them punny names as usual.
They are: Seams Blanc E3 5b, Vein Rouge E1 5a and Raspberry Ripple E2 5a.
In Glen Nevis, Gary Latter climbed the vitrified cornflake wall up left from the George Wall.
The grade is E5/b 6a: a fine effort from Gary not 50 yards from where he broke his back last year!
It's called Carpe Diem.
Up above Loch Morar is the craggy hill top by the name of Sgurr Bhuide.
Near the summit on a steep, south-facing crag Going for the Jugular, which climbs the left-hand crack up the steep buttress on the left.
The grade is E5 6b and is described (by myself, oops) as being ‘totally brilliant’.
The team was Rick Campbell and Gary Latter.
In North Queensferry Quarry, George MacIntyre led Nearly An Angel, E3 6a, having briefly inspected the line the previous year.
Very briefly, it has to be said: next time clip both abseil ropes, George…
Books
Ticking off the Alps and rambling with Captain Budworth
The Alpine 4000m peaks by the classic routes
by Richard Goedeke, Diadem, £12.99
The Weisshorn, Jungfrau, Grandes Jorasses and Mont Blanc will be familiar names, but have you heard of the Parrotspitze of Vincent Pyramide?
They, too, top the magic 4000m mark.
In all there are 61 independent 4000m alpine peaks with a further 89 neighbouring peaks (peaklets) which are considered subsidiary summits.
The analogy with Munros and their associated Tops is obvious, and to collect either is likely to involve above average commitment and dedication over a sustained period of years, and require a broad spectrum of mountaineering skills.
And just as there are books on the Munros, Richard Goedeke has written a guide to their alpine equivalents, describing each peak and the easiest way up it.
The text follows a distinct format.
There is an introductory passage describing the peak and its climbing history, followed by grading, time, objective dangers and pleasures (views and historical significance).
A detailed description of the hut approach and the climb itself then follows, and if necessary the descent is described as well.
I couldn't fault the descriptions, although I did find it a little irritating to be several paragraphs into each section before the actual route of ascent was revealed.
I feel it would have been better to include this as a subheading to each mountain.
Ascents are individually described by peak, but logical linked ascents such as the Nadelgrat or the Mont Blanc-Maudit-Tacul traverse are also mentioned.
A simple map is provided for each peak, and there are a number of topos.
The book is unashamededly aimed at peak baggers, although the author does let slip the occasional tedium of a pre-defined list.
For example the Balmenhorn —‘4000er it may be, but mountain it is not…there are a couple of dozen more prominent adjacent peaks exactly like this nunatak.’
Or the pleasure of climbing the Ludwigshohe ‘Another 4000er crossed off.’
In general, though, the book is written in a fresh style and conveys a real enthusiasm for the high alpine peaks.
Other worthwhile routes, both easy and difficult, are listed at the end of each chapter — which might inspire some to venture off the beaten track or on to more technically exacting ascents, although some of the gradings are a little overdone.
For instance, the note describing the Central Pillar of Freney is likely to tickle a few egos: ‘ED+, rock to VI and A3, mixed — at the end of the world and, given bad luck, delivered up to all the hells of weather.’
Overall the book works well.
It's small enough to carry on the hill, but the historical introductions get together to give a good potted history of the Golden Age of Alpinism.
It also manages to tie the Alps together as one whole, treating them as a range of mountains rather than just a list of routes.
Time will tell whether collecting the alpine 4000ers will become as popular as Munro bagging, but for a real challenge, how about going for a complete set of 150 peaks and 4000m tops!
Simon Richardson
The Rock Climbing Guide to Europe
by David Jones, The Crowood Press, £12.95
Let's start by saying that David Jones has done an excellent job here.
As with any guidebook, especially one which covers an area as large as this, you can pick out numerous faults.
However, since the practicality and advantages of this guide far outweigh any problems, I don't propose to mention any of its negative points.
Being a regular to the attractions of the Continent and its sunnier climes, I started by skimming through and picking out a few of the relatively recent crags that I have visited, such as Ceuse &Oppede le Vieux: they are in — fine.
Then I remembered the location of a luxurious caravan a relative has near Perpignan, so I looked up the guide, and found that there are a number of crags nearby — even better.
So guess where one of my weeks will be spent this summer?
Surface only scratched and the guide has proved its worth already.
The introduction tells you how to decipher the crag listings which provide information such as: crag name, sun hours, number of routes (including number in the grades), province and crag number (to locate the crag on the maps which are sprinkled throughout).
Descriptions give a brief introduction about the climbing, rock type, size and style of route, together with the type of in situ protection.
There is also information on where the local topos/guides can be bought (that is assuming they are still in stock by the time you get there).
If camping is a problem in an area, specific sites are suggested.
Finally and most importantly there are simple and easy-to-follow directions on how to find each crag, including the page and cross-reference of that crag on the road atlas (a list of the road atlases used is given).
A lot of information has been crammed into this guide and if you intend going to the Continent, then this is one item you should definitely put on your list of things to take.
Rab Anderson
A Fortnight's Ramble to the Lakes
by A Rambler (Capt. J. Budworth), Preston Publishing, £5.95
As time goes by, and our mountain activities acquire a gloss of history, there is an increasing interest in early accounts of the hills and those who ventured into them.
The Lake District has seen new editions of Wordsworth's and Harriet Martineau's guides, and now comes the reminiscences of Capt. Budworth, who walked the fells in 1792.
Budworth is particularly important because he was the first fell walker to record his ascents with the same attitude and feelings as we have today.
His ascent of Helvellyn is fascinating, not only because it can be followed in detail, but also because of his comment on his guide Partridge, from the Salutation Inn:
‘Partridge, who acts as guide, as boots, postilion, and boatman, at the Salutation Inn, might have brought us down an easier descent; but as he had been out with a chaise all night, he was perhaps induced, from fatigue, to take us the nearest way.
We never rested five minutes that he did not fall asleep and gave us a little nasal music, and which hindered me nothing so fully as I wished to have done.
I think it proper to give this caution, that future ramblers may make choice of which road they please.
As to honest Partridge, he meant no wrong, for he is so bold a mountaineer, he can go anywhere that a sheep can; and I dare say thinks every person can do the same.’
He died in 1815.
The book forms a compact paperback and is available post free from Preston Publishing, Wansbeck, Bethesda Street, Upper Basildon, Berks RG8 8NT.
Walt Unsworth 
Rockgear
by Layne Gerrard, Ten Speed Press (imported by Airlift Book Co) £12.95
My first thought on picking up this very substantial volume, was how on earth can information on rock gear fill so much space.
The answer quickly became apparent: there is an awful lot of padding.
Not only does the text tend to be repetitious but each item of gear if prefaced by an otherwise blank page informing us of the Key Point to be gleaned in that section, pearls of wisdom such as: ‘A file is useful for sharpening the edges of your…hooks.
You can buy a fine metal file at any hardware store’ or ‘Superglue is not healthy.
It contains Cyanoacrylate which is a powerful bonding chemical.’
Sub-headings seem to take up an inordinate amount of space; do we really need separate headings for ‘What is Tincture of Benzoin’, ‘How to use Tincture of Benzoin’, ‘How to carry Tincture of Benzoin’, and ‘Where to buy Tincture of Benzoin’?
There are copious drawings by the author, perhaps too copious.
Is it necessary to use half a page to illustrate a light walking boot or a full page for a very small drawing of a three-print sit-bag?
And, after a while, I found the repeated use of the same illustrations from Whymper's ‘Scrambles in the Alps’ irritating.
Basically, the book could be condensed into half the space without losing anything of value.
What of the actual content?
Well, it is written by an American for Americans so some of the gear and some of the terminology will be unfamiliar to British climbers, but most of it is very relevant.
There are sensible discussions of things like bolts, falling off and full-body harnesses, interesting snippets such as wire-brushing the soles of your rock-boots occasionally or using superglue to protect your fingersss and, of course, lots of detail on gear: nine pages on pulleys, six on chalk bags, six on copperheads, four on gear slings etc, etc.
However, problems arise when the author describes how to actually use the gear.
The illustration of double ropes being used to protect a second on a traverse is incorrect; the drawing of a double-fisherman's knot is actually of a single-fisherman's; the section on rigging anchors seems very sketchy with no consideration of using the rope to equally load them, rather than slings; different types of shunt are discussed for self-protection on abseils but there is no mention of the cheap, simple prussik knot as an alternative, or the even more effective French prussik linking the controlling rope to the leg-loop of the harness.
And so on.
My main complaint about this book, however, is that it encourages us to become not so much rock climbers as consumers.
Although the author pays lip-service to the idea of climbing as a form of meditation and the reward lying in the process rather than the achievement, the main thrust seems to lie in the opposite direction, in the acquisition of things.
There is little here about improvising or making do.
Instead, preceding even the title page is the injunction ‘Immediately after buying this book, send off for the eight mail order catalogues listed on p.357’.
Sensible advice, really, but its positioning in the book says everything.
The means are becoming as important as the ends.
Although there is much good stuff here and I shall undoubtedly find it a useful reference, on putting it down my chief desire was to out and solo something barefoot!
Rob Callister
Nepal: The Mountains of Heaven
by David Paterson, Hamish Hamilton, £30.00
By a remarkable coincidence this book arrived on my desk for review a matter of weeks after I had first seen it and browsed through it in a bookshop in Kathmandu.
I chose not to buy it that day, so I was interested to see whether a longer look at it would change those initial impressions.
This work is described as a personal celebration of the mountains and landscapes of Nepal, but it turns out to be a pictorial account of six treks and climbs in the more popular areas of the country.
Fortunately David Peterson's obvious talent and self-confessed passion for the country have enabled him to present a balanced and interesting collection of images.
The high peaks, the glaciers, the lowland valleys, the paddy fields, the people, the culture and the colour have all been captured to equal perfection.
To his credit he has avoided giving us familiar images of Everest, Machhapuchhare and the like, and instead has chosen to be more creative in his choice of viewpoints, angles and lighting.
Some shots, particularly the front and rear covers of the book, are quite stunning.
But others are less impressive and I wonder how and why they made it through to the final selection.
The chapter on Annapurna contains several images which I felt were well below the overall standard.
Perhaps they have lost something in the printing, but the reader will never know.
If you are looking for a picture book on Nepal for a present or a memento of a trip then this is certainly as good as, if not better than, many of its rivals.
But my opinion of the book is much the same now as it was that day in Kathmandu.
No matter how well intentioned an author may be, no matter how good his work is considered, a lavish photographic book of this kind, and of this price, must stand or fall on the sheer quality of the pictures selected and the way in which they are presented.
Frankly there just isn't enough original or really exceptional material to tempt me to part with thirty pounds of my hard-earned cash.
Ian Evans
Walking the Great Views
by Roland Smith, David and Charles, £16.99
When this book crashed through my letterbox recently and I read the title my heart sank.
Not another ‘Great Walks’ book.
Then I reread the title: ‘Walking the Great Views’.
Could that mean a great view, but not necessarily a great approach walk?
My concerns were unfounded because Roland Smith has managed to select walks over 60 of some of Britain's finest hill and high places which offer excellent viewpoints ranging from Quiraing on Skye to the Dorset Coast.
The outings are grouped under such unusual headings as ‘Folklore and Legend’, ‘Monarchs of all they Surveyed’, ‘Monumental Viewpoints’ and ‘Literary Landscapes’.
Not surprisingly the choice of ‘Great Views’ is a very personal one and many favourites are missing, including my own cherished ones of the Cuillins from Elgol or the summit of Sgurr na Stri at the entrance to Loch Coruisk, or Rannoch Moor seen from Buachaille Etive Mor at the head of Glen Coe.
In fact only a few of Scotland's great views are included but many well known ones elsewhere are covered such as Cat Bells and Snowdon, plus a few less familiar ones such as Mow Cop on the edge of the Cheshire Hills and Bennachie in Aberdeenshire.
The various viewpoints and their approach walks are entertainingly described in the author's competent, easy to read style and contain anecdotes, useful information about the legends, history and geology of the area along with other fascinating disclosures.
The lengths of the outings varies from a gentle stroll to long mountain days, details of which are shown on maps in the now familiar pen and ink style of Mark Richards.
The inclusion of John Cleare's name on the book cover usually guarantees quality photographs, and the colour and atmospheric black and white images were no disappointment.
Let's face it, it's usually good photographs that attract walkers to a specific place and often convey far more than words can.
After seeing the picture of Scafell Massif taken in evening sunshine from the summit of Yewbarrow, I couldn't help wishing I'd been there.
Roland Smith has provided us with a fascinating and interesting book that should whet the appetite of many hill walkers and will certainly provide a wealth of useful background information when planning a walk to some of the ‘Great Viewpoints’ of Britain.
Highly recommended.
Jerry Rawson 
Mail
A season ticket that does climbers no favours
In your May issue you carried a letter from two climbers from Tunbridge Wells who announced that they had negotiated a season ticket agreement for users of High Rocks.
This has not been publicised elsewhere to date, and that is the one redeeming feature of this otherwise unwelcome and ill-considered arrangement.
The BMC and the London and SE Area Committee wish to dissociate themselves completely from this scheme, and recommend that would-be visitors to High Rocks do so too.
We are implacably opposed to the concept of payment to climb.
There are, however, two longstanding situations on Southern Sandstone where payment of an admission fee has been customary for many years.
High Rocks is one of these.
The other site has showed a commendably restrained policy in its charge levels for many years, and has been rewarded by a regular and large climbing clientele.
Not so High Rocks, whose owners have steadily raised their admission charges in the last few years, threatened climbers with access restrictions, and put nothing at all back into the maintenance of the rocks, save to enclose them in a sturdy, reinforced fence.
The entry charge now stands at £3 per climber, with threats to confiscate the equipment of climbers not paying.
No convincing answer has been given as to why picnickers only pay £2.
Efforts over a prolonged period by the BMC and the Sandstone Climbing Club have failed to win reductions in the excessive charges here, but these efforts will continue.
The season ticket agreement John Horscroft and Pat Shilland hope climbers will avidly welcome ever more firmly establishes that climbers should be asked to pay for their climbing.
To the casual or occasional visitor to High Rocks, the season ticket agreement may seem irrelevant at the moment — just something to please climbers living nearby who go there regularly.
But given the discrimination shown against climbers in the present price structure, how long might it be before you climb at High Rocks by season ticket, or prior arrangement and private fee only?
No, this arrangement does climbers no favours.
Given the delicate access positions at other sandstone crags it is an inept and unhelpful piece of privateering.
It will serve only to complicate further an already very difficult situation.
There are no easy answers at High Rocks, but privately negotiated fee deals can only serve to make the right solution even harder to find.
Tom Phillips, Chairman, BMC London and SE Area.
Holiday camps or bothies?
Over the last five years the bothies have become something of an open invitation for exploitation.
They are now regularly used by groups of people involved in Outward Bound activities and school parties.
Visiting certain bothies in the Affric and Dundonnel areas during 1989, I was amazed to find things regulated by a dinner gong!
On Skye during the summer of 1990, I visited a bothy not far from the Cuillins to find certain people staying two weeks (fishing), one week (canoeing) and no room at the inn for overnighters.
This year I have come across a group using a bothy as a base from which to run mountain walking courses.
Reading their literature, it would appear that their charges include accommodation.
Making money out of the use of bothies!
The MBA do a superlative job maintaining these simple buildings, and set out a clear set of guidelines for their useage.
Something has obviously got to be done to make sure that these simple shelters, which are there to offer overnight shelter for anyone in need of it, are not used for holiday centres and the like.
It would also appear that many of the people who abuse the code of these shelters are not members of the MBA, so contribute nothing to their maintenance.
If the current trend continues, the landowners to whom the bothies belong, could decide that enough is enough and withdraw their permission for usage.
Mike Wilson-Roberts, Christchurch, Dorset.
Two fine hills, but they are not Corbetts
While I agree heartily with Cameron McNeish's praise of the Scottish Mountaineering Club volume ‘The Corbetts’(May issue, p.58), I feel constrained to point out that Stac Pollaidh and Suilven are not Corbetts, as he records.
As Cameron recounts, they are both fine hills, but both are considerably below 2,500ft, the Stac especially so.
James Petre, Oakley, Bedfordshire.
One top too many is against tradition
The article ‘Snowdon the Hard Way’ by Jerry Rawson (June 1991) revived many pleasant memories of long days spent over 40 years ago in the mountains of Snowdonia.
This was in a period when I was based at Llandudno and every available minute of spare time was spent in climbing and scrambling among those delightful hills.
We scaled the 3000'ers many times individually but never completed the walk which incorporated them all, although two unsuccessful attempts were made.
On the first occasion, when a clear moonlight night was forecast, the most atrocious storm developed and we were forced to spend an uncomfortable few hours benighted near the summit of Elidir Fawr.
On the second occasion we were overcome by severe stomach pains (a touch of food poisoning, I guess), which caused us to abandon the attempt, again on Elidir Fawr — obviously our jinx mountain.
I notice that Jerry refers to the ‘15 3000 feet tops’.
We always understood there to be 14 and in his book ‘I Bought A Mountain’, Thomas Firbank defines the walk as covering ‘the fourteen peaks in Wales which exceed three thousand feet in height.
It seems that Carnedd Uchaf has crept into the list, but is this not subsidiary summit of Foel Gras rather than a 3000'er in its own right?
A small point to raise maybe, but as a sentimental traditionalist I feel we should stick to the original figure of 14 as adopted by those early pioneers.
Colin Cowman, Grange Over Sands, Cumbria 
Selling off Lakeland's climbing soul for bolts
An open letter to the climbers who recently placed a bolt on Raven Crag, Langdale.
Dear Lads,
I wish to congratulate you on exposing the hypocrisy of the Lakeland climbing scene.
At last someone has had the nerve to bring the area in line with the rest of British climbing: no longer will it be a quiet backwater resigned to a few lines in the climbing press about some brilliant new VDiff on a puny little crag in the back of beyond.
Now the area will be seen for what it has to offer: superb technical lines of good rock and ace protection.
In the 70s the efforts of the locals were eclipsed by the activities in North Wales and the Peak.
We didn't shout loud enough; those who came left impressed, but kept quiet in order to preserve their own reputations.
After all, if you're a superstar, it's no good admitting that you found a route given three grades easier than your latest creation anything but a path!
In the 80s we fell even further behind.
Micro-routes in the Duddon are no match, after all, for a route on any of the limestone crags in Yorkshire or Derbyshire.
As for Scafell, well, how often can you climb there?
How often have you climbed there?
I've forgotten when I was last there.
Get my drift?
Why get all worked up about a crag that is unclimable for most of the time?
The young lads have the right idea.
Get to where the action is and hang in there; sod Scafell, those routes can wait until later.
Climbing has no rules, as the Old Guard are proud of telling us, so what's wrong with what you've done?
Nothing, no rules!
So the Old Guard have got upset — well sod 'em eh?
After all, they've had their say years ago and made a meal of it: undeclared top-roping, hold chipping, secret rests, etc.
Now it's your turn.
No underhand tactics as then, everything out in the open, everyone operating to the same rules.
The new rules.
Where to next?
Let the dust settle then go for broke — by the time anyone realises what's going on it will be too late and everyone can have a good time and relax.
The dinosaurs can have Scafell until they die out, then if anyone can still be bothered to walk (!) up there, I'm sure a line or two of bolts wouldn't go amiss.
In the end I suppose you'll get everything, which is what you wanted all along really but haven't dared to say it.
Though what you'll actually get is nothing.
No past, no future, no hope.
Just thought you ought to know before you sell your soul; you can't get it back.
Bob Wightman, Llanberis, Gwynedd.
* See our Lakes Report in this issue for the definitive story on the Raven Crag bolt placement.
Stares, whispers and the route to colour prejudice
I have noticed recently that in the climbing world some consideration is being given to the lack of participation by black people.
I have certainly been party to one or two discussions amongst friends, and as part of my work I take groups of young people away on climbing trips, most to very white-dominated areas where the mere appearance of a black face in a pub or at a crag is enough to cause stares and whispers.
This has resulted in discussions about the occurrence and effects of racism.
Well this is all very admirable, you might say, and isn't the climbing world just as helpful and welcoming to one newcomer as the next?
In answer I would draw your attention to the report from the Lakes in your April issue, where incidental mention is given to a climb named ‘Blind Nigger’.
Might I suggest to whoever has the power — the first ascentionist, the local guidebook compilers, that this and any other racist names are changed.
After all, I'm sure a climb title which includes obcenities would not be accepted by a guidebook.
To me and, I'm sure, to many others, the title above is far more offensive.
Susan Williams, London.
Range West is in the best hands
Although agreeing in principle with the views expressed by Jim Perrin in his article ‘Range War’(May issue), I feel I must take issue with one or two of his conclusions, which I think require further examination.
Opening an area such as this to the public means just that, and together with genuine walkers and climbers arrive the wild flower pickers, the egg stealers and the litter louts.
And despite the Ramblers' Association suggestion of management etc, we have not made too good a job of protecting other wilderness areas open to the public.
Secondly, it appears that the military do not use Range West much.
This statement can defend both sides of the argument.
1)
Therefore, why can't the public have access.
2)
If the military don't use the area often, they cannot cause as much distress to the natural environment as opening it to the public would.
Lastly, I think Jim Perrin is being more than generous to suggest that climbers and walkers have an exemplary record in observing agreements and their respect for the environment.
One has only to read recent editions of Climber and Hill Walker to see evidence of atrocious behaviour by climbers and walkers: abuse, noise, breaking down fences, fouling areas with litter and excrement and climbing in areas when specifically requested to desist for good safety reasons — at Cheddar and Upper Pentrwyn.
The mindless few maybe, but what happens when these people have access to areas like Range West?
Another gate closed for ever, another genuine unspoilt area ruined.
Maybe it's best left in military hands until we have a generation of truly environmentally friendly humans.
P.S. I have no military connections.
David Beere, Finchfield, Wolverhampton.
Zero credibility
Peter Livesey
One of the problems with not getting killed climbing while still young is that you reach such a great age that your standard falls mercilessly, and it is only possible to relive great exploits by reading about yourself in guidebooks.
I was practising this the other day, in preparation for the time when my climbing standard drops slightly, and was surprised to read some interesting facts about myself.
Did you know, for instance, that I led Birdman on Kilnsey Crag, or that I spent several days top-roping and practising Zero on Idwal's Suicide Wall?
Now, while I'm quite happy to take the credit for Birdman I'm not sure that Ron Fawcett feels the same way, but what really bugs me is Zero.
That route I always consider one of the best and most adventurous of my climbing career; most adventurous because this very serious route (even by today's standards — or perhaps especially by today's standards) was first attempted on sight.
A precarious failure at 50 feet was followed immediately by an abseil inspection, then a week later by the ascent itself.
That was a total of two visits to the crag, some 3 hours in all.
Where the printed story came from I don't know, but basically it was made up somewhere along the line; a fairy story.
Those fairy stories prompted me to read a couple of the latest guidebooks, one Welsh and one from the Lake District, plus a recent history of Lakeland rock climbing.
In each case the accuracy rate concerning events of which I had first-hand knowledge was about 50%; half the information correct, half wrong.
I have to assume therefore that the rest is equally bad and that little of what we read in guidebooks as climbing history should be taken seriously.
I'm not the only one to notice this; Geoff Birtles has related his own experiences with fairy-story history in the recent Gogarth guide.
More serious perhaps was Paul Ross and his brush with the FRCC guidebook writers.
Ross, on his return to Britain, went back into the new route business as an outsider to the establishment scene — a position I know only too well.
On one Borrowdale route, Deja Vu, he left a long sling dangling down to aid an injured second.
A chance observer saw the sling being used by the second and soon the rumour was circulating that Paul Ross had used ‘dubious tactics’ on Prodigal Sons (a later companion route to Deja Vu).
Some time later that same rumour appeared as historical fact in Ron Kenyon's Borrowdale Guidebook.
That the wrong route was cited is bad enough, but the inclusion of unchecked rumour is inexcusable, and unfortunately turns error into fact.
No matter how much Ross protests in magazines, they are only transitory statements, while the guide is a permanent tablet of stone where history, now made, is reprinted wholesale in the next edition.
Ross's experience struck an identical chord with me, for John Sheard and I had exactly the same experience on the first ascent of Face Route where the second, hanging on a sling to remove gear, was observed by a member of the establishment and a rumour immediately started that was rapidly translated into guidebook writer's ‘fact’.
Ross explains the process precisely in pointing out that most guidebook history is written from the editor's perspective, and he believes what he wants to believe.
This means in practical terms that friends and club are OK, and are to be believed, while ‘outsiders’ of all kinds are not, nor are they worth contacting to check information.
The history of Lakeland climbing is therefore the history, according to the FRCC, of the guide editor's climbing friends, and similarly in Wales, history is the CC perspective of what went on.
Nor is the distortion of fact or the deification of rumour the only problem; there is also the considerable problem of the temporal nature of commenting on climbing style.
What could legitimately be described as ‘dubious tactics’ on Malham Cove in the early 70s would have been regarded as quite normal in the early 60s and would be considered style of pathological purity in the 90s.
A typical example is the 1978 Tremadoc Guidebook comment after the first ascent of Fingerlicker in 1975, where alone in that guide it was pointed out that the route had only been climbed after two ‘Yo-Yo's’(according to the 1975 definition of a Yo-Yo).
The 1975 definition was an exceptionally pure version that had not been current previously and only lasted a year or two.
Once the definition has changed (and that was before publication of the guide) then the criticism of the style of ascent could have been dropped, but of course it was not, and can still be seen amidst ascents where the rock is scarcely touched.
This is not a plea for historical recorders to get their act together and check facts first-hand — I think the forces of establishment and vested interest are too strong for that to work, and anyway it wouldn't solve all the problems.
No, forget the history in guidebooks completely, leave history to the writers of climbing epics where no one cares if the facts are bent to make a good story — or do they?
