THE PRACTICAL HOME IMPROVEMENT MAGAZINE SEPTEMBER 1991 £1.40 DIY DO IT YOURSELF POWER TESTS CERAMICS FOR WALLS &FLOORS SPECIAL JOBS SECTION BRIGHT IDEAS Decorating £5,000 GUINNESS HOLIDAY COMPETITION £2,500 MAKITA POWER TOOLS TO BE WON 
CONTENTS
4 UPDATE
What's making the news in home improvements.
More on 34, 41, 54
5 WOODFINISHING
We help you choose the best materials for the precise finish you want.
14 LIGHTING
You choose lighting for mood and activity — here's a complete house guide
21 JOBBING NOTEBOOK
This month you can find out how to:
Fix kitchen door fronts
Produce a limed wood finish
Repoint brickwork
Fit a fire surround
Lay a slab path
Plumb-in a bath
Stencil on varnish
Lay a workshop base
Roof a conservatory
Fix fence posts
35 CERAMIC TILES
What to use on walls, floors and worksurfaces
43 TOOL TESTS
This month we look at a
Rotary hammer drill
Orbital sander
All-purpose saw
Disc grinder
47 LETTERS
Share ideas, opinions, and hints with other readers — and there's a prize for this month's star letter
48 SPECIAL OFFERS
Wall chaser, bench sander, non-return valve, RCD adaptor
50 NEXT MONTH
Find out what's in your next DIY — including a fabulous free gift
51 £2,500 COMPETITION
Win a compendium of Makita power tools
52 GARDENWISE
This month we look at gardens which have a rustic appeal
57 £5,000 COMPETITION
Another chance to win a fabulous Caribbean holiday with Guinness Original
ADVICE CENTRE
58 FIDOR
How the Fibre Building Board Organisation can help you
59 EXTERIOR PAINTS
What to use on rendered or pebbledashed walls
60 GARDENING
Creative lighting, bird protection, containers, bulbs and safety
63 PATIO DOORS
If you are in the market for new doors, read this first
64 FINANCIAL AND REGULATIONS
Insurance, debit cards and building notices are discussed
65 PROBLEMS
Our experts answer another batch of your questions
70 BUILDER'S DIARY
Our professional casts his eye over burglar alarms
NEWS UPdate
HALF-PRICE TICKETS FOR SELF BUILD HOMES SHOW
The second Self Build Homes Show is being held in the Great Hall at Alexandra Palace, from 18 to 22 September.
It will be at least three times larger than the first show, held last year, and will represent every area of self build, from finance to land plots, as well as house design ‘packages’ and most related building and interior products.
One of the major features is a timber-framed house which will be under construction throughout the show, allowing visitors to see the various elements and skills involved.
A free seminar programme entitled A step by step guide to building your own home will also run hourly throughout the show.
And to keep the children amused, a Lego competition will be held in the creche, so that junior selfbuilders can also build their own houses, and perhaps win some Lego, too.
Tickets are £5, or £2.50 for senior citizens or children between 5 and 16.
But anyone booking in advance can get their tickets half-price.
The telephone hotline is 081 547 2080.
HIGH GLOSS LACQUER NOW IN AEROSOL FORM
International Paint's well-established Jet-Dry Japlac now also comes in a handy aerosol to complement the existing range of standard cans, available in 750ml, 500ml, 250ml, and 125ml sizes, and to facilitate application in awkward areas, or where speed and convenience are prime considerations.
Japlac is a high gloss lacquer which produces a mirror-like finish that leaves ordinary paints looking lacklustre in comparison.
Its hard, shiny finish means it not only looks smart, but withstands knocks, bumps and scrapes.
It is easy to apply and can be used on wood or metal, inside or out, and its quick-drying formulation means it is touch-dry in two hours and ready for over-coating in six.
Japlac complies with BS 5665 Part 3 1989 and the European Toy Safety Standard EN71 Part 3 1988, enabling you to give an exceptionally glossy finish to toys, nursery furniture, climbing frames, and indeed any surface where the safety of a child is of tantamount importance.
The 300ml aerosol dispenser is ozone-friendly and CFC free.
It is available in five attractive colours — Jet Black, Arctic White, Signal Red, Gold, Silver — and Clear.
It costs £4.99 from good d-i-y stores.
DOUBLE OR TRIPLE GLAZED READY-TO-FIT REPLACEMENT WINDOWS
Fitting replacement windows is not necessarily a job for a professional builder.
Swedhouse ‘instant’ windows are supplied ready for installation by the more accomplished d-i-yer.
They are made to measure and supplied pre-glazed — double or triple — with all the fittings and screws in place ready for immediate, trouble-free installation (as long as measuring up has been done carefully, and the hole for the window is square).
The frames are made from Swedish redwood timber which comes from regularly replanted forests, and they are engineered to keep the warmth in and the cold out.
The new windows are wedged in the window opening, fixed to the sides of the opening with frame fixers, and the gap between the window frame and the wall is sealed with nonabsorbent flexible sealant.
MODULAR ALUMINIUM TOWER IS ANSWER TO ACCESS PROBLEMS
The 6×2ft Modular Aluminium Tower launched by Youngman's could be the all-in-one answer to household access problems.
The simple to erect system is designed for d-i-y and light trade use, and consists of three main packs; a Base pack (£132), Platform pack (£108), and Extender pack (£135).
Different combinations of the packs provide a range of heights from 12ft (3.6m) to 24ft (7.2m).
all braces are fitted with locking claws, and the hinged working platform is made of non-slip Combiboard for additional safety.
The tower can be used indoors and out, and the lightweight system can be transported on a car roof rack, and is also easy to store.
Adaptable for staircase use, the tower includes adjustable base plates.
WOODCARE Finished to perfection
Staining or bleaching, varnishing or waxing…choosing and using the most suitable finish is the secret of good wood care.
It may seem strange to start by describing the best method of removing old finishes, but there is probably more work done on renovating old furniture and existing woodwork than on new wood.
OFF WITH THE OLD
Old finishes can be removed with a blow-lamp, hot air stripper, by sanding or with a solvent paint and the varnish remover.
However, all but the last method can damage the wood, which is not important if the wood is to be painted, as this will obliterate any damage.
The best method of removing old finishes from wood that is to be re-finished with a transparent or semitransparent coating, is with a solvent paint and varnish remover.
There are several types available; those containing methylene chloride are quick acting and are usually free from caustic or acid and will not harm the wood.
The surface should then be damped again with the paint remover and the wood rubbed with the grain with small pieces of grade 2 or 3 steel wool, wiping afterwards with rag and white spirit.
The solvent type paint removers do not normally raise the grain and it is not necessary to sand after stripping.
This is important, as many woods, particularly mahogany, acquire a beautiful patina on ageing, which is immediately destroyed by even the lightest sanding.
STARTING FROM SCRATCH
All the processes that follow apply to wood that has been stripped and to articles made with new wood.
Bleaching : is a process that may be necessary, either to remove stains caused by weathering, ink or water, or if the article that is to be finished is required in a lighter shade.
Wood can always be stained to a darker shade than its present state, but cannot be lightened other than by bleaching.
Wood can be lightened with oxalic acid, but as it is a poison it would be better to use a proprietary two part bleach.
Bleach will only work on bare timber, so any existing finish must be removed first.
The ‘A’ or No. 1 solution is then applied liberally and after about 10 minutes the second solution is applied.
Do not worry that the first solution will actually make the wood darker.
It is applied to turn the wood into an alkaline condition, so that when the ‘B’ or No. 2 solution is applied, it will liberate oxygen, thus bleaching the wood.
The second solution can be left for several hours, or overnight, when the wood should then be scrubbed with clean water to which a little acetic acid has been added.
If the wood is very badly stained, it may require two applications of bleach.
If the  wood has been bleached because a light coloured timber is required, then a very pale finish must be applied to prevent darkening the surface.
Suitable finishes are transparent or white French polish, a cold cure lacquer or an acrylic varnish.
Wood dye : if the colour of wood is to be changed, then probably the most dramatic effect is obtained when the bare wood is coloured with a penetrating wood dye.
At one time the word ‘dye’ was used for exotic colours, such as reds, blues etc, and the word ‘stain’was used when colouring woods to natural wood shades.
A true dye or stain does not leave anything on the surface that will obscure the grain, unlike a paint which is made by grinding pigments into a binding medium and, because they are opaque, will leave the wood a uniform colour.
In recent years the situation has become confused, because there are now exterior wood stains available, which differ from a true dye or stain, as they leave a coloured film on the surface of the wood and do not require another finish to be applied over them.
When wood is coloured with a penetrating dye and then sealed with a transparent finish, there is no change in colour, other than after the first coat of finish has been applied, whereas with an exterior type of wood stain, each extra coat will make the surface deeper in colour.
Until a few years ago most wood dyes tended to fade in strong sunlight, but now many of them contain transparent iron oxides, which do not fade and can be used on interior and exterior woodwork.
Wood dyes are best applied with a cloth, because if applied with a brush, there will be dark areas where the brush first touches the wood.
It is important that if wood is being dyed, areas round joints are completely free from any glue, as this will prevent the dye penetrating and will leave a lightercoloured patch.
Some woods, such as mahogany and teak, darken considerably even when a completely clear finish is applied and before dyeing wood.
It is always advisable to try a small area first with the finish that is to be used, or damp a small area with water, as this will give some indication of the change in shade that will occur.
There are a wide range of finishes which can be used after the preparation process is complete.
Which one to use depends, to some extent, upon the appearance which you wish to achieve, which may be an oiled or waxed appearance, a high gloss, satin or matt finish, and on what is being finished.
Floors, for instance, require finishes that are hard, water resistant, but at the same time flexible, so that the surface is not brittle and will not crack when objects are moved across the surface.
Furniture requires finishes that can be made perfectly smooth to the touch and  that can be brought to a mirror-like gloss, if required.
Some finishes can be used for all purposes.
Beeswax : is one of the oldest types of finish, although most modern waxes now contain other waxes, such as Carnauba or micro-crystalline waxes, to improve the performance.
Paste waxes are best when applied to bare wood, while liquid waxes are suitable for use on furniture that has been French polished or lacquered.
Any type of wood can be waxed, although it is usually applied to pine or oak.
Before waxing, the wood should be sealed with shellac sanding sealer or white or transparent French polish, as these will prevent the wax soaking into the wood and will enable a shine to be obtained with much less effort.
Waxing is a very laborious process and the wood will require re-waxing at regular intervals.
Oil : is probably the easiest way of finishing wood.
Linseed and boiled linseed oil are the traditional types but both are slow drying; linseed oil takes approximately 3 days and boiled oil 24 hours.
Modern oils, such as teak and Danish oils, dry in 4–6 hours and usually contain tung oil, which has far better water resistance and durability than linseed oil.
Teak oils leave the wood with a slight sheen; Danish oil with a natural low lustre.
All oils can be applied with a brush or with a cloth, the surplus being wiped off with clean rag or paper kitchen towel.
It is important that the rags or paper kitchen towel are not left crumpled up after use, as they can catch fire, due to spontaneous combustion.
They should be either burnt or laid out flat to dry, or kept in an airtight tin.
It is advisable to apply three coats of oil to new wood, and as oiling does not leave a thick protective film on the surface (as does a varnish), exterior wood has to be re-oiled at least once a year to keep the surface in good condition.
Varnishes : are probably the most commonly used finishing materials.
A varnish is a transparent coating based on drying oils, resins and solvents.
There is now a growing trend towards the manufacture of environmental friendly finishes which are solvent-free, and acrylic varnishes are being produced by many manufacturers.
Traditional varnishes dry by evaporation of the solvents and then by oxidisation and polymerisation of the oils and resins.
Acrylic varnishes are emulsions of dispersed acrylic resin, coalescing agents and water.
They are milky-white whilst liquid, but when dry are completely clear and transparent.
As the water evaporates, the coalescing agents cause the acrylic dispersion to fuse and form the surface coating.
They are very quick drying, with a low odour, and have the advantage that the brushes can be cleaned with water.
Because they contain water, they must be stored in conditions where the temperature will not drop below 5°C, and must not be applied in cold, damp conditions, or when there is high humidity.
As they are fast drying, usually about 30 minutes, the application technique is slightly different from the traditional varnishes.
They should not be ‘brushed out’ in the same manner, but applied fairly liberally across the grain and then the brush should be drawn lightly along the surface with the grain.
As they contain water, the first application may cause the grain to raise on some woods, and a light sanding is recommended before applying the second coat.
Some manufacturers recommend a light sanding between the second and third coats and it is important, as with all types of products mentioned, that the instructions are read carefully before use.
Although acrylic varnishes are dry in about 30 minutes, they continue to harden over a period of 24–48 hours, but here again this time may vary between different makes.
Acrylic varnishes have good resistance to heat and alcohol, but are not resistant to strong solvents.
Gloss acrylic varnishes are available, but the gloss is not as high as that obtained with a polyurethane or oil varnish.
Varnish stains : as well as using dyes, wood can also be coloured using varnish stains.
These are clear varnishes to which either dyestuffs or transparent pigments, or both, have been added.
Unlike wood dyes, varnish stains can be applied to previously coated surfaces, as long as they are clean and free from wax or grease.
As a varnish stain colours and finishes in one operation, they are very popular, but it should be noted that because the colour is in the finish, each extra coat will make the surface darker, and if the varnish stain is not applied evenly, where the film is thicker, the colour will be darker.
If the desired shade is obtained with one coat of varnish stain, then further protection should be given with extra coats of clear gloss, satin or matt varnish.
French polish : furniture usually requires a finish of higher quality and appearance than one applied to, for instance, doors or wall cladding.
The traditional finish is French polish, which is so-called because it was invented by a French cabinet maker in about 1825.
French polish is a solution of shellac dissolved in alcohol, which is applied with a ‘rubber’ made by wrapping a piece of cotton wool in cotton or linen rag.
French polish is usually a dark brown colour, but as a collective noun it includes button, white, transparent and garnet polishes, which are made with various types of shellac.
Button polish is usually a more orange colour than French, and garnet is darker.
White French polish is milky-white and is used on bleached wood and marquetry, and in all cases where it is desired to keep the wood as light as possible.
French polishing requires a higher degree of skill than any other method of wood finishing, and there is no doubt that when done properly it gives a very lovely appearance to furniture.
However, it is easily marked by heat, solvents and scratching and if starting with bare wood, it would be better to use a cold cure lacquer.
Cold cure lacquers : are usually based on urea formaldehyde and melamine and ‘cure’ after mixing with a hardener.
Once mixed, the shelf life in an open container is about 3 days, but this can be extended if the container is sealed after mixing, and kept in a cool place.
Unlike French polish, cold cure lacquers can be applied liberally and it is not necessary to use a good quality brush.
Three coats are usually sufficient if a high gloss finish is required.
The last coat is rubbed down with wet and dry paper and brought to a high gloss with a burnishing cream.
Alternatively, the surface can be rubbed with grade 00 or 000 steel wool and wax polish to produce a smooth satin or matt finish.
When dry the surface is resistant to heat, solvents and abrasion.
APPLICATION
Traditional varnishes should always be applied in a warm, dry atmosphere and, when used inside, in a well-ventilated area.
It is also important that the areas where the varnish is being applied are dust-free and that you are not wearing clothes which will shed dust or fibres on to the surface.
Clear gloss varnishes should not be stirred or shaken before use, as this would cause air bubbles to form which would might spoil the appearance of the varnish.
The non-drip thixotropic varnishes should also not be stirred, as this would destroy the gel structure.
Satin and matt varnishes and varnish stains must, however, be thoroughly stirred before use until there is no more sediment on the bottom of the container.
THis is because they contain special matting agents, which cause the varnishes to dry with an irregular surface, so that light is reflected at random angles.
If these matting agents are not thoroughly dispersed before application, then the varnishes or varnish stains will dry to a gloss.
Varnishes can be used direct from the container if the diameter is large enough for the brush being used, but it is better to pour the varnish into a paint kettle which has a wire stretched across the middle, so that excess varnish can be scraped off on the wire.
Use a good quality paint or varnish brush, and the size should be suitable for the surface being coated.
If varnishing a door, it is better to use a 2½ or 3in brush, rather than 1 or 1½in.
If varnishing a floor, use a 6in brush or even a roller.
When using a new brush, try to remove all loose bristles by opening them with your fingers and thumbs, pulling out any loose bristles which may appear.
The brush should be suspended in linseed oil, so that the bristles are in the oil, but not touching the bottom of the container, as this would distort the bristles.
Leave the brush in the oil for several hours, or longer, and then remove it and squeeze out the oil and work the brush backwards and forwards over plain brown paper or the side of a clean carton.
Wash in white spirit or a proprietary brush cleaner.
Straighten the bristles after cleaning and wrap with clean plain paper, so that the bristles maintain their shape, and then lay it on its side until it is required for use.
A good varnish brush is expensive — a 2in brush can cost as much as £10, but when used correctly and cleaned properly after use, it will last for many years and produce excellent results.
BRUSH STROKES
When applying a varnish, the brush should be dipped into it for about one-third of the length of the bristles and then, holding the brush in a similar way to a pencil, with the fingers holding the metal ferrule and the handle resting between the thumb and first finger, spread the varnish quickly and evenly over a small area.
The first coat should be applied across the grain and then with the grain, to make sure that the surface has been covered completely.
Repeat the process on an adjacent area, drawing the full brush towards the previously coated area.
Use light even strokes so as not to cause bubbles to form in the film.
The first coat of varnish applied to new wood can be thinned with approximately 10% of white spirit.
When the first coat is dry, lightly sand with fine glasspaper or wet and dry paper to remove any nibs or particles of dust which may have settled on the surface.
Further coats of varnish should be applied undiluted and with care to avoid runs and an uneven surface.
Apply the second and subsequent coats, initially with the grain, with even backward and forward strokes, then with slightly less pressure across the grain, and finally with the grain again, drawing the tips of the bristles very lightly across the surface.
This procedure should ensure that no brush marks are left to mar the appearance.
If, despite the precautions to remove loose bristles, one does drag on to the varnish, remove it using the corner tip of the brush, or with a toothpick or cocktail stick.
EXTERIOR WOODWORK
The choice of finishes for exterior woodwork is not as great as that for interior woodwork.
Exterior wood stains, which can be solvent or water based, tend to mask the grain of the wood, but have good resistance to ultra-violet light and do not fail by peeling or flaking.
Some exterior finishes are microporous which, it is claimed, allows the wood to breathe.
Other manufacturers prefer to use flexible alkyds, as it is the continual movement of external wood as the moisture content varies, that causes varnishes to crack.
Once this occurs moisture penetrates, causing the varnish to flake or peel from the surface.
A marine or yacht varnish is recommended when a clear film is required that will not obliterate or mask the natural grain configuration of the wood.
It is important that at least three coats are applied and that the top and bottom edges are given at least one coat to prevent moisture being absorbed.
THE IMPORTANCE OF SANDING DOWN
It is important to remember that however carefully the wood is finished, any imperfections will be apparent, particularly if the work is finished with a high gloss.
New wood must be fine sanded and if an orbital sander has been used, it is essential that the final sanding is done by hand with the grain, otherwise small circular marks will be seen in the finish.
Small cracks, nail holes or sunken screws can be filled with woodstopping or plastic wood .
Unfortunately, where woodstopping has been used, it is usually apparent as it breaks the natural grain configuration.
The stopped areas can be made less noticeable by imitating the grain with a fine artist's brush and paint, usually using a mixture of ochres and siennas, according to the type of wood.
ACHIEVING A MIRROR FINISH
If a high gloss or mirror finish is required, then it is necessary to use either a grainfiller to fill the pores of the wood, or to apply extra coats of finish, rubbing down between coats until the grain has been filled.
Grainfillers are available in paste form, which can be thinned with white spirit before use.
The filler is rubbed hard across the surface of the wood, wiping off the surplus filler with a clean cloth.
If wood is to be stained as well as filled, then it is possible with some makes to thin the filler with the wood dye, so that dyeing and filling can be carried out in one operation.
A ‘malachite’ finish created by combing a piece of card in circular motions across a still wet coat of acrylic varnish (Cuprinol) Below: the water-resistant qualities of Cuprinol's Decorative Wood Preserver
Above: The beauty of natural wood — a combination of clear and coloured varnishes from Ronseal
Below: Hall floorway finished with Cuprinol's Enhance for Interior Floors
Above: Antique pitch pine in the stairway of a Victorian house.
Treads and spindles have been stripped and finished with Langlow's Patina
Left: Gloss and satin varnishes applied to a panelled hallway (Ronseal)
Left &below: Liberon's Black Bison wax is available in thirteen wood tints.
Applied with fine steel wool, the wax can darken faded wood and provide a resistant finish.
Coloured woodwork (Dulux Woodtones)
Left: Sadolin's Classic is water repellent and contains fungicide
Right: Yacht varnish provides a durable coating (International Paint)
LIGHTING Let there be light
Follow our guide to updating and improving the lighting in your home.
Most homes have inadequate provision for lighting.
The average builder will probably have put in just a single central pendant light in each room, so we have to add extra lights by plugging them into precious socket outlets (precious because the builder doesn't put enough of these in either!).
But if you're prepared to learn how to do the wiring and to do the ‘building’ work (and redecorating) involved, it's not difficult to improve the lighting arrangements in your home by fitting new permanent lights, and by doing something about the switching set-up.
LIGHTING DESIGN
Light performs four main functions in the home.
It can provide general lighting so you can move around safely and see more or less what you are doing when it's dark outside;task lighting when you want more concentrated light in a particular area for a particular job (including reading);mood lighting to provide different atmospheres in different rooms at different times; and it can also be used to illuminate the outside of the home.
Before planning your new lighting, you will want to think about how you use different rooms, and whether the lighting will have to cope with more than one use of a room (often the case in sitting rooms).
It's a good idea to experiment with different set-ups, using temporary light fittings until you are happy, before making holes in the wall or the ceiling to fit the lights.
General lighting means having around 20 watts of normal tungsten light (or 10 watts of fluorescent) for every square metre of floor area.
Pendant lights, usually hanging on their own flex from a ceiling rose, are the most common form of general tungsten lighting — ideally, there shouldn't be just one light in the centre of a room, but two or more around the room, including over any table.
Decorative pendants, supported by a chain or screwed brass rod, may need a special ceiling fitting (see FITTING LIGHTS TO THE CEILING ).
General light can also be provided by recessed ceiling lights (either downlighters, which give a pool of light, or eyeball spotlights, where the beam is adjustable), or tracklights attached to the ceiling, fitted with spots, spotlight clusters and flush-fitting ceiling lights.
Recessed lights, positioned over the front edge of a worktop, are particularly effective in kitchens; enclosed ceiling light fittings are good for bathrooms.
In other rooms, interesting effects can be achieved with wallmounted or free-standing uplighters, which bounce their light off the ceiling, and with special recessed ceiling lights which ‘wash’ a wall with light.
Fluorescent lights are mounted on the ceiling, and are cheaper to run than normal lights, but the colour is not so ‘warm’— though you can get special warm white tubes, usually on order.
Task lighting is best achieved with individual lights — desk lamps, striplights under cupboards (in the kitchen), standard lamps, and table lamps.
These types of light fitting are the easiest to install, as you simply plug them into a 13amp socket — provided, that is, there is a convenient socket.
The lights must be positioned (or shielded) to avoid glare, and must be placed so you are not working in your own shadow.
Task lighting must be combined with general lighting — on its own, it could give you eyestrain.
Mood lighting can be used not only to create an atmosphere, but also to highlight features of the house, such as decorative cornices, ornaments (especially inside glass-fronted cupboards), or pictures.
Several different types of light fitting can  be used, and some of the best effects can be achieved with the use of pastel-coloured light bulbs, and by fitting dimmer switches.
Outside lights include lanterns, bulkhead lights and other designs, with the important proviso that the fitting is weatherproof.
A special type of outside light is the security light , which is switched on by a passive infra-red (PIR) sensor (usually, but not always, part of the light fitting), whenever someone approaches.
LOW-VOLTAGE LIGHTS
Most house lighting runs at the full mains voltage of 240 volts.
The latest type of lighting, widely used in shops and offices, but only recently available for the home, is low voltage lighting.
This runs at 12 volts, and has two big advantages over normal lighting: the bulbs can be very much smaller (and often come in small attractive fittings), and the light bulbs last longer, and are much cheaper to run.
The disadvantage is that they require a transformer to step down the voltage, which either means fairly expensive fittings (incorporating the transformer so they can replace existing fittings), or expensive wiring from a central transformer to the light fittings — low voltage means high current, so the wires have to be much bigger than normal lighting wiring.
LAMPS
A ‘lamp’ is the correct name for what most of us call a light bulb, and the common or garden light bulb is known as a GLS (general lighting service) lamp.
These days, GLS lamps come in a variety of designs (including some with glitter on them) and in ‘soft’ light versions, as well as pastel shades.
Many spotlights, recessed lights and other modern fittings are designed to take internally-silvered reflector lamps.
These usually come with an Edison screw (ES) connection, rather than the more common bayonet cap (BC) with the two familiar side pins.
Note that there are two sizes of both ES and BC (the smaller ones are labelled SES and SBC), so it is vital that you check which one of the four connections your light fitting takes before buying the lamps.
One special type of reflector lamp is the PAR (parabolic aluminised reflector), which can give a very defined beam, and has the advantage that it is resistant to changes in temperature, making it ideal for use outside.
Another type of light bulb you may come across is the tungsten halogen bulb.
This gives a crisper, brighter light than a normal light bulb, and is used outside for floodlights and inside for uplighters.
It generates a lot of heat, so care needs to be taken positioning the fitting.
Normal fluorescent tubes are familiar enough, but the main development in recent years has been in compact fluorescent lamps, which take the place of normal light bulbs.
The advantages of these are that they last much longer and cost much less to run (the saving well outweighs the higher asking price); their disadvantages are that the light they give is not quite so ‘warm’ and does not come on instantly.
With some, you'll also need an adaptor, which you buy separately — it will also do for all subsequent lamps in that fitting.
LIGHT SWITCHING
The common type of light switch is the rocker switch — rock it downwards for on, and upwards for off.
This comes with one or more switches on the same ‘plate’, operating different lights.
Most rocker switches are wired for one-way operation — that is, the light is turned on and off from just the one position; but most are capable of two-way operation, where the light is turned on or off from two places — in a through room, in a bedroom, or top and bottom of the stairs, for instance .
A simple way of upgrading switching is to fit dimmer switches, which alter the light level.
Most simply replace the existing rocker switch, but cannot be used for controlling the fluorescent lighting.
Dimmer switches can usually be fitted for one or two-way operation; with two-way switching, only one switch can be a dimmer type.
A security light switch also replaces an existing light switch.
What it does is to turn the light it controls (typically a hall light or an outside light) on and off, according to how you set the timer, to give the impression (to a potential burglar) that the house is occupied.
LIGHTING WIRING
All lighting circuits are radial ones — that is one cable goes from the fuseway in the consumer unit to the first light position, and then on to the second, and so on to the last on the circuit.
Most houses will have two lighting circuits — one for upstairs and one for downstairs — wired in one of two ways: junction box or loop-in.
The maximum number of light fittings on a circuit is 12.
In junction box wiring, the lighting cable goes from the consumer unit to a series of four-terminal junction boxes, each usually positioned roughly over the appropriate light switch; cables lead from each junction box to a ceiling rose and to the switch.
In loop-in wiring, the circuit cables go direct to the ceiling roses, and all the connections are made there.
The ceiling rose has ‘banks’ of terminals to take all the wires.
Loop-in wiring is more straightforward to do, but junction box wiring is a better system for light fittings (other than simple pendant lights) and is easier to add to.
With either system, the easiest place to add is the last light in the circuit, which is often the hall or landing light.
RUNNING LIGHTING WIRING
The upstairs lighting circuit is laid out on the floor of the loft, taking care not to put it under any loft insulation (where it could overheat), and not to put junction boxes where they could be damaged by careless feet.
The downstairs lighting circuit is run under the first-floor floorboards, with cables preferably threaded through holes drilled in the centre of joists, or clipped to the sides of the joists.
To run cable down to light switches or to wall lights, it will usually be necessary to ‘chase’ slots in solid walls, though if you are rewiring a house which was originally  wired in metal conduit, you may be able to use the existing conduit buried in the plaster leading to light switches to feed the cable down.
Chasing solid walls is done with a bolster chisel and club hammer, and it is important to keep the cables vertical so that you know where they are.
Ideally, cables should be covered with metal half-channel before the plaster is made good with filler or a d-i-y plaster: you will, of course, have to redecorate the wall afterwards.
With hollow walls (plasterboard or lath-and-plaster on timber studs), you can run the cable for wall lights and switches in the void behind the wall surface, starting by drilling a hole in the top timber member.
The problem comes when you meet a horizontal nogging — the positions of which you can determine with a joist and batten detector.
The answer is to cut out a small square of plasterboard (or to cut through the laths in the same way), cut a narrow notch in the nogging to allow the cable through, and then replace the plasterboard, nailing it in place either side of the notch, and making good with filler.
Repairing cut-out lath-and-plaster is more difficult, but is generally best done with a small piece of plasterboard.
If there are problems getting the cable to the right place, start off with a piece of weighted string, which you can ‘fish’ through the hole you have cut, and then use this to pull the cable through.
The alternative to burying cable in the walls is to run it on the surface in mini-trunking, and then use surface-mounted light switches.
Although the mini-trunking will be fairly obvious, it does save a lot of work, especially on decorating.
SECURING LIGHT FITTINGS TO THE CEILINGS
Any light fitting which is secured to a ceiling should ideally have at least one of its screws going into a joist, but where this is not possible, it is best to secure a piece of wood between the joists to take the securing screws, rather than relying on hollow wall fixings into plain plasterboard or, especially, into lath-and-plaster.
Decorative pendant lights which have chains or screwed brass rods can be supported in one of two ways.
The first is to cut a hole in the ceiling and to fit a metal or plastic BESA box (designed for use with conduit wiring), with its face flush with the ceiling, and with the box screwed to a supporting piece of timber fixed between the joists; the BESA box has two screwed holes which match the holes in the plate supporting the chain or screwed rod.
The second method is use a Ceiling Maestro, which is screwed to a joist or a piece of timber between the joists, and which has a hook for a chain and a screwed hole for a rod.
Several manufacturers make Luminaire Supporting Connectors (LSCs) which (like the Ceiling Maestro) come in two parts which can be separated, allowing lights to be changed easily or removed for cleaning, but not all LSCs are designed for use with heavy fittings.
Fluorescent lights and track lighting can be screwed to the ceiling using hollow wall plugs, but if you can arrange for at least two screws to go into a joist, the fitting will be more secure.
Recessed ceiling lights (eyeball spots and downlighters) are fitted in circular holes which you cut out of the ceiling with a padsaw.
Normally, they need not additional support, but you must take care to ensure that the position is between joists, and that there is sufficient clearance above the light to prevent overheating.
SECURING LIGHT FITTINGS TO THE WALL
Many wall lights, like some decorative pendant lights, will come with a backing plate, with two screw holes exactly 2in (50mm) apart.
This matches the holes in a BESA box, so one way to fit a wall light is to bury a BESA box in the wall, and then to secure the light fitting to it (the wiring connection is made via a terminal connector strip with three terminals).
The alternative is to bury an architrave switch mounting box in the wall to take the terminal connector strip, and secure the light fitting centrally over this, so that the securing screws can go into wall plugs fitted in holes, which you drill in the wall either side of the box.
It is not good practice simply to leave the cable poking out of the wall, and many wall light fittings will not have space in their backing plate to make the connections.
SECURING LIGHT SWITCHES
For flush-mounted switches, you will have  to make a hole in a solid wall to take a metal mounting box — most light switches fit into a 16mm plaster — depth wall box, so you don't have to cut away any of the brick or block.
Secure the box to the masonry behind with wallplugs and screws — don't rely on filler to hold it in place.
For hollow walls, you can get special plastic boxes with ‘wings’ which open up behind the plasterboard to hold the box in place.
You can get special surface-mounting boxes which have a slot to take mini-trunking, but if these are not available, simply run the mini-trunking up to the edge of the box and knock out one of the holes in the side.
In bathrooms, you must use ceiling-mounted pull-cord switches,not wall-mounted ones.
TYPICAL WIRING JOBS
Adding a new light:
To put in a new light which is independently switched, there are two choices for the wiring.
One is to take a supply from an existing loop-in ceiling rose or junction box to a new junction box, and then wire to the light switch and light fitting.
The other is to take a spur from the socket outlet circuit, via a switched fused connection unit, fitted with a 3amp fuse, and use this to feed the light — the switch will then turn the light on and off.
This latter method is often a good way of wiring outside lights.
Replacing a pendant light:
If you want to fit a fluorescent light, recessed light(s), ceiling light, or track lighting in place of an existing pendant light, you will normally want to remove the ceiling rose.
With the junction box method of wiring, you may simply be able to re-use the cable for the new light fitting.
With loop-in wiring, the wires are labelled carefully, and drawn up into the space above the ceiling, where they should be reconnected in a junction box, in exactly the same way that they were connected in the ceiling rose, and a cable taken from this junction box to the light fitting through the hole in the ceiling (if the new light fitting is in the same place).
If you are fitting several lights (downlighters or eyeball spots, say), run this cable to the nearest fitting, and then run cable from this to the next nearest, and so on to the last.
Fitting two-way switching:
Converting an existing light — in the hall or the bedroom — to two-way switching is not difficult.
The existing wiring is left in place, and a length of three-core and earth lighting cable is run from the existing light switch (which must be two-way) to a new two-way light switch.
Fitting a dimmer or security light switch:
No extra wiring is necessary to fit dimmers or security light switches, as they simply replace the existing switch.
The only problem comes where the existing switch is part of a two-way system, where you might need some technical help understanding the instructions, which are often written in electrician's jargon rather than plain English.
You might also need to fit a standard depth (25mm) box if the existing switch is in a plaster-depth one.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION…
Anglepoise Lighting Ltd.
Wide range of task lighting, including low-voltage &energy-saving, flexible low-energy uplighting system
Ashley &Rock Ltd
KLIK modular plug &socket connector systems, ceiling &wall
ELEC
Electrical installation materials, plus full range of pir security lanterns/floodlights, garden lighting, low-voltage fittings, uplights, burglar alarms, etc.
Four branches in south, plus mail order nationwide.
Free colour catalogue
GE Thorn Lamps
Low-energy replacement bulbs (+ adaptor).
Decor Rounds + Candles, Softglow coloured range, shaver &striplights, garden &security lighting
Lumiance
Several ranges of downlighters, wall &ceiling luminaires, track &spotlights, &tubular lighting systems; includes low-voltage, compact fluorescents, etc
Maestro Light
Ceiling Maestro (plug-in ceiling rose, also suitable for wall lights
Micromark Lighting
Range of decorative pendant &wall lights, rise &fall pendants, spotlights, desk &nursery lights, uplighters, downlighters &eyeballs, garden &security lighting, &electrical accessories
MK Electric Ltd
Electrical accessories &switches, LSCs, etc
Philips Lighting Ltd
Range of energy-saving lightbulbs with bayonet fittings (no adaptor needed), ‘natural sunlight’ Halogena bulbs (bayonet &screw fittings), high performance spotlight bulbs, Softone pastel range, &security lighting
Quest Emess Ltd
Full range of decorative &modern indoor lighting, including low-voltage, track &spot, low-voltage downlights, outdoor &security lighting
Wickes Building Supplies Ltd
Basic range of interior &exterior lighting.
Includes low-energy, low voltage, &cabling, electric fittings, etc.
Left: A Hint of Peach for a living room, with Philips' Softone bulbs
Right: Stylish Vogue uplighters, from Mazda's Interiors range, produce a subtle, sophisticated effect.
Available in four designs
Rise and fall pendants are ideal above dining areas, especially when connected to a dimmer switch.
These from Micromark have perforated metal shades, in white, grey, red or black
Get more light for your money with Philips' concentrated-beam Spotline bulbs
Above: Sparkling Crystal Gold finish from Mazda's Images collection looks just as appealing when bulbs are not lit.
Three finishes are available, in decor rounds and candle bulbs
Left: Freestanding Quad Uplighter from Anglepoise provides efficient but well-diffused lighting
Left: Wall-mounted Athena metal uplighter from Micromark, available in matt black, white and gold
Cutout, below: Improve your home security with a Philips automatic floodlight system, which includes a passive infra-red sensor to trigger the light when someone approaches
Adjustable floodlight with PIR sensor: the economically priced Powerflood from ELEC has a range of 12m
Suitable for porches and covered areas, ELEC's PIR Lantern Light in black has an adjustable sensor range of up to 50ft
JOBBING NOTEBOOK
REPLACING DOOR FRONTS
When you think about it, the beauty of even the smartest kitchen is only skin deep.
It is the doors and drawer fronts which provide the main attraction, and the rest of the construction is hidden behind them.
So, replace the doors and drawer fronts and you can totally transform the appearance.
The owners of this modern kitchen preferred a wood appearance and so they rang the changes.
In selected independent stores you will find a range of replacement doors and drawer replacement doors and drawer fronts in some 40 sizes.
You have a choice of pine which can be varnished, stained or painted — or there is a very attractive solid cherry.
Prices range from around £5 for a door in pine, to £7.50 in cherry.
Conversion is simple.
1
Remove the old door and hinge from the cabinet.
And, hopefully, you will be able to re-use the hinges
2
Most modern cabinet hinges require a circular hole to be bored in the door, so use the hinge as a guide
3
Use an end mill for boring the holes.
And as an aid to drilling, make a simple template from a length of batten.
As solid cherry doors are pre-varnished, protect the surface of the door when using cramps
4
When boring the holes, take great care not to go too deep or you'll come through the face of the door!
Ideally use a drill stand with a depth stop
5
Screw the hinge to your new door.
It is wise to drill small start holes to make the insertion of screws easier
6
Fit the new door to the unit and make the necessary adjustment to the hinge to ensure the door sits correctly
With the drawer fronts, it will be necessary to top off the existing fronts using a rubber hammer or mallet.
Check to ensure no screws are holding the fronts in place.
Then glue on the new fronts.
With doors and drawers in place, you have the choice of replacing old handles or investing in new.
But new will certainly add to the transformation.
If you experience difficulty in locating the doors, contact Leboff International Ltd 
LIMING AN OAK TABLE
If you have one of the thousands of barley twist-legged tables produced from the Edwardian period onwards, the chances are that it will be coated with a dark, almost black varnish.
These tables can be easily lightened to produce a limed-oak effect.
1
Strip off the old varnish with a chemical stripper and wire wool.
Once back to bare wood, raise the grain by rubbing briskly with a stiff wire brush
2
If a different base colour is required, now is the time to apply a wood dye
3
Once the dye has dried, apply a coat of protective transparent polish
4
Rub white undercoat paint into the grain with a circular motion
5
Remove excess with white spirit.
Finish with wax or Danish oil
Materials available from Rustins Ltd 
CREATING A LIMED PINE EFFECT
Wood finishes that let the natural beauty of the grain show through are becoming more and more popular.
A d-i-y alternative to limed oak can be created by treating pine to a coat of liming wax.
1
These pine cabinet doors were sanded to a smooth finish before being given one coat of Antique Pine wood dye.
Brush on the dye, working with the grain, and rag off any excess.
This darkens the very white new pine and provides more depth to the finished effect
2
Liming wax is scrubbed on to the door when the dye has completely dried.
Work with the grain, forcing the wax into the grain with 0000 gauge wire wool
3
Once dry, the excess white wax is removed by rubbing the wood with clear wax polish.
This seals and protects the door.
Buff the wax with a soft cloth or polishing bonnet fitted to an electric drill
4
The finished door — because of the soft wax finish, this is not suitable for areas of heavy use eg kitchen units.
For these areas, use white undercoat paint to ‘lime’ the wood, followed by clear varnish
Liming wax, clear polish, wood dye and wire wool available from Liberon Waxes Ltd 
FITTING A FIRE SURROUND
The lounge with fireplace and living fire is back in vogue.
So, when you next plan to change the lounge décor, why not add a new fireplace?
Kits are available with four basic components — surrounds, inserts, hearth and the fire itself.
And the combination of all four illustrated costs in the region of £500.
This includes hardwood surround, marble inserts and gas flame effect fire.
1
Remove any existing heater and fireplace — and take great care with old tiled surrounds.
They are extremely heavy
2
Hack out the old fire surround.
This fireplace succumbed to the blows of club hammer and bolster.
This is a good time to have the chimney swept
3
The components involved, laid out for inspection.
Keep in mind at this stage that a gas supply is needed.
Contact your local Gas Board in good time
4
To set the hearth, measure the centre of the wall and drop a plumb line to the base of the opening.
Lay a piece of masking tape at the centre point of the hearth, then line it up with the plumb bob
5
Lay a bed of mortar (1 cement to 3 soft sand) in the form of a rectangle, and place the marble hearth on it.
Check for level
6
Attach two brass mirror plates to the wood blocks at the rear of the back panel
7
Tape glass fibre rope around the fire opening.
This forms a smoke seal once the panel is fixed in place
8
Offer the marble to the wall, making sure there is an equal amount of hearth either side of the panel
9
Before screwing to the wall, fit the brass frame around the flue opening.
This is held in place by four metal lugs which are bent around the opening
10
Fix the mahogany legs to the top mantel using brackets and screws.
Work on a carpet or dust sheet to avoid marking the surround
11
Now screw the two keyhole slotted brackets to the inside of the surround legs
12
The unit can now be offered to the wall and the gas pipework and setting of the fire undertaken.
The actual surround can be removed during the process to avoid damage
In case of difficulty, further information is available from Wickes Building Supplies Ltd .
LAYING A PAVING SLAB PATH
The simplest but least permanent method of path making is to lay slab on sand.
And sand will provide a stable base providing rainwater cannot reach it.
So it is important to ensure all joints are well pointed and sides are sealed against the ingress of water.
Where a lawn is involved, cut away the turf and loose topsoil.
Then consolidate soft areas by ramming in rubble.
You need a firm base allowing for about 30mm of sand plus the thickness of the slabs so your path will lie flush with the lawn soil level.
This will make lawn mowing easy.
1
Treat exposed soil with weedkiller, then tip sand on to the prepared foundation, and rake smooth
2
Use a garden roller to consolidate the sand.
Add more until just the thickness of the slabs remains
3
Lower each slab on to the sand so as not to disturb it.
Use a rubber hammer or the handle of a club hammer to level each slab.
Add or remove sand as necessary to ensure slabs sit correctly.
Leave a gap of about 15 to 18mm between slabs
4
Seal all joints with mortar.
Use a mix of 1 cement to 4½l; soft sand by volume, and add a minimum of water to produce a dryish mix.
It should be dry enough to brush off the slabs without staining
ALTERNATIVE METHODS
For a more permanent path, where perhaps there is likely to be heavy foot traffic, slabs can be laid on large blobs of mortar.
Prepare the ground as already described, then make up a mix of 1 cement to 5 sand, with a minimum of water.
Place a blob for each corner and one for the centre of each slab.
Lower the slab in place, then tap down with the handle of a club hammer.
Check with a spirit level.
For even better bedding, prepare the site, then lay an even bed of mortar over an area which can be paved in about half an hour.
Lay it to a depth of at least 25mm (1in); rake smooth, then lay each slab in place, lowering it so as not to disturb the mortar bed.
Tap in place with the club hammer handle and check with a spirit level as work progresses.
RE-POINTING BRICKWORK
Re-pointing defective mortar is vital to prevent damp in walls.
First rake out all loose mortar to a depth of about 12mm.
For a small job use a bag of mortar mix.
This should be mixed, with clean water to produce a dry mix which can be lifted on a trowel without sagging or sliding off.
The makers of the Jarvis Painting Hawk, used here, claim it allows you to work 400% faster.
1
Place mortar on the hawk and hold it in line and just below the joint to be filled
2
Lift a wedge of the mortar up the vertical face of the hawk and press in place with trowel edge
3
With the hawk still held in place smooth out the mortar for the length of the hawk
4
Carefully lift away the hawk and trim away any surplus mortar with the trowel tip
5
To fill the vertical joints, turn the hawk and separate off a small amount of mortar, lifting it on the underside of the trowel
6
Turn the trowel and apply the mortar to the joint, lifting away any surplus with the trowel point.
Note brickwork stays clean
FIT A SMOKE DETECTOR
Despite new regulations, there are still plenty of materials in most homes which could produce lethal fumes if fire broke out.
So, to provide ample warning, fit smoke alarms.
Ideally, site one in the hall and another on the landing.
Avoid fitting one in the kitchen, as fumes from cooking are often enough to activate the alarm.
The one illustrated is by First Alert: like most types it can be simply screwed into a ceiling.
SEALING GLAZING BARS
After painting glazing bars, cover them with a self-adhesive weatherproofing tape such as that produced by Aquaseal.
This will ensure the paintwork stays in good condition, and it will make the roof watertight.
Once positioned, press into tight contact with the glass.
PLUMBING-IN A PLASTIC BATH
The modern plastic bath is so much easier to handle than its heavier metal counterpart.
And this in turn makes it easier to connect the various fittings.
But because of the flexible nature of plastic, correct support is vital so the bath cannot move while in use.
Check movement by filling with cold water.
1
As the bath is plastic, you screw the legs to location spigots situated under the bath rim.
Then screw them to the baseboard.
Screw the small leg to the centre of the base
2
Hold the bath/shower mixer in place on the bath by tightening the back nut on each tap tail.
A rubber gasket is sited under the top body to protect the surface of the bath
3
Connect the pop-up bath waste from the rear of the bath, adjusting the waste so the components match up with the holes in the bath.
Then screw overflow and waste grids to the waste pipe sections
4
Attach a shallow-seal bath trap to the waste outlet, then connect to the waste pipe by means of a swept-tee
5
The hot and cold water supply pipes can be simple handbendable sections.
Bend the pipes to connect each tap tail to the supply pipes
6
In this case, straight sections of Kopex connectors were pushed into Acorn connectors after the pipe ends had been smeared with lubricant.
The tap connector screws to the tap rail
7
To complete the job, clip the moulded bath panel in place.
There should be clips attached to the bath frame at the top, and at the base the panel will be held by sticky pads located on a floor-mounted batten.
This bath is from Armitage Shanks
STENCILLING ON VARNISH
Large areas of cabinet or wardrobe doors can look very plain.
Stencilling is an easy way of producing a complex decoration that will add interest to any area of bare wood.
Choose one of the many pre-cut stencil designs on the market, or make your own from card.
The Ronseal varnishes used here can also be applied to a painted or previously varnished surface that has been rubbed down with a fine abrasive paper.
WHAT YOU NEED
Stencil (form your own using card, if desired)
Stencil crayons — available from art shops and branches of Laura Ashley
Stencil brush
Masking tape
Ronseal Pine Satin Varnish
Ronseal Clear Satin Varnish
White spirit
Lint-free cloth
1
Bare wood should be rubbed down with fine grade abrasive paper, working along the grain, and the dust removed with a cloth moistened with white spirit
2
If you wish to antique new wood, apply one coat of Ronseal pine coloured Satin Varnish.
Brush along the grain and allow to dry for at least six hours.
3
Stick the stencil in position using masking tape and cover any areas around the designs that may be accidentally brushed with colour
4
Solid areas of colour can be applied with a stencil crayon
5
To give stencil designs such as fruit a three dimensional look, use a stencil brush to create areas of light and dark colour.
Brush lightly to give a lighter tone and use more pressure to give a darker ‘shadow’ around the edge of the fruit.
Hold the brush at right angles to the surface and use circular motions
6
Brushes may also be used to colour larger areas such as the blue ribbon of this design.
Remember to mask adjoining cutouts.
When all the colours have been applied, remove the stencil sheet and leave to dry for about 48 hours
7
Seal the whole door with Ronseal Clear Varnish to protect the design from wear
For more information contact:Ronseal, Sterling Roncraft 
LAYING A WORKSHOP BASE
The base of a garden shed mainly used for storage can be supported on a number of paving slabs, but a workshop, which may house heavy machinery, needs a good firm base.
And it is wise to spend time getting it smooth and level so that all the bolt holes in a prefabricated building line up correctly.
An uneven base can make assembly really difficult.
Clear off all loose top soil within an area slightly larger than the size of the workshop.
Then dig out to allow for a layer of hardcore plus about 75mm (3in) of concrete on top.
A base up to 3m (10ft) long can be cast in one slab.
But anything over that size should be divided into two equal slabs with a dividing board between.
This ensures that the concrete slab won't crack.
Use a mix of 1 cement, 2½ damp sand and 4 coarse aggregate — or 1 cement to 5 mixed sand and aggregate.
Use the minimum of water, to produce a dryish mix.
1
Drive in pegs to match the proposed height of the formwork.
Check between pegs with a spirit level
2
Fix boards to the pegs, checking for horizontal as work progresses
3
Check that both sides of the formwork are level — and this may involve adding a central peg from which to check
4
Use a builder's square to check that corners are true right-angles
5
Apply rubble and tamp well down, leaving enough space for 75mm of concrete on top
6
Tip on the concrete and level out with a rake until it is just about the level of the formwork
7
Select a straight board which is wider than the base and use it to tamp down the concrete…
8
…then move it across the area — zig-zag fashion — to get it level.
Fill in any voids as you progress
9
cover the concrete with either polythene sheeting or wet sacking while it cures.
This is particularly important in hot weather
10
Before the concrete sets, the surface can be given a final smooth in a number of ways.
A soft broom produces a smooth surface; a stiff broom a lightly textured surface, and a wood float a smooth, non-slip surface.
If the workshop has a timber floor, obviously the finish is not important
ROOFING A CONSERVATORY
If you're planning to build your own lean-to sun room or conservatory, it is essential to get the roof right.
If you don't, there will be endless problems with leaks.
One efficient method of covering the roof is to combine twin wall Lexon Thermoclear sheeting with Twinfix aluminium structural glazing bar.
So before launching out to buy materials, send for literature from each company.
This will help with recommendations such as the ratio between sheet thickness, width and the distances between glazing bar centres.
Addresses are given below.
Illustrated is the system used for securing sheets to a simple lean-to verandah roof with timber frame.
This incorporates Twinfix 261 Rafter Gasket and 226 aluminium glazing bar.
1
When ordering Thermoclear always state width and length carefully — and ensure that the ribs will run from top to bottom (ridge to eaves) and NOT sideways.
Also always ask for the swarf to be blown out of cut sheets, and for the ends to be temporarily taped up to keep the sheets clean inside
Before installing on a roof, peel back a little of the protective masking and remove the temporary tape.
Place aluminium tape over the ridge (top) ends of the sheets, and aluminium antidust breather tape over the eaves (bottom) ends.
This helps to prevent rainwater ingress from the top, and also helps to keep the sheets clean, while allowing any condensation which may develop in the flutes to evaporate
2
In order to protect the aluminium breather tape, and give a neat rigid finish at the edge of the sheets, cover the breather tape at the eaves with an aluminium ‘U’ channel
3
Place the rafter gasket centrally on the wooden rafters and nail down through the centre channel, with galvanised nails 300mm apart
4
Remove the protective masking from the Thermoclear.
Ensure the side with the UV protection faces outwards (ie the side with the pictorial masking) and place the Thermoclear panels on the rafter gasket
5
Insert the gaskets in the aluminium glazing bar cap; place centrally over the rafter gasket and screw down no more than 400mm apart, using matching coloured acetal headed stainless steel screws.
Do not overtighten as this prevents expansion and contraction of the Thermoclear.
Screw-on glazing bars are preferable to snap-fits as they hold this flexible glazing sheet more securely in place
6
Place a simple push-fit polycarbonate stop and cap over the end of the capping bar to give a neat finish
7
An ‘F’ profile supports the sides of the sheet and protects the edge of the roof slope.
Use a spirit level to ensure that the glazed sheet is horizontal before fixing it to the barge board with stainless steel screws 300mm apart.
Finish off the ridge with lead flashing, and fit guttering at the eaves
SUPPORTING A DAMAGED FENCE POST
Where a post has rotted, to avoid dismantling fencing, plan to use a concrete spur.
These may be plain or, if the post can be cut, a stepped spur is available upon which the post can rest.
To make the spur less conspicuous, it can be stained brown with a special concrete stain.
When you buy your spur, also buy bolts sufficiently long to pass through both spur and post to leave at least 25mm (1in) protruding.
1
Clear the ground around the damaged post.
Buy a spur of suitable length, allowing for at least 2ft. into the ground
2
Dig a hole, keeping the sides as near vertical as possible.
Remove the rotted section of post
3
Anchor the post in a truly vertical position, insert the spur and mark and bore holes in the post for the bolts
4
Ram rubble around the spur then fill with quick-setting concrete, tamping well down.
Check that bolt holes align before the concrete sets
5
Insert the bolts; add washers, grease the threads then tighten nuts
6
use a hacksaw to remove surplus bolt thread
ADJUSTING A BALL VALVE
Methods vary for ball valve adjustment, according to the type of valve involved.
1
With a modern diaphragm valve, it may only be necessary to move the float up or down on the serrated spindle connected to the valve arm
2
But some modern valves have a small adjusting screw close to the actual valve mechanism.
Screw it further in to lower the water level — or out to raise it
3
With the older Portsmouth valve, adjust by carefully bending the ball arm.
Never hold the ball while bending.
It may snap off from the arm
4
A damaged ball from an older pattern can be unscrewed and replaced.
As a temporary repair, empty out water and encase the ball in a polythene bag tied with elastic
NEWS UPdate
INSULATION BOARD REDUCES NOISE THROUGH WALLS
A new product from Heraklith is available to improve the sound insulation properties of various types of walls.
Heraklith Sound Insulation boards, for example, will improve the airbourne sound insulation index of a solid 250mm brick wall by 13dB (10dB means a reduction in sound level of 50%).
The boards, 25 or 35mm thick, are a laminate of layers of Heraklith-M-Original magnesite-bound wood incorporating a flexible foam core.
It is the careful balance between the dynamic rigidity of the core and the weight of the surface layer which prevents significant resonance incursions.
The boards are fixed to existing walls by adhesive or dowel fasteners, and the M-Original surface may be directly plastered or have plasterboard attached.
The fixing process is simple and clean, and only minimally increases wall thickness and adds little dead weight to the structure.
SAFETY WINDOW FILM OFFERS PROTECTION AND PEACE OF MIND
Although glass surrounds us, if a glass window shatters it may cause horrific and perhaps even lethal injuries.
Courtalds Performance Films has launched Protech Safety Window Film to prevent precisely this type of domestic tragedy.
Protech is a polyester-based film which is easily fitted to flat glass, providing all the benefits of toughened glass at a fraction of the cost.
Fitting the film is easy.
The glass must be thoroughly cleaned and made dust-free.
It is then sprayed with water, for which an ordinary hand-held plant sprayer is ideal.
The backing sheet is then removed from the film before wetting it and applying it to the window.
A squeegee tool is used to smooth out the film and the excess film around the edge of the window is trimmed off with a safety knife.
The film gives peace of mind to the potentially vulnerable, such as the elderly, and to the parents of young children, and it is also a deterrent to the intending intruder.
In addition, Protech has excellent solar control properties, the clear film screening out 95% of damaging ultra-violet rays and giving 13% solar energy rejection.
Bronze and smoke-tinted film is also available.
As a guide to price, 7ft × 24in of clear film costs £14.
NEW LIGHTING EQUIPMENT IMPROVES HOME SECURITY
In 1990 nearly a million homes were burgled, almost 20% up on the previous year.
This has urged Bosch to make its debut in the security products market with a range of sensor-controlled security lights, movement detectors, and mini alarms.
All are simple to use and compatible with existing lighting systems in the home.
The range includes a decorative security light with a clear or frosted glass globe, a traditional lantern light in black or white, and a floodlight security kit with a powerful 500watt halogen bulb.
All will welcome you or your guests, but startle intruders.
All lamps have a built-in passive infra red sensor which react to invisible thermal radiation emitted by people or other sources of heat.
Any movement detected by the sensor is signalled to the electronic switching circuit which automatically turns on the lights.
Using a pre-set timer, the lights can be set to stay on for a period from 25 seconds to 12 minutes.
The range of detection is approximately 15m, and the detection angle is 120°.
The sensor can be adjusted through 180° horizontally and 90° vertically, so the detection zone is therefore almost infinitely variable.
All lamps can also be used as dusk to dawn security lights and have a daytime ‘test’ facility.
Prices range from £40.82 for an Automatic Porch Light to £81.69 for a Security Light Lantern.
CORDLESS DRILL WINNERS
The winners of Black &Decker 9032 cordless hammer action drills which were the prizes in a competition which appeared in the May issue of DIY are as follows:
TILING For a lasting impression
Ceramic tiles offer an excellent range of properties for use on wall and floor surfaces.
They are easy to handle, fixing is simple, and the resulting surface is waterproof, easy to keep clean, hard-wearing and extremely long-lasting.
Ceramic tiles are thin slabs of fired clay decorated on one side with coloured glazes, and often with a printed or handpainted pattern too.
They have been around since Egyptian times, which makes them one of our oldest decorating materials.
They are popular these days because of the huge range of patterns and designs now available.
The only drawback is their price — anything from about £8 per square metre for the plainest types, up to £20 per square metre, or sometimes a lot more for elaborate designs.
TILES FOR WALLS
Ceramic wall tiles are generally about 4mm thick, and come in a number of regular sizes.
The most popular size used to be the 4½in (108mm) square tile, still available in a limited number of ranges, but displaced from the No 1 position by larger 152mm  (6in) square tiles, which are quicker to fix (you need only 44 to cover a square metre of wall, compared with 86 of the smaller tiles, and there's less grouting to do as well).
Rectangular tiles are becoming more popular too; common sizes are 200×100mm (8×4in) and 200×150mm (8×6in), with coverages of 50 and 33 to the square metre respectively.
You can also buy tiles in interlocking shapes — hexagons, curved ‘Provençal’, and so on.
Some ranges include tile ‘slips’— slim tiles 150mm (6in) long and 25mm (1in) wide (although lengths and widths vary with the particular range), which can be used to create coloured stripes or narrow borders to tiled areas.
Apart from the different sizes available the packaging of ceramic wall tiles is confusing, to say the least.
Depending on the tile size and on the manufacturer concerned, you are likely to be offered packs containing anything from 6 to 50 tiles, and some packs — of 13, 22 and the like — don't make estimating quantities any easier.
Fortunately, most retailers will split packs for you if buying whole packs would be uneconomical, so it's best either to count up the numbers you need from a scale plan of the area to be tiled, or else to use the ‘number per square metre’ figures given above.
Tile designs alter with changing fashions in interior design, and current demand seems to be mainly for large areas of neutral or small-patterned tiles, perhaps interspersed with individual motif tiles on a matching background.
Plain tiles, often with a simple border frame, are also popular, as are tiles which create a frieze effect when laid alongside one another.
There are also sets of tiles which build up into larger designs (known as feature panels), and which can look quite striking when surrounded by an area of plain tiling.
Some tile ranges still include what are known as insert tiles — tiles carrying moulded bathroom accessories such as soap dishes and toilet roll holders, though these are not as common or as popular as they once were.
The same applies to the small quadrant-shaped tiles used for finishing off the junction between baths and tiled walls still available, but in a limited range of colours these days (sealants and plastic trims have taken their place).
The surface of ceramic wall tiles is no longer always highly glazed, as it traditionally was.
You can now choose semi-matt finishes instead if you prefer, often with a slight surface texture that softens the somewhat harsh glare of a high-gloss surface.
Since colours can vary slightly, it's important to buy all the tiles you need  at once to ensure that they're from the same batch; it's also a good idea to unpack and mix them before fixing them, to even out any colour variations.
The other important point to remember about wall tiles is that spacer lugs are no more, and the old-fashioned types that are rounded on one (RE) or two (REX) edges, used to finish off the perimeter of half-tiled areas, have virtually disappeared too.
Most tiles now have square edges; these are sometimes glazed on one or two edges, sometimes not, so if you want an exposed glazed edge, check the actual tiles before you buy.
Otherwise, you'll have to use some form of edge trim.
Tiles glazed on all four edges are described as ‘universal’.
TILES FOR FLOOR
Floor tiles are less widely used than wall tiles, but are a popular choice for heavy traffic areas such as porches and hallways, and also for conservatories.
They are generally thicker and harder-fired than wall tiles, to enable them to stand up to heavy wear without cracking.
They may be glazed, with a plain colour or a printed design, or unglazed — more commonly known as quarry tiles — and many have textured surfaces to make them less slippery underfoot.
Most are square-edged, so spacers have to be used to guarantee an even grouting gap; some ranges (especially quarries) still include RE and REX tiles for finishing off parttiled areas or forming tiled skirtings.
Common sizes are 150mm (6in) and 200mm (8in) squares, and 200×100mm (8×4in) rectangles; hexagons are also available in plain colours, and a popular variation is a plain octagonal tile which is laid with small square coloured inserts at tile intersections.
Pack sizes vary, but boxes of five or 10 are the most common.
As with wall tiles, most retailers will break packs to help you buy economically.
Note that special frost-proof grades are available for use outdoors on steps, passageways and so on; ordinary indoor grades will be damaged by frost.
TILES FOR WORKTOPS
You can of course use ordinary ceramic tiles as a worktop surface.
Special shaped tiles are available for finishing off the edges of the worktop, and consist of straight strips with an L cross-section, plus mitred lengths for internal corners, and square ‘caps’ for external ones.
As with bath trims, there is a limited colour range.
MOSAICS
Mosaics are just tiny tiles — usually plain in colour, sometimes with a pattern — which are sold made up in sheets on a tough fabric backing.
They are laid just like tiles, in a bed of adhesive, and the gaps are grouted afterwards.
Square mosaics are the most common, but discs, hexagons and other interlocking shapes are also available.
Sheets are usually 300mm (12in) square, and are often sold in packs of five or 10; the best way of estimating quantities is to work out the area to be covered, and to divide that by the coverage figure given on the pack, which will tell you how many packs to buy.
Note that wall and floor types are of different thicknesses, just like ordinary ceramic tiles.
TOOLS &EQUIPMENT
For almost any tiling job, large or small, you will need the following: tile adhesive; a notched adhesive spreader; some tile spacers (unless you are using universal tiles); lengths of tile edge trim (optional); grout plus a flexible spreader; a steel tape measure; some lengths of 38×12mm (1½×½in) softwood battening plus masonry pins and hammer for large wall areas; a spirit level; a tile cutter; tile nibblers, pincers or tile saw; some dowelling for shaping the grout lines; a pencil and felt-tip pen; and some sponges and cloths for wiping and polishing.
You may also need some silicone sealant for sealing joints where tiling abuts baths, basins and shower trays, and maybe a profile gauge if laying floor tiles around awkward areas like architraves, etc.
Both adhesive and grout for wall tiling are usually sold readymixed, in plastic tubs complete with a notched plastic spreader.
For areas that will get the occasional splash or may suffer from condensation, a water-resistant adhesive and grout is perfectly adequate, but for surfaces such as shower cubicles, which will have to withstand prolonged wetting, it is essential to use both waterproof adhesive and waterproof grout.
Always use waterproof grout on tiled worktops; ordinary grout will harbour germs.
Grout is usually white, but you can buy coloured grout if you want to make a feature of the grout lines (an effect that looks best with plain or fairly neutral patterned tiles).
Floor tile adhesive is widely available in powder form as well as ready-mixed, and the former is generally more economical to use.
It's best always to use a waterproof type (plus waterproof grout), even in theoretically non-wet areas.
Adhesive and grout are both sold in a range of pack sizes, sometimes labelled by weight (in kilograms), sometimes by volume (in litres); always check the coverage given by the manufacturer when buying, so you don't over-buy or run out half-way through the job.
TILING WALLS
The best way to practise your tiling skills if you've never done any before if by covering just a small area such as a washbasin splashback, where setting out the tiles so they are centred on the area concerned is a simple job, and you have the minimum of tile cutting to do.
When you are tackling a larger area — a whole wall, or perhaps even a complete room — you use exactly the same techniques; the big difference is the sheer scale of the job, which makes the preliminary setting-out by far the most important part.
The problem is that unless you have absolutely plain walls, there will be a number of obstacles to tile round, and you have to decide how to get the best fit round them with your inflexible tile squares, without ending up cutting impossibly thin slivers to fill in all the gaps.
You may also want to tile awkward shapes such as the window recesses, or things like bath surrounds.
Here, extra care is essential to get professional-looking results.
PLANNING THE LAYOUT
If you're tiling a whole wall or room, the most important thing to do is to plan precisely where the whole tiles will fall.
On a flat, uninterrupted wall this is quite easy; you simply find the centre line of the wall and plan your tiling to start from there.
However, you will probably have obstacles such as window reveals, door openings and built-in furniture in the room, all competing to be the centre of attention, and you have to work out the best ‘centre point’ while trying to avoid having very thin cut-tile borders and edges anywhere.
It's best to use a device called a tiling gauge — a batten marked out in tile widths (and spaces between tiles)— to work this out.
It's easy to make your own from a straight piece of timber about 1.2m (4ft) long, marked off with pencil lines to match the size of tile you will be using.
You can then use this to ensure that on each wall your tiles will be centred accurately on  major features such as window reveals, with a border of cut tiles of equal width at each side.
Now turn your attention to the actual setting-out.
With large areas of tiling, two things are vitally important.
Firstly, the tile rows must be exactly horizontal; if they're not, errors will accumulate as you tile across the wall, throwing the verticals out of alignment, with disastrous results.
And if you're tiling right round a room, inaccurate levels will mean your rows don't match up at the start and finish point.
Secondly, the tiles need some support while the adhesive sets; without it, the whole tiles area could slump down the wall.
What you do is to fix a line of battens across the wall (or right round the room) just above skirting board level, securing them with partly-driven masonry nails so you can remove them later when the adhesive has set.
The precise level will be dictated by your setting-out with the tiling gauge, but will usually be between half and three-quarters of a tile width above the skirting board.
Don't rely on this being level; it probably won't be.
Draw the line out in pencil first, using your spirit level, and then pin the battens up and check the level again.
If you intend to tile over existing tiles, you will have to drill holes through them for the masonry pins.
Drill nail holes in the batten, hold it up to the wall, and drill through one batten hole into the tiling.
Pin this end in place, then swing the batten up to the horizontal, and drill through its other end, ready for nailing.
Once you have got all the battens in place, the hard part is over and you can start fixing the tiles — a job that is repetitive and boring, at least until you get to the cut bits at corners and edges.
Even these should fit nicely if you did your planning carefully.
TILING A FLOOR
Start with the tiles themselves.
Once you've decided on the type (and design, if relevant), make a note of the tile and pack size so you can work out how many to buy.
Some packs give a total coverage on the wrapping, but it's best to work out the total by accurately measuring the room size so you can calculate how many rows, containing how many tiles, will be needed.
Count part tiles as whole ones, then add an extra 5% to allow for wastage.
You'll also need special floor tile adhesive; there's a waterproof type for bathrooms, and a flexible type which you use when tiling on a suspended timber floor.
You'll need grout too, plus a tile cutter, preferably heavy-duty type, especially if using quarry tiles (Vitrex makes one which will cut wall and floor tiles); and it's worth investing in a tile file or saw if you anticipate a lot of fiddly cutting round pipes and similar obstacles, and a tile gauge if you have any really awkward shapes to tile around.
Quarry tiles are usually laid in a mortar bed, although you can use thick-bed tile adhesive instead.
It's worth hiring a heavyduty cutting jig if you have a lot of quarries to cut; ordinary cutters aren't strong enough for the job.
PLANNING THE LAYOUT
This is far easier than setting out wall tiling, because floors have far fewer obstacles than walls do.
The first step is to find the centre of the room by linking the mid-points of opposite walls with string lines.
Dry-lay a row of tiles from this point out to each wall so you can see how wide the cut border pieces will be, and adjust your starting point if necessary, to avoid having a very narrow border strip which will be difficult to cut.
When you're happy with the layout, mark your starting point clearly on the floor, ready for the tiles.
The only exception to this method is when you are laying quarry tiles in mortar; then, having set out the tiles dry, you start laying in one corner of the room, using battens as guides, and work across the room in bays four or five tiles wide.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION…
Building Adhesives Ltd
All types of tile adhesives
Candy Tiles Ltd
Wall tiles include Victorian styles &very modern; floor tiles include ‘granite’, geometric terracotta &patterns
Cristal Tiles
Wall tile range includes borders, floor tiles include Provencal shape
Dennis Ruabon Ltd
Quarry &floor tiles, including ‘3D’ geometric shapes, in range of colours; frost-resistant
Fired Earth
Range of hand-made tiles, wall &floor
Homelux Products Ltd
Tile trim, strip, corner trim, cover &sealing strips
John Burgess Tiles
Range of quality reproduction Victorian &Art Nouveau embossed ceramic wall &floor tiles (for restoration work)
Langley London Ltd
Villeroy &Boch wall, worktop, floor &mosaic tiles, &moulded border tiles
Merchant Tiler
Range of mainly hand-made wall &floor tiles, many imported, includes terracotta &slate
Pilkington's Tiles Ltd
Wall tiles
Ramus Tile Co Ltd
Range includes mosaics, wall and floor tiles
Royal Dutch Sphinx Ltd
Wall &floor tiles, feature &relief tile strips
Vitrex Ltd
Wide range of tiling equipment
Wellington Tile Co
Range of glazed &unglazed floor quarry tiles &inserts, &some handmade imported wall tiles
Wickes Building Supplies Ltd
Floor &wall tiles, border tiles
Autumn wall tiles from the New Season Collection by Cristal
Above: From Langley, Series Adeline Beige tiles for walls, floors and worktops
Left: Sphinx Corniche with fruit panel
Cut-outs on this page are from Dennis Ruabon's range of geometric quarry tile shapes; use as borders, or for threedimensional effects
Left: Cut-out from Dennis Ruabon's Start-Border design; in red, ironstone and black, it can be combined with the six standard quarry colours
Right: Part of a nine-tile panel design of daffodils, in black, blue and gold, Panel-Accent Orpheus, from Royal Dutch Sphinx, can be used as a feature in bathroom, hall, or even the bedroom
NEWS UPdate
ALARM AND LOCK BAR SECURES PATIO DOORS AND SLIDING SASH WINDOWS
Older style sash windows, modern sliding windows, and patio doors can all have added security with the new all-in-one Security Alarm and Lock Bar from Smiths Industries.
These battery-operated devices fit tightly between the door or window and its frame, preventing it from being forced open.
If there is an attempt at a forced entry, the Alarm and Lock bar flashes a bright light and sounds a loud alarm.
The Smiths Alarm and Lock Bar is cylindrical in shape with a diameter of 40mm to fit neatly into any door or window frame.
Two versions are available; one to suit lengths of between 610mm and 1040mm (24in and 41in), and one to suit lengths between 370mm and 610mm (14¾in to 24in).
A mounting clip is available for fixing the alarm in larger openings.
Prices are around £29 for the larger (ALB41) model, and £24 for the smaller (ALB24).
VERTICAL BLIND HAS ALUMINIUM SLATS FOR HEAVY SERVICE
Faber is introducing a new vertical blind called Uprite which has aluminium slats and will give unequalled service as it can be washed and re-hung immediately.
The perforated slatting is ideal for kitchens at the front of the house (or overlooking the garden) as it allows privacy, conceals work areas, yet allows a view of the outside — the garden, the horizon, or just the weather!
The 2in (50mm) slatting has 180 pin-fine holes to the square inch and is available in eight colours: black, white, red, grey, eggshell, flint, pink, and marine blue.
As with all Faber vertical blinds, damaged slats can be replaced individually.
Vertical blinds are also practical for doorways, and can be used as shown in the photograph as a ‘concealer’ between breakfast bar and kitchen.
They can be parked left or right, or have a split centre draw leaving a clear throughway.
Two or more colours can be ordered if wanted for a specific scheme.
‘WATER’ PAINT IS A PLEASANT ALTERNATIVE TO TRADITIONAL FINISHES
D-i-yers have a pleasant alternative to traditional paints with the launch of an innovative range of water-based paints by Dulux.
Available in gloss and satin finishes, the new paints result in a lower odour than traditional solvent-based paints, making home decorating a more enjoyable task for both the applier and the occupants.
Easy to use, the new paints require no undercoat and are quick to dry — touch dry in two hours and recoatable after six.
Additionally, paint brushes can be cleaned in water.
Dulux's water-based gloss paint comes in six ready-to-use colours, including Magnolia, Whisper Grey, and Misty Glade.
Both the water-based gloss and satin paints come in pure brilliant white and not only start whiter, but stay whiter than other traditional solvent-based paints.
Formulated for interior use only, the range is suitable for windows, doors, picture and dado rails, and skirtings.
The new paints are available from major d-i-y, department, and specialist decorating stores, priced from around £7.49 and available in 750ml and 2.5 litre (pure brilliant white only) sizes.
EASY WAY TO FIX SLIPPED AND REPLACEMENT SLATES
Ubbink's Sim-Fix is a simple yet effective way of fixing slipped or replacement slates in an existing roof.
The Sim-Fix is a strap and clip made from nylon rather than upvc.
Nylon was chosen for its strength and its resistance to extremes of temperature and atmospheric pollution.
The clip is dual-purpose in that as well as holding the slate in position, it also secures it against wind uplift which is a possible cause of the original slippage.
With the Sim-Fix it is unnecessary to punch extra fixing points in the slate and the strap is quickly and easily nailed to the batten with three optional fixing points, making it possible to use it with any size of slate.
It is very light in weight and its dark colour makes it almost invisible once in place.
Unlike a lead tingle fixing, the Sim-Fix cannot be pushed out of place by snow slippage.
The strap costs around 30p and is available from Ubbink UK and its network of stockists.
MAKITA 9045N ORBITAL SANDER
This Makita finishing sander simply oozes quality.
As soon as you pick it up you know it is going to work well, and it does!
This is basically an industrial tool built for professional use, and the build quality is superb.
It is comfortable to hold, feels ‘solid’, and is obviously well assembled around a die-cast aluminium frame.
Before you can start using the tool, a 13amp plug must be fitted to the rubber-covered lead.
This is 2.65m (8ft 8in) long so you are not forever dragging an extension lead socket around the workplace.
While it is hard-wearing and safe, rubber-covered cable has the additional benefits of being very flexible and resistant to kinking in use.
The machine is supplied with a pack of ten half-sheet abrasive papers to fit the 234 × 114mm (9¼ × 4½in) base pad.
To fit the abrasive sheet it is first necessary to push the dust frame cover off the front or back of the machine.
Fitting the abrasive sheet under the end clamps is easy to achieve by easing the push buttons on the deck of the machine inwards using a thumb.
The instructions supplied with the tool recommend pre-bending the paper to help in fitting it tightly, but we found this unnecessary.
The machine can be used without the dust frame cover which simply snaps on to the decking, but in this case you will lose the benefits of dust extraction; to this end, a dust bag is supplied and this very simply pushes into a part of the side of the machine.
There is a small spring catch to hold the dust bag in place and at the correct alignment.
The bag should be emptied before it gets about half full and this is achieved by turning the bag anti-clockwise so that the spout can be pulled out of the dust port.
You would not expect a well-made machine like this to be light, and at 2.8kg (6.2lb) it isn't, so you need the two handles moulded into the case of the machine to help hold it.
These make it easy to control the tool, but it is still best to sand surfaces horizontally whenever possible.
The on/off switch at the top of the main handle is very easy to operate with the thumb.
The sander has a smooth and powerful 520watt motor and its easy action is helped by the ball-bearing construction.
The pad oscillates very fast (10,000 orbits/min), with an orbit diameter of 2.4mm, and this makes for quick and efficient swirl-free sanding.
The dust extraction system is quite efficient; it certainly keeps a lot of the dust out of the air, but there is still quite a bit of dust on the surface of the workpiece after you finish sanding.
The dust cover prevents the machine from sanding right up to return edges; it keeps it away about 10mm (⅜in) at the sides and 15mm (⅝in) at the ends.
However, the cover is very easily removed if you need to get into a tight corner.
WHAT IT COSTS
At £175 including VAT this is not a cheap sander, but you get what you pay for and for the keen d-iyer or woodworker, or even a tradesman, this is an excellent tool that should last a lifetime.
Push buttons on deck make it easy to clamp abrasive sheet in place
Dust frame cover simply snaps into place on the base pad
On/off switch is conveniently placed on the main handle
This sander smooths large areas of timber very efficiently
BOSCH ALL PURPOSE SAW MODEL PFZ 550 PE
At the start of this test we thought that we were reviewing an all-purpose saw, but in fact we discovered that the Bosch All Purpose saw, model PFZ 550 PE, is a lot more ‘all purpose’ than we thought.
With the right accessories it can also be used for metal filing, wood and plastic rasping, and for brushing!
The saw has a 550watt (input) motor and features variable speed and orbital action saw blade, yet it weights only 3kg (6.6lb) so it is quite light to use.
The blade, which is something like a large jigsaw blade, protrudes from the front of the saw to give a cutting capacity of 150mmin wood and 12mm in steel, as long as the correct blade is fitted.
The blade has a stroke of 26mm (about 1in) and the noload stroke rate is between 500 and 2600/minute.
This tool is supplied with a plug ready-fitted (well done Bosch!)
and a generous 4m (13ft 1½in) of cable lead.
Fitting the blade is easy using the allen key supplied to clamp the blade between the blade holder and a clamping plate as often found on jigsaws.
To start the saw, the starting lock at the top of the handle has to be pressed forwards and at the same time the trigger switch is squeezed.
The saw is fitted with a quick-stop blade system, and as soon as the trigger is released, the blade stops almost instantaneously; a good safety feature.
The stroke rate is controlled by squeezing the trigger, and a particular stroke rate can be pre-selected by turning a small thumb wheel situated on the trigger.
The orbital movement of the blade, which helps to speed cutting by aiding the removal of sawdust, has three settings.
One setting gives the full orbital movement for fast, rough cutting in wood and softer materials.
A lower setting gives slight orbital movement for harder materials, while the third setting allows the orbital action to be switched off for a straight reciprocating movement for filing or rasping, or fine cutting in hard materials.
For most cuts, the work is steadied against the foot plate which can be angled to bring it into contact with the workpiece; because the teeth of the sawblade tend to become worn close to the foot plate, the plate can be unclamped and moved forwards to bring a fresh section of the blade into use.
The saw is supplied with a general purpose wood cutting blade which is ideal for rough cutting.
However, with a five-piece saw blade set (Part No 2 608 650 330) the use of the saw is considerably enhanced.
This kit contains a blade suitable for cutting wood with nails, plasterboard and non-ferrous metals; a fast-cutting blade for wood and plastics; a blade for iron and non-ferrous metals; a rough/fast cut blade for wood; and a useful flexible blade for non-ferrous metals.
In one of the photographs we show the latter being used to cut off a water pipe close to the floor.
Also available is a file for metal and a rasp for wood which we found very useful for shaping and smoothing these materials.
Although we didn't try them, a selection of brushes is also available.
We would imagine that the wire brush is very handy for cleaning up old iron and steel.
It is no good pretending that you are ever going to do fine woodwork with this All Purpose saw, but for rough cutting and shaping it has many uses around the house.
One useful technique is plunge cutting into a surface, such as floorboards when these need to be lifted.
You hold the machine on the surface and gradually tilt the blade downwards to saw through.
It takes a bit of practice, but this is a useful technique to master.
Of course, if you prefer, you can drill a hole through which the tip of the blade can be inserted.
WHAT IT COSTS
At £151.83 this would be a very useful tool to buy for those odd jobs about the house and garden.
Blade fitting and a selection of blades available
The saw is ideal for rough cutting, such as sawing logs
Shaping wood with the rasp tool fitted.
Metal file also available.
Using the flexible blade to saw through a water pipe flush with floor
HITACHI FG10SA DISC GRINDER
Disc grinders are still generally associated with trade use — cutting paving slabs, car bodywork repairs and the like.
However, their use to the d-i-yer can be worth the £50–£100 investment.
The Hitachi FG10SA is the Japanese company's answer to the home improvement/small tradesman market.
Based on the smallest of the commonly available disc sizes, the 100mm (4in), the machine is almost identical to its larger brother, the FG12SA.
Setting up the tool requires only the two spanners provided as standard accessories.
One holds the spindle steady whilst the other fits into the twin holes on the wheel nut and tightens the disc in place.
Also provided with the grinder is a disc for use on metalwork.
Finally, a screw-in side handle is fixed on to the alloy gear cover, offset either to the left or right depending on the user.
Once in place, Hitachi recommends a trial in a safe area to ensure everything is properly assembled.
This, like all safety instructions, should always be followed.
Damaged discs or grinders can be very hazardous and gloves and goggles must be worn.
Like all disc grinders, the body shell is basically a cover for a powerful motor which drives the disc at high speed.
In this case, a 550 watt motor provides the power behind the 11,000rpm disc.
Unlike some machines of this wattage, noise was well suppressed and only became excessive when the disc was used on stonework.
Applying the 1.6kg tool to metalwork proved easy, even for the inexperienced.
We put the machine to the test removing rust from a section of decorative ironwork and the only problem was the tendency of the disc to bite into the metal if too much pressure was applied.
This will happen with all grinders if used too enthusiastically.
It is important to let the tool's weight do the work.
The only control on the single speed machine is the on/off rocker switch mounted on the top of the machine, towards the front of the green plastic casing.
To turn the grinder on, the switch is eased forward until it clicks downwards.
As a safety feature, the rocker need only be lightly touched on the back section to cut the motor.
Hitachi have also taken the trouble to make the control large enough to operate when wearing thick gloves.
Grinders should be held at a shallow angle of between 15 and 30° to the work when they are used to abrade the surface.
This offers the maximum amount of disc edge to the work and does not overload the motor.
When in use, the semi-circular wheel guard of the Hitachi deflects sparks, chippings etc away from the operator.
Two screws hold the guard in the optimum position, the open sides pointing directly away from the body of the machine.
However, the guard can be loosened and repositioned for particularly awkward jobs, as long as it is fully retightened.
In all, the FG10SA performed well on metal and stone.
The machine comes with a 100mm disc but the guard will allow the fitting of the standard 115mm disc.
Build quality seemed good and there are now enough agents in this country to make servicing and spares less of a worry.
WHAT IT COSTS
The Hitachi FG10SA recommended retail price is £80.65.
Spare discs are £1.64 
Changing the 100mm discs using the spanners provided
For grinding, the disc is kept at a shallow angle to the work
Scoring a paving slab with a stone cutting disc
Screw-in handle can be attached to either side
PROLINE PL28 ROTARY HAMMER DRILL
If you think you've already got a hammer drill, then it's time to think again!
With the Black &Decker Proline PL28 Rotary Hammer Drill, drilling holes in masonry and concrete takes on a whole new meaning.
It differs from ordinary hammer drills (which operate on a ratchet/percussion mechanism) because it is operated by an electro-pneumatic mechanism.
This is like a road-maker's pneumatic breaker in miniature, except that the drill bit rotates to clear the debris from the hole.
With this new drill, the energy from the motor is transmitted directly to the drill bit via a piston and beat piece.
The material being drilled is effectively broken up by the drill bit, and the rotary action of the drill bit is primarily to remove debris from the hole.
To make a hole in masonry or concrete you do not need to exert anything like the pressure you do with a conventional percussion/ratchet hammer drill which basically relies on drill rotation to wear away the material.
The new rotary hammer virtually smashes its way through hard materials.
When you look at the new PL28 drill, the first thing you notice about it is the absence of a conventional three-jaw chuck for holding the masonry bit.
Instead there is a special tool holder to take SDS (special drill system) drill bits.
The SDS drill bits have four slots in the shank which are quickly slotted into place in the tool holder.
Removing them should also be quick by simply depressing the sleeve of the holder in the direction of the arrow so the bit can be pulled out.
Probably due to the newness of our sample, this proved quite difficult to do, but by the end of the test it was getting easier, either because the sleeve was wearing in, or because we were developing the knack — you must push the sleeve right back.
Incidentally, all sizes of SDS drill bits have the same size of drill shank to fit the standard tool holder.
The tool is supplied without a plug, but the lead is a generous 4m (13ft 1½in) of rubber-covered flex so there should not be too much need for trailing extension leads.
For a 450 watt electro-pneumatic rotary hammer drill, the PL28 is compact, but with an overall length of about 12½in (without the drill bit) you need a fairly unobstructed area in which to work.
It works with a variable speed trigger, but the speed (0–400rpm) is considerably slower than a normal percussion drill.
However, it drills three times as fast with only one third of the effort required with a normal percussion drill.
It has reverse action which is basically used for removing debris and jammed drill bits.
Its relatively light weight (1.9kg/4lb) makes drilling above shoulder height a lot less tiring than with the normal electropneumatic hammer drills which you may hire.
The drill is basically designed for drilling holes into extremely hard masonry, usually for some type of fixing, or to clear a way for cables or pipes.
It does this extremely efficiently, but if you want to use the tool for conventional drilling and screwdriving, the hammer action must be switched off and you need an SDS adaptor (Part No A13123) which will screw into a ½in chuck with a ½in female thread fitting (part No.
A5223).
It is important not to use conventional chucks for hammer drilling.
WHAT IT COSTS
At £117.95 the B &D Proline PL28 is an excellent buy for anyone who frequently needs to drill into materials .
Slide the sleeve right back in order to fit an SDS drill bit
A conventional chuck being fitted using an SDS adaptor
Drill held by side handle with two fingers on the trigger
Drilling a bolt hole in a concrete floor is easy with pneumatic action
YOUR SAY
If you've an interesting d-i-y tale to share, we'd like to hear from you.
We pay £5 for every letter published.
Write to 
SAW POINT
Some years ago, my father built an 8in rise-and-fall tilt arbour saw bench from a set of plans produced by Cliff Bowers.
Over the years, he has used it for many successful d-i-y projects.
However, he eventually sold it, and replaced it with another model.
Following in my father's footsteps, I would like to build myself a Cliff Bowers saw bench.
I have scoured magazines for any information on this subject, but so far, to no avail.
I would be very grateful if any of your readers could assist me in obtaining an address to write to, or better still, a copy of the plans.
I would be pleased to reimburse any costs incurred.
KE Smith, Newport, Isle of Wight 
Can any of our readers help?
If you can, write to the address at the top of the page, and we'll forward your letters to Mr Smith — Ed.
NO PROBLEM
Many household jobs are basically easy, and are only made difficult because they're so inaccessible.
I found this to be the case when trying to replace a ballcock valve washer in a hot water tank in a very narrow airing cupboard.
I overcame the problem by making the shelves in the cupboard easily removable.
Using 3½× ¾in wooden slats resting on battens, I made spacers from the same wood, and glued these to the battens.
There's no need to nail the shelves down, as they can't move sideways because of the spacers.
Except for the few slats supporting the tank, all the shelves in the cupboard can be removed in a moment, making access really easy.
S Cox, Gosport, Hants 
ICE IDEA
When inserting posts or stakes into the ground for use as fence supports, good rigidity can be ensured by inserting the post through the centre of a four-litre plastic ice cream carton, then filling it with concrete mix.
The carton and post are then buried at the required depth.
The container holds the mix until set, and can be left in the ground.
L Stringer, Derby, Derbyshire 
STAR LETTER PRIZE
The lucky winner of this month's Star Letter Prize will receive a free pack of essential Evo-Stik products worth over £50.
The pack includes some of the ever popular Make 'n' Mend range, such as Evo-Stik Household Adhesive, Fabric Adhesive and Super Glue.
Other products are Evo-Stik Wood Adhesive Waterproof, the ideal choice for all general woodworking jobs, Bath, Sink and Shower Sealant, Outdoor Sealant and All Purpose Silicone Sealant, from the market-leading Evo-Seal range.
Last but not least, the pack includes Evo-Stik Impact 2 Adhesive, which is a safe, solvent free and non-flammable contact adhesive.
Happy sticking!
STAR LETTER
NUTS 'N' BOLTS
I do the odd bit of d-i-y round the home, which I don't find too difficult, being an engineer by trade.
But my pet hate is woodwork joinery.
When faced with a request for a garden seat, similar to the one on a recent DIY front cover, I searched high and low for one which I could buy, rather than make myself.
But a well-built version cost over £100, and one at about £50 seemed far too rickety.
I eventually resolved to make one, but overcame the drudgery of all those mortise and tenon joints by developing the following method:
1
Mark positions of the joints.
2
Buy some long bolts, 3in long, ¼in diameter, with slotted heads and square nuts.
3
Drill a hole just oversize for the bolt head diameter, about ¼ to ⅜in deep.
4
Drill through a ¼in diameter clearance hole.
5
With the bolt in the hole, bring up the second part of the joint, and mark round the circumference of the bolt.
6
Drill the end of this piece with a ¼in diameter clearance hole to required depth.
7
Cross-drill on the mark, to about three-quarters of the total thickness, or right through.
8
Coat the end of the wood with quick-set glue.
Use tweezers to put a nut on the end of the bolt in the cross-hole, and screw the bolt tight, initially preventing the nut from turning by using a screwdriver.
9
When set, fill the holes with matching dowelling and glue, or plastic wood.
Result — a rock-steady garden seat, built in less than a day, for less than £40.
And no fiddly joints to cut!
M J Pinner, Sheffield, Yorks 
DIY DISASTER
We've all had our d-i-y disasters — but some are worse than others!
Douglas Kane Ltd, distributor of the famous OBO range of home improvement products, is inviting you to send in details of your worst d-i-y disaster.
In return they will give £30, and a range of OBO fixings worth another £20, to the most amusing letter each month — to make sure you get it right next time!
Each OBO fixings prize pack will contain a selection of Terrier Nails (a wood-to-wood nail specially designed to provide the fixing strength of a wood screw), special Masonry Nails (general purpose nails which fix wood to all kinds of masonry without drilling, plugging or screwing), and Timber Connectors (for creating a permanent fixture without the need for screwing or nailing).
A CRACKING TIME
When we redesigned the bathroom in our Victorian terrace, we fitted a shower in one of the bedrooms, to allow dismantling and fitting to proceed at a more leisurely pace.
Working late one Saturday night, wanting to finish ‘just one more job’, I was hammering in a cross-piece on the adjacent wardrobe, when my hammer slipper .
I watched it float in slow motion towards the ceramic shower base, which it cracked neatly in two.
The whole unit had to be dismantled to allow a new base to be fitted — a costly and time-consuming disaster, which taught me that 11pm on Saturday, at the end of a tiring day, is not the time to be doing d-i-y!
AG Regan, Gosforth, Tyne &Wear 
SPECIAL OFFERS
WOLFCRAFT BENCH SANDER FROM £34.95
You will probably never realise how useful a bench sander can be until you have tried one.
While self powered bench sanders are available an excellent introduction to this machine is via the Wolfcraft Bench Sander drill attachment.
This sander was featured in our May 1991 issue.
We were so impressed with the unit that we have arranged a Special Offer for DIY readers.
It is made to the usual high Wolfcraft standards using thick steel for the bench table and a cast alloy housing for the disc.
The disc itself spins easily on a sealed ball-bearing race.
The sander is clamped on to the edge of a workbench so the disc is vertical and the shank of the disc is locked securely into your power-drill chuck — most drills with a standard 43mm diameter neck are suitable.
It is important to set the drill on a high speed setting (5,000rpm maximum), and the disc must turn in the direction shown by the arrow on the housing.
The bench table is clamped securely in position by means of two tommy bar bolts.
For most applications, you can use a try square to set the table at 90°, but the table can be angled downwards and locked for sanding angles down to 45°.
The bench table is fitted with a very useful horizontal angleguide which can be locked into any position in front of the disc, or it can be locked at the desired angle while being free to slide in a slot parallel with the disc face.
The Wolfcraft Bench Sander is ideal for truing up faces of timber prior to making joints, especially mitre-joints (ideal for frame makers!)
In addition, you can use it for metal-grinding, for instance when sharpening cold chisels, rotary-mower blades and other cutting tool blades.
The Wolfcraft Bench Sander normally comes with three grades of sanding/grinding discs — coarse, medium and fine.
These simply and securely fit on to the 178mm (7in) diameter disc using a Velcro-type fastening.
It is very easy to change the discs when necessary.
We are including an extra pack of two coarse discs for you in the pack — worth £2.69.
The Wolfcraft Bench Sander normally sells for £35.35 but we are offering the complete kit for only £34.95, saving over £3 on the usual prices.
Use Ref: WBS on the order form when ordering.
Extra sanding discs are available for only £2.49 if ordered at the same time as the Bench Sander.
Use Refs: WBDC (coarse); WBDM (medium); and WBDF (fine) on the order form when ordering.
WOLFCRAFT WALLCHASER ONLY £15.95
Anyone who has ever tried chiselling out a channel in a wall to accommodate electrical conduit or other piping will appreciate this useful accessory from Wolfcraft.
It simply fits on to a standard 43mm diameter drill chuck and uses a 12mm diameter tungsten-carbide tipped cutter to channel into breeze-block, brick, plaster and other wall surfaces.
The Wallchaser can be easily guided along using the control handle and support wheels.
It usually sells for £18.13 but we are offering it for only £15.95, saving over £2.
Use Ref: WWC on the order form when ordering.
Additional 12mm diameter cutting bits are available for £6.50 each if ordered at the same time as the Wallchaser.
Use Ref: WWCB on the order form when ordering.
C.K.
NON-RETURN VALVE ONLY £16.95
GARDEN TAPS AND THE LAW
There are new, far-reaching water bye-laws now operating.
These came into force January 1989 but they are still not widely known.
Bye-laws 17, 18 and 22 deal with back-siphoning: wherever a cold water supply is connected to a flexible hose, the law insists that the tap or outlet is fitted with a non-return valve to prevent contaminating liquids being sucked back into the mains system by any fall in pressure.
It does not take much imagination to realise the very serious risks if, for instance, a modern weed-killer solution contaminated drinking water supplies.
Most modern household appliances, such as washing machines and dishwashers are already fitted with non-return devices.
As a householder you should pay particular attention to outdoor threaded bib-taps which are usually used for garden hoses and sprinklers.
Unless you already have a non-return valve fitted (and only the very newest installations will have this built-in) a double-check and drain valve is needed to comply with the law.
We have arranged a special offer with C.K.
Tools this month: their swivel-action valve is made from rust-proof solid brass.
It comes complete with all fittings for usual tap-threads, and all you will need is a wrench to tighten it in position to comply with the law — incidentally, a fine of up to £400 can be imposed for non-compliance with the law!
The C.K.
non-return valve is Water Research Council listed and the patented, lock swivel fitting prevents removal, plus giving a kink-free movement to your hose.
You can pay up to £20 for similar valves but we are offering the C.K. non-return valve for only £16.95 including VAT and carriage — a small price for such a sensible permanent accessory.
Use reference CK on the attached order form when ordering.
RESIDUAL CURRENT ADAPTOR OFFER ONLY £18.95
If you use any mains electrical appliance or tool outdoors, or where there is a possibility of water spillage, or even using ordinary power tools indoors like drills and saws, you could be putting yourself at risk.
Frayed or cut wires, for instance, can destroy expensive property by fire or even kill through electrocution.
We have arranged a special offer with one of the UK leading manufacturers for their new RCD adaptor.
The INPUT SHOTECTOR works by monitoring the current flowing in the ‘live’ and ‘neutral’wires and is activated by any leakage of current to earth — perhaps through you!
It senses the danger and almost instantaneously cuts off the power with a speed of reaction which can prevent a tragedy occurring.
The Shotector simply plugs into any standard ‘square’ pin socket.
You then plug your appliance into the adaptor — absolutely no wiring or electrical know-how is needed.
The Shotector has an easily accessible Test/Reset button to give you additional peace of mind each time you use it.
It is made to BS1363 and 4293.
You can pay up to £24.95 for RCD adaptors in the shops, but we can supply the INPUT SHOTECTOR for only £18.95 including VAT and carriage.
Please use reference PRCD on the order form.
MAKITA COMPETITION
WIN! £2,500 WORTH OF POWER TOOLS
Makita power tools are the very best quality and are built to industrial standards, not only to take hard work, but also to incorporate many safety features.
Now the range has been extended with the Makita ‘Pro-Range’ and in this exclusive competition, we are pleased to offer compendium kits of these fabulous tools as prizes.
Each tool kit contains SIX Makita power tools and is worth £760, and we have THREE of these sets as prizes.
In addition, there are 21 runner-up prizes of leather tool holsters worth over £10.50 each.
These are just the job if you need to carry a rechargeable drill around with you, especially when working from a ladder or steps.
One of the first prizes is shown in the main photograph.
It comprises model 6092 DWK Drill/Driver; model 1901 82mm Power Planer; model 3620 Plunge Router; model 4320 Jigsaw; model 500 140mm Circular Saw; and model BO4510 Palm Sander.
The 6092DWK Drill/Driver is at the top of the Pro-Range of cordless drills.
This 9.6 volt machine with a 10mm chuck, two speed gearbox, variable speed trigger and electric brake makes the 6092DWK a very capable power tool for any job, whether it involves drilling or screwing in materials such as wood, metal, plastics or laminates.
Where a power planer is required, then the Pro-Range's 1901 is the machine to have.
With an infinite adjustment depth of cutting control mounted on the front of the machine, coupled to the TCT mini blades, the power to produce 3200 cuts per minute and a non-marking die-cast aluminium base, all mean accuracy, and that a professional finish is made so much easier.
The Pro-Range Router is one of the most versatile machines available for the woodworker, being lightweight and highly manoeuvrable, with a three stage depth stop.
Whether for chamfering, grooving, templating or using it for intricate decorative work, this machine will help you do it cleanly and quickly.
The 4320 jigsaw has a variable speed control mounted in the trigger, a lock-on button to maintain the desired cutting speed and has the air flow cleverly directed forward to clean dust off the cutting line.
The bevel allows cuts of 0°–45° to both right and left, and the machine comes with a Perspex guard over the front of the blade to protect the operator.
The 500 Circular Saw has a bright red lock-off switch fitted which only allows two-handed operation for operator safety, and prevents the machine from being started accidentally.
There is also a telescopic blade guard to protect the operator, and a riving knife to stop the timber from jamming.
Standard equipment includes a tungsten carbide-tipped (TCT) blade.
The BO4510 Palm Sander is the ideal tool for all those small awkward jobs involving sanding into tight corners or confined spaces, or sanding between staircase rail supports.
It is a light-weight, yet incredibly powerful machine which offers finger-tip control and over 12,000 sanding orbits per minute.
Rustic appeal
Create your own oasis of rustic charm with an intimate and cosy garden like this.
Use plenty of shrubs for privacy as well as a profusion of blooms, and use rustic features to create a focal point and provide useful extra height…
How to make a rustic arch
Assemble the sides on the ground, using stout rustic poles treated with a timber preservative and galvanised nails.
The top should be at least 2.4m (8ft) above ground level
Excavate holes for the support poles, and wedge them in place with broken brick and rubble.
Top off with a concrete mix to fix the supports securely
Nail the cross members to join the two sides.
To make the structure more rigid cut and fix four angled poles into the corners as shown to act as braces 
NEWS UPdate
MAINTENANCE-FREE AND TROUBLE-FREE PLASTIC BOARDS
Plastic windows are widely fitted as maintenance-free alternatives to timber.
Now it is possible to have maintenancefree plastic boards fitted on the exterior of the home to replace timber fascia boards, barge boards and weatherboards.
Made from cellular upvc, they are ideal for replacing those boards which are on a high level and consequently difficult to paint.
Once installed, they cannot rot or be attacked by woodworm, and will never need painting.
One supplier of this type of boarding, Caradon Celuform, now offers much more than just a maintenancefree material.
It has introduced a scheme whereby householders who have Celuform materials fitted by a Company-approved installer are protected by an insurance-backed guarantee on labour and materials.
In addition, they are protected against the insolvency of the installer.
Under the Celuform scheme, the Company guarantees that faulty workmanship and materials is put right even if the installer has ceased trading.
PORTABLE DOORCHIME SOUNDS ANYWHERE
The limitations associated with conventional doorbells and chimes which cannot be heard clearly in rooms far away from the source of the sound, or in the garden, are overcome with a new portable wire-free doorchime from Friedland.
Suitable for use both indoors and out, with a range up to 50m, the new Courier chime enables the presence of visitors at the front door to be signalled clearly to homeowners no matter where they are located, whether in the house or garden.
In addition to its use as a versatile doorchime, the Courier can also be used by the elderly, the disabled and bedridden as a handy low-cost call device.
The Courier operates from batteries and therefore is very easy to install.
It comprises a transmitter and a portable receiver which is designed to be moved from one location to another as required.
As a doorchime, the transmitter is connected to a conventional bell-push, with the receiver unit simply positioned in any location within a 50m radius of the transmitter.
The Courier chime retails at around £38 and is available from leading department stores, d-i-y stores and most good electrical stockists.
MINIATURE MEASURING TAPE AVAILABLE FOR FREE
The Stanley Powerlock, the world's best-selling pocket measuring tape, is being given away in miniature to help keep house, car and office keys easily to hand.
The keychain Powerlock, worth £5, is being given away free of charge with each purchase of 5m/16ft, 8m/26ft and 10m/33ft Powerlock tapes.
Stanley Powerlock rules have chromium-plated cases for strength and durability.
The steel blades are protected by a Mylar coating for wear resistance, giving protection up to 10 times longer than the blade's normal life.
Clear graduations are printed in black and red, whilst ‘true-zero’ sliding hooks maintain a high degree of accuracy.
CONSIDER WINDOWS IF YOU ARE REPLACING AN OLD GARAGE DOOR
If you are thinking of replacing an old garage door, consider all the options which have ‘opened up’ since you last fitted one, say specialists Cardale Doors.
Changing a garage door, they say, has become a simple home improvement which can result in ongoing maintenance simplicity.
Ready-finished doors are now among those on offer and these require just an occasional wipe over to keep them looking immaculate.
Cardale have around 350 design, material and size options, with an additional choice of operating gear.
Steel, coated steel, timber and glass fibre are the commonly used materials for up and over doors, but you should also consider steel curtain roller doors, and doors with windows, as shown here.
This is an easy way of getting light into a garage, and the glazing material used by Cardale is said to be 100 times stronger than glass.
It is available in frosted, diamond and square-leaded designs, and even in ‘stained-glass’ forms.
TEST YOUR DIY SKILLS WITH GUINNESS ORIGINAL…and win a holiday for two to the Caribbean
In this fun competition from Guinness Original and DIY, you can test your d-i-y skills, pass on useful tips that can win you £100,and have a chance to win a dream holiday for two to the Caribbean worth up to £3,500, with another £500 spending money.
The Star Prize is a two-centre holiday for two the sunny Caribbean islands of Antigua (pictured above) and Barbados, organised by Kuoni Worldwide.
The winner and their partner will spend the first week in Antigua, based at Hawksbill Bay, with its four magnificent beaches.
They'll be able to bask in the sun, visit some of the hundreds of palm-fringed coves around the island, or participate in excellent watersports.
For the second week they'll be whisked off to lively Barbados, where they will stay at the Discovery Bay Hotel on the fashionable West Coast of the island.
The competition is being run for five months, of which this is the fourth, so you've still got two chances to win this holiday of a lifetime.
Each entry goes into the Grand Draw, so the more monthly competitions you enter, the greater your chances of winning.
As well as the Star Prize, each month we'll be choosing the best Original Tip from those sent in, and the winner will receive a £100 bonus prize.
The entry will go back into the bag for the Grand Draw, so you'll have the chance of winning more than one prize if you fill in this section — but it is entirely optional.
As a final bonus, the senders of the first 500 entries received each month will be sent a 50p money-off voucher redeemable against any future purchase of Guinness Original.
HOW TO ENTER
All you have to do is study the picture printed on the Entry Form, circle the 10 deliberate d-i-y mistakes it contains, and locate the hidden bottle of Guinness Original, which you should also highlight with a circle.
Remember to add your Top Tip if you wish to enter the optional part of this fabulous competition.
You may include a separate piece of paper for this, but print your name on it very clearly.
Fill in your name and address, and send the Entry Form to the address on the form to arrive by 16 September 1991.
If you include a tip, put a ‘T’ on the back of the envelope.
Then sit back and relax by opening a chilled bottle of Guinness Original.
Pour it slowly into a glass, study the rich oatmeal head and dark velvet body, then enjoy its distinctive bitter taste as you slowly drink it.
What better way to reward yourself!
Don't forget, the first 500 entrants each month will receive a 50p money-off voucher for Guinness Original, so don't delay — post your entry today!
ADVICE CENTRE
FIDOR
If you're converting your loft, or want a fitted bedroom or bathroom, you'll probably be making use of fibreboards in one shape or another.
To help you get to grips with the different grades, types and finishes of these products, you'd be well advised to contact FIDOR (Fibre Building Board Organisation), the trade association for the fibre building board industry.
FIDOR was formed in 1953 to promote and develop the UK market for fibre building boards.
It is an international trade association whose members include distributors, importers, processors, UK and overseas manufacturers, and UK agents; and it currently represents over 90% of suppliers to the UK market.
There are three basic types of fibreboards: mdf (or medium density fibreboard), hardboard, and softboard (often called insulating board), and within these categories boards may also vary in size, grade, properties and finish.
Possible applications range from loft insulation to making fitted furniture, so selecting the right board for the job is vital.
FREE ADVICE
The association offers specialist advice, literature and information free of charge.
On average FIDOR handles around 10,000 enquiries every year, and of these, around 50% are from members of the general public.
Many requests are for details of fibreboard d-i-y projects — FIDOR can supply booklets which will enable you to construct a serving trolley, make a bedhead, build a stylish fire surround, or a kitchen island unit.
For the more ambitious, these brochures also include design ideas for carrying out a loft conversion and constructing a fitted kitchen, bathroom or bedroom — each contains full working instructions and lists of materials needed.
Technical queries handled by FIDOR staff range from the fixing and finishing of mdf — a grey area to many d-i-yers; to advice on how to ‘condition’ fibreboards to prevent warping.
Other queries involve a spot of detective work, such as trying to identify a particular type of fibreboard needed for refurbishment work.
FIBREBOARDS
Standard hardboard provides a durable, cost effective floor overlay.
Laid mesh side up it gives a good base for carpets and tiles, and smooth side up it can be painted and stencilled to match design schemes.
Hardboard is also ideal for facing walls with problem surfaces.
Panels can be painted, papered or purchased in pre-decorated finishes to simulate anything from tiles to woodgrain.
Tempered hardboard (tempered with oil or resin) is more durable and water-resistant, so can be used outdoors, eg as a wall lining or cladding; or indoors as a very hard-wearing floorcovering.
Softboard has a spongy texture, which gives it good sound and thermal insulation properties.
It can be used under hardboard to cover floors (where it improves noise insulation and cuts heat loss), or in sheet or tile form to improve the appearance of ceilings.
It is easy to cut and handle and can be decorated with paper or textured paint.
All the association's leaflets make extensive use of mdf , a fibreboard that handles like solid wood, and is stable and smooth on both sides.
Mdf's smooth surface enables it to accept all types of finishes, from veneers and laminates, to paints and varnishes.
The absence of knots also means there is little wastage.
Commonly used for furniture units, panelling and partitions, the scope of mdf is increasing all the time, as moistureresistant, fire-resistant and exterior grades are coming on to the market, together with pre-finished d-i-y products such as skirtings, covings, architraves, mouldings and floor panels.
Fibreboards are also a fairly ‘green’ product, as wood fibre comes mainly from plantation sources, wood waste and forest thinnings — and they're relatively inexpensive to buy.
Both hardboard and softboard can be specified with Class 1 ‘Surface Spread of Flame’ ratings.
CONDITIONING
In common with all woodbased materials, fibre building boards must be conditioned before they are cut or fixed in place.
This means that their moisture content should be in balance with their surroundings.
If boards take up moisture once they've been fixed, they will expand and distort.
To condition hardboards, leave them in the room where they are to be fixed for a minimum of three days.
Place them so that air can freely circulate around the back.
The above method will be adequate in most cases, such as in occupied, heated buildings.
However, if the house has been unoccupied for some time, the boards will need to be conditioned with water — this method can also help to flatten wavy boards.
(FIDOR's data sheet SR/2 gives full information on both types of conditioning).
FLOATING FLOORS
On concrete : These consist of a standard or impregnated softboard, in combination with a hardboard overlay.
Standard softboard has good heat insulation properties, and the impregnated version will resist moisture ingress.
Any irregularities in the concrete will be ‘absorbed’ by the softboard, giving a better surface to walk on.
On timber : Floating floors are commonly used where existing floorboards are basically sound, but not in good enough repair to sand and seal.
Hardboard is laid mesh side up, to provide a nonslip surface for carpeting; and a key for adhesive, if tiles are to be fixed on top.
If the board is intended to be on view, it should be laid smooth side up, then finished with a paint or varnish coating.
The floating floor itself consists of a ‘sandwich’ of softboard laid underneath the hardboard.
This method serves a dual function — it will absorb irregularities in the existing floorboards, and also muffle sound.
FIDOR also supplies leaflets on the use of fibreboard for floors, walls and ceilings, and can give details of stockists in your area.
For further information contact:
EXTERIOR PAINTS
Rendered or dashed walls can always benefit from a coat of good exterior wall paint, and surfaces which are already painted will probably need recoating every few years.
We review some of the materials available.
If you have a good facing brick, it is generally best not to paint it or seal it with any kind of coating.
Once on, paint is virtually impossible to remove.
If you have a penetrating damp problem, treat brick with a silicone water repellent.
TYPES OF PAINT
Some water-based emulsion paints are suitable for use outside.
They must contain a fungicide for this use (to inhibit mould growth), and the surface needs to be clean, dry and free from cracks or blemishes.
Most manufacturers describe their exterior wall paints as masonry paint .
Usually, these are water-based (emulsion type) paints which, as well as containing a fungicide, have been reinforced with sand, stone, granite or fibre to enable the paint to fill in and disguise small cracks.
Two finishes are commonly available: smooth and sand-textured.
Expect to pay around £16 to £18 for five litres in white (colours are generally more expensive).
Coverage on smooth surfaces is normally 8 to 12m ²/litre; for smooth masonry paint, 4 to 6m ²/litre; for textured (on rough surfaces halve these figures).
Both Sandtex and Dulux Weathershield are widely available; Sandtex also now makes a glass masonry paint.
Crown masonry paints are solventbased for extra toughness.
You can also get thick-bodied textured coatings, such as Sandtex Fine Build, suitable for use outside.
Generally, these require only one coat.
Around £16 for 7.5kg, to cover 1 to 2m ²/kg; on smooth surfaces.
(It's traditionally sold by weight because of its density).
All of these paints should last for between 4 and 7 years.
There are also professionally-applied textured coatings which are sprayed on, and should last for 10 years or more.
Finally, you can get cement-based wall paint (Snowcem) in the form of a powder you mix with water, which is applied with a roller or synthetic bristle brush, and gives a coarse-textured finish.
This should last for five to seven years, and costs around £14 for a 7kg packet, to cover 20 to 40m² (don't apply over masonry paint).
All surfaces should be clean and dry before applying masonry paint with a brush, roller or spray.
Any mould growth should be killed with a fungicide wash , and loose or powdery surfaces should be treated with a stabilising solution .
Cracks should be repaired with a filler , and porous surfaces primed with a sealant or a diluted coat of masonry paint.
WHO MAKES WHAT
BLUE HAWK Two non-drip masonry paints in white or magnolia, generally needing just one thick coat.
Wallshield gives a smooth finish, and Sandshield a fine sand-textured finish.
Claimed coverage 4m ²/litre.; 
CEMENTONE BEAVER Trade vinyl matt and vinyl silk emulsions are both suitable for outside use.
Stoneface masonry paint a flexible and tough acrylic-based film, which covers hairline cracks and allows minor structural movement, is available in smooth or sand-textured finishes in white and colours.
CROWN Smooth , solvent-based, masonry paint with a matt finish.
Water-based Stronghold smooth , and Stronghold textured masonry paint, reinforced with rock aggregate for extra durability.
Dries quickly; available in white only.
The new solvent-based Stonewall Allweather High-performance Masonry Coating, manufactured with Plioway resin, will tolerate very damp surfaces.
It can be applied easily even at high or low temperatures (down to -20°C), is unaffected by rain 15 minutes after application, and resists marking.
Available in 10 colours.
DULUX .
Weathershield smooth masonry paint gives a smooth, protective, durable finish and is available in white and 13 ready-mixed colours (plus 98 colours from Definitions, the Dulux tinting system).
Claimed coverage 14 to 16m ²/litre.; e 
The textured version hides fine surface cracks, and is available in white and three colours.
JOHNSTONE'S PAINTS Pliolite Masonry Finish, with a smooth matt finish, is available in white and 11 colours.
Jonsil Silicone Alkyd finish is a masonry paint ideal for inner city and coastal environments.
Jon-Tex High Build (in nine colours) is a ready-mixed, water-based paint, which gives even badly weathered masonry a heavy-duty finish in one coat.
Stormshield is an acrylic-based masonry paint, available in either smooth or textured finish, in a range of colours.
MACPHERSON PAINTS Valspar smooth and fine textured masonry paint will cover hairline cracks and needs only one or two coats.
Available in a wide range of colours.
Marbletex fine and smooth textured masonry paints, are both water-based and flexible, so resist flaking.
Marbletex fine has a plastic vinyl resin base, reinforced with mica and fine marble aggregate, producing a tough, weatherresistant finish.
Marbletex smooth contains a tough flexible resin to provide weather resistance.
Spreading rate is up to 7sq m/litre for fine, and 10sq m/litre for smooth.
Powercote is an oil-based coating, based on a special synthetic resin called Pliolite.
It can be used on exterior stucco, cement, stone, precast concrete (within three days of shuttering being removed), pebbledash and asbestos.
Surface-dry in two hours, it can be recoated overnight.
Coverage is 6.5sq m/litre.
OWN BRANDS .
All the large d-i-y superstores (B, Do It All, Homebase, Texas and Wickes) have their own ranges of masonry paints available in smooth or sand-textured finishes.
SANDTEX Masonry paints in a choice of finish:Sandtex Smooth and Sandtex Matt (with a very fine texture) in white and 23 ready-mixed colours (and almost any colour can be matched with the new Colour Bank machine); the new Sandtex Classic Stone Gloss (white and five colours); and Sandtex Fine Build , a highly durable, fine-textured coating which will cover fine cracks and surface imperfections in a single coat.
Also Sandtex Highbuild , for renovating uneven and irregular surfaces.
SNOWCEM Cement paint, in white or five colours, supplied in powder form.
Provides water-repellent coating on both exterior and interior surfaces.
Two coats usually recommended: can be mixed with sand if required.
Cannot be used over masonry paint.
TETROSYL Textratex exterior wall paint, available in a wide choice of colours and white, with either a smooth or sand-textured finish — the textured finish will cover hairline cracks.
GARDENING
CREATIVE LIGHTING
For anyone who goes out to work or has to leave home early during the week the garden is a weekends-only pleasure for almost half of the year.
Early dusk makes it impossible to enjoy the garden during the week, except in the middle of summer.
The flick of a switch can change all this if you install garden lights.
They need not cost you more than a meal out and a trip to the theatre, yet they will provide many more hours of pleasure.
Mains lights are available from good garden centres and d-i-y stores, and the most versatile type for creative garden lighting is a spotlight with a spike that can be pushed into the ground and a head that swivels so that the beam can be adjusted.
Wall-mounted spotlights are useful, but the ability to reposition the light slightly as well as alter the direction of the beam is especially desirable as it enables different features to be highlighted as the seasons change.
Some wiring instructions will come with the lamp, but there may be no advice about running the actual power supply into the garden.
You must plan the circuit carefully, especially if you intend to move the lights around, and run suitable cable underground (use armoured cable or run the cable in conduit, at least 450mm (18in) deep, connected to the main house consumer unit.
If in any doubt, consult an electrician.
Always use a circuit breaker for added safety.
If you are having a mains garden lighting circuit installed, it makes sense to have power points suitable for power tools such as mowers and hedge trimmers put in at the time.
Even if a permanent garden circuit is contemplated, it makes sense to try out the lights on a temporary basis to find the best positions to fix your power points.
Low voltage lights are widely available and simple to install with no worries about safety.
They usually operate at 12 volts, but in the darkness of the garden even a low-powered light can seem surprisingly bright.
The transformer simply plugs into a mains socket indoors or in a garage, and only the low-voltage wire is taken outside.
You can have the lights installed and working within an hour.
Bear in mind that even though the wire will not present an electrical hazard, it should still be buried: trailing cables are dangerous by day and even more so in the dark.
Most low-voltage lights cast a localised beam or a diffused glow.
Those with a mushroom-style head are intended to cast the beam downwards on to the flower beds below, others with a pencilshaped lamp are suitable for using along the edge of a path or for illuminating an area of border.
But all of these are rather conspicuous by day and are difficult to hide in the way that spotlights can be masked by plants.
You can dispense with all trailing wires by using solarpowered lights .
Six hours of daylight is claimed to give 12 hours of night time light, but of course these cast a soft diffused light rather than a beam you can direct creatively like a spotlight, and they have limitations during the dull days of a typical British winter.
But for summer barbecues and evening entertaining, they provide a useful light.
RULES FOR CREATIVE LIGHTING
Mask spotlights with dwarf shrubs or other plants so that the lamps are not obtrusive by day.
Use white lights rather than coloured ones, which generally create disturbing colour effects with foliage and flowers.
Illuminate flowers and foliage that show up well in the dark.
White flowers will look better than, say, red or blue blooms; yellow leaves will be more striking than green foliage.
Shape is more important than colour at night.
Use a spotlight on plants with a strong profile, such as a yucca or red hot poker, or a tall, feathery fennel.
These will look imposing and create a dramatic effect with shadows.
Ornaments, such as an interesting pot or a bust on a plinth, which make good daytime focal points, also look good at night.
Avoid allowing light to shine into neighbours' gardens or into windows.
Do not direct a beam where people will walk through it: eyes take time to readjust to dark areas again, and this can be a potential hazard.
BIRD PROTECTION
Most of us appreciate the beauty that birds can bring to the garden, but when they spoil our fruit and vegetables they become less desirable garden visitors.
Bullfinches may strip buds from fruit trees in early spring, wood pigeons ruin winter cabbages and cauliflowers and uproot seedlings of peas and beans in spring, or strip buds of fruit from blackcurrants and other fruits.
Blackbirds and thrushes will make a meal of ripening strawberries, pears etc, and even blue-tits can damage ripening apples and pears by pecking them and letting in fungi and bacteria that may cause the fruit to rot.
The best solution is to erect a permanent fruit cage, though this is not always practical for tree fruits.
If you have just a few bushes, drape individual plants with nets, burying or pegging down the edges during vulnerable periods.
Unfortunately small animals such as hedgehogs can get entangled in the net, and removing it to pick the fruit can be tricky.
Because the net will inevitably be in close contact with some of the fruit, birds will still do some damage where they can peck through the mesh.
BUYING THE FRAMES
Fruit cages are relatively expensive and you have to consider whether it would be cheaper to buy from a pick-your-own farm than to pay for a fruit cage.
The choice is mainly between galvanised steel, painted steel, and aluminium frames.
Painted steel is likely to be less durable than the other kinds, but it is equally important to choose strong frames that are not likely to buckle:(aluminium may be more likely than steel to bend under strain).
The size and type of netting is equally important if a fruit cage is to last and serve its purpose.
A 25mm (1in) mesh will exclude most birds, but if tits are a problem it is best to choose an 18mm (¾in) mesh.
A 10cm (4in) mesh may be adequate to keep pigeons off winter greens, but isn't practical for a fruit cage.
The smaller the mesh the more expensive the net, so there is no point in using a smaller mesh than necessary.
Snow is more likely to cause damage to a small-mesh net.
Netting is likely to be made from either polypropylene or polythene.
Ordinary polythene netting will deteriorate within two or three seasons, but manufacturers usually add a uv stabiliser, which considerably extends its useful life.
Different manufacturers claim widely different life expectancies for both materials, but you can reasonably expect a five-year life from most types (but as some manufacturers claim a life of only half this, and others double, check before you buy).
The majority of bird netting is likely to be knotted (this produces a fine and very flexible net) or knitted, but the thickness of the thread is likely to be more important than the type of assembly.
A reinforced edge adds strength and is useful for a fruit cage.
MAKING YOUR OWN
A fruit cage is a practical d-i-y project.
You could use galvanised steel tubing (try a scrap merchant) for the uprights, and metal tubing or galvanised wire across the top.
An all-timber construction is easy to assemble.
Suitable netting is available from garden centres as well as by mail order.
Clips for fixing and joining the nets are available from some cage and netting manufacturers.
PROTECTING STRAWBERRIES
Cloches are widely used to protect strawberries in spring and to produce an early crop.
Some can be fitted with a net to provide bird protection once the glass has been removed.
Netting can also be stretched over the hoops used for the popular polythene tunnel cloches.
So after the early strawberries have been protected, use the cloches as a fruit cage.
KEEP CONTAINERS BLOOMING
Windowboxes and other containers often begin to run out of flower power towards the end of summer, but it is usually possible to give them a boost to sustain interest until it is time to plant them up for a spring display.
Dead-head regularly.
Plants like pansies will flower for longer, but even those that flower for a long time anyway, like African and French marigolds, will look neater and tidier if dead-headed, and the dead flowers will not detract from flowers that are still blooming.
Remove plants that have finished .
they make the container look untidy; often neighbouring plants will fill the spaces vacated.
If most of the plants have finished, discard them and plant up with spring-flowering bulbs or winter-interest dwarf shrubs.
Use fillers , such as all-year-round chrysanthemums, potgrown busy Lizzies, or even small foliage plants like pots of ivy, to fill in gaps.
These can give a new lease of life to a jaded windowbox or tub.
Feed with a liquid fertiliser — at this time of year quick results are needed, which granular or slow-release fertilisers may not provide.
Regular feeding will often extend the life of container-grown plants by many weeks.
CUTTING TIME
Geraniums are an excellent investment.
Once you have a few plants, they are easy to propagate from cuttings.
Plants from cuttings taken now will produce better, more shapely plants than old plants overwintered, and of course you will have more of them.
Choose healthy and vigorous non-flowering shoots (if this is difficult just trim off any flowers), and make the cuttings about 10cm (4in) long.
Cut just below a leaf joint, and trim off the bottom leaves together with the stipules (the small scalelike growths at the base of each leafstalk).
Dip the end of each cutting in a rooting powder (even this is optional) and insert round the edge of a 15cm (6in) pot — or plant individually in 8–9cm (3–3½in) pots.
Place in a cold frame or on a windowsill out of direct sunlight, where they will soon root at this time of year.
Pot individually when rooted, and overwinter the young plants in a light, frost-free place.
GARDEN IN SAFETY
Do you think of your garden as somewhere to relax, and where the children can play in safety?
Then beware, because your garden can be dangerous: 320,000 people were injured in gardens last year.
There are all sorts of hazards in gardens: electrical equipment which can kill if not used correctly, or if it is faulty; tools which are easy to trip over; garden canes, which cause many eye injuries; loose paving and muddy surfaces; and sharp implements and thorns.
And for children, there are even more hazards: from ponds to poisonous plants and chemicals.
The Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, the Consumers' Association, and the Department of Trade and Industry have got together to produce a leaflet to warn you of garden hazards which you may not be aware of, and may not be aware of, and how to safeguard against them.
Entitled Do it safely , it's available free from garden centres and d-i-y stores, as well as local trading standards and environmental health departments.
BULB BARGAINS
Bulbs are a good long-term investment if you choose them wisely.
Those that tend to split up into smaller bulbs the following year, then take several years to reach flowering size, can be disappointing unless you replant with fresh bulbs each year.
Hyacinths, most tulips and some of the dwarf irises, such as Iris danfordiae , fall into this category.
By choosing bulbs that multiply that flower prolifically, however, your investment shows good dividends every year.
These are often inexpensive bulbs too, and most of them can be left to naturalise freely with the minimum of attention.
Some good ones to try are suggested in the table.
Although most can be planted in a lawn, the grass in that area must be left uncut until the leaves begin to die down.
If this is unappealing, plant them in bold clumps or drifts in front of shrubs or towards the front of a mixed or herbaceous border.
They will provide pockets of interest early in the year before the herbaceous plants make an impact.
Bluebell
Best for moist shade — ideal for a woodland area but good in grassed areas planted with shrubs
Usually sold as a mixture, but separate blue, pink and white varieties are available
Crocus
The large-flowered dutch crocuses need no description.
C chrysanthus varieties are smaller but flower earlier and naturalise well in the rock garden or grass
For naturalising, large-flowered mixtures are best for lawns.
Try the separate varieties of C Chrysanthus, such as‘Ladykiller’(purple and white) and ‘Blue Pearl’(soft blue)
Daffodil (narcissus)
The large-flowered trumpet daffodils are widely grown everywhere, but some of those with short, contrasting cups are just as attractive as the trumpet varieties, and there are charming miniatures too
Mixtures of the large-flowered kinds are likely to be best for naturalising, as they are often sold in bulk very cheaply for this purpose.
For a more ‘old world’ appeal, try the pheasant eye narcissus (N Poeticus) with its tiny yellow cup edged crimson against white petals.
One of the finest miniatures for naturalising in grass is the hoop-petticoat daffodil, N. Bulbacodium
Erythronium
Charming plants for a damp position, perhaps beneath deciduous trees.
There are several kinds but of all have nodding flowers with turned-back petals
E Revolutum, which grows to about 25cm (910in) is one of the most dependable.
‘Pagoda’ is a good strong yellow hybrid with marbled foliage
Glory of the snow (chionodoxa)
Nodding star-like blue and white flowers on spikes about 10cm (4in) tall
All species will do well, but C luciliae is one of the most widely available and dependable
Grape hyacinth (muscarl)
Clusters of tightly packed small blue flowers on stems about 23cm (9in) high
M armeniacum is cheap and excellent for naturalising.
M botryoides ‘Album’ is white
PATIO DOORS
Patio doors are big business these days.
There's a wide range of products at a wide range of prices, and deciding which to go for can be a difficult decision…and an expensive one to get wrong.
So if you're in the market for some new doors, here are some of the things you need to know.
If you are replacing existing patio doors, you have two options.
The first is to fit doors of a similar type and style to those you already have.
Doors with wood or aluminium frames are widely available from builders' merchants and timber yards, and you can either do the work yourself or call in a local builder to do it for you.
This is the cheaper option, but does not generally give you a great deal of choice in terms of design, features or finish.
Your second option is to go for tailor-made and professionallyinstalled doors that combine the latest design and construction techniques with materials that promise minimal maintenance, and which include the bonus of having extra-wide sealed-unit double glazing and built-in weather-stripping.
The only difficulty you might face is in getting the right look — doors that match the style of your house — but manufacturers have come a long way from the early aluminium-framed types, and a range of styles is now available.
Choosing this road is likely to cost more than the first option, but you will at least ensure that your doors are the best that money can buy.
That's the theory, anyway.
WHAT'S ON THE MARKET?
Patio doors are made in timber, aluminium and plastic (unplasticised polyvinyl chloride, or upvc for short).
These materials are sometimes used in combination — aluminium doors may be set in a timber sub-frame, for example, and upvc doors usually have steel reinforcement inside their box sections for extra strength.
Timber doors are usually made either from preservativetreated softwood, or a rot-resistant hardwood such as mahogany, and many have high-performance specifications that include integral weather-stripping and sealed-unit double glazing.
Their advantages are:
Wood is an excellent insulator.
They come in a fairly wide range of standard sizes.
You can paint or stain them to any colour you want.
Set against these points is the maintenance problem; softwood doors need regular decoration to keep rot at bay, and even hardwoods require regular treatment with preservative and stain to keep them in good condition.
Aluminium doors are still the most common (and the cheapest) type of patio door.
They are usually fitted into a timber sub-frame (hardwood, in preference to softwood; there's little point in fitting an indestructible door in a frame that could rot in 10 years), and come with either a silvery finish or a factory-applied coating in a limited range of colours.
Their advantages are:
They also come in a reasonably wide range of standard sizes for d-i-y installation; professional installers usually make to measure, so awkward sizes aren't a problem.
They need minimal maintenance.
They usually have integral weather-stripping.
Their drawbacks are that the frames are prone to serious condensation unless a thermal break is incorporated in their construction, and uncoated types may suffer surface corrosion in industrial or coastal areas.
They also tend to be aesthetically unsuited to many older-style properties.
Plastic (upvc)doors are the latest arrival on the scene, although they have been widely used on the continent for around 25 years.
They usually incorporate internal steel members for extra strength, and because of the relatively large cross-section of the various stiles and rails they can make an appropriate replacement for many older-style houses with timber windows.
Their advantages are:
The frame members are good insulators, so condensation is not a problem.
They can be fixed directly to masonry.
They need virtually no maintenance.
Some colours and wood grain effects are beginning to find their way on to the market, although most are still white.
They are usually made to measure, so matching awkward sizes is easy.
Their two main disadvantages are that they can discolour with time unless an ultra-violet light stabiliser is incorporated in the plastic, and that it's difficult to fit security devices to them (make sure good locks are fitted as standard by the manufacturer and frames are strengthened).
They are, generally speaking, the most expensive type.
Most patio doors consist of one fixed and one sliding panel, up to widths of about 3050mm.
Wider openings may have three or even four panels, and you can generally choose which are open and which are fixed.
GLASS CHOICES
As already mentioned, choosing patio doors that suit your house is one of the most important points to consider.
Most look similar except for the frame material; choose this to match your windows if possible.
Some firms which tailor-make doors offer obscured or patterned glass — usually only to order.
Make sure that the doors you buy are fitted with safety glass to the requirements of British Standard BS6206.
For safety and security, install laminated glass in your patio doors.
Safety glass will break into relatively harmless pieces when it's hit hard, but laminated glass is much more difficult to break, and will deter most burglars after their first attempt.
For information, contact The Laminated Glass Information Centre on: 071 499 1720.
The most recent glass development is the growing use of solar control and low-emissivity glass , which helps to retain heat in the winter and to prevent unnecessary solar gain in summer.
OTHER FEATURES
Once you have chosen the basic type of door you want, there are two other important features to check.
The first is security : the doors should have a key-operated lockable handle, ideally shooting bolts into the top and bottom of the door frame, and should incorporate anti-lift devices so the doors cannot be removed from their tracks from the outside.
The second is ventilation .
If the doors are the room's only opening to the outside air, you should choose a type with a trickle ventilator built into the top frame member to meet the requirements of the Building Regulations.
FITTING
There are literally thousands of firms that offer a supply-and-fit service nowadays, and choosing the best one for your home can be difficult.
Personal recommendation is still the safest method of selection, but members of the Glass and Glazing Federation (GGF) have to abide by the federation's code of practice and so should be a safe bet.
For a list of members, contact them on: 071 792 2614.
If you want to save money and fit your own patio doors, builders' merchants and timber merchants offer a small range of standard-sized doors.
Some window and door specialists also offer a supply-only, made-to-measure service.
In some cases the firm will do all the measuring up; others rely on the customer to do it.
FINANCIAL
ARE YOU SURE YOU'RE INSURED?
Suppose you're decorating the living-room, insulating the loft, or knocking two rooms into one.
Will your household insurance pay for the damage if you spill a can of paint over your wall-to-wall carpet, put your foot through the bedroom ceiling, or demolish a load-bearing wall and bring half your home tumbling about your ears?
Policies differ, but let's look first at the basic type which covers buildings and/or contents against a set list of risks such as fire, theft, subsidence and earthquakes.
Loss or damage caused by accidents is not generally included, though you may be able to claim under some other section.
If you accidentally caused a fire with your blowlamp, you would be covered by the fire section.
If you caused a flood by knocking a nail through a water pipe, the flood section would cover you for damage caused by the water, but not for the damage to the pipe.
Most basic building policies do, however, cover accidental damage to underground gas, electricity, oil, water and sewage pipes or cables.
So you could claim the cost of repair if you chopped one while digging in the garden.
You usually get free accident cover, too, for glass in doors, windows and skylights, and also for baths, washbasins and wcs.
Most basic contents policies cover accidents to mirrors and fixed glass in furniture and some even include TVs, videos, satellite dishes, home computers and audio equipment.
Beyond that, you can usually buy extensions covering accidental damage to the buildings, eg; by putting your foot through the bedroom ceiling, or to the contents, eg, by spilling paint on a carpet.
Yet another option is to buy a policy which itself covers accidental damage without the need for buying a separate extension.
Naturally, it will cost more than a basic policy.
Most expensive of all is an all-risks policy which also gives wide cover against accidental damage.
But watch out.
Some policies which otherwise give good cover specifically rule out damage caused to the buildings in the course of repair, demolition or any work on the structure.
So you couldn't claim if you knocked down a load-bearing wall.
You might also be unlucky if you put a foot through the bedroom ceiling while repairing the inside of the roof; but you should be covered if you were insulating the loft.
If in doubt, ask your insurance agent — and read your policy before disaster strikes.
DELTA DEBIT CARDS
Yet another logo has appeared on the plastic card scene — Visa Delta's interlinking triangles.
You'll see it outside shops and on your Visa Delta debit card when it comes up for renewal.
Visa Delta is a debit card network linked with the Visa credit card network.
It includes Barclays' Connect, Lloyds' Payment and TSB's Bank Card.
You can use these to pay for goods wherever the Visa — or new Visa Delta — logo is displayed.
The money is automatically taken out of your current account in the same time it takes to clear a cheque, roughly three days.
HELP WITH THE LAW
Suppose your new washing machine is on the blink; or your neighbour puts up a fence inside your boundary; or you trip over a paving stone and break your leg.
Polite letters of complaint get you nowhere.
What do you do next?
In theory, the law should come to your rescue.
But your earnings, or savings, rule you out for Legal Aid, and you're reluctant to splurge money on lawyers.
That's where legal expenses insurance helps — it protects against the cost of taking legal action.
Bought as an ‘add-on’ with a house contents policy for a few pounds a year, it should cover you for consumer, household and personal injury claims.
A separate, dearer policy would also cover you for job, tax and inheritance disputes.
For more details, send an sae to the Association of British Insurers, Aldermary House, 10–15 Queen Street, London EC4N 1TT, for the free leaflet,Legal expenses insurance .
REGULATIONS
BUILDINGS REGS APPLICATIONS
The next time you call at your local council offices to collect some forms for making a Building Regulations application, don't be surprised if you are asked, ‘What type of forms do you want — Full plans or Building Notice?’
The reason for this is that there are now two ways of getting your council's blessing to proceed with the work you have in mind.
The Full Plans method is the old system that has existed for many years, whereby detailed plans of your proposal are submitted in duplicate, along with an application form.
The plans are examined by the council for compliance with the Building Regulations, and if everything is in order you will receive an Approval Notice in due course, which you can then file away with your deeds.
The Building Notice procedure is a comparatively new system and does not require the submission of any detailed plans.
With this method a simple form (Notice) is deposited with your council, which gives brief details of the work you want to do.
Although no detailed plans are necessary, you will be required to provide a location plan showing the siting of your building, the boundaries of the site and particulars of any drainage works.
Once a Building Notice has been submitted and accepted by your council you can start work within 48 hours.
As there are no plans to examine, the council is not obliged to issue any formal letter of approval.
Compliance with the Building Regulations is enforced by means of site inspections during the progress of the work.
A question which is often asked is, ‘Are there any risks involved in using the quicker procedure of submitting a Building Notice rather than depositing full plans?’
The answer is yes, although the risk may only be minimal in the case of minor projects associated with dwelling houses.
Unlike the Full Plans method, the use of the Building Notice procedure does not entitle you to any documentary proof from your council that your proposal is satisfactory, or that the work will be accepted by the Buildings Control Officer who is required to inspect the work as it proceeds.
A good working knowledge of the Building Regulations requirements is therefore necessary.
The council is also empowered to ask for details of any unusual part of the project to prove compliance with the Building Regulations, eg special foundations for building on doubtful ground.
Another disadvantage of the Building Notice procedure is that if your work is to be financed by a bank or building society, then you may be required to produce some form of documentary proof that your proposal is satisfactory when you are negotiating for your loan.
Your council will only provide a Building Regulations Approval Notice when Full Plans are deposited, so you will have to use this method.
The Building Notice is most suited for minor jobs associated with dwellings.
Unfortunately, there is no difference in the amount of fees payable with the two systems.
PROBLEM SOLVER
For free advice on any d-i-y problem, write to .
We can reply only if: 1: You enclose a valid Free Advice Coupon with each query.
2: Also enclose an sae.
Each separate query must be accompanied by a valid Free Advice Coupon and an sae and each query should be written on a separate piece of paper.
We regret that we are unable to answer multiple queries that do not comply with these instructions.
And we are unable to supply plans for projects.
DECORATING
Painting sills 
My window sills are badly rotting in places.
How should I prepare them for repainting?
Wood generally, and wooden windows in particular, are prone to rotting.
Test the surface for sponginess by probing it with a screwdriver and renew rotten timber either by replacing complete sections with new preservative-treated wood, or by cutting-in new sections of wood, or if the area of rot is not too extensive, by replacing the decay using a modern wood repair system as made by Ronseal and Cuprinol.
The basis of both these systems is a wood hardener which strengthens the decayed wood fibres, and a two-part high performance wood filler.
In both cases, the wood should be as dry as possible when the wood hardener is applied, and when this is dry, the two-part epoxy-resin wood filler is pressed into the cavity to give a noncrack, non-shrink repair.
A sander will be required to remove excess filler and shape it to match the existing timber.
A second application of filler may be required to fill cavities which sanding reveals.
On completion the repair is primed and painted in the normal way.
RUST
Hinges and latches 
How can garden gate furniture be protected from rust?
Hinges and latches on garden gates are very prone to rust — the action of opening and closing them will wear away any protective coating you may apply.
While you should try to keep most of the hinge and latch painted for appearances sake (unless it is brass or galvanised), you must accept that the main working parts will rust; so be prepared to apply regular coatings of oil or WD40 to protect them.
This will not only make the hinge or latch work evenly but will provide a medium in which any existing rust is worn away and any future rust is prevented.
A jammed hinge or latch can be freed with a penetrating oil such as Plus Gas.
All locks on external doors are candidates for rust: the answer again is to squirt in a lubricant on a regular basis.
DRIVES
Crack repair 
How do you deal with cracks in a concrete drive?
Settlement cracks go in various directions and result in a depression that collects water.
The cure for this is to break up and remove all the affected concrete, right back to sound material.
Some of the foundation hardcore may also have to be removed, and any soft ground dug out till you reach a firmer base.
Extra hardcore is then rammed well down into the hole and the concrete replaced, using a mix of one part cement to two sand and three of 20mm gravel.
Alternatively, you can use a mix of one part cement to five parts ballast.
Finish the surface to match the rest of the drive.
Sloping drives are often left with the parallel ridges made by the tamping board.
Smooth-trowelled finishes can be slippery in winter, so it's best to finish with a wooden float as this will give a slightly textured surface.
WATER GARDENS
Fitting a pump 
How should a submersible pump be fixed?
Submersible pumps should always be completely submerged (remember to allow for the inevitable drop of water level through evaporation in warm weather).
But don't sit them directly on the base of the pond, where the filter will soon become clogged with sediment.
If possible, raise the pump on bricks, or a small plinth.
STAIRCASES
Filling a gap 
A gap has appeared above the string of our new loft staircase.
How should I fill it?
Use either a flexible mastic sealant or pin a wooden bead or moulding in position.
A standard cellulose filler would very quickly crack and fall out again due to normal movement.
CENTRAL HEATING
Corroding radiators 
What are the symptoms of corrosion taking place in central heating?
Corrosion in central heating systems is a major problem and can result in a build-up of sludge, the main symptom of which is cold areas at the bottom of the radiators.
When corrosion really takes a hold, the radiators themselves may start to leak, and the overall effect is to reduce the system's efficiency.
Corrosion can be avoided in central heating systems if an inhibitor is added to the feed- and — expansion cistern.
Choosing the right inhibitor (which may need to include anti-freeze) and deciding on the correct procedure (which may involve cleansing the system first) is not always easy.
ELECTRICITY
Bell push 
Is an illuminated bell push heavy on batteries?
Illuminated bell pushes should only be used with transformers as they get through batteries extremely quickly.
They should also not be used with certain electronic chimes as the current they use may trigger the chime.
If you are buying a 12 volt chime, you'll need to use special bulbs in the bell push.
The illuminated versions can be handy if sited near the keyhole — they will probably give you just enough light to stop you fumbling in the dark with your key.
You can also get them with space for a name card behind a clear plastic window.
PATHS
Brickwork 
Can any bricks be used to lay a path?
With bricks you must be sure to use the correct variety.
Ordinary flettons or stocks can be used for garden walls, where water will run off them, but for paving you need special quality frost-proof or engineering bricks, otherwise they will quickly disintegrate.
PLUMBING
Shower pressure 
Despite raising the cold water cistern in the loft, shower pressure is poor.
What else can I do to improve things?
If you have sited the cold water storage cistern as high as possible, yet your shower still lacks pressure, then the answer will be to fit a shower booster pump.
Such a pump will even allow you to have a shower where the cold water storage cistern is below the level of the shower rose.
Most major companies in the shower pump market, like Stuart Turner, offer a technical advisory service which can advise on the correct choice of pump and its installation.
Adding a waste 
I have a 1930s house.
I want to run a waste from a shower.
Are there any snags to watch for?
Older houses will have a two-pipe drainage system with the wc waste going into its own soil stack.
And the waste from bath and basin are taken into a hopper head which connects to a drainpipe running into a gully (often the same gully as the kitchen sink).
This type of system is easy to add to.
You make a hole in the outside wall and run the waste pipe through, fit an elbow and lead another pipe into the hopper head.
Cold water cisterns 
How should you deal with rust in a cistern?
Metal cold water cisterns are covered with an internal galvanised coating to prevent rusting of the underlying iron.
However, with time, the galvanised coating will be worn away (especially if there is a copper pipework in the system) and the cistern will start to rust.
Not only will this make the water unpleasant but it may cause leakages if the corrosion goes right through the cistern.
At one time, painting the inside of cold water cisterns with bituminous paint was the answer when it had corroded, but this is no longer recommended.
The best thing to do when an old galvanised cistern has started to rust is to replace it with a modern plastic type.
PRESERVATIVE
Treating battens 
Do battens need to be treated in any way before fixing?
They are to be used outside under cladding.
Wherever possible, buy pre-treated (often called Tanalised) battens.
These will have been pressure-impregnated, and will be resistant to damp and insect attack.
If you can't get treated timber, soak it in a simple preservative-filled trough made of bricks covered by a heavy gauge polythene sheet.
This is far more effective than brush application.
HAMBONE by Mike Flanagan
SO I SAYS TO HIM, OK LOUDMOUTH, LET'S SEE YOU TAKE OVER MY COMPANY!
TIMBER CLADDING
Rot prevention 
What is the best way to prevent timber cladding from rot?
The biggest enemy of timber cladding — and its supporting battens — is rot.
If water can penetrate and collect in joints, the wood will rot quickly unless steps are taken to prevent it.
For this reason, all wood used for cladding — unless it is naturally rot-resistant, like Western red cedar — should be pretreated with preservative before use.
Ideally this should be carried out by the timber supplier (treated wood is described as ‘Tanalised’ or ‘Celcured’by timber merchants and other stockists) to ensure thorough and deep penetration of the wood.
But d-i-y treatment will go a long way towards keeping rot at bay, and you should be prepared to give freshly exposed cut surfaces of both cladding and battens an extra coat of preservative during installation for extra protection.
Drawbacks 
I want to fix waney-edged boards on my house.
Are they suitable?
Waney-edged boards have irregular-shaped bottom edges (often with the outside bark of the log still attached) and are generally of uniform thickness.
They suffer from the drawback that warping can leave open gaps in the cladding (waney-edged boards are particularly prone to this because of the way they are sawn), and so they tend to be used more on out-buildings than on house exteriors, except as feature panels.
Battening out 
What size should battens for supporting cladding be, and how are they fixed?
Wall battens are usually 38×119mm, or 50×25mm in cross-section, and should be fixed to the walls either with masonry nails or with non-rusting screws driven into wallplugs.
Nails should penetrate about 10mm into solid masonry and should not be driven into mortar joints.
If you are fixing battens over existing rendering make sure they are long enough to give adequate penetration into the brickwork or blockwork beneath.
While cladding can be fixed directly to existing masonry walls, it is good practice to cover them with waterproof building paper first to prevent any moisture that gets behind the cladding from penetrating the wall itself.
It can be held in place by the battens.
DRIVES
Gravel 
How is gravel laid and are weeds likely to be a problem later?
Like all other paving materials gravel depends on its foundations for its efficiency.
If all the weeds and garden loam are dug out when the drive or path is laid, there should be no serious problem with weeds.
The base for gravel is hardcore or hogging, which is a rough, unwashed gravel.
This has to be well compacted before the 20m gravel is laid — to a depth of about 50mm.
A small sized gravel,(about 10mm) can be used for paths, but not for drives, as it would get into tyre treads.
The edging for a gravel drive must be deep enough to keep in the gravel which is below ground level, and high enough to prevent the gravel being spread on to the garden.
Cars tend to roll gravel on to the pavement.
To reduce this problem you could insert a low edging across the end of the drive.
If it has a rounded top, projecting only about 25mm above the gravel, it will not harm the tyres.
Depressions are usually caused by tyre tracks and simply need filling with more gravel.
Where most of the gravel has been compacted into the soil below, weeds have to be removed and a good general weed-killer applied.
Then new gravel is laid directly on top — the old gravel will form a firm foundation.
DECORATING
Painting metal 
How do you prepare and paint metal gutters and windows?
Preparation consists of cleaning and degreasing: iron and steel need to be cleaned of rust.
All encrustment and blisters must be scraped off and then the metal is wire-brushed to remove loose fragments.
When cleaned, non-ferrous metals are best brought to a bright finish before priming with zinc chromate or zinc phosphate.
Iron and steel can also be primed with these materials for interior work, but for exterior work calcium plumbate primer is best.
Calcium plumbate primer can also be used on galvanised iron, but zinc chromate or zinc phosphate is used on aluminium alloys.
Iron and steel can also be treated with a cold galvanising paint, which reacts with a thin layer of rust to form a rust-proof coating that can be painted.
After priming, the metals can be painted in the usual way.
A popular paint for iron railings, gutters and downpipes is black bitumen, which though it loses its gloss quickly still retains its protective qualities.
When dealing with windows, remove all traces of rust and apply a neutralising agent to badly affected areas.
This makes rust inert.
Rub down with abrasive paper then degrease the surface with white spirit.
Apply one thin coat of primer immediately (rust can reform rapidly) and allow to dry before coating with gloss.
CLADDING
Choosing plastic 
I want to use plastic cladding but a friend says it will soon crack.
Is he right?
Early versions were comparatively flimsy mouldings which tended to suffer from brittleness and yellowing as they aged, and which relied on complicated channellings and fixing clips for their installation.
Later developments, however, have produced greatly improved versions of this type of cladding.
It is widely available and is now much simpler to fit.
There is also a ‘second generation’ of plastic cladding materials which have none of these drawbacks and which are also extremely easy to handle and install.
These have a solid cellular core of unplasticised polyvinyl chloride (upvc) enclosed in a smooth, durable outer skin, and they can be sawn and drilled just like timber.
They are rigid, completely impermeable to water and almost maintenance-free, simply requiring occasional washing to remove surface grime.
Another major advantage over the thinner types of cladding is that they provide additional insulation to exterior walls (which can be augmented by fixing them over an extra layer of insulation).
A range of profiles is available from the various manufacturers, and while most come in white only, a few are also made in cream, green and brown.
FLOORINGS
Quarry tiles 
What are the pros and cons of quarry tiles?
These are similar to ceramic tiles, but are unglazed and come only in a range of earth/terracotta/red colours as they are made from unrefined clay.
They are usually associated with farmhouse kitchens and look good with real wood and natural materials.
While extremely hardwearing, they aren't a good idea if you're prone to dropping things — the tiles won't break, but whatever you drop will.
They're ideal for porches and conservatories — and for kitchens with careful cooks!
Tiles are usually 4 or 6 in square, ½, ⅝ or 1¼in thick, and some hexagonal, rectangular, and with anti-slip surfaces are available, as well as skirting tiles.
WINDOWS
Steel frames 
I will soon be installing newer windows.
I like the idea of using steel but is there a problem with rusting?
Steel frames were widely available in the 1930s, but these early frames were liable to rust and could soon look tacky.
However, the latest frames have a galvanised coating which keeps them rusts-free.
A wipe down with a damp cloth is all that's needed to keep them clean, and if they have a factory-finished polyester powder coating, they won't need to be redecorated for 15–20 years.
If you choose metal windows, ensure that they're fitted with a ‘thermal break’ to reduce condensation problems — windows without this feature can stream with moisture in cold weather.
DAMP
Using mastic 
Is bituminous mastic useful for filling cracks in roofs?
Bituminous mastics, applied with a trowel or putty knife, can be used for cracks in roofs, but shouldn't be applied in very cold weather.
You'll probably need to apply a liquid waterproofer on top of the mastic.
Left: Paint and stencil hardboard floors to suit design schemes exactly
Below: Veneered mdf architectural joinery is ideal for skirting boards and architraves
Protect your home with a durable exterior masonry paint.
This is Weathershield, from Dulux, available in a wide choice of colours
Feed and dead-head plants regularly for a long-lasting display
When choosing aluminium doors, look for a thermal break to prevent condensation, and a trickle ventilator built into the top frame
DIARY
BURGLAR-PROOFING
Extracts from the diary of the working supervisor for a small building company, with useful tips on all sorts of building problems
Summer's back, but it never seems to last long enough.
Those who haven't taken advantage of early season low prices still have to take their hard-earned rest.
But before you jet off to soak up sun and sangria , or cruise around the Norfolk Broads give some thought to security.
Is your home a burglar's paradise?
We'd called at a house to install some concrete steps in the rear garden, and learnt that they had been burgled the previous night.
We continued our work until the fingerprint man arrived to dust that dreadful black powder everywhere.
Being the nosy type, I thought I'd pick his brains.
Apart from the basic security arrangements that we're probably all familiar with by now, he offered some interesting information.
There are basically two types of thief: the opportunist and the pro.
The first quickly takes advantage of a window carelessly left open or a house that's in darkness.
Some people even leave notes on the front door for a delivery man — you might as well put an invitation in the front garden.
The second is a slick operator, who studies his victim's habits for a few days to establish a safe crime time.
This guy is the most difficult to deter, and uses some devious methods.
The pro isn't put off by time switches.
When the light comes on at precisely the same time each night and the curtains aren't drawn, it's clear the house is empty.
Neighbours who will do this service for you should use the back door, where there's less chance of them being seen going in and out.
Careless talk can be disastrous.
If you are going away, tell only those who need to know — a slip of the tongue in the street, pub or corner shop could be overheard by the wrong sort.
Addresses don't have to be mentioned, they can easily be looked up in the electoral roll just from a name.
If you're in the phone book, it takes only a couple of rings to confirm your absence before some toe-rag pays an unwelcome visit.
British Telecom will disconnect your phone at the exchange while you are away, so that callers will hear the discontinued number tone, suggesting that you've changed the number, didn't pay the bill, or there's a fault on the line — BT won't tell them.
Or you could always take it off the hook, which has a similar effect.
You get what you pay for with locks.
Two-lever morsite locks are very easy to pick compared to their five-lever counter-parts, and deadlocks are a perfect menace to a would-be intruder.
A pro can identify the mock burglar alarm, but the genuine article is a real deterrent.
Some work on electronic beams, while others are activated by air movement — just opening the door can be enough to set off this type.
It is important to make sure there are not too many false alarms.
Rotten pun, but seriously, it drives the neighbourhood wild when the thing rings for hours, and most importantly, nobody takes any notice if it happens too often.
It could be just one of these occasions when your home really is being ransacked.
Alarms and Neighbourhood Watch schemes not only improve security, but with some insurance companies can lower your premiums too.
Small items of both financial and sentimental value should never be left in the house unless a good safe has been installed.
The best precaution would be to deposit them with the bank.
Sadly, the thief who leaves no clues and is careful disposing of his ill-gotten gains is unlikely to be caught.
The bottom line on who pays is the insurance companies and the householder.
I've seen many concrete steps, otherwise well constructed, crying for a little finishing and more support at the time of casting.
Initially, that gaping space can be a little puzzling, but it's quite simple really.
The horizontal distance for the flight of steps can be divided equally to establish the depth of each step, correctly called the ‘going’.
This shouldn't be less than 225mm, but before deciding on a firm measurement, the same calculation should be applied to the vertical measurement, between the highest and lowest points.
This will give a height (riser), which ideally needs to be around 150mm, but not more than 200mm.
From here it's a simple juggling act to find the best sizes to suit the application.
Where a wall encloses the sides of the steps, fixing the shuttering couldn't be easier.
Open steps will need shuttered stringers, simply cut from the two measurements calculated.
Our shuttering had been fabricated in the workshop, complete with risers reinforced with some 75 × 50mm timber, but we could have made it up on site.
It can be surprising the amount of pressure a little wet concrete puts on shuttering.
Economically, thinner ply is preferable, but needs strengthening to prevent curved steps.
We manhandled the formwork into position, digging out here and there to get it level in both directions.
Although the formwork was quite heavy, we pegged it down at the four corners as a precaution.
Available hardcore can be placed in each step, saving on concrete, which should cover by at least 40mm on all external faces.
The strength can be 6:1, or for the most durable surface, 3:1 may be used.
It goes without saying that you start with the bottom step, to prevent the concrete falling through to the one below.
Once filled, the sides and riser were gently tapped with a hammer for a couple of minutes to expel trapped air, which can cause surface voids.
As each tread was scraped flush and tamped, we moved up to the next; when the surface water had run off, the step could be finished.
We made the non-slip surfaces by stippling the tops with a bass broom — a fairly new one works best.
The outer edges were rounded and smoothed with a small edging trowel, which gives a very attractive finish.
Covering the work to protect from frost and rain, we left it for a few days to dry, which helps the shuttering to loosen itself too.
We didn't get any tea that day, but under the circumstances were quite forgiving.
