DOGS TODAY AUGUST 1991 We meet the man who turned his suburban semi into a Rottie sanctuary Sinitta's hectic life doesn't easily suit dogs.
She relies on roast chicken.
Win a holiday at a five-bone hotel.
Sally gives Bona-Fido breaks the paws-up Your invite to Top Dog '91 — the biggest and best doggie party ever staged PLUS!
Dobermanns * See Dunbar, Neville &Fisher live on stage * Diabetic Dogs * Win 10 VIP Working Dog of the Year tickets * Pet Census Results * Acupuncture * New Dog Video…
AND MUCH MORE His Master's Voice says NO What other shops say to dogs PUPPY OF ALL BATTLES We help bring Des back from the Gulf
Contents 
Special features
PUPPY OF ALL BATTLES Des the Desert Dog has landed 
DOGGED DISCRIMINATION?
Which shops are dog-friendly?
SINITTA Singing the praises of dog ownership 
A BONA-FIDO HOLIDAY Sally enjoys a five-bone break 
ESCAPE FROM EGYPT Scottie travels from Cairo to Chorley 
ROTTIE TO THE CORE Rescuing Rottweilers from rotten homes 
PET CENSUS RESULTS We introduce our typical reader 
DIABETIC DOGS Living with the condition 
IN THE FRAME Do you have a masterpiece on your walls?
SEEING FOR MILES A story of love, devotion and miracles 
TOP DOG '91 An invite to the biggest dog party ever 
NEEDLE WORKS Acupuncture is available for dogs, too 
DOBERMANN — DOG DILEMMA This breed needs careful owners 
Competitions &Offers
CAPTION COMPETITION Prizes from Pedigree Petfoods 
WIN A SCOTTISH WEEKEND For two plus one dog 
PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPETITION Win Pet Value insurance 
ARE YOU TYPICAL?
We're looking for our average reader 
CROSS-QUESTION What's this month's mystery mix?
WORKING DOG OF THE YEAR Ten pairs of VIP tickets 
AUGUST READER OFFERS New video and the Walk-Easy Collar 
SHRINK THINK TANK Another chance to attend 
GYLES BRANDRETH'S PRIZE CROSSWORD Omega Tasty prizes 
Regular features
NEWS HOUND
FOGLE'S FILES Puppy parties 
HOROSCOPES Roar of the lion-heart 
MEMOIRS OF A DOG SHRINK An unusual phobia 
POSTER PULL-OUT Lorimer's ‘A Dog and a Mirror’
VET'S CORNER Food for thought 
COPING WITH PET LOSS Sharing grief 
DOGGIE POST BAG Featuring the Good-boy star letter 
FIDO FACTS Dobermann Pinschers 
TRUE CASE HISTORIES Peter Neville: From stage fright to limelight 
CAREERS WITH DOGS Becoming an RAF police dog handler 
SHORT STORY Big is Best, by Robert Killick 
TAIL ENDING
KATIE'S PROBLEM PAGE The puppy-farming plague 
Dear Readers
I'd like to apologise most sincerely to everyone who was concerned about the advert for the electronic training collar in our July issue.
I was as shocked as you to find the advert in our magazine and fully understand and applaud the concern of all those who telephoned.
In future we will not be accepting any similar adverts and we'll be donating the revenue from this advert to the RSPCA.
We've received reports of dogs which have reacted adversely to low-dose electric shock training.
Next month we will print animal behaviourist John Fisher's views on this and other extreme training devices.
Please try to persuade anyone contemplating using this method to seek advice from a vet, animal behaviourist or reputable dog trainer.
Reward-based training is the method our experts advocate for most situations.
If there's a very serious canine-life threatening problem, experts need to be consulted.
Once again we're very, very sorry.
I hope you enjoy this month's magazine.
We've never given you quite so many opportunities to get involved.
Attend the Shrink Think Tank, Top Dog '91, or take advantage of some of the competitions and offers.
Sally recommends a five-bone break.
Read about her holiday on page 18.
Beverley Cuddy, Editor
Beverley and Sally enjoy their five-bone break
Caption Competition 
Can you think of a suitable caption for this picture?
To win a prize send in your captions as well as any photographs you think could feature in this section to:Dogs Today 
Entries to be received by September 2nd 1991.
The best caption wins 24 tins of Pedigree Chum, a big bag of Mixer, a sack of Pedigree Formula, and four packets of treats.
Five runners-up will receive 24 tins of Chum and a bag of Mixer.
News Hound 
NO SAFE SEX FOR DOGS
Dickie the Great Dane has been entrusted with the unusual task of demonstrating that safe sex has its place in the canine world.
The RSPCA first unveiled this eye-catching poster in Liverpool, where local RSPCA centres have to destroy hundreds of unwanted pets every week.
POLITICAL ANIMALS
The Dangerous Dogs Bill was rushed through the Lords and is expected to become law before the summer recess.
Owners of ‘dangerous’ breeds are likely to have a three-month period — until the end of November — to obtain a police permit for their animals.
RSPCA spokesperson Amanda Avis explained: ‘Owners are likely to be required to: Have the animal neutered; get compulsory thirdparty insurance; have the dog permanently identified and registered, and; when in public, comply with muzzling and leashing regulations.’
More than 300 owners of ‘dangerous’ dogs rallied outside the Houses of Parliament earlier this summer.
Organiser Kevin Horton said there was plenty more support as yet untapped.
‘The night before the protest rally Mr Baker pulled back on the destruction order he'd originally announced,’ Kevin explained.
‘Had that not happened we would've had a lot more people at the rally.
‘The ball is now in the Government's court.
We are ready and willing to bring further pressure on them if we see it as necessary in the future.’
DOG-AIDS HELP
We are planning an investigation into autoimmune problems.
If you have had any experience of Aids-like illnesses in dogs, please write to us enclosing as many details as possible and giving a daytime telephone number.
HEN RUSSELLING
Two-year old bantam hen Betty was so taken by a pair of new-born Jack Russell pups, she decided to take them under her wing.
Farmer Tom Savage, from Worcester, told Dogs Today : ‘I couldn't believe it when I saw them.
I've been farming for the last 70 years and never seen anything like it.’
The real mother seems more than happy to feed the pups, then allow them to nest under the bantam.
CRAZY FOR CRISPS
A four-year-old Labrador has discovered a passion for crisps — he even buys them himself.
JB, who lives with his publican owners, always makes a bee-line for the regulars as soon as he hears the last orders bell.
They usually give him a 20 pence piece and he heads straight for the bar to buy his favourite ready-salted snack.
Margaret Price, landlady of the Four Alls in York, told Dogs Today : ‘He's so human.
He opens the packet of crisps himself and starts munching away.’
JB is also very tidy — he always puts the empty packet in the bin when he's finished.
EXTREME PRESSURE
The Canine Crisis Council (sponsored by Hugo Summerson MP, Baroness Phillips and Lord Ross of Newport) has called for all dogs to be muzzled in public places and for large dogs to be kept muzzled even in the privacy of their owners' garden.
They want all existing large dogs to be included in the provisions of the Dangerous Wild Animals Act and to ban Alsatians, Dobermanns, Rottweilers and other big breeds from future private ownership.
They seek to restrict town-based owners to one dog per household and legislate for all puppies to be neutered before being sold.
Their literature states: ‘We have a dog crisis which we must seek to eliminate’.
If you would like to contact the Canine Crisis Council to give your opinion of their policies or find out more write to: PO Box 76, Leicester or fax: 0533 743141
We are grateful to the concerned Dogs Today reader who informed us of the lobbying activities of this organisation.
MERKIN STOLEN
Actress Arkie Whiteley's collie-cross, Merkin, was stolen from outside a shop on the Portobello Road, London, on April 29.
Despite extensive newspaper and TV coverage, Arkie has uncovered few clues as to the whereabouts of the black, tan and white dog she rescued from an RSPCA pound three years ago.
‘The night he disappeared I got a call from a woman who said she'd taken him because he looked abandoned,’ Arkie explained.
‘but he was wearing a collar and I'd tied him to a lamppost.’
The actress, currently appearing in Jeffrey Bernard is Unwell , said the woman claimed to live in Kent.
Sightings in Kent suggest Merkin may now be wearing a new red collar.
If you have any information about Merkin, call 071 727 1361.
ROBBED OF MEMORIES
Florrie Thompsett,(as featured in February Dogs Today ) was devastated when thieves broke into her home in Kent.
Florrie, 85, well known for her rescue work with Greyhounds, lost her many coursing trophies collected over the years.
Among the thieves' haul were an engraved silver salver, awarded to Florrie as part of her Rescue Personality of the Year prize, and bronzes of Greyhounds.
‘I've got nothing to show for what I've won over the years,’ a distraught Florrie said.
SHORT LEADS
RAVING BULL
Britain's first Raving Loony councillor, Stuart Hughes, has launched the Raving Loony Staffordshire Bull Terrier Party.
Hughes, from Sidmouth in Devon, decided on the new political group to highlight the confusion between the Staffie and the Pit Bull Terrier.
BARDOT BACKS OPS
Actress Brigitte Bardot has launched a campaign to have France's 35 million dogs and cats sterilised.
Brigitte wants to stop the destruction of unwanted pets.
WHAT A PICTURE
The Rottweiler Welfare Association is pleased to announce the winner of its most photogenic rescue dog competition (Dogs Today April issue).
Molly is a Labrador cross, owned by Gay Cosens from Reigate, Surrey.
When she was dumped she was in terrible condition, coping with seven young pups.
Now, well down the road to recovery, Molly looks in fine health.
Molly receives a box of doggie goodies and the runners-up will receive, by post, a special gift.
PAW-O-VISION
Does your dog like to sing to the soaps?
If so, we want to hear from you as quickly as possible.
Please send us a photograph and a tape recording of your dog's best singing efforts — or even a video.
Please complete this coupon or carefully copy all the details on to a plain sheet of paper and return to: Paw-o-Vision Song Contest 
If you'd like to listen to five of our Paw-O-Vision entrants, call 0898 100 239.
Calls cost 34p per minute at cheap rates and 45p per minute at all other times (VAT included).
Your dog can't prevent unwanted litters.
Neutering can.
Pit Bull owners demonstrate outside Parliament.
Police banned the Pit Bulls from taking part.
PUPPY OF ALL BATTLES
War brought Des and his troops together.
Peace pulled them apart.
Dogs Today,Eukanuba and British Airways reunited them 
SEAN KEEBLE
Des is a Desert Rat — or Desert Dog, to be precise.
The eightmonth-old cross-breed with marked Saluki and retriever influences was adopted by Warrant Officer second class Dave Forster and seven other members of the Royal Army Ordnance Corps Expeditionary Forces Institute (RAOC/EFI) unit based at Jubail, Saudi Arabia, during the Gulf War.
Des was one of a litter of seven pups found at the EFI compound at Jubail.
Most of the other pups were ‘shipped out’ to other units and their respective fates are unknown, but Dave and his mates — two others based with Dave at RAOC/EFI Headquarters at Claygate, Surrey, and five more still stationed in Germany — were determined to hand onto their new recruit.
At the end of the Gulf War, British Army authorities announced they would have to destroy all dogs which had been picked up and kept by British units in the war zone, but Dave and his colleagues decided they weren't going to let this cruel fate befall Des.
Letters were written; faxes were sent; phones rang hot as Dave set the wheels in motion on the mission to rescue Des.
That's where Dogs Today was able to take a hand.
We contacted British Airways Flying Pets Club and they kindly agreed to fly Des home.
One call to pet food company Eukanuba and the expensive quarantine and complicated paperwork were taken care of.
The result: Des was airlifted out of the Gulf in mid-May and, on May 29, at Arden Grange International Quarantine Kennels in Albourne, Sussex, Dave saw Des for the first time since March 23.
‘I was both thrilled and relieved to see him again,’ Dave said.
‘When I left Kuwait, I didn't know what was going to happen to Des.
I was one of the first ones to be flown out and then there was a postal hold-up so I had real trouble finding out what was going on, and also trying to organise to have him brought home.
‘I wrote to the Daily Mail , which is affiliated with Dogs Today , and your magazine very kindly took up the campaign on our behalf.
‘Everything's looking up now.’
Indeed, three-quarters of Des's existence, so far, has been fraught with hazard.
‘We have no idea who his father was and his mother, while not actually wild, was roaming around the compound for weeks,’ Dave said.
‘We found the pups, fed them and looked after them until we were moved out in January when the war build-up escalated.
We took Des with us and put up notices for the other dogs, which were replied to by various other units.’
By this stage, Des was more than just a mascot.
He was bestowed with the rank of War Dog First Class and his fame spread quickly.
Dave takes up the story.
‘He travelled with us from Saudi, along the border and into Kuwait, and, amazingly enough, finished up 30 kilometres northwest of Kuwait City, which is where I last saw him.
‘What was even more astonishing was the fact that people travelled miles to come and see him.
He was particularly popular with nurses, especially the American ones.’
Dave is a dog lover but because of his army routine and duties, he has not had the time or lifestyle to be able to keep a dog.
But that will change this month, when he will be permanently based in Surrey.
Des will be cleared from quarantine on November 6 so until then, he will have to make do with a weekly Saturday visit from Dave and fellow home-based squadron mates Corporals Brian McCourt and Richard Starkey.
‘There's a major reunion for all Gulf troops planned, and the other five, who are now in Germany, will be here then,’ Dave said.
‘I'd imagine they'll be very happy to get the chance to see Des again.’
According to Dave, Des has ‘doubled in size since I last saw him’ and has settled in well to his quarantine kennel life.
‘He seemed very happy.
He's being well looked after and everything's going smoothly,’ Dave added.
After a glittering military career, Des is ready for what will be a comparatively unexciting civilian life.
Des proved a real handful
Sheltering from the desert sun
Desert Rats together
‘Phew — I made it!’
Dogged DISCRIMINATION?
Our investigative researchers ventured into the centre of London to find out if High Street shops are dog-friendly and if they're not, why not?
CHAIN STORE MASSACRE?
JOHN LEWIS
Although no one stopped us entering the store, it was obvious we were being scrutinized by both shop assistants and the public.
Nevertheless, we were given the green light — unfortunately, poor Molly was accidentally stepped on a couple of times.
SELFRIDGES
Stickers on most doors around the store clearly indicated ‘No Dogs Allowed’.
However we pushed our luck and took Molly in, with no protests whatsoever.
Spike then followed, but was immediately challenged.
We concluded that as Molly was so small, nobody had noticed her.
BARKERS
No signs and no specific policy.
Staff seemed evenly divided — we received some smiles but also caught some rather unsavoury glances.
Generally, no problems.
MARKS &SPENCER
No.
Well-known rule here, and generally accepted.
Food in store.
Harrods 
For many years Harrods had a creche where customers could leave their dogs while they shopped in the store.
Sadly, due to refurbishment and a desire to create more shopping space, the kennels have been closed.
THE ENTERTAINERS?
HMV
Biggest shock of our day — no dogs allowed into a shop worldrenowned for its dog logo.
Quite farcical.
Uniformed security guard said: ‘Only guide dogs, you know what I mean.
There's no need for dogs to be in here.’
DILLONS
The manager was very helpful and happy to tell us dogs were certainly OK.
‘Dogs are welcome in here as long as they don't wee on the carpet,’ she said.
Most staff here seemed quite happy to have dogs with owners in the store.
A very warm atmosphere.
TOWER RECORDS
A round of applause for Tower Records; finally, a dog-friendly music store.
As long as your pet is under control you're welcome to take a spin round the store.
OWNER-DOG DUOS:Christine Davis, with her 18-month-old Border Collie, Spike, and Fiona Watson, with her Shih Tzu pup, Molly.
NO SHOPS CONTACTED PROHIBITED GUIDE DOGS OR HEARING DOGS 
SHOO SHOPS?
DOLCIS
Manager and staff were a little bemused by our request, but were happy to co-operate.
Fiona tried on a very bright pair of shoes.
One assistant said: ‘Dogs are fine, as long as they don't disgrace themselves’.
FASHION DISASTERS?
MONSOON
Love having dogs in the store.
Spike was again very well-behaved, lay down immediately when told, waited for instructions.
Manageress Jaci Henderson said: ‘We have no problems as long as they aren't running around, through clothes, making a mess, etc.
‘Quite a few of our customers have dogs and there are some large ones among them, although most of the ones who come in here are small.
But whatever they are, we have no objections at all.’
BENETTON
Friendly assistant manager, Colin McPherson, had no objections.
‘Yeah, we allow dogs in here.
Well, you've managed to get one in, anyway,’ he laughed.
‘I don't see why not.’
Benetton's true colours shine through.
HORNE BROS
Apparently no specific policy but managers told us they had some problems in the past with dogs messing in the store.
One spokesman said: ‘We usually deal with any dogs as individual cases.
If they're not giving trouble and no one complains, then they're fine.’
NEXT
Company policy is to prohibit dogs from entering the store.
The staff were polite but when asked why there was no sign on the shop door, we got a rather unsatisfactory answer.
We were told that previously, when dogs were allowed, there'd been problems, so they decided to stop letting them in.
‘We do not have a sign on the door.
We usually have a sign near the main till but it's not here today.’
We were not convinced.
SCOTTISH WOOLLEN
A strict anti-dog policy.
One shop assistant was polite, but adamant and explained: ‘Dogs are not allowed because of the risk of soiling or damage to the woollen clothes.’
PRESENT &CORRECT?
BODY SHOP
The sweet smell of success: Staff happy to allow owners with dogs to browse.
We received some odd looks from customers but most smiled and fussed over Spike &Molly.
CLINTON CARDS
Manager Mr Cutts said: ‘Provided they're with their owners and are on leads, they're welcome, but to be honest, we don't get many in.’
Clearly no anti-dog policy here.
OTHER DEPARTMENT STORE POLICIES:
Store
Policy
Comments
BHS
No
Health &safety reasons
Harvey Nichols
No
Company policy
C
No
Company policy
Army &Navy
No
Hygiene — sells cosmetics clothes and food
Peter Jones
Yes
As long as well-behaved
Harrods
No
Company policy
OTHER BOOK/RECORD STORE POLICIES:
Store
Policy
Comments
W H Smith
No
Children sit on the floor and read books
Virgin Records
No
Operational policy
Our Price Open It either depends on the shopping centre or individual managers
Waterstones
Yes
Happy, if well-behaved
BOOKS etc.
Yes
If under control
John Menzies
No
Because we sell food
Rymans
Yes
People usually leave dogs outside
OTHER SHOE SHOPS POLICIES:
Store
Policy
Comments
Russell &Bromley
Yes
If well-behaved
Bally
Yes
If not unruly
Ravel
No
Customer complaints
Clarks
Yes
If well-behaved
OTHER GIFT STORES POLICIES:
Store
Policy
Comments
Ratners
Yes
If well-behaved
H Samuel
Very welcome
If under control
Zales
Yes
If clean
OTHER CLOTHES STORES POLICIES:
Store
Policy
Reason
Top Shop
Yes
No problem
Burtons
Yes
Operational policy
The Gap
No
Corporate policy from the USA
Austin Reed
Yes
No problem
Laura Ashley
Yes
Ditto
Hennes
Yes
If well-behaved
River Island
No
Store policy
Richards
Yes
No problem
Sock Shop
Yes
If under control
Fogle's Files 
Puppy Parties
The whole family joins in with these parties — dogs and all.
It's the ideal way to socialise your pup
BRUCE FOGLE
If you've been to a puppy party you'll know how much fun it can be to train your pup in a positive and natural way.
Families learn how to handle dogs and dogs learn how to live with each other and all sizes and varieties of humans.
We all realise puppyhood is the most important time in a dog's life.
The experiences during those first 16 to 18 weeks affect your dog's personality forever.
And it's so easy to create good and practical experiences for your pup's benefit.
Puppy parties work this way: someone organises a weekly gettogether for pups and owners.
The pups are not fed their meal before the party but, instead, the organiser provides every human a small bag of dry dog food.
This is important, because at puppy parties, the pups are fed by strangers.
The first few times, the pup gets his food for free to demonstrate to him that people are nice, but after a few treats he has to sit for his stranger and for his supper.
All the family come to the party and children take an active part.
This is especially important and valuable for puppy owners who do not have young children, because this is how pups learn about kids — and how much fun they can be.
During the first party, children give the dogs treats.
That's a good introduction to kids.
At the next party a week later, the children learn how to get their pups to sit by simply using a hand signal.
Once they learn how to do that with their own dogs, they can't resist commanding other pups to sit for their food rewards.
The result is that the children learn how to control dogs and the dogs learn that obeying children is simply part of life.
And the extra reward is that if a dog learns to sit when he sees a child, it means he doesn't jump up.
Fun, isn't it?
THROWING A GOOD PARTY
I started organising puppy parties for my clients a few months back, using a good dog trainer to co-ordinate the parties and a local church hall as the venue.
During the six weekly get-togethers, open only to pups under 18 weeks old, they and their families learn the basic commands —‘come’, ‘sit’, ‘heel’ and ‘wait’— as well as how to toilettrain, groom and road-walk their dogs.
Owners get information on pet health insurance,kenneling and more advanced training.
For too long I thought this type of training was not the responsibility of the vet.
After all, we're trained to a superbly technical level of scientific competence.
My job is to treat cancer, repair fractures or control disease.
Why should I possibly become interested in the emotional development of my young patients?
LESS NEEDLE
The answer is strikingly simple.
The most common cause of death in dogs under one year of age in the UK is ‘elective euthanasia’, the active decision by owners to put their dogs to sleep.
The most common reason why so many families come to such a harsh decision is because their dog has behaviour problems they can't control.
It is far easier to prevent behaviour problems from developing than it is to correct them once they have become entrenched habits.
By providing patients and their owners with organised puppy parties, I can save more lives than I will with drugs or scalpel.
This case is one which emphatically supports the old axiom: ‘Prevention is better than cure’.
SCRUFFS
by Russell Jones
HOW COMFORTING TO KNOW THAT WHEN ONE IS FINDING CITY LIFE A TRIFLE TIRESOME, ONE HAS FRIENDS IN HIGH PLACES GRACIOUS ENOUGH TO INVITE ONE OUT FOR A DAY IN THE COUNTRY…
TO THE WOODS KEVIN MY GOOD MAN AND DON'T SPARE THE HORSES!!
Sinitta SINGING THE PRAISES OF DOG OWNERSHIP
Sinitta's whirlwind lifestyle in the pop world doesn't easily match the routine demands of dog ownership.
It takes effort, planning…and roast chicken
JOHN RICHARDSON
Many of us know the difficulties of having a dog and holding down a job.
For a chart-busting pop star with a heavy travelling schedule — like Sinitta — it is particularly hard.
She is, however, determined to make a success of everything she does, including being a dog owner.
For as long as Sinitta can recall, she has owned a dog.
As a child of 11, she had one which featured with her in her first professional engagement, as Dorothy in The Wiz , the all-black version of The Wizard of Oz , at the Sheffield Crucible.
Her Yorkshire Terrier played Toto.
When Sinitta was with David Essex, her Mutiny on The Bounty costar, he presented her with Fletch, a Cairn Terrier named after Fletcher Christian, the character he played in the show.
Shortly afterwards, Sinitta and David split up and she signed a major recording deal which culminated in her single So Macho reaching number two in the charts, only missing the top spot because of Chris De Burgh's Lady in Red .
The record company prepared her an exhaustive schedule which made it impossible for her to give Fletch the attention he deserved so, reluctantly, she gave him to friends.
For the next couple of years, Sinitta was dog-less as she ran up an amazing string of chart hits with the guidance of the nowlegendary Stock, Aitken and Waterman.
By the end of the 80s, Sinitta had established a stable home life suitable for a dog, even if she wasn't always able to be around.
When she got engaged to Shakespearian actor Tom Harklie, she bought an Australian Silky Terrier puppy called Mr Cod.
‘He earned his name because of the expression on his face.
‘Cod’ is a word we use if someone is a bit off or fishy,’Sinitta explained.
‘Mr Cod could be very fishy when he wanted, but he was also very nice!’
Sadly, Mr Cod was destined to  be with them for only a short time.
While Sinitta was on tour, she loaned the recording studio in the basement of her home to another songwriter.
He left a gate open and Mr Cod wandered off, never to be seen again.
As this happened two weeks before Christmas, Sinitta hopes someone scooped him up for a Christmas gift.
Extensive efforts to trace him turned up nothing.
When Mr Cod was a puppy, Simon Cowell, the man who signed Sinitta to her first recording deal, bought her a Yorkshire Terrier to keep Mr Cod company.
He was named Massino — Max for short — and is currently ‘number one’ canine in Sinitta's life.
Since Mr Cod's disappearance, Max goes to the country to stay with friends whenever Sinitta has to go away.
‘He really loves his country visits as he is very pampered and fed on roast chicken,’ she says.
‘He is quite a character.
When he comes back he goes on a hunger strike for chicken.
He usually stops eating for a couple of days but I talk him out of it.
On occasion I have stopped eating, too.
Soon he is back to his normal diet.
‘I recently bought lots of special doggie chews back from the States.
He has ignored them all.
‘He quite enjoys singing along to records at parties, except when one of mine is played!
He tries to figure out why my lips aren't moving.’
Max has been to numerous rehearsals with his celebrity owner and once appeared on breakfast TV.
‘One of the other guests made a great point of saying she would never work with children or animals,’ Sinitta explains.
‘She looked Max and I up and down in a most condescending manner.
Max took an instant dislike to her and from then on, when she tried to speak, he would howl like a wolf and I got a dreadful fit of the giggles!
I couldn't help myself.’
‘Eventually, Max had to be escorted off the set.
I got bags of letters, all giving Max tremendous support.
Actually, I think the woman was envious that I was sexy and Max was cute — or the other way round!’
Among Max's other hobbies are going for long walks, travelling in the car and sitting on the fax machine, which always gives him a surprise when it starts working.
‘Lately, he's been very much in love because he saw the April issue of Dogs Today with Julian Clary's dog, Fanny, on the cover.
He spent two days drooling over her.
Perhaps we should do a little bit of matchmaking,’ she suggested.
Sinitta has a very serious involvement with animals.
She is the chairman of the Animal Defenders Youth Group, whose aim is to expose and alleviate animal suffering.
She designed a T-shirt for them and has written their anthem Children of the 90s .
The group recently opened a shop in Birmingham selling only crueltyfree products.
In coming months, Max may be spending a bit more time in the country, as Sinitta is on the brink of signing a world-wide recording contract and a movie deal.
He can take some comfort in the fact that, while his mistress works on becoming music's ‘Name of the 90s’, he can fully indulge his passion for roast chicken.
Dog Stars 
JACK RUSSELL GRANT
Virgo (Aug 24–Sept 23)
You feel a bit dozy and dull this month, with a propensity for lying on your back in the sun, dreaming of bygone days.
Try to think more positively about walks, and wake up to new opportunities outside your immediate area.
Green grass and fresh fields are there for the taking.
Libra (Sept 24–Oct 23)
This is the month for new ventures, whether it be in the form of a dog show, obedience class or merely a fraternisation with local canine characters.
Your owner will indulge your whims and you'll feel favoured by all.
Scorpio (Oct 24–Nov 22)
Your down-to-earth, no-nonsense mood will endear you to your owner, who may well remark on this new change of character.
Now is the time to consolidate your gains by asking for more walks and extra perks, as your sensible attitude will enhance your standing during this fruitful period.
Sagittarius (Nov 23–Dec 21)
The middle of the month arrives with you really having a fling.
You are popular with canines and humans alike, so get out and about.
If entering a show, you may well find you come up trumps, mainly because you feel so fit and full of life.
This is definitely a phase when you can wag your tail with impunity at both friend and foe.
Capricorn (Dec 22–Jan 20)
Family friendships are becoming increasingly important to you, especially those involving the young fry, so make the most of this camaraderie and enter into the spirit of things.
Canine relationships are also good and you may meet a long-haired mutt of doubtful pedigree but winning ways, who will prove a good chum.
Aquarius (Jan 21–Feb 19)
The somewhat revolutionary character of the true Aquarian is showing through this month and you're definitely on the lookout for subversive activities, such as home-wrecking or a protest howl-in.
Try to neutralise these tendencies by taking heed of your owner's complaints, or you may finish up the underdog.
Pisces (Feb 20–March 20)
Caution should be your watchword this month.
Keep well away from disputes involving dogs, cats and any other species of small creature.
Learn to appreciate your home comforts.
Concentrate on indoor delights rather than outdoor fights and you'll be much better appreciated.
Aries (March 21–April 20)
The leadership traits of the Arien bring your talents to the fore, but don't get too carried away.
Earn your freedom by behaving well and keeping in with your owner.
Although you are all for outings with a pack, you will have to be content with your lot for now.
However, brighter times are ahead, when you will get the opportunity to realise your full potential.
Taurus (April 21–May 21)
An unexpected outing comes your way and you'll feel buoyant liberated; willing and able to cope with new demands upon your intellect and personality.
Strange canine characters are pleased to get acquainted and never have you been more popular.
Keep up the good work during this exhilarating time.
Gemini (May 22–June 21)
Frustrations will cloud your horizons for a time but you will shake them off and emerge well pleased with your efforts.
A surprise gift is forecast, in the form of some mouth-watering delicacy, but watch your figure and don't over-indulge
Cancer (June 22–July 23)
There'll be an unexpected meeting with a rakish hound which, initially, may cause a few problems.
However, owner know-how will extract you from trouble.
Just keep your cool and you'll yet emerge as top dog.
LEO (July 24–August 23)
Roar of the lion-heart
An amorous meeting is forecast, so keep yourself smart, sociable and suitably alert for what promises to be an interesting episode.
Your owner may not be too happy but persevere and you'll emerge triumphant and glorious.
Other outings will bring further adventure.
Owner's tip: Try to remember that every dog must have its day.
A Bona-Fido holiday
Chesterfield's Ringwood Hall is part of the Consort hotel chain, which welcomes dogs to its establishments.
Our canine consultant, Sally, was only too keen to check out its bona fidos.
BRIAN KELLY
No pain, no sprain; not even a yelp.
Bearded Collies can show all the grace of drunken hippoes .
As with most good tumbles, you could see this one coming a mile off — and could do nothing to prevent the inevitable.
We humans used the bridge, but of course, Sally had to negotiate this dry Derbyshire creek bed her own way.
She took a run-up, carved quite a beautiful arc against the sky and promptly vanished, with a shoosh, into very long, dry grass.
Her paws kept reaching for the ground, but it was not there.
She tried gamely to hold her head high and proud, but to no avail.
She simply disappeared.
Looking back, it was bloody hilarious.
A shocked demeanour and a couple of nettle stings to valiant rescuer Beverley were the only legacies.
Luckily, it was the worst thing to happen to poor Sal all weekend.
After all, this adventure was definitely her holiday.
Best alternatives for holidaying dog owners have traditionally been kindly neighbours or kennels, but a York-based hotel chain say you can take it with you (your pup, that is).
More than 170 Consort hotels welcome dogs, with about a third offering something a bit special — Bona-Fido — which operates a bit like the AA's rating, but with stars switched for bones.
Ringwood Hall, a gentry dream built about 1805 and now overlooking Sheffield's satellite towns and remaining greenery, boasts the full five bones.
If you think your dog is spoilt rotten at home, check out what's on offer here.
There's a ‘chat-and-pat’ service; staff call your hound by name, and tiptoe past your room at night so as to let sleeping dogs lie; your dog's photograph is taken in the hotel; the hotel manager appears for a final ‘wave-and-wag’; there's a VIP service for show-winning dogs; and a discount for families whose dogs are better behaved than the owners!
Of course, it's not all free-range.
Dogs can't go in eating areas, and it's preferred that they don't climb all over furniture in sitting rooms, but there's a good acre or 27 of space for romping and rambling.
Ah yes, digging up the bowling green would probably mean some explaining, as well.
Assistant manager Nicholas Tindall said not all staff were madkeen on dogs and neither were all guests, but wishes were always respected and the dogs were generally well accepted.
‘We've been doing Bona-Fido for about two years but still get some guests who don't realise they could have brought their dogs along,’ he said.
‘Ringwood's history with dogs goes back a bit further.
Somewhere in the grounds there's a grave for Lady, who was the pet of the original family here last century.
Most hotels offer a one-bone service, welcoming well-behaved dogs and providing doggie bowls on request.
Add another bone and you also get a list of recommended walks for dogs and tinned dog food made available, to your canine chum.
Three bones gets you an official welcome and 15-minute walkies with a staff member.
A quartet means the first refusal of all carvery scraps and use of a dog-sitting service.
Bones don't appear just in the rating.
A ‘real’ shaped version was offered to our Sal — and popular it was, too.
It's now a well-gnawed stump on our sitting room floor.
It's a nice idea.
In an allegedly animal-friendly society, where the rules for pets in public places are generally blurred and often very bad, it's pleasing to put your head down on a strange pillow knowing your pet is just a pat away.
Having dogs catered for is fine, even if they are clumsy oafs!
WIN A WONDERFUL WEEKEND WITH CONSORT
Consort Hotels have generously offered a free weekend for two — plus one dog — at The George Hotel, Montrose, Scotland.
Our lucky free draw winner will be treated to dinner, bed and breakfast, but the holiday must be taken before December, 1991 (subject to availability and excluding bank holidays).
To enter, send a postcard (or closed envelope) with your name and address to Bona-Fido 
The winner will be drawn on September 1st.
If you would like a Consort Short Breaks brochure, listing all bone-rated hotels, phone 0904 620137 or write to Consort Hotels Ltd, Ryedale Building, Piccadilly, York, YO1 1PN.
All callers will receive a special Dogs Today 10% discount voucher, redeemable against any holiday listed in the brochure and booked through Consort Central Reservations.
ESCAPE FROM EGYPT
From Cairo to Chorley is an incredibly long journey.
Thanks to an abandoned mutt, a whole family decided to take the slow boat home
ANNABELLE FLEMING
Scottie and her sister were found in the boot of a car.
The car was in Cairo and belonged to my brother, who was working there on a six-month contract.
That was 1984.
Whether the pups had been put there in the hope they would be cared for, or just dumped, is not exactly known.
All enquiries as to their ownership produced no clues.
The abandoned pair were orphans and obviously unwanted.
The pups had the appearance of a Pharaoh Hound crossed with a rough-haired terrier.
Scottie is mainly black, with a white chest and white ankle socks on black legs.
In contrast, her sister is self-coloured grey.
My brother, a dog lover, whose own elderly dog was being cared for back in England, decided to take the pups home to the family.
An American expatriate offered to take the grey.
That left Scottie, a gentle beast, to settle in, make friends with the children and grow very tall and healthy.
As the weeks passed and the time to leave drew nearer, the family became worried about Scottie's future.
Now used to kindness, she would not survive the streets of Cairo if they left her behind.
A new home would have to be found.
Adverts extolling her virtues were placed at every suitable vantage point.
‘Gentle dog adopted by British family needs kind replacement home.
Good with children and house-trained, very obedient.’
No one seemed to want Scottie, virtues or no virtues.
Only one option remained.
Scottie's visa was applied for; she was coming to England.
Her application was not processed in time for her to fly home on British Airways with the rest of the family so the flight was cancelled.
They would have to come home the long way round.
They sailed to Italy.
The boat docked at Ancora, where Scottie was accepted and allowed to land.
Then it was on to Switzerland and, finally, by road to Belgium.
Scottie loved travelling and behaved splendidly during the long drives and sailing periods.
Reluctantly, Scottie had to be left in kennels in Ostend while her family applied for her entry papers in England.
Once they were granted, the ship sailed with her to Dover.
There she was met by her family and, after a joyful reunion aboard ship, she was collected by kennel staff and quarantined in Manchester.
Her kennel fees and fares cost more than £1,000.
Scottie is very happy in Lancashire and she is patient with the elderly, family dogs.
Scottie is afraid of men, perhaps some remnant of her unknown past.
She continues to love children and mothers all small animals.
Rottie to the core
Steve Norman is a real-life hero to hundreds of Rottweilers, going against the weight of public opinion to turn his own home into a Rottie rescue centre
JONATHAN CRAYMER
The spate of Rottweiler horror stories in the press last year resulted in dozens of owners turfing their dogs out.
Horrified by this trend, Steve Norman, a joiner from Berkshire, turned his home into a shelter for unwanted Rotties.
He's not popular with some of the neighbours but Steve couldn't sit back while the animals suffered.
‘Devil dogs’, the headlines screamed; ‘killers’, ‘murdering beasts’.
The tabloid press and the film industry (for example,The Omen ) unnecessarily portray the Rottweiler as an evil beast with insatiable bloodlust.
In 1989, an 11-year-old girl was killed by two Rotties and public terror reached fever pitch.
Fortunately, much of the fuss has abated, but not before hundreds of the dogs were abandoned or, worse still, brutally mistreated in the name of discipline.
SEXUALLY ABUSED
One of the first dogs Steve rescued — four-year-old Tyler — had an eye poked out by a loutish owner wielding a screwdriver.
It wasn't the first such attack.
‘Some of these people think you have to treat ‘tough’ dogs brutally,’he said, bitterly.
‘You couldn't print my personal opinion of them.
Many of the lowlife characters who get hold of Rottweilers have the same mentality as child abusers.
In fact, some of the dogs brought to us have been sexually abused.’
Steve and Joanne de Nobriga set up the refuge in mid-1989.
I first went to meet some of their charges in April last year at Steve's rescue home in Bracknell.
I knew I'd come to the right place.
The ground shook with a chorus of deep barks.
I imagined Gregory Peck running for cover in that spooky cemetery in The Omen .
I hoped the dogs would be in the garden but the moment I stepped inside I was surrounded by five of the massive dogs.
All I could think of was that joke —‘What has four legs and an arm?
A Rottweiler.’
I hoped the dogs hadn't heard it.
I needn't have worried.
All I could feel were five soft muzzles have a friendly sniff.
Stumpy tails wagged.
Then the ground shook again; this time it was Steve, ordering them back to the kitchen.
They obeyed, instantly.
As we chatted, most of the five dogs sat on my feet.
‘They're very human orientated,’ Joanne said, encouragingly.
Brought in early last year, Max had been so badly kicked by a sadistic owner that most of his bodily organs were in the wrong places.
His digestive system developed a cyst, requiring a special diet — no meat, eggs or milk.
Veterinary nurse Tracey Chamberlain, a Rottie rescue helper, said: ‘Some people are so sick.
When the owner had finished beating him, he was advertised in the local paper as ‘a loving dog needing a new home’.
‘His new owners wondered why he wouldn't come out of his kennel.
He was too scared.’
Sadly, Max never fully recovered.
‘He was distressed from all the moving, so it was kindest to put him down,’ Steve said.
Steve has kennels for between eight and 10 dogs.
Where possible, he tries to rehome dogs directly.
Last year he rehoused 165 Rotties.
Of those, only two had to be destroyed.
One was Max, the other was a bitch which had never been socialised.
‘She was kept in a garden by an anti-social owner,’ Steve explained.
‘She never met anyone or anything.
She wanted to bite and kill everything.’
When we talked again, Steve had two dogs in the house — Branston and Dennis.
Dennis had been abandoned and, having wandered about long enough, he climbed into a passing car and wouldn't budge.
The perplexed driver took him to a police station — which then contacted Steve.
The RSPCA hands out Steve's phone number to anyone having difficulties with Rottweilers.
He's had dogs from as far afield as London and Liverpool.
Branston came from Birmingham.
A couple with two children, expecting a third, decided their house was getting too crowded so the dog had to go.
Thankfully, as many people ring up wanting Rotties.
‘People who've lost a Rottweiler often want another adult dog, rather than encourage the puppy market.
They usually provide good homes.’
In fact, Steve's relieved to see the need for his work diminishing.
‘Much of the media hype has gone, and the Rottweiler Association asked owners not to breed their dogs, so there's a lot less of them about.
Breeders can be more fussy about who buys them.’
This year Steve's rehoused just 40 dogs.
Because of business commitments he's cut down on his rescue work.
However, Steve's 20-year-old son Mark looks after the dogs when dad's away.
Recently, Steve gave up his joinery business to set up a small security firm, hoping for more time to devote to the much-needed rescue.
When doing his night work he takes his dog, Kessler.
‘He barks on command and looks aggressive, but he's trained not to bite.’
Steve is a trained dog-obedience instructor and believes people are to blame in almost every headline-hitting incident involving Rottweilers.
Indeed, the Kennel Club describes the Rottweiler as: ‘Goodnatured, not nervous or vicious.’
The Kennel Club's Bill Edmond added: ‘225 Rottweilers were shown at Crufts last year without a snarl or a growl from any of them.’
‘The key is train them properly  from the word go,’ Steve emphasised.
‘They must be socialised, meet people and children, and get used to busy streets, fairgrounds and traffic.
Dogs missing these early experiences could end up frightened of anything — and, yes, a potential menace.
‘Also, leaving dogs alone in a yard will tend to make them aggressive and anti-social.’
‘Often, what's perceived to be aggression is simply fear or nervousness,’ Joanne added, recalling the first dog they rescued.
‘It was awful.
An owner, who'd clearly been mistreating it, gave it back to its breeders.
They couldn't cope either and, in desperation, literally dumped it on the doorstep.
WOODEN LEG
‘I was alone and had no idea if it was going to attack.
But, after half an hour prowling round the kitchen, the dog — Rudy — came over to me.
I stroked him, he gave me a big lick, and I could see relief sweep over him knowing I wasn't going to hit him.’
Ideally, Steve would like more space for the rescue operation.
He is hoping a local farm owner will rent him space to run a boarding kennels and rescue side by side — one supporting the other.
Steve's immediate neighbours are terrific.
There've been no complaints when rescued dogs have howled through the night.
However, others are less supportive.
Rubbish, dog excreta, broken glass and other unpleasant items have been thrown into Steve's garden and his tyres have also been slashed.
Joanne and Steve work closely with the RSPCA.
An RSPCA spokesman said: ‘We welcome any organisations working for animal welfare.
‘But we would like to see dog owners registered — a move we feel would cut out a lot of bad apples and would also make much rescue work unnecessary.’
Steve and Joanne took in Captain Pugwash — a 17-stone Great Dane-Mastiff cross — after it bit a pensioner's leg off.
The story made News of the World .
‘It was only a wooden leg, though,’ explained Steve.
The two owners were aged 84 and 71 and, after the chewing incident, the RSPCA swapped it for a smaller dog.
‘We obedience-trained him and found him a new home.
He didn't chew anything after that.
‘I think he'd been fascinated by the wooden leg banging on the floor.
It was just a stick to him.’
RESULTS PET CENSUS
Are you typical?
Thanks so much to the thousands of you who took the time and trouble to fill out the Pet Census in the April issue.
We now know so much more about you!
Now we can introduce the typical Dogs Today reader.
She is a 34-year-old lady who lives in the suburbs of a city with her husband or partner.
They own a retriever called Ben.
She collected Ben from his breeders when he was eight weeks old, having paid £175.
Both parents were registered with the Kennel Club and the mating was planned rather than accidental.
Ben is fairly obedient but he won't beg or fetch slippers.
He's allowed the free run of the house.
He sleeps in his owner's bedroom, but he's got his own bean bed.
When he travels in the car, he's safe behind the dog guard.
Ben gets two or more walks a day and plays with a rubber ring.
He's usually walked on a flexible lead.
Ben's owner always carries a poop scoop and is very aware of the anti-dog brigade.
Ben's favourite treat is a dog chew, but dog biscuits and bones aren't far behind.
Every few months his owner gives Ben a bath.
He has his own towel and shampoo, but she uses the family bath and sometimes her own hairdryer.
She chooses Ben's food — a dry, complete diet, twice a day — because it suits his digestion and he likes it.
Price is a minor concern, as is packaging.
She first saw Dogs Today on the newsstand, reads it from cover to cover and then keeps it.
Her partner reads the magazine, too, and sometimes she lends a copy to a friend.
Her favourite article is Peter Neville's True Case Histories.
She likes all our regulars but finds the crossword a bit hard!
Ben always goes on holiday with his owner.
When she's got a moment she probably reads Bella ,Best or Take a Break , and regularly buys the Daily Mail .
She sometimes goes to agricultural shows and exemption dog shows.
Is this typical reader you?
If so, we'd love to hear from you!
The most typical reader will win a special golden bone award.
Send us your photo and tell us how similar you are to our average reader.
Send your letters to: Typical Readers   
Memoirs of a Dog Shrink 
Watt phobia?
Jess was a mellow sort of chap until he came face to face with a light bulb 
Cartoonist Russell Jones takes a ramble through Peter Neville's files
Case number: 72
Name: Jessie
Breed: Collie
Problem: Light bulb phobia
Jess the collie was a laid-back sort of hound who spent most of his life stretched out on a fireside rug in his large Surrey home.
The closest he came to exercise was to open one eye every so often, if someone entered the room, or to open both eyes, smile, and wag his tail as he'd done on one occasion when confronted by a housebreaker!
This extremely lazy lifestyle was one long yawn from dawn to dusk.
Only the odd bouts of involuntary twitching in his sleep reassured his owner that Jess was still safe and sound in the land of the living!
One winter night, as the mutt twitched away in front of the fire, his mind somewhere between Basingstoke and the twilight zone, a 100-watt light bulb in the standard lamp above his head suddenly exploded without warning!
According to his owner, who witnessed the spectacle, Jessie rose gracefully toward the ceiling like a space shuttle and, after lingering in mid-air for what seemed an eternity, crashed to the floor and fled the house with a speed and agility the owner found quite amazing.
Jessie did not return home for several hours.
When he eventually did show up, it was obvious to all that he was a changed dog!
What plodded through the front door was not the lovable, lazy hound who had once lived there but a grim-faced light bulb serial killer!
Within seconds of his return, Jessie launched a vicious attack on a table lamp, popping the bulb and wrecking the shade before charging into the lounge.
There, in a frenzy of violence, he reduced the standard lamp to a table lamp in 10 seconds flat!
After a room-to-room chase lasting several minutes, during which every lamp in the house was turned to sawdust, the dog was finally caught and wrestled to the ground.
With his house plunged into darkness, Jessie's owner sought my help.
SIMPLE SOLUTION
When I first saw the dog, it was quite obvious he'd been deeply affected by the explosion and had developed a 100-watt phobia for light bulbs!
By placing his feeding bowl closer each day to a table lamp the dog gradually learned to live with his enemy.
Within a couple of weeks, his killer instincts had disappeared and he was back where he belonged — twitching away peacefully on the fireside rug.
CROSS QUESTION
Can you guess which breeds Peggy's parents are?
She is a first cross between two well-known breeds.
The first correct entry out of the hat on September 2nd will win a prize.
If your dog is an unusual first cross, please send us a photo and all the relevant details so we can include him or her in a future issue.
Send your answer to Cross-question 
JUNE SOLUTION
Ben's parents were a Gordon Setter and an Afghan Hound.
The first correct entry drawn out of the hat came from Caroline Fitzgerald from Stamford Brook, London, who wins a Golden Bone Award.
Diabetic dogs
Diabetes in humans is not pleasant, but nowadays it can be dealt with and controlled without too much inconvenience.
Similar advancements have also made life easier for diabetic dogs like Jasper STEPH FREEMAN
Dogs Today 's Launch issue cover story last November featured Guinness, who earned a Bounce Superdog award when he saved his owner from a diabetic coma by fetching him a Mars bar.
Many humans are diabetics (this writer included!) but did you know one in 200 dogs also live with this condition?
So what is diabetes all about?
Diabetes mellitus occurs when the body is unable to convert carbohydrates (for example— in a dog's case — choc drops, dog biscuits and cereal products) into energy.
This is due to a lack of the hormone insulin, normally produced in the pancreas.
Insulin controls the body's blood sugar level.
The effect of this can be quite shocking, because the body's reaction is to start breaking down fat stores and tissue in order to produce energy.
The resulting high blood sugar level — the unconverted carbohydrate — means the kidneys must work harder, thus requiring more water to flush out waste products.
Not surprisingly then, common signs of diabetes mellitus include increased urine production, weight loss despite a healthy appetite, increased thirst and tiredness.
Possibly a smell similar to pear drops will also be present on your dog's breath.
Despite the frightening connotations, with careful management and medication your dog will regain weight and can live a fully active life.
Should these symptoms become apparent, get your dog to a vet — quickly!
Neglect and lack of treatment will eventually result in a coma and possible death.
Diabetes is not curable.
It is known, rather alarmingly, as a chronic condition.
Good control of the condition is vital and this is achieved through a combination of insulin injections, diet regulation, control of exercise and careful monitoring of the condition — in other words, a regular routine.
ROAD ACCIDENT
Jackie Sinclaire, from Horncastle, Lincolnshire, has a seven-year-old Golden Retriever named Jasper who was diagnosed diabetic about 18 months ago.
‘It was a bit of a shock at first,’ Jackie said.
‘I'd never heard of it before in relation to dogs but our vet was wonderful.
‘He explained everything to us and was always available when he was needed.
Jasper had been in a road accident a few months before the diagnosis.
He wasn't badly hurt but people have since told me that shock sometimes starts the onset of diabetes.
‘I've also been told a prolonged illness can start it and, of course, some dogs just have a weakness.
Jasper had been fine until the accident — very healthy in fact — but soon after, he showed all the symptoms of the condition.
‘He was drinking a lot, eating loads and still losing weight.
‘The worst thing was the puddles on the kitchen floor!
He obviously felt really guilty about that.
He'd always been so clean before, so we knew there was something wrong and took him to the vet immediately.’
How does Jackie cope with the injections?
‘Well, it was a bit difficult at first,’ she explained.
‘I'd only ever given him pills before, and I'm not medically trained, but it's surprising how quickly you get used to it.
‘It becomes part of the daily routine, like brushing your teeth.
Jasper wasn't too keen to start with and you can hardly blame him, but now he's fine about it.
It's all done very quickly.’
Are there any problems?
‘No, not really.
I do have to watch what he eats very carefully, give him his injections and make sure he eats regularly.
‘If I don't, he has a hypo (hypoglycaemic attack), when his blood sugar dips too low.
You have to remember the amount of insulin he's given dictates how much he is allowed to eat and that's OK.
‘The problems start when he becomes more excited and frisky than usual.
I can tell when he is having a hypo because he gets disorientated and confused.
He also twitches a lot.
‘He knows what to do though — he comes straight to me, whining a bit.
I carry sugar lumps around with me and feed him those.
He gets over it very quickly.’
So do dogs like sugar?
‘Well, I must admit he wasn't so keen to start with,’ Jackie said.
‘He never really had a sweet tooth, not even for choc drops.
Now he realises a sugar lump will make him feel better so he doesn't mind.
‘Funnily enough, Jasper and I once helped a human diabetic out of a hypo with Jasper's stash of sugar lumps!’
Jackie is maintaining an optimistic outlook for the future.
‘I've still got Jasper and he's going to have a long and happy life,’ she declared.
‘All the effort is worth it.
I wouldn't give him up for the world.’
UNDER CONTROL
Your dog's vet will count carbohydrates by prescribing a set diet, through which, with regular exercise, the insulin can be balanced.
This is relatively easy with dogs.
In the long term, provided care is taken, there should be relatively few problems.
Poor control of diet and insulin intake will cause problems.
A diabetic dog's wounds must be carefully monitored and bad control means wounds heal more slowly.
There is also a risk of gangrene due to poor circulation, plus cataracts and possible kidney failure.
However, as Jackie said, it isn't too difficult to take adequate care and avoid these problems.
Diabetes mellitus does not mean the end of the world.
With a little commitment from you, as well as the expert help of your vet and cooperation from your dog, the risks are greatly reduced.
Jackie concluded: ‘Jasper certainly wasn't born with a silver spoon in his mouth, but there are quite a few occasions when he needs one now — of the sugar variety, of course!’
In the frame
Old master or not?
Everyone dreams of finding a masterpiece in the attic.
That picture hanging over your fireplace might just be worth more than your whole house.
Why not check it out?
MAGGIE CROWLEY
Hanging proudly and prominently in many houses is a favourite doggie painting.
Whether inherited or picked up from an antique shop, it often holds a sentimental value — but what is it really worth?
That dusty old painting on the wall could well be worth a small fortune once inside an auction house.
But for many, the idea of selling those treasured pieces at a major sale has never crossed their mind; either that, or they just don't know how to do so.
In fact, it's relatively easy, provided there is a market.
Leading auctioneers, Bonhams and Christie's, have regular dogrelated sales every year and welcome any potentially valuable works of art.
Bonhams have a sale of canine art every January to coincide with Crufts, in which every doggie artefact imaginable can be found.
Bonhams press officer Jill Potterton told Dogs Today : ‘We are happy to give free evaluations to members of the public who come to see us.
‘If it is any good, and the owner wants to sell, we will put the article into the January sale.’
Christie's hold similar auctions twice a year; the first in January — also to mark Crufts — while their most recent, ‘Man's Best Friend’, was held in July.
This auction included the largest single collection of paintings and sculptures of cats and dogs, from a deceased estate, but Christie's spokeswoman Susan Adams added: ‘We do have mixed properties, too.
This auction is unusual as the deceased had quite a lot of paintings of cats — we normally have more pictures of dogs at this particular auction.
‘If anyone wanted to sell their piece, and we can see it's of sufficient quality or by a popular artist, we'll give an evaluation.
No one should be put off trying.’
The Man's Best Friend sales attract potential buyers from around the world, with particular interest from America, which may indicate a growing market for animal art.
‘I think there's a market, even though it's a narrow field,’ said Susan.
‘Collectors are very active and are prepared to pay for a painting of a particular breed or artist.’
However, Bonhams auctioneer Alastair Laird believes the actual numbers of artwork coming on the market is not as great as 10 years ago.
‘When we first held these sales, we'd have up to 600 lots but now it's less than that,’ Alastair explained.
Whatever the current market climate, Christie's expect success with the Man's Best Friend auction, which features works by celebrated artists John Emms, Maud Earl, and John Henry Lorimer.
However, George Earl's oil painting ‘St Bernards in a snow drift’,(above) is expected to attract the highest bid.
It is valued at £18,000.
So, if you're on the lookout for a nice little earner, dust off the cobwebs and take your painting along to the professionals.
Once inside the auction room, it's just a matter of crossing your fingers and hoping somebody takes a fancy to it, too.
WIN free tickets
Working Dog of the Year Show 1991
The second Working Dog of the Year Show, sponsored again by Pedigree Chum, will take place at Wembley Arena on Sunday, 13 October.
Dogs Today has joined forces with Pedigree Chum to run an exciting competition for 10 lucky people to win free tickets to see this thrilling doggie spectacular.
The Working Dog of the Year Show is scheduled for the Sunday after the horse of the Year Show and is set to become the top spectator event in London for dog lovers .
The 10 winners will see dramatic displays by working dogs from all walks of life.
There'll be demonstrations by the Metropolitan Police and Royal Army Veterinary Corps, showing how the military use dogs in their work.
There'll also be the Pedigree Chum Professional and Fun Agility Challenge finals, the Pedigree Formula Working Dog of the Year Awards and the fun Flyball competition.
Racing for Sled Dogs and Whippets will also be conducted and, to complete this canine extravaganza, there'll also be demonstrations by the International Sheep Dog Society and Guide Dogs for the Blind.
This event is a must for all dog enthusiasts!
Our lucky Dogs Today winners and their guests will spend an afternoon at the show, with special Champagne tickets and VIP dinner included.
All winners will have their travel expenses paid.
Remember, if you'd prefer not to cut-up your magazine you can always photocopy the entry form — it will still be valid.
Seeing for Miles 
Pete was Andrew Miles' guide.
He even introduced Andrew to the woman he would marry.
The doctors believed he would never see again.
They were wrong
ALAN COMBES
Surprisingly, not all blind people that own guide dogs are dog lovers — fortunately, however, Andrew Miles was.
I'd been officially blind for five years when I met Pete at the Guide Dog Centre in Wokingham, Berkshire,’ Andrew Miles explained.
‘His trainer remarked at the immediate bond which formed between Pete and I.’
Andrew was born with congenital glaucoma.
For his first 20 years, Andrew could see out of his left eye.
However, specialists told him glaucoma was slowly attacking the sight in his good eye.
‘In the year before my vision went, I didn't let it get me down,’ Andrew said.
‘I did a parachute jump, abseiled the White Cliffs of Dover and rode tandem to Paris.
‘I've always believed in living life to the full.’
Not only did Andrew meet Pete at the Guide Dog Centre, he also met his wife-to-be.
Wendy looked after the dogs, one of which was Pete.
During the 30 days of training at Wokingham, Pete and Andrew became the best of buddies and Wendy accepted a delighted Andrew's marriage proposal.
Four months later, Andrew, Wendy and Pete moved to Middlesborough to live.
Pete fulfilled the best man role and, during the wedding (in July, 1987), Pete wore all the gear and carried the rings in a little pouch on his harness.
Andrew was determined to pursue a computer career.
Pete accompanied him to training and Andrew was at last offered a Civil Servant post.
‘Pete became very popular.
Everyone made such a fuss of him,’ Andrew said.
While on holiday in Scotland, Andrew and Wendy met a Christian group.
‘Those people just had something special and we got to know them well,’ Andrew said.
‘We decided to make a commitment and moved down to Malton in North Yorkshire so we could go to Bible College.
‘As part of the college course we took a trip to Bristol to help with an evangelistic outreach.
‘As I was blind, it was arranged for me to stay at the organiser's house.
His wife, Shirley, believed we'd been brought together for a reason and, after a while, she reckoned my sight would be healed.
‘A lot of prayers were said for me but for six weeks absolutely nothing happened.
Then one morning Wendy left a pair of rubber gloves between the kitchen taps.
The sun was shining through the window and illuminated them.
I saw them and felt moved to pick them up.
‘That was in July, 1990.
By September, I was driving a car and my sight was restored in both eyes.
‘The doctors are completely baffled.
Medically, it's impossible for someone who has lost their sight due to glaucoma to get it back.’
Incredible as this story is, it presents problems for Pete, the well-known and loved retriever cross.
Andrew and Wendy plan to work with drug addicts in Hong Kong and they will soon embark on a two-month trial period.
In their absence Pete will be looked after by the Bible College's bursar and husband in Malton.
Indeed, if things work out, this may be Pete's future.
‘Leaving Pete is hard but we know he gets on well with these people and he's very adaptable.’
How did Pete react to the restoration of Andrew's sight?
‘Shortly after it returned, Pete was rolling around on the carpet and found a titbit,’ Andrew explained.
‘Guide dogs are trained not to pick up such morsels because they may eat something unpleasant or possibly even dangerous.
‘So I gave him a clip across the back and told him ‘No!’
He just looked at me as if to say ‘how did you know I was doing that?’
‘The first time I took him for a walk without a harness, he had a bit of a job to work that out as well.
He kept looking round at me.’
When I spoke to Andrew, he and Wendy were tending a farm for friends away on holiday.
Pete had established an amazing rapport with all the animals.
Lambs rubbed against the fence adjacent to Pete and cows seemed to smile at him across the farmyard.
Andrew and Wendy will miss Pete in Hong Kong, but so intelligent and sensitive a canine is he, they can expect the warmest Yorkshire welcome when they pay a return visit.
Dogs like Pete don't forget their friends!
Quick Bites by David Appleby
‘HE KNOWS HE'S DONE WRONG!’
This is what most owners say when confronted by cherished furnishings, door frames or personal items, such as books or the remote control for the TV, that have been torn to shreds by beloved Rover in their absence, or nearly as distressing the evidence of his lack of toilet control.
Their assumption that ‘he knows what he has done wrong’ is based on the fact that Rover is slinking along the floor with its head and tail down looking for all the world like a naughty school boy who's just broken the headmaster's window.
On the basis of this evidence they proceed to chastise Rover to a degree consistent with their temperament.
They are always surprised, however, that Rover never seems to learn, whatever tactics they employ.
This is not surprising as the dog's capacity to associate a form of behaviour and the consequences of it are limited to less than two seconds.
The owners are not seeing guilty behaviour when Rover slinks across the floor, they are seeing the submissive behaviour Rover displays in anticipation of the aggression, however mild, the owners are about to use in attempt to reprimand him.
If they do, the next day Rover may believe the owners will come home and become aggressive without any reason.
This will make it anxious.
Two of the things dogs often do when anxious are to chew or lose toilet control — and so the whole situation becomes a vicious circle.
Vet's Corner
Food for thought
This month I've been inundated with more questions about dog foods, and feeding in general.
I couldn't be more pleased, so keep sending them in.
Some of you are also sending me labels and leaflets because you find the information on them confusing.
Not only will I be dealing with some of your concerns through ‘Vet's Corner’, but I am taking them up with the very people who make the food — with some eye-opening results!
WEIGHTY SUBJECT
Q I have two working retrievers — a three-year-old and a two-year-old.
They are both fit and active but I find it very difficult to keep their weight up.
I was told by their breeder that I wasn't giving them enough protein.
Dutifully, I changed them to a complete muesli-type food which is described on the bag as ‘Hi Protein Fitness Food’.
A Your dogs need more fat, not more protein, but for some reason most of the dog-owning world believes otherwise.
Perhaps it's because we humans tend to associate protein with fitness and athleticism.
Who knows?
The fact is there is no real evidence to suggest high-protein diets improve performance or are likely to prevent weight loss in working dogs.
The good news is that you are not on your own; many owners share your problem.
I quite often see underweight dogs in my surgery.
Generally, they are either very active working dogs, or very excitable ones, who work incredibly hard even though they don't really achieve anything.
The answer is relatively straightforward.
The diet they're being fed doesn't contain enough energy or calories.
That's why your dogs are eating so much.
They're craving calories!
No matter how much they eat of their current food, they just can't get enough energy from it.
Energy can be supplied in a variety of ways but the best source is fat.
However, before you go adding vast quantities of fat to your dogs' food, spare a thought for what it will do to the rest of your diet.
For a start, both dogs will eat less of the food itself and, as a result, will take in less vitamins and minerals.
By adding the extra fat, you will have altered the balance of the diet.
You could add extra vitamins and minerals but how much should you give?
Remember, too much could be just as harmful as too little.
The easiest way to solve the problem is to feed a high-fat, complete food which has been scientifically balanced for the working/hyperactive dog, rather than to play around with the ingredients yourself.
If their work is seasonal, don't forget to change them back to a standard adult food (so-called ‘maintenance food’) when they're not working.
When they come back into work, begin feeding the highfat/performance-type diet about six weeks in advance while you are training them up for the extra work ahead.
Working dogs — even those dragging sledges across the snow for days on end — should not look like hat stands.
And they won't if they're fed properly.
Ah well, I can get down off my hobby horse now!
TICKED OFF
Q I live out in the open country and my adorable springer, Sally, is forever picking up ticks.
I've heard ticks can carry a nasty disease which can affect humans as well as dogs.
I would be grateful for more information.
A The disease you refer to is called Lyme Disease and, as you rightly point out, it can affect people and other animals.
The disease is widespread in America and quite recently there have been reports of cases in dogs in the UK.
One such case was reported in my home county of Sussex.
However, the truth of the problem was lameness, which may affect more than one leg.
Other signs include lethargy and loss of appetite.
The condition can be confirmed by taking blood tests and is treatable with antibiotics.
The signs may wax and wane, and the longer it is before a diagnosis is made, the more likely the dog is to end up with long-term arthritis, another disease where preventive measures are very easy and effective.
Regular treatment of your dog and your home with a suitable insecticide is all that's required, so it's no more than you should already be doing to control our old friend the flea!
Do make sure the method you employ against fleas will also work against ticks.
Many collars, sprays and powders are only claimed to be effective against fleas.
It's a good idea to check with your local veterinary centre.
PRICEY PROCESS
Q What does spaying — or is it spading — a bitch really entail?
I've always owned bitches and I've always had them done.
My youngest girl has just been operated on and I couldn't believe she only had two stitches.
That's more than £30 per stitch!
A Where does this word ‘spading’ come from?
The correct term is spaying, or if you want to be really scientific, panovariohysterectomy!
‘Panovarious’ refers to both ovaries; ‘hyster’refers to the uterus or womb, and ‘ectomy’simply means ‘cutting out’, so there is your technical answer.
Spaying is the complete surgical removal of the entire uterus (womb) as far as the cervix, together with both ovaries.
The surgical procedure is now so refined a skilled surgeon — with small hands — can complete the operation through a very small incision.
But slick surgery and bikini-line sutures may be doing us vets more harm than good!
In general, owners seem fascinated by the number of stitches their pets have after surgery.
Very often, they believe the more stitches, the more difficult the procedure.
So, according to that logic, if there are only two stitches left after spaying, the operation must be a very simple one.
Well, although spaying is a common operation (not common enough for my liking!), it's a very intricate operation and, on a scale of 0–10 for complexity, rates a good five.
In reality, if your pet is left with a small, beautifully-sutured wound, then all credit must go the skill of your veterinary surgeon and it's worth remembering that, for the time and skill required, spaying is a very cheap and justifiable operation.
The reason is simple.
Vets, like all those involved in promoting responsible ownership, want to encourage owners to have their pets neutered and, while many charities talk about trying to set up discount neutering schemes, vets have been running their own for years.
The problem is they don't shout about it — they just get on with it!
If you have any problems or questions about the health of your pet, please write to Vet's Corner  
Mark Evans is a small-animal vet currently practicing in Surrey.
As a TV-am After Nine contributor, he is used to answering all types of questions.
If you have any medical queries, from how to clip your dog's nails to how to cope with hip dysplasia, you can be sure of sound advice
TOP DOG NINETY ONE
YOU ARE INVITED TO THE BIGGEST CANINE BIRTHDAY PARTY EVER
The National Canine Defence League (NCDL) celebrates its centenary this year and Dogs Today has joined with the NCDL to sponsor Top Dog '91.
This will be a show the like of which has never been seen.
The emphasis is on fun — for the scruffiest to the Cruftiest.
Keep the date free in your diary — October 13th, 1991, at the National Agricultural Showground, Stoneleigh, Warwickshire — for a once-in-a-lifetime experience people will be talking about for the next 100 years.
The final of the famous Paw-O-Vision song contest will be one of the highlights of the show.
There's still time to enter Paw-O-Vision (there's a special entry form on the News Hound pages).
However, you don't have to be Shirley Basset or Tom Bones to take part in Top Dog '91.
It'll be a great day out for everyone.
There'll be demonstrations by working dogs, plenty of doggie experts and celebrities giving talks, shaking paws and meeting the crowds.
If you want to be a part of Top Dog '91, fill in the entry form opposite — and do it now.
As class sizes will be limited, the earlier you get your entry in the more chance you have of being included in your preferred classes.
Remember, it only costs £1 a class and all the money is going to a very worthy cause, so why not enter as many different events as you can.
There'll be lots of prizes, rosettes and trophies but, more importantly, you'll be helping to raise money to open the NCDL's 14th rescue centre.
There are eight classes you can enter in advance.
The best turned-out class provides plenty of opportunity for diversification.
You can interpret it in any way you like — it could mean the best groomed, it could refer to canine  coats, attractive collars and leads.
The judges may even take the owner's appearance into consideration when making their minds up!
The Lookalike competition could also provide a chance for using your imagination.
Very few of us naturally look like our dogs so a little augmentation might be called for.
The veteran classes are our equivalent of the glamourous granny or grandpa competitions!
Dogs must be seven years old or over and we'll be looking for good health and condition as well as stunning good looks.
The child handler competition is open to anyone under 16 and the judges will be looking for a good rapport between kids and dogs.
The canine talent competition is fairly self-explanatory.
We're looking for dogs with star quality.
If your dog has a party piece don't be afraid to show it off.
It could be a trick, an impression (we've heard of a dog who impersonates an anteater!) it's up to you.
Feel free to bring any props you might require.
Competitions for the most handsome dog and prettiest bitch need no explanation.
Suffice to say Kennel Club standards will be out the window on Top Dog Day.
The last class is quite exclusive; only dogs rehomed from an NCDL kennel are eligible.
There'll be plenty of activities to participate in when you get there.
The waggiest dog side-stall should prove popular.
A special wag-o-meter (a person with a stiff neck and a stopwatch) will assess each individual dog's wag rate.
There'll even be eating races for both human and canine competitors.
Dogs Today readers will get a discount of £1 on admission charges to Top Dog '91 if they produce a copy of the magazine.
Otherwise, it costs £3 per car-load of people.
We look forward to seeing you there.
You can help make Top Dog '91 the top dog event of the year.
Coping with Pet Loss 
Sharing grief
We know our pets won't live forever but, having shared many happy years together, the idea of putting your companion to sleep is almost unbearable
LAURIE LEE
The decision to end the life of a trusted and devoted animal friend can be the most difficult an owner has to make.
When you have shared years of happiness and companionship, making that final choice seems like an act of treachery but it will probably be the kindest, bravest decision you will have made for your pet.
When children leave home, parents feel somewhat redundant, while a pet can enter our lives at any stage, providing hours of pleasure, love and immense fulfilment.
This was the case with Marjorie, who'd just accepted voluntary retirement after 20 years in her office.
Her children had families of their own and her husband wasn't due to retire for several years.
Marjorie was looking forward to her freedom; no need to be up at seven o'clock to go to work, no rushing back to make the tea.
Yet, when her freedom arrived, something was missing.
Suddenly, it didn't matter what Marjorie did.
She was accountable to no one and was no longer relied upon by anyone.
She felt unwanted and unneeded.
Life drifted aimlessly, until a friend came visiting with her Labrador Retriever.
When Marjorie saw how close the pair were, she had an idea.
But would husband Bill allow her to get a dog?
He'd never given the impression of being a dog lover.
To her amazement, Bill was keen, so they immediately began their search.
Impressed by her friend's Retriever's good nature, Marjorie decided on a Labrador.
She and Bill went to see a litter of pale, yellow puppies and Marjorie fell in love with the smallest bitch.
Marjorie named her Lizzie (she'd always intended to call a daughter Lizzie but had produced only sons!) and the two forged a strong bond.
When such a close relationship develops between pet and owner, a certain empathy also builds.
Just as Marjorie stayed up all night while Lizzie was recovering from a womb infection, so Lizzie stayed by Marjorie's bedside while she recuperated after a gallstone operation.
Marjorie was astonished at how attached Bill became to Lizzie, as if Lizzie was the daughter they'd longed for.
Many happy hours were spent walking in the woods, chasing elusive rabbits and splashing through the muddiest water.
Lizzie became the focal point of Marjorie and Bill's life; holidays were only taken if Lizzie could go too.
The thought they would one day lose Lizzie never occurred.
Even when their vet warned them that Lizzie was getting on, they didn't realise just how much she had aged.
One morning Marjorie noticed Lizzie hadn't moved from her basket.
Alarmed, Marjorie made an appointment to see the vet that evening.
As soon as Bill came home, they carried Lizzie, in her basket, to the car.
They drove in silence, unable to discuss their worst fears, clinging to the faint hope that the vet would make things right again.
The vet was very kind but had to explain that Lizzie had severe heart failure, repeating himself several times before Marjorie and Bill could comprehend the situation; he was asking them to make a decision — a decision to end Lizzie's life.
The vet left them in the staff room while they tried to discuss Lizzie's future.
They sat in silence, unable to look at each other, struggling to keep control of their emotions.
Eventually, Bill blurted out ‘just do it’ and rushed from the room, back to the sanctuary of his car.
Marjorie steeled herself, asked to see the vet again, and said she would stay while Lizzie was put to sleep.
Surprisingly, Marjorie didn't cry.
The tears wouldn't come.
She held Lizzie's paw, looked into her big, brown eyes, wishing Lizzie could live forever.
All the love and devotion which had poured out of those once-bright eyes reassured Marjorie that, somehow, Lizzie actually understood.
Marjorie left Lizzie's body at the vet's and arranged for her to be cremated.
She left the surgery clutching Lizzie's collar; in the space of a few minutes it was all she had been left with, apart from memories.
BRAVE FACE
Marjorie and Bill were left to cope with their own personal loss while putting on a brave face for each other.
For weeks life was very difficult as they both tried not to upset each other, even slightly.
Finally, Bill couldn't stand it any longer and one night he just clung to Marjorie and cried.
He'd never realised he had become so attached to Lizzie and his own pain was unbearable.
Marjorie cried too, and at last they were able to release much of their pent-up grief.
The next day they found the courage to collect Lizzie's ashes and bring them home.
They placed them in their bedroom, together with a vase of flowers.
They have also requested in their wills that Lizzie's ashes be buried with them to ensure that, one day, they will all be together again.
If you would like to write to Laura about any bereavement problem or issue, please mark your letters Coping , Dogs Today   
DOGGIE POST BAG
We love reading your letters and we'll try to publish as many as possible.
Our STAR letter wins a Good Boy hamper full of doggie goodies, and every letter published will win a special golden bone award.
The editor reserves the right to edit letters.
Please write to this address:
SEEDS OF DESPAIR
Dear Dogs Today 
I am writing to warn other dog owners of the potential hazard of the rape plant (you'll have noticed the bright yellow flowers now covering so many fields).
Last month we endured the loss of our beautiful, two-year-old Airedale, Ben.
Ben loved to run along the public footpath through the rape fields, but at times, although not to venture into the field itself, he would often spot a rabbit and give chase.
Once he came back sneezing and coughing.
His nose was obviously irritating him and he banged it both with his paw and on the stone road until it actually bled.
The sneezing bouts continued for a couple of days, accompanied by shivering and coughing fits.
We took Ben to the vet and he was given a course of antibiotics, which seemed to do the trick.
We did not venture near the fields again until a friend with children came to spend a weekend.
The children took Ben for long walks, again crossing the rape fields.
By Monday, Ben was terribly ill and, once more, we took him to our vet, who gave him an antihistamine injection.
About 20 minutes after the injection Ben began hallucinating and having fits.
We rushed him to the veterinary hospital, where he was given an antidote which should have worked within 20 minutes.
Unfortunately, the injection did not work and despite much medication to calm his heart, he passed away in the early hours of the morning.
He was a young, strong dog.
Mrs Samah Green, Nr Saffron Walden, Essex 
Has anyone else experienced a problem with rape fields?
BEST OF BRITISH!
Dear Hagler
I've noticed that your walks in Windsor Great Park have been somewhat curtailed recently, due to your shoulder injury.
So I thought I'd drop you a line through the magazine to convey my get-well-soon message and show the rest of the readership what a handsome chap you are.
May I also pass on my thanks to your master for providing such a great venue for my business lunches.
The Two Brewers pub is indeed an enlightened establishment, encouraging such a highclass canine clientele.
Sally, Canine Consultant,Dogs Today
LITTLE PARCELS
Three weeks ago I became the proud owner of a Chihuahua and he's changed my life completely.
I am a nurse working shifts and enjoyed, and needed, early nights and morning lie-ins.
Now I'm up early, full of energy and have a new outlook on life all because of Rags, my wonderful dog.
He comes to work with me, in a residential home, and has also changed the lives of four mentally-handicapped people with whom I work.
I could never believe how much such a beautiful, tiny dog could alter the lives of so many people in such a short time.
Miss N Green, Moseley, Birmingham 
STAMP COLLECTING
Thank you for publishing my letter (Stamps for the National Canine Defence League ) in your June edition.
I am receiving, on average, four envelopes full of stamps per day.
Your magazine has really helped to boost my appeal.
I returned home from work one day to find a parcel from Armitages for the star letter of the month.
I can honestly say I was not expecting it.
I feel the dogs at the NCDL's kennel at Kenilworth should be the benefactors.
When I go to take the stamps I have collected, I will take the parcel of toys and goodies with me.
I hope you don't mind but I believe my own dog would not appreciate the goodies as much as those who are in the kennels.
Julie Brown, Coalville, Leicester 
It's good to hear the stamp appeal is going so well.
In case anyone missed it, Julie's address is:
We hope the stamps keep coming.
I'm sure the dogs at the kennels will love your prize.
EAR EAR!
My name is Bonnie and I'm a Miniature Schnauzer.
I don't see many of my kind, so people look at me strangely and ask — rudely — what I am.
But I don't care, as my Mummy says I'm unique because my ears stand up when they should be down.
As you can see, I'm quite vain.
If there's a camera around, I'm there like a shot.
Now everyone can see how unique a Schnauzer I am.
I might not fit the breed standard, but who knows?
I could start a trend and all Schnauzer owners might change the looks of their dogs.
If not, well I'll just be me — an individual.
If there are any other Schnauzers like me out there, please send a photo to Dogs Today so I can see.
Bonnie Newman, Hounslow, Middx 
Is your dog an ‘individual’?
Please send us a photo and tell us what sets your dog apart from the crowd.
RESCUE A ROTT
After reading your All I want is a room somewhere , I decided to write in case any of your readers were considering a home to Carla.
Six months ago I acquired a Rottie and can honestly say I am absolutely delighted with my dog.
My husband and I bought Millie as a companion for Mac, my Standard Poodle, and for my peace of mind, as my husband is a police officer who frequently works nights.
I recently took Millie to her vet.
He agreed that she was very good natured and nearly all Rotties he saw were calm and friendly.
I am not saying they're all pussycats but if you love and respect them, they will return those qualities tenfold.
What they also need is a good half-hour run  off the lead, daily, in a safe place, to maintain a well-balanced mind.
Of course, that goes for any large dog.
So, if anyone does want to rescue a dog, don't automatically overlook the Rottie.
You could be passing up the chance to obtain the most loving, loyal friend anyone could wish for.
Mrs H N Elcock, Telford 
You must have read our minds!
Turn to the article on page 22.
I'm sure you'll be very pleased to hear the NCDL received over 100 enquiries about Carla.
She is now settled in to her new home, which she shares with another Rottie and a German Shepherd.
POODORBOX
I was very interested in your article on the Labradoodle Dandy in the June issue of Dogs Today .
I thought you might be interested in seeing my adorable mutt, Bubbles, pictured (below) with her superior companion our Yorkshire Terrier, Boswell.
The reason the Labradoodle caught my eye is that Bubbles is the result of a liaison between a Miniature Poodle and — wait for it — a Labrador/Boxer cross.
We call our rather unusual breed a Poodorbox!
She is roughly Cocker Spaniel weight, but taller.
Her gorgeous tail curls right up over her back and wags incessantly.
She is chocolate-brown but has fair-coloured highlights (the poodle was champagne-colour), and you'll also see she has a white beard and a tiny dab of white on one of her back paws.
She is, however, only two years old but is often mistaken as being older.
She has many Poodle traits, including standing up on her hind legs and walking.
She casts her coat like a Labrador.
Yes, she's quite a mixture as you can gather!
Patricia Robertson, Helensburgh, Dunbartonshire 
DEVON DELIGHT
I enjoyed the article entitled Run of the Mill in the June issue of Dogs Today .
Would you be kind enough to forward the address of this seemingly delightful establishment.
My dog, Tess, and I would love to stay there.
Mrs June Ingram, Gamlingay, Cambs 
For a brochure, contact Una Cornthwaite at Hayne Mill 
COLLECTING CANS
In your June Doggie Post Bag you mentioned you were unable to trace any animal charity which collected aluminium cans for funds.
We do!
We would appreciate any quantity, people can deliver or send, and we also collect can ring-pulls.
Please help us raise funds now so our four-legged inmates can celebrate our centenary in 1992.
Beryl Romand, Appeals Manager, Birmingham Dogs Homes, Birmingham, B5 5QS.
I collect aluminium cans for the local branch of Guide Dogs for the Blind.
I must stress that only aluminium cans are acceptable and, if possible, they should be crushed as they take up less room.
Any readers who want to collect aluminium cans can either send them to me or contact local scrap metal dealers and take them there, where they can then donate the cash to a charity of their own choice.
As a point of interest, our branch also collects used English and foreign stamps, while any foreign coins left over from your holidays would be welcome, too!
June Chapman, 22 Hosker Close, Oxford OX3 8EN 
WRITE TO ESTHER
You may recall my story from the April issue, headlined No Protection .
(The sad story of how a new dog harness snapped and Putzie the Yorkie was run over and later died — Ed)
I have since written to Esther Rantzen.
Esther is keeping my letter until she hears of more complaints about faulty harnesses, leads or dog toys.
Consumer laws must be extended to protect our pets.
If any readers have had similar experiences with bad goods, please write directly to Esther Rantzen, or to me, and I will post all letters to her team.
I want to stop this injustice.
Why should people get rich from selling shoddy goods, causing us and our pets distress and even death.
Miss M Boothroyd 
If you've had similar experiences, please write to Esther Rantzen at ‘That's Life’, BBC Television, Lime Grove Studios, London W12 7RJ, or to Miss M Boothroyd, ‘The Dog House’, Good luck with the campaign; if we can be of any further help, let us know.
STAR LETTER
BULLIES GETTING BULLIED
I am 30 and have owned Bull Terriers for the past five years.
I have a dog, Billy, and a bitch, Becky.
I am an avid dog shower and do very well.
I love all dogs but, to be fair, Bull Terriers are my first real love.
My home is a shrine to them and a talking point for my friends, who think I'm completely nuts.
I feel the brunt of unwarranted anti-dog prejudice almost every day.
My dogs wouldn't hurt a fly.
I am scorned often, even by other dog owners, for owning ‘damn Pit Bull Terriers!’
All this is due to newspaper picture editors' inability to distinguish between a Pit Bull, Staffie or, my beloved breed, the Bullies.
Matt Smith, Peckham, London 
PS.
Billy Boy and Becky Lou say: ‘There's not a bad bone in our bodies’.
Needle Works 
Acupuncture is widely used in human alternative medicine.
So why not canine?
Lots of vets now grasp the point as dog owners needle them to learn the art
STEPH FREEMAN
In the wake of major advances in medicine and technology it's interesting to hear that not only is acupuncture still used for many human conditions, but there is also an increasing trend toward using acupuncture for pets.
Perhaps this is not so surprising, since the nation's pet population often suffer from similar complaints to those of their owners.
Acupuncture is used for the healing and relief of pain such as arthritis, muscle and ligament strains, and some forms of paralysis.
Some vets also claim acupuncture has aided considerably in the treatment and control of a variety of other disorders, including false pregnancies, non-specific vomiting, ear diseases, nerve degeneration, kidney problems and auto-immune joint disease.
It sounds impressive and the major advantage is that use of drugs is minimal, if at all.
Where the technique was first practised is unknown, although it is traditionally thought to be of Chinese origin, although there are accounts of it being used in India around 550 BC.
Practitioners use fine needles — normally stainless steel — to stimulate specific anatomical points of the body.
To prevent the spread of infection (and because we live in a throw-away society) disposable needles are often used, although if your dog requires prolonged treatment your vet may keep a ‘permanent’ set especially for that purpose.
The anatomical points used are vital and specific combinations correspond to the particular ailments.
Most vets use about 40 anatomical points, although very experienced practitioners may use up to 360, which seems a lot, but on the human body there are 1,000 possible sites.
The placid dog is a more promising patient and the treatment, I am assured, is so relaxing that dogs often fall asleep.
The insertion of the needle is less painful than the hypodermic counterpart, but may cause an animal to arch his back or tighten his muscles.
Nasty as this sounds, it is what your vet is looking for.
This means the vet has hit the right spot, but, despite giving the appearance of a canine pin cushion, it is obviously not too unpleasant an experience.
The needles are usually left in for about 15 minutes and are vibrated at intervals to achieve the required effect.
The highly aromatic herb Moxa is sometimes used.
It is rolled into a pellet and fastened to the end of the needle and lit so that it smokes.
Supposedly acting as a healing herb, it presumably also heats the needle to give an additional, soothing effect.
However, there is something rather disturbing about the thought of having your pet stuck with needles, let alone seeing smoke rise from him as well.
There are two main theories as to why acupuncture is so successful.
The first is that the needles act to stimulate the nerves, causing the brain to produce endomorphins.
These are the body's pain suppressors, rather like a natural form of the drug morphine.
This theory would explain why many quite aggressive dogs are calmed by the treatment.
Aggression may be caused by nagging pain, which your dog is unable to express to you, and which is soothed by acupuncture.
The second hypothesis is the much more traditional Yin &Yang theory.
Here, we enter the realms of fantasy, because Yin &Yang are related to light and dark or sun and shade.
The idea behind this theory is that these should be in perfect balance within the body.
The introduction of acupuncture apparently restores this balance when it's been lost.
It may sound rather fanciful to our western world, but many such ancient ideas are associated in some way with established scientific fact.
Surely the proof of any pudding, however, is in the eating and there is little doubt that acupuncture has gained credence and acceptance in the past decade or so.
There is no guarantee it will work on any specific case — the first treatment often causes the condition to briefly worsen.
Most vets work on the assumption that if, after the third session, no improvement is noticed, acupuncture is not going to be effective.
Nevertheless, many pet owners are now requesting acupuncture — often because they have been treated successfully by it themselves.
It is quite a commitment on behalf of the owner.
Sessions generally last for about 40 minutes and are required, by necessity, on a regular basis.
The longer the treatment continues, the better the results — but it is heavy on your vet's time and an appropriately heavy hole will appear in your bank balance!
If you want to try acupuncture, ask your vet and he should be able to ‘point’ you in the right direction!
Quick Bites
by David Appleby
PLAYING FOR KEEPS 
Owners of domestic dogs do not normally expect their pets to be out hunting prey, bringing it down and killing it, in the same fashion as their wild cousins — the wolf on the Arctic Tundra or the Cape hunting dog of the African Serengeti.
In fact, most owners would be horrified if they did.
But often, unknown to them, their dogs are exercising those inherent hunting instincts.
Just as the wolf will chase its prey, Fido chases his ball.
In the heat of the moment, the grey-coated wolf will wrestle with its quarry and Fido will violently shake rags until they lie motionless or chew squeaky toys until they squeak no more.
The pack will pull the carcass apart, competing for the best of the kill, and Fido plays tug-of-war games, hoping to win the toy.
Once successful, he will run around and not allow you to get hold of his prize.
Not only do dogs play games to exercise their hunting skills, they play to determine who is boss.
If we were to introduce a new toy to a litter of puppies, they would play with it.
Invariably, during the play period, the dominant puppy would get the toy and keep it.
This helps to reinforce his status within the group.
Fido's owners should be aware of this and take steps to play him at his own game.
Toys should become the owners' possession and be placed where Fido cannot get them.
As often as possible, they should invite Fido to play and play nicely for some time so Fido enjoys himself.
As the game progresses, owners should start to win the chase or the tug-of-war so, by the end of each game scenario — before Fido has lost interest — they are in possession of the toy, playing with it and not allowing Fido to have it.
Finally, they should put the toy away.
To Fido, this is a signal that he is subordinate to the rest of the family or pack.
If he loses games to them he is more likely to accept their authority, resulting in a much better-behaved dog all-round.
Dobermann Pinscher 
ROBERT KILLICK'S FIDO FACTS
Breed:
Dobermann
Group:
Working
Place of origin:
Germany
Original function:
Guarding
Availability:
Moderate
Average life span:
10 years
Age of maturity:
Three years
Height and weight:
Dogs 27″, bitches 25½″; medium size
Is the breed a natural guard dog
Yes, strong instincts
Attitude to strangers:
Can be aloof
Coat type:
Smooth
Colour(s):
Black/tan; brown/tan; blue/tan; fawn/tan;
Does coat mat?
No
Does coat tangle?
No
Does coat need professional grooming?
No
Maintenance of coat:
Very little, a hound glove may be used.
Coat maintained by balanced diet and exercise
Exercise:
Twice daily, combining free running with road walking on lead
Food:
Two tins and mixer for adults but varies with size
Ease of training:
Moderate
Good family dog?
Good, if treated with respect
With other people's children:
Suspicious until known
With other dogs of same breed:
Males can be difficult together
Other breeds:
Ditto
With cats:
Generally not good, but OK with own
Can they live in peace with other pets?
Not advisable
Town or country?
Should have a garden
Adapt to a flat?
Not completely — needs some space
Good kennel dogs?
Not an ideal kennel dog
Does the breed suffer from cold, heat or wet?
Suffers from cold and wet and is OK with heat
Hereditary anomalies?
Cervical spondalopathy and some hip dysplasia
Special considerations?
Likes warmth.
Should be trained from young age.
Needs human capacity and to be treated with respect.
Not a dog for everyone.
Character sketch:
Faithful, reliable dog provided it is treated properly and trained with firm kindness.
Care should be taken to buy from a breeder with a reputation for breeding good temperaments
Dobermann — dog dilemma
by JOHN RICHARDSON
Debonair and dignified, or a danger to the community?
The Dobermann has been the focus of much controversy since being introduced to Britain 50 years ago
The Dobermann is a smart-looking breed of German origin.
Standing about 27 inches at the shoulder, the Dobermann is usually black and tan in colour, but can be bred in any of four other colours.
The breed is currently undergoing a backlash of adverse publicity in light of the Government's ban on ‘aggressive’ dogs, such as the American Pit Bull Terrier and Japanese Tosa.
Some people are trying to include the Dobermann in that dangerous category.
The Dobermann first came to the UK in the late 1940s, imported from Holland by a keen ‘stockman’, Lionel Hamilton-Renwick.
Mr Hamilton-Renwick won Best of Breed at Crufts in the early 1950s, with Birling Rachel, the first of the breed to attract serious interest.
Mr Hamilton-Renwick soon moved on to the Dobermann's smaller relative, the Miniature Pinscher.
The Dobermann really came into its own as a domestic dog in the 1980s and, subsequently, far too many were bred.
One young and conscientious breeder, Graham Hunt, could foresee problems for the breed.
Graham is the breeder of the top-winning Dobermann, Champion Sallates Ferris, who was the winner of the Working Group at Crufts in 1987 and 1989.
He has bred four other champions and captured the top Dobermann awards of 1987, 1988 and 1989.
He owns just five dogs, including an imported dog and a bitch.
‘I saw problems coming for the breed and in 1984 I started a training club for Dobermanns and, more specifically, for their owners,’ Graham said.
‘We have about 200 in training in any one year.’
If you still want a Dobermann and can handle any adverse public reactions, you'll need to know the specific requirements of the breed.
‘Firstly, they need lots of exercise and they must be welltrained and socialised,’ Graham explained.
‘When buying a puppy, try and ensure it is well-bred and reared by a breeder who has some aim to produce well-tempered stock.’
Graham emphasised the fact that the breed needs plenty of mental exercise, too, even if it's only basic obedience training.
It is no good you being a couch potato and having a Dobermann, only to wonder why it seems so frustrated with its existence.
As kennel dogs Graham doesn't feel they really thrive, as they have thin coats and can feel the cold.
They can also develop pressure sores on the elbows and other joints.
They can adapt to kennel life but they MUST have lots of human contact.
HEALTHY EATERS
As a general rule, Dobermanns usually have good appetites and, therefore, it is not uncommon for them to get fat — a combination of too much food and too little exercise is not good for this breed!
Graham advocates an hour of free running every day.
The breed is prone to occasional stomach troubles and bouts of enteritis so a good-quality diet is essential.
It will cost you an estimated £10 per week to feed one dog.
And what of the aggression aspect the media has made so much of?
‘All dogs, of any breed, have a degree of aggression,’ Graham said.
‘This is how they establish their pecking order in the pack.
It is a trait which is essential to any canine's make-up.
What is important is how humans react to it.
You should not tolerate your dog doing something you feel strongly against.
‘Also, if you allow the dog to sit on your settee, then replace that settee with a new one you don't want the dog to sit on, you must not expect it to suddenly understand why it cannot sit there.’
If your dog shows a marked degree of aggression with which you cannot cope, you must get it to someone who understands the breed and can help.
If, after that, you can't get it to live amicably in a domestic situation, there is not much hope left, although Graham stressed he has had some success with temperament improvements by castrating the males.
True Case Histories 
Moby: Stage fright to limelight
Dear Mr Neville,
We recently acquired a large, boisterous and wonderful blue Great Dane called Moby.
Generally, Moby seems as playful and excitable as the next puppy, but he occasionally becomes nervous and withdrawn, sometimes even panicky, especially on walks.
Odd things alarm him and he is inconsistent.
One day he will happily walk along a busy road.
The next day he starts at one car coming around a bend a little fast.
Sometimes he is oblivious to the sound of aircraft; other times it panics him.
More worrying, perhaps, is that he happily accepts most people at home and outdoors, but sometimes shies away, even from people he's met.
We're sure Moby's behaviour is simply a phase.
After all, he's only been experiencing the outside world since his vaccination course was completed a few weeks ago.
But, with him already so large and strong, we're concerned he shouldn't panic unnecessarily, or become uncontrollably excited.
One problem is the conflicting advice we've received.
Some people tell us to keep Moby on a tight lead and only walk him in one or two places; others tell us not to let him off the lead as his bones aren't yet strong enough to take the strain; some tell us to relax and hope he grows out of it.
What should we do with our enormous dog during his puppyhood?
Yours sincerely
Jeanne and John Hursey
Peter Neville is a consultant in animal behaviour and Honorary Secretary of the Association of Pet Behaviour Consultants (APBC), 50 Pall Mall, London SW1.
He also co-presents the pet slot on BBC1's Daytime UK morning programme with Frisky (above) and Cassie
I first saw Moby at the photo session for the cover of the new video ‘It's a Dog's Life…and how to enjoy it’.
When Moby and I met, he was the biggest Great Dane I'd seen and full of confidence!
He even jumped on me when asked to pose for a photo and, towering above me with his paws on my shoulders, gave me the most enormous, slobbering lick imaginable.
Yuk!
No sign of nerves, but Moby was definitely still in that highly excitable stage where everything in life is fun and needs exploring.
There were legs flying in all directions as Moby dashed around on the front lawn of Bradley's smart surgery near Harrow.
However, he calmed down beautifully when Jeanne called, and posed delightfully (just check out the video's cover shot!).
But life had not always been that way with Moby.
When Jeanne contacted me, she and husband John were, indeed, unsure exactly how to handle Moby, or how to prevent his nervousness and excitability becoming normal behaviour without inhibiting his need to experience his surrounding environment.
I felt I didn't need to see Moby unless matters deteriorated in the weeks after Jeanne contacted me.
I was happy to offer advice by telephone while Moby was still a puppy — simple and, better still, free!
Moby should be gradually introduced to as much of life as possible!
I advised Jeanne to take Moby to as wide a variety of different places as possible and encourage him to meet many more people and dogs.
Of course, Jeanne would have to be careful with such a large dog that, in his enthusiasm, he didn't bowl other dogs or people over, or frighten them.
I advised Jeanne to ignore the old nonsense about not letting young Great Danes off-lead to run around, and to seek the advice of their vet about correct feeding of a rapidly-growing dog.
EXCESSIVE CALCIUM
My veterinary colleagues tell me one of the main dangers with such large dogs is not that they injure themselves (through overexercising before their skeletons can carry their weight) but that their diets are over-supplemented, particularly with excessive calcium, which damages bone growth and hinders development.
All young dogs have the need to play, exercise and socialise with people and their own kind.
For Moby it was especially important because, as with most pups, he had correctly been kept away from parks and streets for health reasons during that critical early period of socialisation until his vaccination course had taken effect.
There was no other option as the Hurseys live in a known highrisk parvovirus area  and carrying around a Great Dane puppy in a blanket to acclimatise him to street life — as one might with Yorkshire terrier pup — is hardly practical AND needs a very large owner!
Owners should make up for any lost socialising time with large dogs because, while lack of socialisation can mean problems for any dog, the big boys are that much more of a handful in later life.
Obviously, I wasn't suggesting Moby should simply be allowed to run off-lead.
Instead, I suggested Jeanne and John tire Moby with a few chase and throw-fetch games in the garden before taking him out for a walk on an extendable lead.
I asked that they take a different route each time, as far as possible, and to occasionally drive him there.
I also proposed they aim for all other dogs (except known or obvious ‘nasties’) and people, and to speak encouragingly to Moby as they did so, to keep him relaxed.
If he became excitable, I advised they gently apply the brake on the lead and calm Moby down with quiet words and perhaps a short ‘sit’, before leading him off toward the dog or person again, allowing Moby to become used to their presence.
If Moby became nervous or anxious, I suggested Jeanne and John tried to ignore it and simply jolly him along unless he became overtly upset, in which case they were to offer short, protective verbal reassurance, insist gently on a ‘sit’, then gradually lead him off again toward the object or person which had spooked him.
Too much protection of young, nervous dogs can lead to a condition known as learned incompetence, whereby the dog fools the owner into always being ready to protect him.
If Moby became mildly excited, or interested in another dog, he was to be allowed forward on the extendable lead to meet it.
If this went well, he could be allowed off the lead to play with his new friend for a short while.
I asked Jeanne to find as many friends as possible to accompany her on walks with Moby, and to give them control of the lead and take him away to explore without her if they felt confident.
This would help expand Moby's loyalties and prevent him from becoming too dependent on his main daytime companion.
While this was a general, day-to-day policy for Moby, it was also essential he start to receive some structured contact with his own kind, and begin basic training as soon as they possibly could.
So many dog training clubs only take dogs when they are six months old…well past the steep part of the learning curve and often at an age when male dogs, especially, are starting to grow up (and become as rebellious and resistant to authority as any human adolescent!).
Particularly with large dogs, it's essential for their future control and success as a pet that simple training in the basic commands, such as‘sit’, ‘stay’, ‘down’, ‘come’ and ‘stop’are taught as soon as the puppy is taken on.
When still young, they are willing to please and respond well to their new ‘mother figures’.
Concentration spans are short at this age but, once commands are taught on a ‘reward-for-getting-it-right/patience-not-punishment-for-getting-it-wrong’ basis, it's just a case of frequent practice.
Fortunately, Jeanne and John live very close to Bradley's clinic and were able to attend excellent puppy classes run by Jenny Williams (owner of Moby's Chinese Crested video cover colleague Chan.)
Here, Moby could acquire basic social and communication skills with other dogs, get used to being handled by many different people and Jenny could show Moby and the Hurseys how to start a course of basic obedience training.
Watching puppies of all different shapes and sizes, hair types and characters, rushing around together at these classes is great fun, and they're learning how to be dogs and human companions all at once!
TRAINING CLASSES
As soon as Moby was too old for puppy classes, he went to the bigger-dog classes, run by Jenny, to reinforce what he'd been taught at puppy classes and, most importantly, what he'd learned at home.
A bad training class, of which there are sadly too many, could have set Moby's development back months, or even permanently ruined his character.
I've seen so many clients train dogs in classes too large and too loud, where the pup becomes confused and unsure of what is expected of him.
Others have been half-trained on slippery floors, where they worry about keeping their feet, yet are yelled at for failing to respond quickly enough to commands.
Sadly, so many dogs seem to end up in classes run by loud, aggressive people, where they are yanked cruelly on choke chains and punished physically if they don't do as they're told.
It's unnecessary and unkind for any dog but disastrous for the likes of Moby.
Fortunately, the number of these old-fashioned classes seems to be gradually falling.
How nice it was to reassure Jeanne and John to follow their own judgement and instincts and carry on socialising Moby as much as possible — with a little proper help from Jenny.
All they had to do, as they knew already, was to apply love and patience to Moby's upbringing and all would be well.
And all was well, as everyone could see when big, proud, handsome and scatty-but-obedient Moby launched himself out of the car (on command, of course!) for the video cover photo call.
From a nervy start to cover dog; a nice story about a dog anyone could be proud of!
Part 8 Careers with Dogs 
Could you handle it?
Dog squadron instructor Keith Waugh was born to be in the RAF and, after 11 satisfying years, he's happy to say his family's links with the force have gone to the dogs 
SEAN KEEBLE
Keith Waugh was armed with only the vaguest canine knowledge when he took the first steps along his career path.
Eleven years down that path he now has a far greater appreciation of dogs and the people who handle them professionally.
Keith, 32, is the NCOIC (non-commissioned officer in charge) of the dog squadron at RAF Northolt and as such, has learned what is required to make a special working partnership successful.
‘Above all else, you've got to be 100 per cent committed to the job and, most importantly, to your dog,’ Keith advised.
‘When you're responsible for one dog, you form a special partnership with him.
You work with your dog so you have to look after him very carefully.
‘You feed, clean, groom and exercise him — it's not difficult to see how the bond develops.’
Being a dog handler with the RAF involves frequent night shifts; usually security work, such as patrolling of airfields and any RAF installations and property.
‘It can be a very lonely job, for both man and dog, which is why it involves such a special relationship,’ Keith explained.
Despite the obvious satisfaction with which he carries out his work, Keith admits, when it became time, he didn't have much of a say in choosing a career in the RAF.
‘I was a forces child,’ he explained.
‘My father was a flight sergeant caterer and I suppose I just followed in his footsteps.
‘When I was a kid our family was constantly moving, between the UK, Cyprus and Singapore.
‘My father retired when I was 10 years old and I started in 1980.’
As Keith explained, it was not any easier for him to take up employment with the RAF because his father had been a career forces man.
The first step is an interview at the RAF Careers Information Office and sitting for an induction test to gauge the individual's suitability for the RAF.
‘You're first asked what trade you're interested in,’ Keith said.
‘Everyone starts with basic training at RAF Swinderby, in Lincolnshire.
‘The only real pre-requisite for a trade within the forces police is a GSCE grade C or better in English and a special forces driver's licence which I had to qualify for at RAF St Athan.
‘Apart from that, all you need is to be passed fit and healthy for a doctor's examination.’
There is a height minimum for potential recruits — 5′7″ for men, 5′4″ for women.
FEMALE RECRUITS
Keith had to complete a 13-week basic RAF police training course before moving on to a waiting list for the eight-week doghandler training programme, which is completed at RAF Newton in Nottingham.
‘There's usually 12 to 15 people in the dog training classes.
You qualify out of that as an acting corporal, then you're used by other classes; for example, as a helper or decoy in staged attacks.
‘You're also required for demonstration work with your own unit during the waiting period before starting the dog-training course.
‘Completing your dog-training course could take a couple of months but it could also take a couple of years because of the waiting period.’
A spokesman for the Police Dog Training School at RAF Newton said the need for instructors and dog handlers fluctuated.
‘It depends on the demand in the trade at the time but some years the training classes are full and sometimes there's hardly any recruits at all,’ he explained.
‘The field has been open to females only during the past year but we soon expect at least 10 per cent of dog-training course applicants will be female.’
Keith was an instructor at the training school for 4½ years, working with a variety of dogs.
‘I worked with more than 20 dogs, including German Shepherds, Labradors, springers, retrievers and Pointers,’ he said.
Those breeds are used specifically for drug and firearm-explosive detection, because of their natural gundog instinct.
Postings to specialist courses are made by the Personnel Management Centre, for which recruits can apply to be nominated after one year in the service.
At the end of that 12-month period, a recruit qualifies as a Senior Aircraftman or woman (SAC acting corporal), before earning the rank of Substantive Corporal, which is when the recruit is eligible for a specialisation course.
‘My work has helped me appreciate dogs a lot more,’ Keith explained.
‘You learn what they can and can't do and that experience becomes useful as you go on.
‘The most satisfying thing about working with dogs is seeing the results of any work as I go.
It gives me a good feeling.’
As a dog handler, Keith has worked with two German Shepherds in the past five years.
‘German Shepherds are great dogs to work with,’ he declared.
‘Every dog has a different character.
I had my first dog for 18 months and have had my second one for 3½ years.’
Joining the RAF usually means a minimum nine years in the service, followed by a six-year term on reserve.
However, a RAF careers information officer explained a recruit can leave the service by giving 18 month's notice through a ‘notice engagement’.
Keith Waugh has managed to make a career in the RAF a family concern — and is making a tremendous success of it.
For more information on a dog-handling career with the RAF, contact: RAF Police Dog-Training Squadron, Newton, Notts, NG13 8HL, or phone 0949 20771 (extension 453 or 426), or the RAF Careers Information Office on 0734 590650.
Short Story 
Big is beautiful…bigger is better
It was love at first sight but, little did they know, this growing pup — out in the big, wide world for the first time — would wreak havoc
ROBERT KILLICK
I was born in a barn, never knew my father, but was a very goodlooking baby — I could've won prizes.
My best feature was my big, black eyes; I could really melt hearts.
I was a stocky baby with good bone, but perhaps my ears were on the large side — but then so were Clark Gable's and he didn't do so bad.
They said my father looked a bit like Clark Gable, bold and bad, by all accounts a big guy.
Mum's big too but it's really all just fat.
We were a family of nine.
I don't know how Mum managed but we were never without food, although we were short on other things — I never saw a television.
Still, it didn't matter, we spent the days rolling the hay.
My favourite trick was to hide above everyone and jump on them.
One of my sisters got quite hysterical when I did it to her, so Mum had to give her a good shaking!
One day they came to take us away, saying it would be better for us — what do they know?
We hid but it made no difference, they still found us.
We were taken to this orphanage kind of place, separated, and put into little rooms.
We didn't like the food, we preferred Mum's.
There was nothing to do all day so we just lay about.
If we made a noise somebody shouted at us.
Boring, boring, boring!
One Saturday a woman came in and took me to a big room where there was another woman with two children.
She picked me up and held me in front of her face.
‘What a lovely baby-waby,’ she said, in a silly voice.
Baby-waby indeed!
I bit her nose — only a little and the tiniest bit of blood.
She screamed, I laughed and she dropped me.
I expect you've guessed by now I'm a dog.
I went to the smallest girl who grabbed my tail and hit me.
I bit her, too!
I stood in the middle of the room growling and showing my teeth, then I made a puddle!
That did it.
They left.
I was taken away in disgrace and I didn't care.
The next time they took me to the room, a man and a woman were waiting.
I didn't like them from the start — they smelt funny, like dirty dogs.
The man picked me up, roughly, and hurt me.
‘She'll do, I only want her for breeding,’ the nasty woman said.
‘What?’
I thought, ‘Not on your nelly!’
I scuttled to the corner and crouched, trembling and moaning.
The man chased me but I ran.
Then I stood and drooped everything; my head, ears, tail.
You name it, I drooped it!
‘I don't want a temperament like that,’ the woman said, as they left.
I must admit I was getting a trifle worried but then I met them.
It was love.
I came into the room with some trepidation and there they were, two little round people speaking with a strange accent.
‘Vot a darlink’!
she cried.
She came to pick me up.
This was my chance and I grabbed it.
I rolled on my back, stuck my legs in the air and laughed.
I knew these people would be good owners.
‘I vant zis dog to 'ave,’ she said.
‘But you are vanting zer schmall dog’ said zer man.
‘Ou seely man, 'e ist schmall!’
‘She might, 'ow you say, grew a bit,’ he schmiled.
She didn't care.
They paid their money and we left together.
These lovely people were from Holland, on holiday over here.
We had a long journey back to Holland.
I don't know what it was about Holland, whether it was the food, the water or all the chocolates they gave me, but I grew, how I grew.
I weighed 10 stone before I was nine months old; by 14 months I was 15 stone and six feet tall standing on my back legs.
When I put my front paws on my lady's shoulders, I was about a foot taller than her.
I slept on the bed with them but they kept falling out, so they bought another bed, for themselves.
When we were camping there wasn't enough room inside the van, so they bought an awning, which they slept in, of course.
And she still called me her ‘leettle doggie’.
We went camping in Seville, Spain and because I liked to walk about they chained me to their table.
Looking around, I saw this man with a beard, who smelled nice and friendly, so I thought I'd go and say ‘hello’.
Unfortunately, I completely forgot I was attached to the table — all the lunch things fell off, the wine spilt and the glasses shattered.
The man spoke gently and patted my head.
I thought how nice he was and decided to give him a treat and sit on his lap.
I climbed up but his seat collapsed and, as he fell, he knocked his table over.
What a clumsy person.
He should've brought better chairs.
I think he broke something because a big white van took him away and he returned with plaster on his arm.
My lady and gentleman took him out that night and he drank a lot of fizzy stuff and fell over — I'm black and I don't think he saw me in the darkness.
He must've broken the other arm because the next day he had both arms in plaster.
My people drove home without stopping, except for petrol — all 900 miles.
A pity.
I could have become fond of the bearded man even though he was the clumsiest chap I knew.
I wonder how he drove home.
Katie's Problem Page 
If you've got a problem with your pet or any question about dogs generally, this is your page.
Katie Boyle, TV and radio personality, is here to help.
Britain's foremost agony aunt has, in common with the rest of us, a real and genuine love of dogs.
BREEDIN' DISGRACE
Puppy farms continue to thrive.
Dogs at these establishments are merely forlorn breeding machines with frightened eyes, their wretched pups caged in hellholes, often left to rot in their own dirt and squalor.
Are the continual efforts of Puppywatch — set up by Alan Clark and Tricia Roberts, with their circulation of vividly illustrated leaflets — being ignored?
Are those shock reports and sickening pictures of so many suffering animals just forgotten?
Thankfully, no, there has been some progress.
Dr Alan Williams, the caring Swansea West MP, has shown unflinching determination in his campaign to get the powers-ofentry law changed.
Dr Williams' Breeding of Dogs Bill, allowing authorities access to unlicensed breeding premises, was approved by the House of Commons on June 21.
Dr Williams has also taken his campaign to the Kennel Club, and I feel he is in no small way responsible for having persuaded that eminent body to tighten up its act.
Kennel Club chairman Mr John McDougall has assured me, personally, that the new rules are already in force: Six litters only to each bitch, and none after the age of eight.
After that the bitch will be spayed and, hopefully, rehomed happily.
All dog lovers can help thwart the puppy farmers.
Never flinch from informing the RSPCA or giving details to Puppywatch 
Inform them, in complete confidence, of any suspicions you have of people breeding dogs on unlicensed premises (where more than two bitches are kept for profit).
We mustn't lose heart because continued pressure from a caring public can influence even the most apathetic government — eventually!
WOOD YOU BELIEVE IT?
My 10½-month-old Bearded Collie is obsessed with wood.
At home he has chewed the door frame and part of the back door, as well as the kitchen cupboards, although these were done when he was a lot younger.
However, he is still obsessed with wood and eating it in the park.
He picks up sticks and sits down to eat them.
I try to get them off him but am not always successful.
I've taken some of his toys with me to get his attention, which works for a while but he soon loses interest.
What can I do?
Karen Lavender Middlesborough, Cleveland
There are two possible reasons for your Bearded Collie being wild about wood, the first being a second teething period, which some dogs go through.
This can be uncomfortable and requires plenty of gnawing to relieve the growing pain.
Then again, this passion for wood could be related to a lack of fibre in his diet.
I'd take him along for a veterinary verdict on these possibilities and take it from there.
FIRST TIME FEARS
I am not quite sure how to train my dog.
Whenever I say ‘sit’ he doesn't listen but if I have a biscuit in my hand he does it straight away.
We got him from the RSPCA and he is my first dog.
He's very friendly toward people and usually lets anyone pick him up and stroke him, even when he's eating.
But, when he gets too close to any dog he growls and barks.
He also has scabs all over his nose and ear.
Do you think this may have something to do with his behaviour toward other dogs?
I am 11 years old so please help in any way you can.
Rachel Brockelsby Hull
Your dog is responding beautifully to the ‘do and be rewarded’ training techniques just as he should.
As for the other matter, it sounds like your dog could have earned his scabs by either defending himself, or having an argument with a cat.
Get a vet to check him over to be sure.
Either way, the problem you describe, combined with the fact that this is your first dog, makes me think you should go back to the RSPCA and ask them to put you in touch with the most suitable, local training club.
You and your pet have much to learn and it will be both fun and fruitful if you go along together.
However, it would be helpful if your parents — at least one of them — went with you.
There will probably be times, when you are at school, that they will be in charge of him so it's very important they should enjoy this part of his education and development, too.
DIET DOUBT
I have a seven-year-old Rottweiler named Luke.
In the past year Luke has developed arthritis and a thyroid problem — the vet has prescribed thyroscin for him.
The vet also explained Luke had to get some weight off and instructed me to change his diet of cooked chicken and switch to a dried food called Eukanuba.
I am not very happy about this.
Mrs P Heath Wandsworth, London
Your vet is right.
To allow a dog with arthritis to be overweight is tantamount to cruelty and Eukanuba is excellent as a complete food.
Do give it a try — you'll find his waistline improves immediately
A word of warning: please consult your vet as to exactly what quantity of Eukanuba you should give your Rottweiler each day — it is very easy to put ON weight with Eukanuba if you aren't careful — and the instructions on the bag do suggest you allow your dog to take as much as he wished during the 24-hour period.
In your case, I'm sure a specific quantity — which you can divide into two or three meals a day, so he doesn't get too frustrated on a diet — is the simplest solution.
I'm sure Eukanuba will prove successful but you could ask your vet about Waltham's Canine Low Calorie Diet as an alternative.
DOUBLE DILEMMA
I wonder if you could possibly give me the address of the ‘Dogs for the Disabled’ charity, as I would like to send a donation but don't know where to send it.
I would be most grateful for any assistance offered.
Mrs Heather Rubin Manchester
I'm sure Dogs for the Disabled will welcome any donation for the wonderful work they do.
Their address is: Brook House, 1 Ladyes Hills, Kenilworth, Warks CV8 2GN.
SHIRTY SHEPHERD
I adopted an eight-year-old German Shepherd who'd spent his life in kennels as a show/stud dog.
He has been no trouble with my two GSD bitches but while out walking, he flies at other dogs.
Even when at training classes he doesn't recognise the dogs he has spent his previous life with.
He has a wonderful temperament.
Do you think he has become jealous or possessive?
Mrs May Toms Leighton Buzzard, Beds
Your German Shepherd feels insecure away from familiar territory and his aggression is a defence mechanism — a typical syndrome of long-term kennelling, where there has been little socialisation.
I'm afraid no dog club training will be the answer.
Ask your vet to put you in touch with the nearest, most suitable member of the Association of Pet Behaviour Consultants.
You'll need lots of patience, but as you say your boy has a good nature otherwise, the chances are you'll succeed.
Don't forget a muzzle is very helpful in those early days.
If you have any problems or questions about your pet, please write to Katie's Problem Page, Dogs Today, 10 Sheet St, Windsor, Berkshire, SL4 1BG.
Katie regrets she can only reply through this page.
