Crime and Punishment 
(i)
In the mid-1860s Dostoevsky developed a marked tendency to fuss about the relation between real life and fiction, between the goings-on in the newspapers and what he was saying or wanted to say in his novels.
I stress the newspapers.
He was altogether more interested, on the surface at any rate, in what he found there than in what he could observe of people and events around him.
A draft letter to his publisher Katkov — the fair copy is lost — discusses the plot of the as yet unwritten Crime and Punishment .
It states defensively:
You'll find in our newspapers many signs of a extraordinary mental instability leading to terrible deeds (that theological student who killed a girl he had arranged to meet in a shed, and who was arrested a hour later eating his breakfast — and so on).
In short, I'm convinced my theme is partly justified by contemporary life.
For once he was underplaying his hand.
Crime and Punishment did not merely reflect or even confirm that strange and removed elsewhere, the world journalists write about.
It anticipated that world.
Readers were settling down to the novel's opening instalment — not a venture to be recommended for ‘people with weak nerves’ remarked Strakhov, the gifted critic — when a murder story broke in the newspapers.
Danilov, a student who had tried to live by private teaching, intelligent, handsome, dark-haired, solitary, killed and robbed a money-lender and his maid.
In the course of the trial one Glazkov made a false confession which he later retracted.
The newspapers themselves leaped on the parallel with Raskolnikov and his crime and with the innocent Nikolai's declaration of guilt.
Nature had followed art.
Danilov,The Voice observed, had probably not even begun to contemplate his murder when Dostoevsky was shaping Raskolnikov's.
The  two cases were laid side by side, and likenesses and differences were solemnly analysed as if we had here before us two ‘real’, directly comparable objects.
All this brought joy to the novelist.
He often spoke to Strakhov of his ‘pride as an author’ in his creative foreshadowing of facts, and to A. N. Maikov he enlarged:
Oh my friend, I have completely different notions of reality ad realism from our realists ad critics.
My idealism is much more real than theirs [meaning ‘than their realism']…
Their realism won't help you explain a hundredth part of the real events which have actually occurred.
But we by our idealism have even prophesied events.
It has happened.
We are on familiar ground, since this idealism is none other than his deeper — sometimes he called it deepest, sometimes highest — realism; but with new implications in that he is beginning to show a sensitiveness to the actual which no doubt existed before but was rarely evident, a sensitiveness which is now coming out like a bruise.
This is an important aspect of the process I have called his working his way backwards into the Nineteenth Century.
Crime and Punishment takes its place in a perfectly obvious and open fashion among the international classics of naturalism (or realism), and it is the first of his novels to do so: the earlier and great book The House of the Dead walks so close beside personal history as to rule itself out in this connection; formally it is a freak, so I argued, a quasi-novel; and as regards fact and fiction, since he is recounting not ‘prophesying events’, Dostoevsky cannot have found much in the Dead House to get excited about.
Whereas in Crime and Punishment and in the novels which follow he can, though his narrow glee over being ahead of the fact is unworthy of his art and of what ‘idealism’ and ‘deeper realism’intend.
Shrewd guessing at tendency is not the jewel in his casket.
The interest of how things are resides in their figuration, discernible and expressible by the deeper realist, of how things will be only in so far as that futurity is the truth and the end of how they are and always have  been.
His naturalism is apocalyptic.
The social and psychological trends that were bound to produce Raskolnikov/ Danilov are the mere phenomenology of a transcendent mystic and Biblical cryptogram.
The Book of Revelation, which Tolstoy said ‘reveals absolutely nothing’, is more heavily marked than anything else in the New Testament which Dostoevsky took to prison with him, and we know that huge overarching shapes like Baal, the Kingdom of Antichrist, are beginning to appear in his writing from the early 1860s.
Danilov's double murder looks small beer in comparison.
Indeed it is pertinent to ask what scope of revelatory prophecy Crime and Punishment is aiming at.
An ambitious impression is created by Raskolnikov's delirium and nightmare:.
In his illness he dreamt that the whole world was condemned to fall victim to some terrible and unknown pestilence that was coming upon Europe out of the depths of Asia.
Ali were doomed to perish except a chosen few, a very few.
There appeared a new strain of trichinae, microscopic creatures parasitic upon the bodies of human beings.
But these creatures were spirits endowed with intelligence ad will.
People who were infected by them immediately became as men possessed ad out of their minds.
A grand and dread apocalypse.
But this occurs in Crime and Punishment's Epilogue.
It is aftermath rather than the novel itself.
And the Epilogue also points forward in its closing words to ‘a new tale’, because ‘our present one is ended’, and the narrator says he has in mind the slow regeneration of Raskolnikov, now in prison, through love and suffering.
No such novel ever got written.
But Raskolnikov's nightmare calls to mind one that did, namely The Possessed , while the specific link between ‘as men possessed’(besnovatimi ) and The Possessed (Besi , literally The Devils ) is inescapably obvious — just as the word ‘Socialism’ which Dostoevsky has written against the beast in Revelation coming out of the earth with horns like a lamb and speech like a dragon shows the general way his thoughts are tending.
And again this is the way of The Possessed rather than Crime and Punishment .
However, a second marginal comment in his New Testament both latches on to Crime and Punishment and provokes a backward thought.
His note on the beast of Chapter Seventeen of Revelation, the beast which doesn't exist and still has to appear and is destined for perdition, is ‘generalhuman’— the word he coined for Notes from Underground and incidentally never used again in his fiction.
At the end of the underground man's tirade ‘generalhumans’ appears as the notional creatures we are trying to turn ourselves into because ‘we feel it's too much of a burden to be men — men with real bodies, real blood of our own' .
How can we have any other bodies and blood than our own?
We can't.
We can only think about it.
And Notes from Underground is precisely such a fable of disembodied consciousness.
But in the opening paragraphs of Crime and Punishment consciousness has found a home in the unnamed and very physical young man who leaves his stuffy little top room and slips downstairs like a cat, out into the street.
This young man is also very mental.
His being is riddled with theory and hypothesis.
He has a plan.
Rather, he has a plan of a plan: the plan being to murder an old money-lender, while the plan of that plan is to embark here and now, out of doors, in the glare and summer stench of Petersburg, upon a rehearsal of the murder.
The question of motive hangs over these first pages, and over the whole novel.
Dostoevsky's letter to Katkov asserting that crimes like Raskolnikov's can be found in the newspapers also discusses motive.
The old money-lender with her ‘Jewish’ interest rates is to be murdered because her life is worthless and her hoarded wealth can be put to good use; when the unimportant deed is done the doer will launch himself into something that really matters, a large-scale  philanthropic exercise.
But Crime and Punishment didn't work out like that.
The letter to Katkov belongs to the autumn of 1865.
Between then and the end of the year Dostoevsky put aside every word he had written and began again.
And in this new version the philanthropic rationalist and utilitarian Raskolnikov has almost completely disappeared.
And in his place we have a murderer fascinated by the Napoleonic idea.
Repeatedly, he says that to brush a vicious old woman aside like a swatted fly and get on with life is to prove oneself a Napoleon — not Napoleon himself who lost whole armies and forgot about them, but a Napoleon.
He finds out that there is no such person.
In a Napoleon he cannot discover anybody to be;a Napoleon is a projected, dreamed-up, aimed-at type, a ‘generalhuman’.
Dostoevsky's home-made word doesn't appear in Crime and Punishment ; it has been left behind (unlike the mind that coined it) in the much more theoretical Notes from Underground .
With Raskolnikov the issue has been naturalized into a restless and greedy discontent.
‘Mere existence had never been enough for him; he had always wanted something more.’
And it follows from this calculatedly vague ‘something more’ that the Napoleonic idea doesn't settle the question of motive either.
Its domination of the final text only means that it is Raskolnikov's favourite way of rationalizing his malaise.
Nothing in him matches his deed.
Dostoevsky exhorted himself in his notebooks to ‘explain the whole murder one way or another and make its character and relations clear’, but the artist in him wouldn't allow it.
On one occasion, lashing about for reasons after the event, Raskolnikov cries out ‘I simply wanted to dare, Sonya, that was my only motive’; and next to‘I just did it’ this must be  reckoned his least untrue account of himself and his deed.
Wanting to dare is his opposite number to the underground man's wanting to want, because whereas wanting to want holds fast to the earlier novel's metaphysical spareness and abstraction, wanting to dare opens up the whole huge circumstance of the murder itself, the thing that in fact gets done.
(ii)
Though Conrad's Narcissus runs it close,Crime and Punishment remains for me the most accessible and exciting novel in the world.
It is the king of murder stories.
And of detective stories.
And of thrillers.
Its atmosphere and suspense are nursed by locality — Petersburg — in ways which can't be escaped but which often get misreported.
Commentators are fond of discovering and praising a guidebook clarity in the novel.
They have been deceived by the plethora of streetnames, bridges, islands, and so forth.
All these topographical details are there and are correct.
But they don't cohere, don't add up.
You couldn't find your way round this city any more (and here is a strange thought) than you have got the practical hang of the little fortress prison at Omsk by the end of The House of the Dead .
To compare Raskolnikov's haymarket with Kim's bazaar is to see that Kipling has done all the work so that you don't have to go there to know what it's like at the level of vivid and varied description, whereas Dostoevsky leaves his reader with an impression which hovers between smell and vapour and dream.
In fact the street names and the rest belong with the extremely important disjunctive flotsam of the book: paintpots, old rope, the odd sock, boots that once belonged to the Secretary at the English Embassy, twists of paper, egg-shells, fish-guts, frayed blood-soaked strips torn from trouserbottoms and coat-pockets, an axe-sling in ribbons (‘Little bits of tom linen cannot possibly arouse suspicion!,’) half-eaten meals, small change, miscellaneous pawned objects, candle-ends, trousseau-stuff (‘fancy boxes, dressing-cases, ornaments, dress material, and all that sort of junk from  Knopf's and the English Shop’) broken crocks (cherepki), and skulls (cherepi).
And what the commentators are really paying homage to, what prompts their sense of coherence and a world revealed, is a feat of illusionist sorcery.
In a notebook, beneath the underlined word ‘tone’ and ‘NB’penned three times, Dostoevsky has written among other jottings ‘summer, dust, mortar’; and in this case the man and the artist are at one.
This is that city which readers of Crime and Punishment carry with them for the rest of their lives.
The novelist stayed away from‘stinking petersburg’ during the unbearably hot summer of 1866, to avoid his creditors but also on his guard against what he called ‘false inspiration’.
He relied on his mind's eye and ear — and nose.
The result is a townscape of ‘terrible despairing cries’ which mean, and mean more than, that the drunks are leaving the pubs between two and three o'clock in the morning, the pubs that reek of alcohol and cucumber and fish.
A townscape of nightmare yellows: sky, buildings, furniture, wallpaper, faces — the colour of age, heat, pestilence, bile and jaundice, bruisings and stainings, with a stronger connotation of dirt in Russian than in English; the colour of the tickets of identification which prostitutes were required to carry; the colour of Raskolnikov's ‘cubbyhole’ of a room; and the colour which greets him when he comes to after fainting at the police station and sees a man ‘holding a yellow glass filled with yellow water’.
Looking over Dostoevsky's shoulder, we find him first writing ‘small yellow glass’, then deleting ‘small’; and writing ‘water’ then adding ‘yellow warm’to the water, then deleting ‘warm’— the final text uniting an apocalyptic starkness of yellow meets yellow with the topicality of Petersburg's notoriously filthy water supply, a subject of much comment and complaint in the newspapers.
At such moments we come  as close as it is possible to get to the spirit of Crime and Punishment .
Having, as I say, abandoned everything he had done, he sat down and wrote a six-part novel within a year which included a twenty-six day break in which he threw together and dictated The Gambler , itself not a small book nor a negligible one, to satisfy the terms of a contract he had made with a shyster publisher.
‘The very thought would be enough to kill Turgenev,’ so he told a friend, and posterity salutes a marvel of concentrated effort.
He wrote month after month with fearful haste, and yet the Soviet editor only exaggerates slightly when he says that the manuscripts reveal ‘immense, most rigorous work, literally over every phrase’.
This combination of speed and close attention may have a lot to do with the narrative thrust and atmospheric coherence and intensity that make this the most gripping of his novels.
Then there's the energy generated by frustration.
The thing had refused to come right.
His notebooks show him hesitating between reminiscence (‘It was exactly eight years ago’) and testimony during trial (‘I am on trial and will tell everything’).
Note the ‘I’.
He was thinking in terms of first-person narrative — Raskolnikov's own story.
This proved unmanageable.
Much of what the novelist wanted to say lay outside the murderer's ken, and, as we shall see, Raskolnikov's consciousness was in other, subtler ways too confining.
Also, Raskolnikov's narrative was to have been ‘A Confession’— Dostoevsky's own title — and this wouldn't work either.
We recall that the confessional idea has a long history.
First the pre-Siberian ‘confessions’.
Next the unrealized plan for a full-length novel,Confession , which got switched to the shod Notes from Underground .
And now another failure.
And still, after Crime and Punishment , the idea of a confession novel or story tugs at the edge of Dostoevsky's vision, and continues to do so for the rest of his life in the form of The Life of a Great Sinner which he planned on the scale of War and Peace , but which never got written though it fed previous material into his novels of the seventies, and  especially Karamazov at the turn of the next decade.
(Dmitry didn't kill his father but he keeps baring his breast to people about how much he wanted to.)
So the idea of Raskolnikov's ‘Confession’ ran into the ground.
But there it encountered another ruined project, a work to be called The Drunks of which only a tiny fragment survives, and the marriage of these two constitutes the success of Crime and Punishment .
The drink theme too, broadly understood, goes back a very long way.
Behind the truant husband Marmeladov, perhaps the greatest feat of instant creation in all Dostoevsky as he buttonholes Raskolnikov in the pub with hay sticking to his clothes and vodka at hand — behind that immortal Russian drunkard stretches a long line of urban dropouts and psychological cripples, of paupers and other victims of the ravages of early capitalism (think of Petersburg as several decades behind Manchester), of the ‘insulted and injured’ in the novel of that title and elsewhere, back to the beginning, back to Mr Devushkin with his teapot and pipe and his ‘fearful lapses’over the bottle.
Why does Marmeladov drink?
The Crime and Punishment notebooks expend considerable effort trying to establish an overarching reason or at least an empirical scatter of factors, and failing.
Compare Dostoevsky's attempt, frustrated by the good angel of his genius, to explain Raskolnikov's motive for his crime.
In the novel itself, where we might expect Marmeladov to speak of solace, respite, forgetting, companionship, he grasps the paradox that he drinks because he is in search of suffering, of ‘tears and tribulation’.
And, he adds, ‘I have found them.’
This has the same free, metaphysical bearing on his being a drunkard that Raskolnikov's wanting to dare has on his being a murderer.
Moreover, as always in Dostoevsky, the search for suffering refuses to settle into coherent masochistic focus.
Marmeladov's wife, he says, ‘has a consumptive tendency, and I feel it.
How could I not feel it?
And the more I drink the more I feel it.
Indeed that's why I drink, to find compassion and feeling in drink.
It's not happiness but sorrow that I'm looking for.
I drink because I want to suffer more and  more.’
So his intensified sorrow is the intensified compassion and feeling for his wife which drink whips up.
This is the Marmeladov who married his present wife — not that that did any good either — because he could not bear to see such suffering.
We have here the grand selfish selfless nonlogic, the deeper realism, of his drinking.
And so the drunkard wants to suffer, while the murderer wants to dare.
The one is the passive and the other the active form of a single human truth, as Dostoevsky sees it and realizes it fictionally.
The singleness of this truth is what I called the marriage of the Drunks project and the ‘Confession’ project in Crime and Punishment .
The novelist is now of course in middle age, but right back in his teens he wrote to his brother ‘Man is a mystery’, adding that a lifetime spent trying to unravel the mystery would not be wasted.
On its own this reads like a perfectly ordinary youthful Europeanized sententious romantic flourish.
But now comes the idiosyncratic twist.
‘I am devoting myself to this mystery because i want to be a man.’
He doesn't mean that he wants to become mature or to quell the beast within or anything else comfortable to the understanding.
It's a very personal way of thinking and writing which we have encountered several times already, and which now, twenty-seven years after that letter to his brother, appears most insistently with Raskolnikov as he Paused for a moment to take breath, to collect himself, and to enter as a man ’ and tell the police who it was killed the old money-lender and her sister.
But since Crime and Punishment encompasses the drinking as well as the confessional theme, we can approach Dostoevsky's abiding human question — what is it to be a man?— also by way of the minuscule Drunks fragment:
‘The reason we drink is we're at a loose end.’
‘Nonsense.
We drink because we've got no morals.’
‘Yes, and the reason we've got no morals is that for a long time (150 years) we've been at a loose end.'
And that's all.
put most simply, being at a loose end leads men to the vice of drunkenness and the crime of murder; and the jobless Marmeladov and the ex-student Raskolnikov are both very pointedly at a loose end.
But to say that the devil finds work for idle hands to do is misleading because hypermoralistic or (if meant literally) hypertheological.
In that little exchange which is the entire Drunks fragment the ‘loose end’ idea undercuts the moral and every other aspect of the matter, and once again there's a link with journalism, this time Dostoevsky's own.
He specifies 150 years because he has in mind the social and political reforms of Peter the Great in the early Eighteenth Century.
This subject had interested him, both as contributor to and editor of the magazines Time and Epoch in the years immediately before he wrote Crime and Punishment .
He believed that Peter's reforms had disrupted society by creating a Western-type bourgeoisie and separating the educated class from the common people.
What Peter had damaged, and what one might hope to restore, was the natural soil-based unity of Russia.
And so, as in Winter Notes , Dostoevsky is really talking about pochvennost , his own brand of romantic conservatism, half history, half dream.
In Crime and Punishment itself the Petrine reforms get the merest glancing reference, and only one, when Raskolnikov's friend Razumikhin speaks of ‘us’(compare the ‘we’ of the Drunks fragment) as ‘divorced from practical affairs of every sort for nearly two hundred years’.
This is a hasty throw-off in the middle of a wide-ranging argument, and it has no particular bearing on drink.
Nor for that matter on crime.
Nor has it any more to do with Peter's reforms than might perhaps justify an editorial footnote.
But the underlying idea of being at a loose end, or out of the practical swim, is a different matter altogether.
It is the very clay out of which Dostoevsky shapes his fictions of solitude and society.
And while it might be said that his version of pochvennost comes from this same source, and while it is certainly true that pochvennost deserves a longer footnote than the Petrine reforms, a footnote is all it should  be.
For the novelist works to one side — hence parajournalist — of the writer busy with magazine polemics in Time and Epoch , just as his novel exists to one side — parajournalism — of the double murder in the newspapers and of scary sciencefictionish forewarnings about microbes.
This to-one-side posture of novelist and novel explains how it is that Raskolnikov and Marmeladov are pointedly at a loose end while Crime and Punishment is anything but pointedly sociological.
The thrust of their loose end, as of details like the murderer's yellow cubby-hole — coffinlike, his mother calls it — and Marmeladov's greenish-yellow face and the mortal yellow-black bruise over the heart after he gets run over, is metaphysical and apocalyptic, not documentary.
‘Every man must have somewhere to go,’ Marmeladov tells Raskolnikov who has dropped into the pub after his ‘rehearsal’of the murder.
‘For there comes a time when he absolutely must go somewhere.’
Raskolnikov is young, preoccupied and merely puzzled —‘young, abstract and therefore cruel’, the severe voice of the novel descries him elsewhere — but the reader attends in tragic wonder, for he understands that Marmeladov has indeed nowhere to go, a nowhere which is the finality of his loose end, at once in character, at once personal to the selfish selfless rationale of one man's marriage and his other circumstances, personal to his ‘destitution’ or ‘extremity’or ‘misère’(nishcheta , which he is careful to distinguish from his poverty), and at the same time an objective and transpersonal theme running through all Dostoevsky's work.
From the novelist's journalism and notebooks and letters we glean the almost comically unresonant information that being at a loose end leads men to drunkenness and murder.
His novels, though, suggest a mental movement not unlike Vergil's thought to the effect that bees are working animals and don't retire and spend their sunset years playing golf:.
being at a loose end is not the condition of us spiritual and working animals, it is not being a man among men.
Marmeladov doesn't think of a drunkard as a human being but as a brute, a beast, a swine.
He lives a swine and he dies a swine.
But on the Last Day certainly God will call the drunkards of the world to Him:.
He will summon us also: ‘Come forth,’ He will say, ‘ye also!
Come forth ye drunkards, come forth weak ones, come forth children of shame!’
And we shall all come forth, and yet not in shame, ad we shall stand before Him.
And He will say: ‘Ye are swine! ye are made in the Image of the Beast and bear his mark; yet come ye also!’
And the wise ones ad the men of learning shall say: ‘Lord, why dost tho, receive these?’
And He shall say: ‘I receive them, O ye wise ones, I receive them, O ye men of learning, inasmuch as not one of these has deemed himself worthy.’
And He will stretch forth His arms to us, and we shall fall down before Him ad weep, and we shall understand all things.
So the swine — swine in God's eyes too — will appear on judgment Day immortal souls capable of penitence and knowledge.
This tirade, carried on vodka-laden breath, is a classic instance of Dostoevsky's apocalyptic naturalism working on two levels at once.
Marmeladov projects the Christian Revelation on the church-slavonic plane of his and every Russian's Bible and liturgy, remoter from everyday usage than the English Authorized Version; and he indulges a maundering drunken account of himself.
The second is an untidy surgical exposure, the more convincing and moving for its incompetence, of the first's withheld human inwardness, while the first is a theological drama in which the must of ‘a man absolutely must go somewhere’ gets tortured on the rack of faith.
The one point on which Mr Golyadkin and Double were agreed was that there is nobody like God, but it follows pat and false that if a man has nowhere to go God will look after him.
In the notebooks of Crime and Punishment , Marmeladov (at this stage called ‘the civil servant’) is made to argue that ‘if only a man is really alive , then he suffers, and therefore he needs Christ, and therefore Christ will come.’
Such explicitness would be a disaster in the novel, but it underlies the final text of the pub tirade like a geological substratum, and it reflects the great and growing importance of mystic suffering in Dostoevsky's post-Siberian work.
Even more damaging would be the inclusion of the following thought about Raskolnikov: ‘NB.
With the crime itself begins his moral development, the possibility of those questions which didn't exist before.
In the last chapter, in prison, he says that without the crime he would not have found within himself such questions, desires, feelings, needs, strivings, and development.’
Were he to say any such thing we would be left with a therapeutic murder.
But again Dostoevsky is fumbling after a creative or regenerative suffering, because it is of the essence of Raskolnikov's questions, desires, feelings, and so forth(which of course do appear in the novel) that they should be agonized.
The fictional morphology of this suffering is more aptly suggested by the novelist and critic Akhsharumov, writing the very year Crime and Punishment appeared in hard covers, who observes that Raskolnikov's mental torment, which is his punishment in all but its public aspect, begins with his first promptings towards the crime.
Thus Akhsharumov directs the reader to something that makes him certain he holds a masterpiece in his hands before he has read half a dozen pages: a single pre-natal life, a foetal stirring and growth, no ordinary robust narrative sense of something afoot.
Raskolnikov's first thought on slinking down the lodging-house stairs is one of surprise at himself that he should be ‘simultaneously’ in terror of his landlady and planning a murder.
The mental suffering and the evil intent won't be separated.
Raskolnikov doesn't put it to himself like that.
We do.
He is just surprised.
On the surface of his mind lies the contrast between a trivial though tormenting fear and a monstrous scheme; and beneath that contrast appears a positive contradiction: for a few sentences earlier we have been told ‘He was not really afraid of any landlady’.
The question, who tells us?, recalls the most important of Dostoevsky's many changes in the course of writing Crime and Punishment , his switch from first-person narration — the murderer's story — to what is formally third-person but proves so supple, so volatile, that the distinction between the inside and outside of Raskolnikov's head disappears when his creator wants it to.
The solution to ‘He was not really afraid of any landlady’ might appear to be that we have here a masked first-person avowal, and that it is simply an indication of Dostoevsky's boldness that it should be surrounded by authorial statements which are firmly outside and (so to say) on top of Raskolnikov in the classical omniscient third-person mode: for example, information about his poverty, irritable frame of mind, withdrawal from society, his ‘not naturally timorous and abject’disposition.
But masked first-person narrative turns out to be deflected stream of consciousness —‘He was not really afraid’ will only transpose into ‘I'm not really afraid’flitting through his head as he passes the landlady's open kitchen door — so that the past tense collapses into the present, and we find we have put our finger on something pertinent to the novel's urgency and attack and (to borrow Andrew Forge's ugly but useful key-term for late Monet) its frontality.
That Raskolnikov is not by nature timorous is the author's assurance to his readers, dependable through nineteenthcentury novelistic convention.
That Raskolnikov is not really afraid is, in its latent truth and force, what he tells himself.
The two narrative modes walk side by side in bold yet relaxed society, and support each other in the face of the fact that Raskolnikov is shaking in his shoes.
The author knows (even if Akhsharumov has to remind him) that the natural man in his hero has been laid low by the combined psychic onset of crime and punishment.
Raskolnikov knows (but leaves us to infer) that his present state of mind renders chatter on the stairs intolerable, which looks like fear of his landlady but ‘really’ isn't.
As to state of mind, Raskolnikov lives with his own continuously but inspects it only intermittently, like the rest of us; whereas the author surveys the whole truth the whole time, so that we never find him wondering whether perhaps Raskolnikov is thinking this or  perhaps he is thinking that: a fact which isolates Crime and Punishment among the mature novels, because elsewhere Dostoevsky loves the unsettled and unsettling narrative posture of ‘perhaps’, particularly with his contracting and dilating collective voice, the ‘we’ swept by rumour and speculation which arrives in The House of the Dead and reaches its full flowering in The Possessed .
While Crime and Punishment's author (or omniscient narrator) knows the truth, he picks his moment to tell it.
He bides his time.
Then he moves in, for example to reveal that the young hero-murderer, once the deed was done, had a completely new experience ‘of infinite loneliness and estrangement’; and that this experience ‘was most agonising in that it was a sensation rather than knowledge or intellectual understanding, a direct sensation, the most painful sensation he had ever experienced in his life.’
Raskolnikov could never have said that — which introduces the deeper issues involved in the switch from first-person to a nominal thirdperson narrative.
Raskolnikov lives with his pain, but most of the time he doesn't focus on it.
He rubs it absently, accosting strangers in the street, seeking out a friend and within minutes exclaiming that he wants to be by himself, watching children wistfully, accusing wellwishers of persecuting him with their kindness; until at last he explodes on the brink of confession in a terrible universal cry: ‘Oh, if only I were alone and nobody loved me, and if only I had never loved anyone!’
Of course he doesn't really want to be alone.
He is still just rubbing his pain when he says that.
What he really wants is a business of the inside and outside of his head, in this case of his ‘alone’ juxtaposed with the authorial ‘loneliness and estrangement’: a rich relationship, not a flat contradiction or dead end, a relationship which evokes and nurses a distinction established as far back as The Double , between false solitude (‘loneliness and estrangement’) and true solitude which is the obverse of true society and meaningless without it.
But occasionally, as I say, Raskolnikov contemplates the pain he lives with:
The conviction that everything, even memory, even the simple power of understanding, was deserting him, began to torture him unbearably.
‘What if it is beginning already, what if my punishment is already beginning?
Look, over there— I thought so!’
And indeed the frayed scrappy edges he had cut off from his trousers were lying strewn on the floor, in the middle of the room for everyone to see!
‘What on earth can be the matter with me?’ he cried again like a man utterly lost.
And this in fact, not in theory, is how crime — the bloody evidence on the floor — and punishment — Raskolnikov's agony — intertwine in the novel.
A wonderful moment.
It sets one hesitating between general admiration and the attempt to give point to frontality or some such term: anything to obtain leverage on a narrative mode which sweeps up event and idea, fictional past and stream-ofconsciousness present, into a single impulse of this immediacy and power.
(iii)
For a moment Raskolnikov wonders if his punishment has already begun.
Now the reader met a suffering young man on the first page of the novel.
And having met him, he at once began studying him and suffering with him: observing him ab extra and sharing the inside of his head; hence his sense that he is both witnessing and experiencing the ‘strange smile’ which accompanies Raskolnikov's surprise at his own dread of meeting his landlady.
That ‘strange’ which would be a lazy gesture in another novelist is indeed strange to the reader, strange as the feline, supremely observed young man himself; and yet he feels the very muscles and skin-surface of Raskolnikov's smile — a prelude to the way in which the book's entire action is simultaneously read about and lived through.
Common sense may deem this a highfalutin account of a quality possessed by every exciting story.
Well yes, in so far as it's a question of degree, though if Crime and Punishment really is the king of thrillers then there's something unique to remark in it and even to wax a bit pompous about.
For in a monarchy, as Beethoven remarked of Handel, one knows to whom one must bend the knee.
But also: well no.
Sometimes there's no question of degree.
The wrath of Achilles doesn't work like Dostoevsky's novel at all, and not because it's an old tale.
The ship Narcissus in her fight to the southward doesn't work like this either.
The truth is, not all exciting stories are properly thrillers.
Being gripped by a narrative is an altogether wider notion than what is presaged by the two-in-one of being outside yet inside Raskolnikov's ‘strange smile’: the rehearsal of the murder, the murder sequence itself, the three long duels with the detective Porfiry, the suffering, the hesitation, the final climb up the police-station stairs.
Dostoevsky's own attempt to suggest how he disposes his reader in relation to these events goes as follows: ‘Narration by the author, a sort of invisible but omniscient being who nevertheless doesn't leave him [meaning ‘his hero'$ for a moment…
’ So, after appearing to settle for third-person narrative, he doubles back on himself and leaves us to make what we can of an omniscient author who is bound hand and foot to a far from omniscient protagonist.
That he succeeds in having it both ways is our experience of reading his novel in its dominant and thriller aspect.
His Petersburg counts for an awful lot.
The illusionism which conjures a complete and natural (I would prefer apocalypticnatural) city out of materials as unpromising as the colour yellow, also yields up Raskolnikov like a natural secretion, and this vouchsafing process encompasses and transcends the resources both of first- and third-person narrative.
To stay with yellow for a moment: we noted a paring-down to the bare bones of yellow water in a yellow glass when Raskolnikov comes to after fainting on his first visit to the police station.
An opposite movement occurs with the elements of oppressive heat and smell on that same momentous fourth floor.
In the first draft of the scene neither are mentioned.
Then, as an afterthought, Dostoevsky wrote ‘the air was  terribly stifling’ and ‘in addition, a smell of wet paint assailed the nostrils’.
Our final text elaborates this to ‘the nauseating smell of fresh paint which had been mixed with rancid oil’.
Rancid oil is simply right.
Hundreds of such details mark Dostoevsky's year-long burst of composition, hour upon hour, ‘Without straightening my neck’, he said.
Thus he caught the police station and the whole city during those few fictional july days when everything except the Epilogue happens.
And he caught his hero too since a man is (among a million other things — but art concentrates attention) the yellows he sees and tastes, and the evil rancid oil he smells.
Also, and perhaps to a greater extent, a man is what he has smelt: later in the novel Raskolnikov gives the police-station smell as the reason for the suspicious circumstance of his fainting, which is neither the whole truth nor a straight lie but the blending of the guilty man with the Poison of the city.
Crime and Punishment's Petersburg does not produce the murderer with the inevitability shown by the ‘abstract’ city in the novel immediately preceding it, where the underground man ‘was bound to appear in our midst’.
The draft letter to Katkov merely claims that crimes like this fictional one can be found in the newspapers, and that the fictional murderer has come under the influence of certain half-baked ideas which happen to be in the air at the time.
Here, despite life following art with Danilov's double murder, we have an ordinary modest contingent naturalism, and in this area the novel bears out the letter to Katkov.
Inevitability, at once psychological and religious, enters (so the letter goes on) after the crime has been committed, in the shape of ‘the truth of God and the law of nature’ which compel Raskolnikov first to be exiled from the humanity he has outraged, and then to confess and accept the public consequences of confession as the only way to become a man among men again.
Here we have the apocalyptic naturalism which marks out Dostoevsky absolutely, and in this area too, though we shall find an overreliance upon the Epilogue,Crime and Punishment follows the Katkov letter while breathing life into its dry and sketchy determinism.
Moreover the novel takes up the remark to Katkov that the criminal ‘himself morally demands ’ his punishment (which on its own might mean no more than that Dostoevsky had been reading Hegel or popularized Hegel), and builds some marvellous effects upon it.
Raskolnikov has of course outraged the human being in himself too; the pad pad pad of the hunter and hunted relationship with Porfiry is intertwined with self-pursuit to the point where the murderer actually makes the running in the second of the three long interviews, arriving unsent-for and demanding interrogation ‘according to the rules’, if interrogation there must be; which leads Porfiry to exclaim: ‘Good heavens!
What do you mean?
What is there for me to question you about?’
And in the third interview, the net now drawn tight about him, when Porfiry makes a sudden little feint which suggests he won't be accused after all, ‘Raskolnikov felt a rush of a new kind of fear.
The thought that Porfiry believed him innocent suddenly began to frighten him.’
The reader is both astonished and utterly convinced, as he is later on in the interview when Porfiry plays the dangerous game of saying he has got no real proof, he's going on hunch and ‘psychology’— so Raskolnikov had better confess.
It's up to you, he's saying, to satisfy the hunger which the letter to Katkov and the Crime and Punishment notebooks rationalize as the criminal's moral demand.
Porfiry is also asking Raskolnikov to recognize his hunger for what it is.
Both he and Sonya Marmeladov, in their separate areas of the novel, impress the need to accept suffering.
Now suffering is a vast and many-sided fact of Crime and Punishment , as of all mature Dostoevsky — larger than the ‘loose end’ idea of The Drunks which produced Marmeladov the marmeladey wallower in abasement and humiliation, the man who seeks suffering and finds it (and so finds satisfaction too) at the bottom of his vodka jug, who screams ‘I'm loving this!’when his wife pulls him across the room by his hair; and larger than the ‘out of the practical swim’idea of ‘A Confession’from which emerges the murderer, the man with something to confess, who doesn't seek  suffering but learns, though only in the Epilogue, to accept it.
Prostitution is the hardest labour in the world, Dostoevsky thought, and Sonya of the yellow ticket who sells her body to buy her family's bread has no loose-end aspect to her suffering.
Nor has her consumptive step-mother, Marmeladov's wife, endlessly busy with children and no-home.
One can only regard them as victims of other people's loose ends, just as the terrible sustained anxiety of Raskolnikov's mother and sister on his account is the measure of his power to make others suffer as well as himself in that limbo which his friend — his only friend — Razumikhin calls being out of the practical swim.
Nastasya, the general maidservant at Raskolnikov's lodging-house, finds him in bed, where he often is nowadays:
‘You used to give lessons to children, so you say.
Why are you doing nothing now?’
‘I am doing —’ Raskolnikov began reluctantly and grimly.
‘What are you doing?’
‘Work.’
‘What sort of work?’
‘Thinking.’
Nastasya fairly shook with laughter.
Murderous and anguished work — the thinking that goes on between the rehearsal and the deed itself.
This thinking is the mental pulse which registers the single prenatal life of his crime and his punishment.
Razumikhin would not have laughed like the jolly Nastasya.
Nor would Raskolnikov's poor mother and sister: ‘but I'm afraid, afraid — oh God he's so strange.
He speaks kindly but I'm afraid.
What am I afraid of?’
We recall that in the notebooks Dostoevsky has Raskolnikov reflect upon his crime and declare he had to commit it to achieve moral development and get himself out of the mess he was in.
A comically facile conclusion.
Nevertheless he was in a festering condition, and the murder did induce a crisis.
In his exchange with Nastasya he reveals himself an underground man who has wandered into a nineteenth-century naturalistic novel, a bohemian Hamlet.
The point of contact with the fable of disembodied consciousness  is that thinking has become Raskolnikov's work, it has almost become Raskolnikov, and if he did and were nothing but this work we would have the first part of Notes from Underground repeated.
And of course committing the murder is an act of perverse self-assertion, like the underground man's notional sticking his tongue out — with the difference that the anti-hero's mind movement breaks no bones, and hurts no feelings except his own.
With the murder Raskolnikov erupts into the full glare of the actual, and parts company with his predecessor.
But Dostoevsky did not want to surrender the tract of suffering bounded by the sense of being and doing nothing but one's thoughts.
The result is Svidrigailov.
The notebooks show Svidrigailov developing from a minor into a major character while Crime and Punishment was being planned and written, and they show his growth as interdependent with Raskolnikov's final definition.
In some early drafts Raskolnikov commits suicide, and the striking thing here is that it's never suggested he does so out of remorse or because he thinks he's going to get caught or even from some vaguer, larger self-loathing.
He appears to lose interest in life.
He is bored.
Sonya asks him, ‘I don't understand: how will things be for you, how will you marry and have children?’— of course thinking about his estrangement from human kind; and he replies (Dostoevsky's italics): ‘I'll get used to it .’
During the year in which the final version was written it became clear that Raskolnikov must be freed absolutely from suicide and blanket boredom and ripostes like the one about family life which issue out from beneath that boredom.
All these are inconsistent with ‘living life’, the two words which are placed between inverted commas and imposed at the level of mere idea upon Notes from Underground , but which truly drive Raskolnikov, which are his need to become a man  again.
Mere existence had not been enough for him, in the Epilogue's diagnosis; he had always wanted something more.
This wanting teased him on as it happened — contingent naturalism — to murder.
Then murder led him inexorably — apocalyptic naturalism — to confess and accept suffering, and acceptance of suffering took him back to mere existence which is living life, neither more nor less.
Life is life.
It has no outside to it (hence Dostoevsky's ready acceptance of Christ the complete man and his difficulties with God).
To theorize about life is not to live.
But on the last Page of the novel ‘life had taken the place of dialectics’, and Raskolnikov is on his way home.
Meanwhile Svidrigailov has taken over the suicide role, which is to say the blanket boredom has become positively terminal.
‘You know, I take no particular interest in anything,’ he tells Raskolnikov musingly on their first encounter; ‘especially now, I have nothing to occupy me.’
In his time he has tried a lot of things: card-sharping, prison, wife-thrashing and perhaps wife-murder, child-violation, even good works.
He contemplates balloon-travel and a journey to the North Pole.
‘All my hopes rest on anatomy now, goodness me they do!’
‘On anatomy?’ asks Raskolnikov, understandably mystified.
But Svidrigailov ignores the question and starts talking about politics.
He puts in a word on behalf of debauchery because ‘it's an occupation of a sort’.
Yes and no.
The notebooks are beginning to pull him into shape with their ‘NB.
Not an occupied man.’
In fact nothing binds him to life.
He pictures eternity as a filthy Russian bathhouse with spiders in the corners, and yet he blows his brains out to send himself there.
It's difficult to avoid making his suicide sound too purposeful.
Again the notebooks can be seen moving in the right direction with ‘Svidrigailov : I'm happy to go to America at once, but somehow nobody really wants to.’
America is his favourite way of talking about the undiscovered country, and it shows that as well as suicide and blanket boredom he has taken over the flavour of Raskolnikov's joke about getting used to family life.
Dostoevsky's notebook word ‘tone’ amounts to more than dust and mortar and summer smells; it catches up human beings and entangles them with the city.
It's no accident that Svidrigailov is the only one in the novel to handle yellow paper money, just as it's no accident that children are frightened of him and run away ‘in indescribable terror’ because (so we understand in our bones) they smell death on him, or rather the unattachment to life which defeats even Sonya Marmeladov.
The girl who has reached the human being in Raskolnikov the murderer is left for the last time by Svidrigailov ‘bewildered and frightened, and filled with vague and oppressive suspicions’.
He has just walked out into a spectacular summer storm.
As he leaves, she asks him ‘How can you — how can you go now, in such rain?’
‘What!
All set for America and afraid of the rain!’
America is his bleak private fancy, the loneliest of witticisms.
He shares the rain, though, which comes evenhandedly to city and inhabitants, a psychological force like the heat it dispels.
The rain brings him an end-of-time vision, solitary as his sense of humour, of flooding cellars and emerging rats.
To others it brings relief from the merciless summer heat.
Raskolnikov is one of the others, though it's only through the long crime-and-punishment process that he comes to understand this: he had ‘wanted something more’— more than our mere-existence rain.
He had wanted to be a Napoleon and special.
In the closing moments of their final interview Porfiry wonders if there's a storm coming —‘and it would be no bad thing’, he says, ‘to freshen the air’; which is a literal rephrasing of the metaphorical ‘All you want now is air, air, air!’ with which he presses home his argument for confession and acceptance of suffering, and for life.
Porfiry's words have a heightened transpersonal effect because Svidrigailov has just told Raskolnikov the same thing.
‘Ah, Rodion Romanovich,’ he says completely out of the blue, ‘what every man needs is air, air, air!
That above all!’
He doesn't exclude himself.
Balloon-travel, debauchery, card-sharping and so forth are frustrated struggles for air, and he knows it.
When eavesdropping (a vicarious ghost-life he goes in for), he hears Raskolnikov tell Sonya about the crime, and later, without openly referring to it, the potential suicide twits the actual murderer: Sell, you can certainly do a lot.’
The irony of murder as doing a lot — doing anything — bears the stamp of Svidrigailov.
He is probably a murderer himself; the lightmindedness of his retrospective half-confirmations and half-denials is oddly disgusting; and for him killing people is no more doing something than sleeping with little girls or setting off for the North Pole.
It's just another struggle for air, for living life.
He recognizes in Raskolnikov a fellow-struggler, and repeatedly he says that the two of them are birds of a feather; but he also bids him farewell with a pointed ‘You to the right and I to the left, or the other way round if you like’ towards the end of their final meeting, because setting off for America, unlike the North Pole, while it may or may not amount to doing anything (Crime and Punishment doesn't raise the question) marks a parting of their ways.
In Svidrigailov's America there is no air to struggle for, and no rain to soften hearts and freshen cities and give the excluded (or self-excluding) man occasion for jokes about fear and death.
Most people breathe naturally, they don't struggle for air.
In the underground man's sick yet piercing analysis, most people are roadbuilders, instinctively being somebody, doing something, going somewhere.
Not so the antihero himself paralysed by the disease of hyperconsciousness in abstract Petersburg.
And not so Svidrigailov and Raskolnikov, both hyperconscious men, and both (as we shall see) linked by their condition to the city which Peter the Great pondered over and then ordered to be built.
Svidrigailov's answer, when Raskolnikov asks him Shy don't you see a doctor?’ is that he doesn't need to be told he's ill.
It doesn't follow that he knows what the matter is —‘honestly, though, I don't know what's wrong with me,’ he adds.
He hasn't got the underground man's bodiless analytic clarity.
He only knows that he needs air and can't get it; a state evinced by  his terminal boredom, and by single sovereign descriptive strokes like the fact that his eyes are ‘a little too blue’ leaving the reader to imagine a pair of empty summer-sky souls, very bright and staring in pain.
One of the marvels of Crime and Punishment is its clear distinguishing, untainted by clinical knowingness, of Svidrigailov's and Raskolnikov's ways of being (as the saying is) not with us.
Svidrigailov appears not to notice insults and rudenesses.
Nothing signifies for him, yet he seizes on details with a toneless precision, almost pedantry: when Raskolnikov calls him a gambler he says he is actually a card-sharper.
Observing Raskolnikov wince at the idea of eternity as a bathhouse, he murmurs ‘with a vague smile’ that he would certainly have made it like that himself.
He suggest that behind Raskolnikov's sister's loathing of him there lurks attraction, and he states flatly that she and his own wife were once in love with each other; and perhaps he is right.
Ghosts visit him, he says.
He frequents a seedy restaurant —‘You see this wretched tavern I spend all my time in, and I enjoy it, or rather it's not that I really enjoy it, but one must have somewhere to perch’: this is the form which the Dostoevsky no-home takes with him, likewise the transpersonal motif first voiced by Marmeladov in this novel, that a man must have somewhere to go.
He is absent yet meticulous, paying for a missing drink-shop teaspoon which has nothing to do with him, and spending a long time in the ‘interesting occupation’ of trying to catch a fly.
(Recall ‘not an occupied man’ from the notebooks.
And recall Kafka on incidental madness in Dostoevsky; it's not just the children whom Svidrigailov terrifies.)
Raskolnikov is not with us either, but in the novel's final text he could not have done or said any of the things I have just mentioned.
Even his way of throwing his money about, what he has of it, is immediately distinguishable from Svidrigailov's, while with both of them money is the very image of merely imputed and therefore reversible value in a loose-end world: ‘You to the right and I to the left, or the other way round if you like.’
Cocooned in false-Napoleonic narcissism  he reads about his own deed in the newspapers.
He goes in for a sort of hall-of-mirrors self-impersonation, telling people how he would have done the murder if he had done it (which he has).
His crime-and-punishment existence is a process of endless self-monitoring:
What Razumikhm had just said about Porfiry also disturbed him.
‘I'll have to play the sick ma act with him too,’ he thought, white in the face, his heart pounding, ‘and I'll have to do it naturally.
But the most natural thing of all would be to do nothing.
Make a point of doing nothing.
No, making a point would be unnatural again.
Oh well, it depends how things turn out — we'll see — soon enough — is it a good idea to go there or not?
The moth flies into the flame of her own accord.
My heart's pounding and that's bad!.
A normalizing and fleshing-out of Mr Golyadkin deciding to adopt a passive role.
And the details of Raskolnikov's alienation show Dostoevsky at his most unrelentingly careful and sensitive.
In another passage our final text reads ‘His words were as if meant for himself, but he spoke them aloud, and he continued for some time to look at his sister like a man perplexed.’
The first draft has ‘he thought to himself’ but nothing about the sister.
The second draft introduces the sister and cuts the thinking to himself.
The magazine text brings in the paradox of public and yet as if private utterance: ‘His words were as if spoken to himself, but he spoke them aloud, and he continued for some time to look at his sister like a man perplexed.’
And that is how the passage appeared in volume form, in the editions of 1867 and 1870.
But in 1877, the last text overseen by the novelist, ‘as if spoken to himself’ becomes ‘as if meant for himself’, shifting and refining nuance while involving the change of a single word in Russian, and enabling the artist to get at last the effect he had been working towards.
The naturalness of doing nothing.
The unnaturalness of making a point of doing nothing.
These are underground and pre-Siberian thoughts.
But a new sort of humour has arrived: witness the exquisite dew-drop exchange between Svidrigailov and Raskolnikov:
‘Incidentally, do you believe in ghosts?’
‘What kind of ghosts?’
‘Ordinary ghosts, of course.'
And with the young doctor who tries to help Raskolnikov, the voice of the underground man has become more accessibly funny: ‘I admit there's scarcely such a thing as a normal human being.
You might find one in tens or perhaps hundreds of thousands, but even he will turn out a rather feeble specimen.’
We all limp, more or less, was the antihero's way of putting it, and for him all consciousness was a disease.
His own hyperconsciousness, the disease in an acute form, he considered a product of nineteenth-century civilization, rendered yet more virulent by the ‘abstract and intentional city’ he lived in.
This tight argument becomes relaxed and humanized in Crime and Punishment .
The hyperconscious Double Act in which Svidrigailov's terminal boredom plays opposite the greedy, theoretical self-assertion of Raskolnikov's wanting ‘something more’ than ‘mere existence’, becomes grounded in suicide and murder; and the Petersburg where these things happen gains a fuzzy-edged documentary aspect which never comes anywhere near dominating the novel, but which is there.
Once and once only a finger is placed, by Svidrigailov appropriately, on the fact that Peter's city turns people odd.
He mentions the climate, but without filling in the summer smells of this novel, or the fog and white nights and wet snow of others.
And he observes in a flat parajournalistic way that Petersburg is ‘the administrative centre of all Russia’.
This makes it a city of arrivers.
Some come like Marmeladov to get a job on the appropriate rung of the bureaucratic ladder.
Others are in search of justice, ‘with a petition to some Minister’.
Others again, like Mr Luzhin, Dunya Raskolnikov's middle-aged suitor, want to make a lot of money: there's a Dick Whittington side to Petersburg.
Speaking for himself, Svidrigailov says he is after the women, which isn't untrue but we know what it's worth.
Raskolnikov  has been here three years.
He arrived from the deep country to attend university.
His friend Razumikhin, a truthful witness, has known him for eighteen months.
Razumikhin himself may or may not have come from the country, but he is certainly a member of the floating, unbelonging population of students and ex-students, and he records in simple puzzlement that Raskolnikov has been growing increasingly moody and suspicious and introverted; ‘he has no time for anything, people are always in his way, and yet he lies about and does nothing’— a confirming echo of Raskolnikov on his bed telling Nastasya the maid that he is working, by which he means thinking.
His mind's not right.
Petersburg encourages his vicious loose-end tendency, as it teases Svidrigailov with phantom images of what it would be like to be an occupied man.
Raskolnikov's ‘incomplete smile’ is the index of those ‘half-baked’(literally, ‘incomplete’) ideas which Dostoevsky writes about in the letter to Katkov.
(iv)
Among Crime and Punishment's major characters only Porfiry the detective is in no sense an arriver.
It will appear mechanical, when plucked out of the huge and vital narrative flow, that Dostoevsky has given him ‘a sickly dark yellow complexion’ as a mark of his belonging to Petersburg.
Nevertheless he does possess a yellow face as opposed to lodging in a yellow room, or handling yellow money, or being issued (the bureaucracy!) with a yellow ticket.
He also belongs for the reason suggested by Svidrigailov; Petersburg is the administrative centre of Russia, and Porfiry occupies his position there as an official examining magistrate within the metropolitan and national legal system.
Therefore he has a public front and function as well as an unhealthy yellow human face.
It's his job to bring the murderer of the old money-lender and her sister to justice.
The job occupies him, as Svidrigailov would say; it involves  both the man and the salaried magistrate, and it defines the part played by Porfiry in the apocalyptic naturalism of the crime-and-punishment process.
But what is there for Porfiry to do?
We have just caught Raskolnikov saying to himself that the moth seeks the candle-flame, and Porfiry says similar things aloud; while behind both of them Dostoevsky is telling Katkov that the murderer demands punishment and bends to an inexorable divine and human law when he gives himself up.
At one level, as in all picturings of God's rule and man's free will, there is nothing for Porfiry to do; he just has to sit and wait, which he is good at.
And at another level he has to know and play every trick of the detective's trade, which he is good at too.
Cat and mouse has no less force, in this fated relationship, than moth and candle-flame.
‘I won't allow myself to be tortured,’ Raskolnikov tells Porfiry, but our sense of their three long encounters is that there's nothing either of them can do about it.
In a single serpentine sentence Porfiry seems to dissolve into his own prose, showering Raskolnikov with a patter of tiny verbal blows as if exercising the Russian particle for its own sake (nu da uzh), telling him that he considers him ‘quite incapable’ of committing suicide, and in the same breath to leave ‘a short circumstantial note if he does.
This, in the blood and bone of the novel, is how the doubleness — the two levels — appears, in which all is destined and anything can happen.
It might be objected that the doubleness is just a trick of Porfiry's.
But this wouldn't match up to the greatness of the Porfiry-Raskolnikov scenes.
It isn't just a trick.
And it isn't just Porfiry's trick.
Life in the guise of the crime-and-punishment process snatches up hunter and hunted into the contradictions and cruelties and deceits and frailties which are, in a word, life — not the whole of life of course, but life.
Porfiry misquotes Raskolnikov back at himself.
He commends him for the wit and wisdom of things he hasn't said.
He tacks on tendentious continuations to things Raskolnikov has said.
He suggests that he's got no evidence, then that he's got some evidence, then both at once: ‘There's nothing here, precisely nothing, perhaps absolutely nothing’— the torture tune.
Surrounded by ‘government furniture of polished yellow wood’, he proffers blandishing diminutives; Mow about a spot of open window?’(okoshechko ) he asks the ready fainter.
He drops, or there happen to be dropped, sore words like ‘Napoleon’ and ‘axe’into his discourse.
He scrambles his own identity as a man and magistrate: ‘Do you suppose I didn't come to search your room at the time?
I did, I did — ha, ha!— I was here when you were lying ill in bed.
Not officially, and not in my own person, but I was here.’
What is Raskolnikov supposed to make of that?
Or the reader?
Or Porfiry himself?
Crime and Punishment is a ghostly book in which all three — murderer, detective, reader — tiptoe mentally round dubitable presences and absences, and create between themselves strange large silences.
Again and again the murder of Lizaveta is ignored.
And yet Raskolnikov's greater enormity is that having forgotten to bolt the door after killing the money-lender he is surprised by her half-sister, the woman who mends linen and has mended his in her time, apparently always pregnant, through simplicity, not waywardness, meek-eyed though ‘she looks like a soldier dressed up as a woman’(who but Dostoevsky!) and Raskolnikov kills Lizaveta too.
Since Porfiry wants to break Raskolnikov, why doesn't he exploit Lizaveta's murder?
Raskolnikov is no moral idiot.
He recognizes an atrocity when he commits one.
Equally, why is it not pointed up that philanthropic murder and the Napoleonic idea and all other theorizing come unstuck here?
There seems no reason, and the very business of raising such questions is itself part of a widespread collusive conjuring of absences and of whole worlds of what might have been.
The fact remains that Porfiry does break, or tame, Raskolnikov, and that an enterprise lucid in prospect becomes fogbound by the chance which brings Lizaveta home unexpectedly.
She, the simple mender and dealer in second-hand clothes, happens to return as she happens to keep getting pregnant — and what fuller and neater manifestation of chance than that, than conceiving and being conceived?
Lizaveta's final outrage is inflicted by a man who almost cleaves her head in two.
Raskolnikov uses the blade of his axe on her, whereas he has just used the back of it on the older woman, crushing her skull.
Again these things happen as they do happen, the magic narrative containing spur-ofthe-moment impulse within trancelike inevitability.
Readers are at one, levels of sophistication vanish, in those cinematic sequences on stairs and landings, where footsteps echo and distant doors slam, and in a flat below two workmen fool about and daub each other with paint.
We all see with one pair of eyes, Raskolnikov's, when the visual field narrows upon the back of an old woman's head, her hair ‘thick with grease, twisted into a rat's-tail plait and gathered up under what was left of a broken horn comb which stuck out at the nape of her neck’.
That broken comb exemplifies the apparently inexhaustible strength of the novel's flotsam, its disjunctive detail which makes nevertheless for tonal coherence.
The painters downstairs, skylarking on the fringe of the main action, celebrate (though they would be surprised to hear it) the living life which was, I said, merely imposed on Notes from Underground , but which now surrounds both crime and punishment and makes the whole novel responsive like a touched spider's web.
Nastasya the maid has only to hand Raskolnikov a bowl of soup for his mental structures to be set trembling in their unrealism.
Lizaveta once mended his clothes: when we puzzle over the chance-induced actuality of her murder being so largely left to speak for itself we are creating a false problem by the inertness of our own metaphor.
‘Didn't I live just now?’
Raskolnikov asks himself after he has helped the Marmeladov family and been in contact with little children.
Other existences rub off on him, as can be shown at the grammatical level when he overhears a student  and an army officer discussing the money-lender.
‘I would kill that damned old woman without a single twinge of conscience,’ says the former, and proceeds to give his reasons.
‘Here you are talking and holding forth,’ says the latter, ‘but tell me this: are you going to kill the old woman yourself ?’
Translators have ‘would you kill?’ here, but Dostoevsky uses the future tense for the officer, whereas the student's ‘I would kill’is genuinely in the conditional.
This distinction should be preserved (even though the Russian verb is not quite square with the English), since it belongs to the novel's overall life-against-logic argument: in theory the student would kill her, but in fact he won't.
‘Of course not!’ he tells the army officer, and that's the end of it.
Acting by theory, Raskolnikov does kill her, and life impinges.
The two painters downstairs impinge — directly through their crazy behaviour arousing suspicion against themselves, and indirectly through Porfiry.
Porfiry uses them to try and catch Raskolnikov out.
They were working in a flat below the old money-lender's at the time of the murder, but not at the time of the ‘rehearsal’ three days earlier.
Raskolnikov has admitted to visiting the old woman on the first occasion but of course not on the second.
Pretending to be worried about the painters and the incriminating evidence against them —‘It's very, very important for them!’— Porfiry asks Raskolnikov if he has any recollection of passing an open door on the lower landing and seeing two men at work inside.
For a split second Raskolnikov is thrown.
His attention has been decoyed.
He gropes mentally, ‘straining every nerve in an agonised attempt to divine as quickly as Possible where the trap lay’.
And then he sees it, and the moment is successfully negotiated.
Porfiry's bait for Raskolnikov (‘a precious question’ Dostoevsky calls this dangled interrogative hook in his notebooks) holds a different but equally potent fascination for the reader, instancing the story's inexorable grip and the virtuosity of the examining magistrate at work.
Porfiry is, as we say, very human.
He smokes too much and is overweight, altogether in poor physical shape.
This simply goes along with his being the archetypal great detective, and even with Dostoevsky making him a vehicle for the airing of central thematic issues.
In their third and last encounter Porfiry tells Raskolnikov that what he needs more than anything is somebody to be —‘life and a definite position’.
This echoes the statement in their second encounter that he, Porfiry, has no intention of making an immediate arrest because by doing so he would give the murderer somebody to be: ‘I'd give him, so to say, a definite position, I'd give him psychological definition and peace.’
Peace!
The out-of-the-practical-swim ex-student, ex-teacher, the worker at thinking in bed, would be able to call himself an arrested man!
We think back to the antihero of Notes from Underground lamenting that he can't even call himself a lazy man, and we think sideways to Svidrigailov: ‘Believe me, if only I were something; a landowner, say, or a father, a cavalry officer, a photographer, a journalist say — but I'm nothing, I've no speciality.’
He too (‘birds of a feather’) has nobody to be, and the ice-cold comedy of his father/photographer/landowner mélange projects the disjunctive genius of Crime and Punishment on yet another plane.
In any case, says Porfiry, there is no need to lock Raskolnikov up, because ‘you won't run away’.
He has nowhere to run to, nowhere, absolutely nowhere, to go.
His crime has brought him to the extremity which Marmeladov was telling him about and tasting at the bottom of his own vodka jug in the opening pages of the novel.
Moreover, Porfiry adds, ‘what will you run away with?’
An amazing stroke.
Raskolnikov is Mr Naked done again.
Porfiry means that he doesn't really believe in his theory; to wonder if he is a Napoleon is to prove to himself that he isn't.
It is to steal his own clothes, and by the time he comes to Sonya to confess, the Napoleonic idea is already crumbling into wanting to dare or something even vaguer.
And nobody else can be a Napoleon either.
A Napoleon is a non-person, a ‘generalhuman’; and although the word doesn't appear in Crime and Punishment itself, the notebooks  make the point that one can't just live ‘the general life of humanity’.
In this general-human life there would be ‘nothing whatever to do’, the notebook continues.
Napoleon himself had plenty to do, but a Napoleon is a member of a conceptual class of people who are like each other; and likeness, the ‘unseemly likeness’ of The Double , is fraught throughout Dostoevsky.
When Raskolnikov goes to Sonya to declare himself, she implores him to tell her ‘straight out — without examples’.
She doesn't want to know what he's like .
She wants to know him , in his unique humanity.
Which also means his shared humanity.
‘But how,’ she cries, Mow can you live without human society?’(literally, ‘without a human being’).
She knows he can't, as does Porfiry who will soon rephrase her question in statement form: ‘You can't get on without us .’
His typically unspecific and floated ‘us ’ is the human family which Raskolnikov must rejoin, and he can't rejoin it without accepting suffering.
Both Sonya and Porfiry tell him so.
The words come easier from Porfiry who speaks for public justice than from Sonya on whom falls the main and mystic burden of creative, regenerative suffering.
Marmeladov's huge notebook gesture towards Christ and the Russian people and suffering constitutes one warning that Dostoevsky was, at one stage, after something too big or too difficult or perhaps simply wrong for Crime and Punishment ; and Sonya's declaration, again in the notebooks, makes a second: ‘The Russian people have always suffered like Christ, says Sonya.’
In the novel itself we meet the Russian people, the folk, only once, and then as inflictors of suffering, in Raskolnikov's half-dream (which is also half-memory) of a little mare being tortured and finally clubbed to death by drunken peasants.
Mrs Marmeladov's death is very like an animal's, like this mare's: ‘Her bloodless, yellow, wasted face dropped back, her mouth opened, her legs straightened convulsively.
She heaved a deep, deep sigh and died.’
The  whole novel reeks of pain.
We mustn't think of its Petersburg crowds as the folk (narod ); they are a medley of exploiters and exploited, above all of arrivers and non-belongers.
When, on his final journey to the police station, Raskolnikov kneels down in the middle of the Haymarket and kisses ‘the earth, the filthy earth’(zemlya ) as Sonya has bidden, it is entirely calculated by Dostoevsky that a tipsy artisan should laugh at the strange young man who ‘is bowing down to the whole world and is kissing the capital city of St Petersburg and its soil’(grunt , the German Grund ).
This has no more to do with Christ and regenerative suffering than Dr Rutenspitz telling Mr Golyadkin that Licht will be provided for him where he's going at the end of The Double .
But in the Epilogue, as opposed to the body of Crime and Punishment , people don't torture animals or bear the mark of Peter the German.
We are back in the world of the Dead House, of simple Russian convicts and Sorrel the horse, their pride and joy.
In effect Dostoevsky is revisiting his own fortress prison at Omsk.
Raskolnikov is here, serving an eight-year sentence.
He has got off lightly: we learn with mildly comic surprise of mitigating circumstances: he had been good to a consumptive fellow student, and he had saved two children from a blazing house, getting burnt himself while doing so.
More important, and very surprising, we are told that ‘he did not repent of his crime’.
So his rallying himself to enter the police station ‘as a man ’ and confess was not the acceptance of suffering which Sonya and Porfiry both — but separately — urged him towards.
Or rather, it was not yet that acceptance, something in Raskolnikov remained obdurate.
Prison finds him longing to feel contrite, to feel he deserves his punishment, but only able to believe he has committed ‘a simple blunder which might have happened to anybody’.
Then, as the notebooks put it, ‘Sonya and love broke him’.
On the same page we read about a vision of Christ and a seeking forgiveness of the common people — two ideas which were abandoned.
And it should be noted that the actual breaking point for Raskolnikov in the novel is the  illness which induces his apocalyptic science-fiction nightmare of germs and Possessed -type madness and destruction, bringing him literally to Sonya's feet and both of them to ‘the dawn of a new future, of a full resurrection into a new life’ which will be the subject of another story.
So having laid the weight of mystic, creative suffering on Sonya, the novel proceeds to hive it off into its own Epilogue where all strains and difficulties are waved away.
What the Sonya of the novel has to do with Christ and resurrection and creative suffering remains fleeting and indirect, though no less wonderful for that.
In the original version, now lost, of the chapter in which she reads to Raskolnikov the gospel story of the raising of Lazarus, Dostoevsky intended and wrote a head-on debate about Christianity; but his publishers refused to print it.
The novelist was very distressed.
And yet he took no steps to reintroduce it in later editions.
I believe he came to see it would not do.
As with the censored Christian argument in Notes from Underground , I believe an unfathomable good luck wearing the face of bad luck was on his side at the start.
If Raskolnikov was to have mounted an assault of something like Grand Inquisitor proportions, if he was to have expatiated on the whole God business not being worth the pain of one misused child, then the time wasn't ripe; we must wait for Ivan Karamazov.
And if Sonya was to have replied to him, what could she have said?
No more than the answer she gave in the Crime and Punishment which did get printed, to the not quite taunting question ‘And what does God do for you?’
‘He does everything,’ she says, but there is no debate.
Sonya is the church-slavonic ‘daughter’(dshcher ) whom Marmeladov introduces in his pub tirade.
God will call her to Him on the Day of judgment, asking ‘Where is the daughter who had pity on her earthly father, the filthy drunkard, and was undismayed by his beastliness?’
There must be many who are touched to the heart by that phrase ‘earthly father’ and yet who don't believe a word of the novel's religion; just as, and more obviously, Raskolnikov's kissing the dirt in the middle of the Haymarket doesn't stand or fall by  Dostoevsky's Soil Philosophy.
For the earth and the filth are the realized human stuff of the book.
Not, of course, all its human stuff; when Dostoevsky told his biographer that the task of his own deeper realism was ‘to find the human in the human being’, he meant there is more to us than filthy earth, and this ‘more’ must be found.
In extremity, with nowhere to go, and not even a believed theory to wear or hold his mind's hand (‘what will you run away with?’),
Raskolnikov turns to Sonya; ‘it was to her, Sonya, that he first went with his confession; when he felt the need of a human being, he sought the human being in her’— which does indeed isolate for a moment, and emphasize, the mystic business of his alienation from the human family; and for this moment the dross (as it were) of Sonya and of Raskolnikov is withheld; the god in his humanity is looking for the god in hers.
But the Raskolnikov of the notebooks who joked grimly about getting used to being married and having children will do that average and earthy thing, though in a different spirit; and in another story, as the Epilogue tells us.
The Raskolnikov of Crime and Punishment has got unused to everything; all the calm pressures of habit are denied him, his punishment has begun.
And the Sonya of the novel is very slightly indicated.
She is little more than her blue eyes and green shawl, the blue and the green undismayed by the yellows and reds of the book, as the girl is by her father.
He, the loose-end, filthy-earth drunkard, introduces the shawl as he does so many motifs.
He describes how Sonya is driven out onto the streets by her step-mother's gibe —‘Why not?
What is there to preserve so carefully?’— and returns and lays thirty roubles on the table.
‘She looked at her step-mother but uttered not a single word; she simply picked up our big drap-de-dames green shawl (it's a shawl we all use, a drap-de-dames one), and covered her head and face entirely with it ad lay down on the bed with her face to the wall, ad her little shoulders and her whole body were trembling.'
His ‘which we all use’ is authorially bold.
We are never told what use Marmeladov might have had for the shawl.
But, ‘We are one, we live as one,’ says Sonya in the Lazarus chapter, and that is much bolder.
Greater disunity than that of the Marmeladov non-home can scarcely be imagined.
I've just mentioned the taunt that drives Sonya to prostitution.
Members of the family are sleeping in three different places.
Even the father's funeral feast explodes in chaos — the classic Dostoevsky skandal .
And yet, while God doing everything for Sonya remains shielded by her faith, the green shawl keeps cropping up through the novel for all to see.
She puts it on to follow Raskolnikov on his final journey to the police station, and through his mind flashes the thought that this is the shawl Marmeladov referred to in the pub as ‘the family one’.
Actually Marmeladov said ‘Which we all use’.
Dostoevsky will have remembered that; it is one of those overlapping cumulations, sameness with difference, which reveal simultaneously the closeness of his workmanship and his imagination's bias.
Our last sight is of the shawl flitting about among the convicts in Siberia: not altogether happy, like many things in the Epilogue.
Again it should be seen as close and calculated that the shawl which wraps the head in shame at first, becomes at last a green emblem of mercy.
And yet the effective place of this life-soiled object is in the body of the book, nourishing the reality of the whole Marmeladov set-up, like the children's washed day-clothes drying overnight.
For there are no spare things.
On second thoughts there is nothing surprising in ‘which we all use’; how could it be otherwise in a family like the Marmeladov's?
And Sonya's We are one, we live as one,’ while it remains  authorially bold, has nothing to fear at the hands of readers quick to sniff out dogma.
Crime and Punishment naturalizes the mystic brazenness of Sonya's statement, as it does Porfiry's ‘You can't get on without us' .
Parajournalism, creating to one side of the actual, seems to me the nub here.
When Svidrigailov and Porfiry, who never meet — bold again — and who have nothing to do with each other, both tell Raskolnikov that a man needs air, my business is to try and suggest how it is that Dostoevsky's reader finds himself in immediate dual touch with a Petersburg july day and a universal truth.
He senses, too, that the actual has more than one side to it.
Thus when the girl secretary who was to become Dostoevsky's wife rang the bell of his flat for the first time, the door was opened by an elderly woman servant with a green shawl thrown over her shoulders.
Anna Grigorevna had been reading Crime and Punishment in the magazine Russian Herald , and she thought she recognized the object ‘which played such a big part in the Marmeladov family’.
No doubt she did.
And soon afterwards, in the first week of their marriage, Dostoevsky showed her the stone under which Raskolnikov hid the stuff he had taken from the old moneylender.
She asked her husband what had brought him — Dostoevsky — to this deserted yard.
He replied, ‘The reason that does in fact bring people to secluded places.’
Now that's our man.
The Possessed
(i)
In the 1860s Dostoevsky was spending a lot of time abroad.
That made the tie between him and journalism even stronger than it had been.
From his letters and his wife's memoirs we picture him in cheap cafés hunched up in his greatcoat over a cup of coffee, with Russian and European newspapers spread about him.
Or spending his evenings in public libraries.
The scene is Dresden Library.
He is picking his way through the Moscow Record of 27 November 1869, and there he reads about a murder which had occurred six days earlier.
An unnamed man had been killed and his body dumped in a pond in a park.
The alarm had been raised by two peasants who, as the first sentence of the newspaper story recounts, were walking in the park and noticed a cap lying on the ground, together with a hood and a cudgel.
Dostoevsky had no use for the two peasants or for the hood and the cudgel, but he wanted the cap.
In The Possessed , the conspirators have enticed their victim to a dark remote spot where nothing will be seen or heard, and have done the deed and tied two heavy stones to the body so that it is sure to sink, and have carried it to a pond and thrown it in: then, ‘With extraordinary carelessness’ they overlook that cap which has no doubt fallen off in the struggle, and which the police will soon find.
The carelessness cuts as much creative ice as the cap.
It interknits with that world of chances and mischances, improbable or absurd or grotesque or just neutrally happening as they do happen, which we meet everywhere in later Dostoevsky and specially in The Possessed .
The conviction carried by how things are in his fiction cannot be separated from the sense that they might be otherwise.
The cap that  happened to get overlooked returns the reader's gaze blankly yet unavoidably, like the bill from a restaurant abroad which the conspirators find when they turn out the dead man's pockets, and like the child's clay whistle which one of them has provided himself with to give the agreed signal — for he has lost so many teeth that he can't trust himself to produce the sound naturally.
The cap, then, falls within an overall grand vision of chanciness and risk; Liputin's teeth are by no means the only things that hang by a thread.
But, I repeat, Dostoevsky wanted the cap for its own sake.
The overlooked hood in the newspaper scanned by the parajournalist would not have done equally well, nor would the cudgel.
The cap is comparable with, while absolutely distinguishable from, the broken horn comb and other odds and ends — the disjunctive flotsam — of Crime and Punishment .
On one level it is yet another accident, and on a second level it is inevitable, it must be so because it belongs here and nowhere else, as the foreign restaurant bill belongs to a novel about human birds of passage, and as the whistle belongs to a novel, in fact the only late Dostoevsky novel, with no children in it but haunted by the toys of absent innocence and peace: the governor of ‘our province’ where these crazy terrible events take place was disappointed in love as a young man and consoled himself by making a paper theatre with curtains, actors, audience, orchestra, conductor — the lot.
Then he wrote a novel and sent it to a magazine which rejected it.
On the other had he constructed an entire model railway, ad again the result was most successful.
Passengers came onto the platform with their trunks ad bags, their children ad dogs, and got into the carriages.
The guards and porters walked about, the bell was rung, the signal was given ad the train started off.
He spent a whole year over that clever toy.
But he still had to find a wife.
And at last, and most imprudently, he married an ambitious tyrant who drove him up the career ladder, and when things began to get too much he set to work on a toy church with pastor, pulpit, congregation, organ and so forth .
But she discovered what he was up to and confiscated the church.
So that when Von Lemke came to ‘us’ as governor and felt himself overwhelmed by ‘our’troubles and scandal; s, he had no toy-making to turn to, he had nowhere to go — his version of the abiding Dostoevsky extremity — and in fact he went mad.
He sent for his carriage and jumped in, and after telling his coachman to drive fast he ordered him to stop.
They were now miles out of town.
Von Lemke got out and crossed the road and went into a field.
The coachman thought he wanted to relieve himself.
But he just stood still and gazed at some withered autumn flowers.
The narrator can't be sure but guesses he wasn't even aware of the existence of the flowers.
On the other hand the Police Inspector of the district found him standing with a bunch of yellow flowers in his hand.
That is typical of The Possessed 's speculative openness, within which a reader is entitled to his own view.
The flowers caught Von Lemke's fancy as ruined but at least not forbidden toys, perhaps.
But back to that dropped and overlooked cap.
The word in the Moscow Record story is shapka .
The name of the murdered man first appears in the Possessed notebooks as Shaposhnikov.
What's in a name?
There is no simple answer with Dostoevsky any more than with Dickens.
Certainly, while he is alive, Shaposhnikov the cappy man refuses to be parted from his headgear; he grabs it when he determines to leave, and he drops it when he is persuaded to stay.
It is a mark of his abrupt nature.
However, in the novel's final text the shapka becomes a peaked cap (kartuz ) and Shaposhnikov's name gets changed to Shatov which has nothing to do with caps or hats at all.
It doesn't follow that the cap/name link disappears but  that it becomes so to say transpersonalized.
Kartuz itself is pinned to a Captain Kartuzov who appears just once in The Possessed , and then only by name.
We learn not a thing about him.
But this Captain is prominent in the notebooks:.
a chivalric Don Quixote figure of absolute non-compromise in matters (as he sees them) of virtue and truth, in effect an overspill from The Idiot — which Dostoevsky seems to have recognized, for he abandoned the positive and sublime venture, and hived off the comic material he had accumulated into the drunken buffoon Captain Lebyadkin who grows into a substantial second-rank character in The Possessed ;, and as to Kartuzov, the novelist left us with nothing more than his cappy surname.
At the same time the final text propagates caps like overnight mushrooms.
We begin with Shatov.
The object goes, as I say, with his impulsiveness; he is the man who roars ‘Shatov is out’ when an unwelcome visitor knocks at his door.
The cap also goes with Shatov as migrant, as a railway-station man, a traveller between Russia, Switzerland, and America, a man with an old foreign restaurant bill in his pocket.
It also goes with the people he moves among, the ‘circles’ and ‘sets’of The Possessed , many of whom are travellers too, and with the ‘quintet’which he doesn't belong to but is entangled with, which he tries to kick himself clear of, and which dumps him in that pond and leaves his cap behind.
Peter Verkhovensky, the real murderer, who manipulates the members of the quintet, whose dupes they are, travels more than anybody.
The novel's atmosphere is thick — sticky!— with news and rumours from abroad, and we learn that Shatov once spat in Verkhovensky's face in Geneva.
Taxed with this incident as his reason for contriving Shatov's murder, Verkhovensky replies: ‘For that reason, and for something else, too.
For many other things.
But without any hard feelings.’
But on the next page he speaks of ‘that swine Shatov’.
And in any case what can it mean to murder a man for spitting in one's face and yet feel no spite towards him?
A breach of objective decorum?
And what are the many other reasons?
And so on.
Such questions begin to evoke the crumbling processes of The Possessed , the instability which flushes its entire structure.
To ask them, and equally (or even more) to wave them away absentmindedly like circling insects, is to greet the novel, to respond to its personality which is the same thing as the tonal area colonized by the novelist for his present purpose.
He gives us a murderer whose ‘words pattered out like smooth large grains’— clear and distinguishable, and yet somehow there is nothing to get a purchase on.
It's no great surprise that a lecture on Othello is mooted in the Possessed notebooks, and that ‘O, Iago, the pity of it’ gets quoted in Russian.
While Dostoevsky was interested in the noble Moor and the jealousy question, he will also have been pondering ghost-reasons for his own villain.
That Shatov spat in Verkhovensky's face is one.
That the members of the quintet will be ‘bound’ to each other in secret guilt by the cement of blood, having been tricked into thinking Shatov is a danger and must be removed, is another and a promising rationalization which reveals a local shrewdness like Iago's.
I stress local: Verkhovensky's group psychology is plausible enough but it doesn't engage with anything wider or further that he proposes to do.
He postures as a political activist, and the solidarity forced on the quintet by Shatov's murder might be expected to make them a more effective instrument.
But the notion of an instrument turns out to be as empty as his posturing.
There is nothing he wants to use the quintet for.
Having entangled them in crime, he catches a train and goes away.
And he takes a travelling rug with him — another of those fussy bag-and-baggage objects which assert the novel's tonality.
For he is an eternal traveller.
As well as a rug he takes a book, author and title unspecified; the eternal traveller is also the eternal student, and it is as ‘the student’ that Verkhovensky first appears in the manuscript drafts.
From the start, as in Crime and Punishment , Dostoevsky is projecting a theoretical murderer, the difference being that Raskolnikov was an ex-student, only potentially an eternal student, because in the event he got pulled back out of theory into living life.
Murder brought  Raskolnikov to see that he didn't believe his reasons for committing it.
Now the other young man never believed any of his professed and contradictory reasons in the first place.
That last fact carries with it an unjust overall valuation of student status, eternal or otherwise, and one which Dostoevsky was not prepared to stand by; which is why ‘the student’ becomes Peter Verkhovensky in The Possessed .
His argumentation is diminished and made much less coherent through successive drafts of the novel, while the sheer rattle or patter of those smooth large grains which are his discourse gets carefully worked up.
It's not that he ceases altogether to be the eternal student, but that he becomes reshaped and misshaped into an aberration.
Nor is the consecutive argumentation — the theorizing — lost.
It gets parcelled out among the society he moves in, or rather flits in and out of, while himself belonging elsewhere, which means nowhere.
This is a novel of talk and opinions got out of books, and at one stage Dostoevsky proposed ‘NB.
A Title:PAPER PEOPLE’, which survives as a phrase in Shatov's mouth, tossed up twice by the polemical flood.
A paper person is a walking theory, and one which may not even believe in itself; and then the paper person will not merely have nobody, he will have no theory to be.
He belongs to a paper society which goes through the motions of life, in the air, notionally.
Many a reader of The Possessed will have smiled at Von Lemke's paper cut-outs — the conductor waving his baton, the bustling railway porter, the hell-fire gesticulating preacher — and at the same time he will have wondered why the microcosmic animated toys feel so supremely right for this novel.
Shatov directs his paper-person thrust against himself too.
‘Since I cannot be a Russian,’ he says, ‘I became a Slavophil’— an articulator, that is, of romantic church-andstate conservatism in the debates of the time: indeed a walking, talking theory.
In the notebooks Shatov (as Shaposhnikov) calls Slavophilism ‘a gentleman's fancy’.
We are back in the area of Peter the Great's reforms.
Peter tried to rouse his countrymen from their aboriginal stupor and turn them into Europeans; but a Russian isn't and can't be a German or a Frenchman, and the result of Peter's efforts was to produce an educated class who can't be Russians either.
They can of course call themselves Slavophils, but that is to try and wish away Peter, to perform an act of mental regression, not to be a Russian.
It is a paper act in a paper situation, inflammable and precarious.
The dangerous consequences of Peter are much canvassed in the notebooks: ‘the social unsteadiness (shatost ), as Shatov says’.
Thus the cappy man has become the shaky man, the waverer.
And once again the motif is transpersonalized, for in the novel Shatov proves himself more than ordinarily resolute; his paper Slavophilism doesn't touch his human courage as husband and friend — and enemy.
Events and tendencies are bigger than he is, and while not shaky in himself he gets dealt the final shove of murder.
(ii)
So on first consideration it seems odd that in the early days of planning The Possessed Dostoevsky should write to his friend Maikov and describe his new venture as ‘like Crime and Punishment but even nearer to reality, even more urgent, and directly concerned with the most important contemporary question’.
‘Like Crime and Punishment ’— another murder story — is obvious enough.
What falls less easily into place is the judgment about relative importance, urgency, contemporary relevance, nearness to reality; because Raskolnikov comes over as a very grand and accessible conception, a nineteenth-century bohemian Hamlet was one way of putting it, whereas Verkhovensky is just a wrecker.
That is our starting point.
It could be said as brusquely of Iago that he is just a wrecker.
And of a terrorist in today's headlines: one of those inscrutable middle-class Germans, for example.
Thus what I called Crime and Punishment's apocalyptic naturalism is its most vital link with The Possessed ; I mean, when Dostoevsky read about that gang murder in the Moscow Record his mind's eye was caught not by a bizarre and therefore very newsworthy incident but by the seed of a foul commonplace: the seed in eternity, in the deepest realism, though also in the mere mundane future, for Dostoevsky did imagine a time when only the most spectacular acts of terrorism would get headline treatment.
Shatov's murder, in the world of this novel, is momentous because it is potentially unremarkable.
Crime and Punishment was different in that Dostoevsky never supposed lots of people would begin committing Raskolnikov-type murders; Danilov doing so was enough to produce from him the exclamation ‘It has happened!’
For Raskolnikov is incorrigibly patrician and rare at heart (which is one reason why the Epilogue does not convince), even if I have overstressed the Hamletish side to him.
Nevertheless his crime, like the tawdry footloose elimination of Shatov, springs from unsteadiness (shatost).
The word appears twice in Dostoevsky's letter to Katkov outlining Crime and Punishment , in the phrase ‘unsteadiness of ideas’— which is natural since a drama of reflection is about to unfold: thinking is Raskolnikov's work, as he tells the maid Nastasya.
Unsteady work, we might add.
Moreover the surname Shatov appears once in the notebooks relating to Crime and Punishment .
But nothing further.
It's as if the name were waiting for the man, and for the novel which will transpersonalize or socialize the murderous concept: ‘social unsteadiness, as Shatov says’ and as we read in the Possessed notebooks.
And in his definitive text the novelist voices social unsteadiness as empty groupings and vapid motions.
Von Lemke's cut-outs are phantom human concourses (theatre, station, church), and they are mobile.
The quintet is Peter Verkhovensky's plaything.
He tricks its members into thinking they are part of a revolutionary network extending across Russia, and at the local level he generates pseudo-purposeful activities which culminate in Shatov's murder.
There's a littleness about it all: again it must not be seen as mere  chance that we encounter Swift's Lilliput on the first page of the novel.
This littleness is at once paltry and menacing and never in repose.
One of the members of the quintet bears the quaint name of Tolkachenko.
Dostoevsky followed the trial proceedings closely, and I think the Soviet editor is right to put his finger on the verb tolkatsya , to loaf or lounge about, which occurs in a speech by the prosecuting lawyer.
The editor might also have noted the colloquial sense of roaming around which the verb shatatsya carries, for this may perhaps have encouraged the switch from Shaposhnikov to Shatov as the novel began to define itself.
Loafing and roaming cohere into a larger whole, together with such imaginative furniture as hats and travelling rugs and passports and foreign restaurant bills and trashy pamphlets printed abroad and incompetently circulated.
This novel seems, but only seems, but does seem insistently, to come from a man who knew nothing but was very opinionated, who checked no facts and guzzled rumour scraps, whose mind was uncouth, raggity, raucous, florid.
For it is a condition of Dostoevsky's art to arouse our longing for the settled and the normal and the beautiful itself.
The Possessed swarms with amateurism and with fooling about and make-believe just as childish as Von Lemke's, but dangerous.
And if not immediately dangerous, then wanton and sinister in its curious evil comedy.
Another member of the quintet, one Lyamshin, a post-office clerk, gets himself asked to parties where ‘he would give imitations of a pig, a thunder storm, a confinement, with the first cry of the baby, etc., etc.; that was what he was invited for’; and later we hear of him ‘mimicking, when requested, various types of jews, a deaf peasant woman making her confession, or the birth of a child…’.
Note the single common element, Lyamshin's confinement act.
Masked by the apparently careless tumble of examples (‘etc., etc.’) is a calculated insistence on the sore spot, on what Shatov in the notebooks calls social unsteadiness, a small but virulent secular profanity standing over against the noble, perhaps the noblest sequence in The  Possessed , where Marie Shatov returns to her husband to give birth to another man's child.
Peter Verkhovensky can't be fitted into this picture because his raison d'être is outside it, manipulating.
He plays with the quintet in a quite different sense from that in which they play at revolutionary politics; though, bemused by him, set at odds, their purposes deflected and their fantasies fed and coaxed along, it doesn't seem like playing to them.
One of the quintet not only means business but high-minded, selfless business.
Virginsky — the surname once more points the way — is a utopian socialist of ‘rare purity of heart’ and ‘honest fervour’; Horace would have called him candidus .
‘I will never, never abandon these bright hopes,’ he used to say to me with shining eyes.
Of his ‘bright hopes’ he always spoke quietly, in a blissful half-whisper, as it were secretly.’
And of the tribulations of his personal life, which were in fact grievous: ‘It's of no consequence.
It's just one particular case.
It won't interfere with the ‘cause’ in the least, not in the least.’’
One senses a rush of creative warmth as this lonely rapt figure is conjured in a few sentences.
Virginsky will always belong to the Petrashevsky Circle of Dostoevsky's own youth, as well as to the ill-assorted group that dances to Verkhovensky's tune in the late 1860s.
How to describe that tune?
I called Peter Verkhovensky a wrecker.
I might also have said a nihilist.
Nihilist is the case but it risks confusion between Dostoevsky and Turgenev who may not have invented the word but certainly gave it very wide currency.
In his novel Fathers and Children which (as the title suggests) is about the generation gap, Turgenev pinned ‘nihilist’ to the son Bazarov.
The heart of this new word and new conception is a humane, scientific, and Germany-focused enlightenment, a delayed Aufklarung hitting Russia's young élite of the 1860s.
Bazarov is an idealist and a brave man, and his aims are rational.
Verkhovensky has courage (though in its lower forms of which Plato speaks), but otherwise there is nothing in common between the two young men except the times they live in.
After the non-fictional Sportsman's Sketches, Fathers and  Children is Turgenev's best book, and the best thing in it, apart perhaps from the bereaved old couple at the end, is the sensitive give-and-take marriage of its hero's idealism to his scepticism, a questing, generous idealism and an undestroying scepticism.
So the novel strikes me, and at one time Dostoevsky thought so too.
At least he said he did.
One can't be sure.
He was at his most two-faced in his dealings with Turgenev.
Anyhow, he praised Fathers and Children to its author, and in his own Winter Notes he remarked Bazarov's ‘greatness of spirit, in spite of all his nihilism’.
Then later, in the Possessed notebooks, we read: ‘Bazarov was created by a man of the 1840s, and was created as a figure without affectation, which means that a man of the 1840s could not create Bazarov without violating the truth.’
A remarkable statement, and a difficult one.
It needn't mean that Dostoevsky had been telling lies and is now telling the truth in the privacy of his own notebooks.
He may very well have changed his mind.
But if he has, I don't think it follows that Fathers and Children has become a bad book in his eyes, but rather, it is now not all that good.
A rift has opened between realism and something beyond, and at the same time a link has been forged between Dostoevsky's favourite phrase, the deeper realism, and my own apocalyptic naturalism.
If Turgenev is a man of the 1840s (which he is), what is he supposed to do about it?
And if Turgenev were to object that one could not find a more typical product of the 1840s than the Petrashevsky Circle to which Dostoevsky belonged, how would the other man reply?
Over both questions, and over all plausible answers to them, I see hovering those common Dostoevsky ideas of split and break and rent.
The raskol of Raskolnikov means split with a further specialized religious sense of schism.
Raskolnikov is self-divided and also separated from the human family in a way which for Dostoevsky is both social and religious.
But, as Porfiry tells him, ‘You can't do without us' .
Nor can he do without his undivided self.
And that is how the body of the novel leaves the matter.
It's only in the Crime and Punishment notebooks that we read ‘Love and Sonya broke him’.
Confusion — the  sundering of raskol — was thus itself confounded; and the crisis or breaking point of his illness followed by his ‘regeneration’(voskresenie ) and his ‘passing from one world to another’ and his ‘acquaintance with a new and hitherto unknown reality’are merely affirmed at the end of the Epilogue.
Just as raskol means split and religious schism, so voskresenie means regeneration and theological Resurrection.
Both areas, breaking and mending, engrossed Dostoevsky from the time when the shared convict existence of prison snapped him like a dry biscuit yet also made him new, so that in the closing words of The House of the Dead , with the knocking off of his fetters, the narrator greets ‘a new life,voskresenie from the dead’.
Of his attempts to realize this experience over again in his post-Siberian fiction, the bald Epilogue to Crime and Punishment is an early and unpromising instance.
We have here perhaps the most delicate of all points of contact between his life and his art: hence the impression that further and very private issues are involved in, even shielded by, the assertion that ‘a man of the 1840s could not create Bazarov’.
As I suggested apropos the Petrashevsky Circle, one feels an urge to smoke Dostoevsky out with the question, who's talking?
‘The epileptic’ makes a neat reply, again touching life and art simultaneously: the author and hero of The Idiot .
I have in mind the experience of being suddenly thrust outside time, which constitutes in The Idiot and elsewhere the epileptic aura.
When this and the regeneration/resurrection theme are brought to bear upon the remark about Bazarov and the 1840s, what seemed a difference of degree turns out to be one of a kind.
The criticism of Turgenev is only incidentally that he is stuck in the 1840s and not far-sighted enough.
New-sightedness, the timeless standpoint, ‘hitherto unknown reality’— these have an air of mystical hubris when dragged  into the open, but they are what Dostoevsky is really talking about.
And so while he sat in a German public library and the story of the murder in the park unfolded before him in the newspapers, a novel began to stir.
Or, in mystic vein, an order of being was glimpsed in which the 1840s, the 1860s, nihilism, Bazarov, found themselves apocalyptically and teleologically disposed — those two polysyllabic adverbs embracing and transcended all nature, including futurity.
As one would except, pre-existing material got sucked into this new world.
First, the murdered man: he turned out to be a student at the Petrine Agricultural Academy, and his name was Ivanov.
It so happened that the novelist's wife had a younger brother at this Academy who knew Ivanov.
Now the remarkable circumstance, recorded by Anna Dostoevsky in her memoirs, is that her husband had a foreboding of political disturbances at the Academy, and fearing that his brother-in-law ‘because of his youthfulness and weakness of character might take an active part in them’, he persuaded Anna's mother it would be a good thing if the young man came to them in Dresden: which he did in October of 1869, the month before Ivanov was murdered.
Next the murderer, the original of Peter Verkhovensky.
He was Sergei Nechaev.
In defensive mood, and not with complete truth, Dostoevsky wrote to Katkov: ‘I do not know and never have known either Nechaev or Ivanov, or the circumstances of the murder, except from the newspapers.
And even if I had, I would not have begun copying them.
He had reason to be touchy about Nechaev.
This ascetic, strong-willed young man, dominating yet dull-toned in personality to the point of satanic flatness, captured as if in his own despite the imagination of the day.
Ordinary people talked about him.
He even disquieted the hardened revolutionaries he moved among, most notably old Bakunin.
His Catechism of a Revolutionary is a classic in the tactics of terrorism, and it came with an agreeable click of fittingness  to learn recently that this work earned a place on the bookshelves of Stalin.
Dostoevsky wanted to stifle the thought that he was riding on the back of Nechacv's perverse glamour.
Thus Nechaev forms the most important part, but still only a part, of the perennial parajournalistic debate about actuality and fiction.
In the same letter to Katkov Dostoevsky also claimed that the murder was itself the merest peg; ‘I am only taking the accomplished fact’; and he went on to assert that the human type ‘which corresponds to this crime’ was the creature of his imagination.
At one level, he got there first.
At another, we are still getting there, and the man whose bomb explodes at Bologna railway station one summer day in 1980 while I am pulling this page into shape falls straight back inside The Possessed .
At yet another, we will never get there since a stream of tendency has been caught and held in new-visioned (as opposed to far-sighted) iconic stasis, and there can be no movement on out of the world we live in into the book we read.
Katkov, therefore, is being asked to accept that ‘my Peter Verkhovensky may in no way resemble Nechaev’.
This of course won't do.
The identities need switching and the whole statement inverting, thus: ‘The historical wrecker and terrorist, whether in Petersburg or Bologna, must bear the mark of the fiction and thereby confirm it.’
For the moment Dostoevsky has been sidetracked by his immediate anxieties.
As I say, he had reason to feel touchy about Nechaev.
It is also important to note the time gap of nearly a year between the murder and the letter to Katkov.
Initially, a swift, artistically rough job was contemplated, a ‘tendentious piece’ which would take a few months to write and would enrage ‘the nihilists and Westerners’and set them ‘howling about me that I'm a retrograde .
Well, to hell with them, but I will say everything to the last word.’
It was to be topical and polemical, and among other things a direct challenge to Fathers and Children .
The enlightened Bazarov had inherited, was continuous with, took a stage further, the liberal and  Westernizing impulse of the 1840s which itself followed the Decembrist uprising of 1825, an aristocratic bid for reform by men who had chased Napoleon out of Russia and had later felt the civilizing influence of Paris.
But Verkhovensky the wrecker is unrelated to anything that had gone before, except in the new-seeing eye of his creator.
He articulates the Dostoevsky split (raskol ) in terms of a generation-gap story.
Obviously the other side of the gap had to be blocked in, and to represent the 1840s the choice fell on Timofey Granovsky, in his time a renowned liberal professor and public speaker, and to a lesser extent a man of letters.
Dostoevsky wrote for Stankevich's published critical study of Granovsky —‘material absolutely indispensable for my work’, a life-and-death necessity ‘like air’.
All was bustle and confidence.
In the earlier Possessed notebooks Granovsky appears under his own name, and Peter Verkhovensky (it must be recorded) is often Nechaev.
The ‘tendentious’ story would soon be out of the way, making possible a return to what Dostoevsky thought was much more important, the Life of a Great Sinner project.
But it didn't come out like that.
He found he had taken on more than he bargained for.
(iii)
Painfully — for no work cost him more or perhaps as much as this one — Dostoevsky came to see that The Possessed wasn't a sideshow.
In its essentials it wasn't a diversion of any kind.
It proved in due course, and in its own degree, the Life of a Great Sinner itself.
Looked at another way,The Possessed and the two remaining novels he had in him to write,A Raw Youth and The Brothers Karamazov , are all generation-gap stories, and for Dostoevsky the generation gap is only subordinately topical and tendentious and mixed up with Turgenev.
How much of the great-sinner project remained unachieved and how much dissolved itself into the books that  in fact got written, can be debated endlessly.
His own discussion of the project tended to be vague and large.
In any event the last three novels juxtapose fathers and sons in an effort to gain access to or leverage upon some further thing.
The October letter to Katkov envisages this world beyond The Possessed's initial scope in forthright great-sinner terms.
Nicholas Stavrogin has arrived during the summer months of 1870s, and has established himself as the one ‘who might really be called the chief character of the novel’.
He is ‘a villain’, but ‘tragic’, and Dostoevsky continues in his most pushy vein, anxious that Katkov shall take notice, ‘I have taken him from my heart’.
He means the heart of his creative instinct.
There is nowhere else to take Stavrogin from, no other link between the middleaged overdriven novelist and his idle young well-connected ‘chief character’.
Dostoevsky also calls him his ‘real hero’ and his ‘new hero’, and I think he might not object to ‘antihero’if the suggestion were put to him.
For Stavrogin reaches back, or rather Dostoevsky reaches back in himself, brushing against Raskolnikov and Svidrigailov as he does so, and makes common cause with the underground man.
Let me try and bring this out by means of a single phrase in Stavrogin's suicide letter.
The final text has ‘When all's said and done I've got the habits of a decent man’.
Five drafts of the relevant passage survive, the first reading ‘When all's said and done I'm a decent man’.
The simple end-product arrives only at the fifth attempt.
With hindsight one can point to the underground man complaining that if he could manage even to loaf and idle around wholeheartedly he would be able to call himself a lazy man.
This is the rationale of the movement from ‘a decent man’ to ‘the habits of a decent man’.
Stavrogin can't, and in our definitive text doesn't, claim to be a decent man or to have any other thing to be; all his letter indicates is a deathlike mime or sleepwalk within behaviour patterns determined by upbringing, class, and kind.
This must appear implausibly neat.
But so do many things once the dust of composition has settled and the builder's yard of notebooks and rejected drafts can be studied at leisure.
The neatness comes afterwards; it gets imposed when a long and laborious and very untidy process is shortcircuited by the observation (which Dostoevsky himself may never have made) of a direct link between Stavrogin and the underground man.
Fumbling after phrases in the suicide letter and a thousand other places, the novelist strives to clarify an idea, but also to purge his understanding of great-sinner preconceptions and ambitions which the developing Possessed refuses to accommodate.
It isn't because Stavrogin is not a decent man that the form of words has to be changed; he also says ‘I'm bored’ in the earliest draft of the letter, and this assertion goes completely.
The reason is the underground one I have just stated.
Stavrogin acts bored, other people call him bored: he is bored!
But he lacks the minimal ontological ballast to call himself bored.
Or anything else.
He writes in that same letter ‘I can't hate anything’, and he admits he can't even own to ‘despair’.
And so he drifts towards vanishing point: ‘One may argue about everything endlessly, but from me nothing has come but negation, with no magnanimity and no force.
Even negation has not come from me.’
Only negation.
But really not even negation.
Nothing.
Which leads one to ask what becomes of the sinner — let alone the great sinner.
What counts as sinning greatly?
Or, what does sinning greatly count as?
One recalls Svidrigailov and Raskolnikov, the potential suicide twitting the actual murderer with ‘well, you can certainly do a lot’.
Stavrogin writes: ‘I've tried the depths of debauchery and wasted my strength over it; but I don't like debauchery and never wanted it.’
It doesn't and didn't amount to anything.
There is nothing (so to say) deedy in his actions.
This crablike sidling away from all he is and does catches the tune of the achieved, fully formed Stavrogin; unlike Svidrigailov, who incidentally makes great play with the fact that he's bored, he would — could — never call himself a debauchee.
He is a different sort of great sinner, or essay upon the great-sinner theme, which is why I stress the aspect of return to the  Vicious and tragic antihero who can't even call himself lazy.
The underground man's heart is no more in being idle than in anything else, however much, as he himself puts it, he ‘wants to want’.
Stavrogin naturalizes this thought by observing ‘My desires are too weak’.
But the suicide letter also keeps a foot in the abstract world, the world of metaphysics in my extended sense.
Between them Stavrogin and Dasha Shatov, Shatov's sister, the girl to whom the letter is addressed, have conjured the word ‘nurse’ which is a term of art as metaphysical as anything in Notes from Underground and impossible to match in the other post-Siberian novels.
‘Nurse’ is a sort of code between them.
She invented it and he picks it up.
He has promised that in extremity he will send for her, and she will come and be his nurse.
He is perching on the railway, six stops down the line, with a stationmaster he got to know somehow when he was on the town in Petersburg — the Dostoevsky no-home at its most stripped and strange in this novel of aimless movement.
She never comes because he hangs himself, she has nobody to be nurse to, but her journey — were she to have made it — would prove as nugatory as his.
The letter declares Stavrogin's fear of killing himself.
It comes no closer than that to threatening suicide.
Nor does it have to: we know his fears are as weak as his desires.
Nature is likely to follow art, art here being the pure abstraction of Stavrogin's remark that even negation is more than he can manage.
Svidrigailov would never have said that; he would have gone on making jokes about America.
And how different the tone of the two men and their two suicides!
The nurse trope, I admit, shares America's power to open human doors the further side of whimsicality, but that is because the suicide letter has only one foot in the completely flat uncomic abstract world of negation talk.
The other foot remains in Dostoevskian nature.
Dasha actually wants to come and look after Stavrogin, as actually as Svidrigailov is bored —‘especially now’, he says, as America looms.
The two worlds of nature and abstraction meet when Stavrogin asks Dasha whether by coming to be his nurse ‘you hope to set up some aim for me at last’.
This thought combines the antihero wanting to want and Svidrigailov trying sex, balloon-travel, good works even, in his struggle to latch on to life.
As nurse, Dasha's aim would be to give Stavrogin an aim — simultaneously an underground and an American idea.
In the Possessed notebooks Dostoevsky tries a snatch of dialogue in which Stavrogin is asked ‘Why don't you just simply live?’; and he replies ‘Ah, that's the hardest thing of all’.
The novel itself foregoes many such touches which aren't quite true because they betray a teasing Svidrigailov-like zest, or, if you prefer, counterzest; just as, on the secondary plane, Lebyadkin's reply to the man who tells him to stop getting drunk is wonderfully funny but wrong.
‘What a strange demand!’ says Lebyadkin with an effrontery beyond the man we have been given, though not of course beyond old Karamazov.
The long disciplining process of notebooks and drafts reduces Stavrogin to a state very near automatism: the habits of a decent man.
In rejecting drafts he is constantly saying he's bored.
In the book we have in front of us — and it is a long one — he never does.
But, as I say, he acts bored.
Peter Verkhovensky is telling him about a religious conversation among some army officers.
The mood of the party, according to Verkhovensky, was atheistic.
As a group ‘they gave God short shift’.
But
One grey-haired captain, a rough old chap, sat and sat not saying a word, mute as a mackerel, then suddenly got up in the middle of the room ad, you know, said aloud as if speaking to himself, ‘If there's no God then what sort of a Captain am I after that?’, ad seized his cap and threw up his arms and went out.
‘He expressed a rather sensible idea,’ said Stavrogin, ad yawned for the third time.
A wine-breath intellectualism hangs over the sturdy little comedy of the captain who has found his own words for declaring God to be the ground of his being.
And if there is no God?
That brings us to Stavrogin's third yawn.
He has grasped the neat theological and ontological crux implicit in the captain's statement, and has acted bored at it.
If he  could help himself this would be mental vandalism; but he can't; Stavrogin's are yawns that refuse to be stifled; automatism and involuntarism are finally one, and the tragic villain-hero who at once apprehends the ‘sensible idea’ and yawns at it betrays a high but helpless intelligence recalling Raskolnikov as well as Svidrigailov.
Stavrogin is no more an atheist than Raskolnikov was, but his belief — all his beliefs — are weak, as the suicide letter to Dasha Shatov makes plain, and their weakness corresponds to the instability (shatost ) of Raskolnikov's.
Equally, to yawn is to act bored, to admit and even to flaunt kinship with Svidligailov, and the evil-omened word listless (vyali ) that dogs Stavrogin, though he never uses it himself, corresponds to the other man's terminal boredom.
This is what it means to say that Dostoevsky brushes against Raskolnikov and Svidrigailov as he reaches back towards the underground man.
The object of the reaching exercise is of course to arrive at Stavrogin.
It holds more true of some of us than of others, that in the struggle to make it new we are writing the same book all our lives; and with Dostoevsky this truth is very true.
His post-Siberian great-sinner project won't convincingly disengage from his interest in the confessional form, and, as we have seen, the Dostoevsky Confession was afoot before Siberia.
With Stavrogin, confession and the great sinner come together in the chapter ‘At Tikhon's’, often referred to as Stavrogin's Confession.
Dostoevsky set great store by this chapter which marks the acutest phase of his tribulations over The Possessed , because his editor Katkov refused to print it.
We recall the same editor's objection to the debate about Christianity between Raskolnikov and Sonya Marmeladov in Crime and Punishment , and, before that again, the censor's blocking of the positive Christian counteraffirmations in Notes from Underground .
But this time the rejected text survives: we have the galley proofs of ‘At Tikhon's’ submitted to the magazine Russian Herald , and Dostoevsky's alterations to those proofs, and his widow's list of further variants.
Therefore it becomes possible at last to read and evaluate what was earnestly planned, executed, fought for, tinkered with in a vain attempt to propitiate Katkov (but also, as we shall see, for another reason), and finally surrendered.
Furthermore, ‘At Tikhon's’ provides the chance to get a look at the figure named by me Dostoevsky's good angel, because here again, as in the two earlier cases, the novelist took no steps to restore the deleted material at some future date when he was his own master; and I think he was right.
My Proposition, embracing The House of the Dead, Notes from Underground, Crime and Punishment, The Possessed, Karamazov , and, negatively, by way of relative failure,The Idiot , is that Dostoevsky could only promote his dearest values by creeping up on their blind side: in other words that he had an urge towards crisis and clarity which he could only satisfy by yielding it to the enemy — to the horror of the flogging routine in the ‘Thy kingdom come’ episode in the Dead House at one chronological extreme, and to Ivan Karamazov's showdown with the Religion Swindle at the other.
Clarity appears in those self-directed exhortations of the novelist to elucidate Raskolnikov's motive for murder.
The novel itself ignores them.
Crisis introduces the word podvig , translated ‘exploit’ or ‘feat’, though Jacques Catteau remarks that avancement sometimes renders it best.
Podvig , also prominent in the Crime and Punishment notebooks, gets relegated in the final text to the Epilogue where it is seen at its simplest in the mitigating circumstance that the murderer is discovered at his trial to have burnt himself rescuing two little children from a blazing house.
With both the motive for the murder and the brave rescue Crime and Punishment sets the pattern for later Dostoevsky; his post-Siberian notebooks swarm with admonitions like ‘Decide the matter definitely one way or the other’, and with the X marks the spot of ‘Here a podvig is achieved’; and in the other novels, as in Crime and Punishment , the actual outcome of such promptings makes an interesting study.
Crisis and clarity are notebook froth whipped up by a single hidden energy.
I ask, what does Dostoevsky's gambling  mania aspire towards?
And I answer, breaking the bank of all banks, busting Plato's very Idea of a bank; and also being cleaned out absolutely — but absolutely: body, mind, immortal soul: in fact the Dostoevsky apocalypse where all shall be revealed, where crisis is clarity.
And obviously the novelist's apocalypse is by no means identical with his received Christian one; hence, in part, the divergence of his art from the things his notebooks show him wanting to say.
It's a reflection on sadomasochism, and on negation, and on the Underground throughout these novels, that the true gambler's urge to lose is as strong as and not ultimately separable from its opposite.
All this bears closely on Stavrogin and his so-called confession.
In ‘At Tikhon's’ he goes to the holy man with a document which he gives him to read, and which he does read, and which Stavrogin next proposes to publish.
I see the whole chapter as a subtle but misconceived footnote to Crime and Punishment ; in these pages, instead of brushing past Raskolnikov and Svidrigailov in his return upon the underground man, Dostoevsky has allowed himself to be obstructed by them, and the result is a Stavrogin who compounds Raskolnikov's bracing himself to enter the police station ‘as a man ’ and confess with Svidrigailov's reaching out in all directions, including the far extremes of moral and physical debauchery, in the hope that something, it doesn't matter what, will make him unbored.
After a sleepless night Stavrogin sets forth.
Then outside the monastery where Bishop Tikhon lives, ‘he stopped, hastily and anxiously felt something in his side pocket and — smiled’.
That is Raskolnikov's smile.
We know it well.
And the gesture is Raskolnikov's too, for example when he feels for the axe slung inside his overcoat.
Even the sudden stopping is tell-tale.
Stavrogin would never stop in the street like that, his psychophysical being is other.
This is not a Possessed moment, not a Possessed sentence.
At the outset we are aware that the chapter ‘At Tikhon's’ is going wrong.
Not bad but wrong.
When, driven by unbearable mental torment, Raskolnikov  enters the building and climbs the stairs, a splendidly ample and imaginative podvig seems to be in prospect,un avancement spirituel .
It's only afterwards, in the Epilogue, that we learn with surprise and perhaps some vexation that repentance and acceptance of suffering come to him not then but much later, in prison; his confession was not the decisive moral feat we took it for.
It was not a heart-and-soul confession but an admission of guilt.
And what about Stavrogin as he stands smiling, not of course a happy smile, no kind of unambiguous smile, about to enter the monastery, fingering the pages in his pocket?
The man as I say is all Raskolnikov.
The document which Bishop Tikhon will read puts Raskolnikov in Svidrigailov's shoes because it is a record of the excesses a mortally jaded palate has got up to.
And as Stavrogin describes his search after new and ever stronger and more bizarre sensations, and as he laments his boredom, and as suicide is touched on, tracts of Crime and Punishment open up again: but without the astral, feathering humour of America, anatomy, and ordinary ghosts.
And as he mulls over his reasons for behaving as he has and for writing and publishing this record, the footnote status of ‘At Tikhon's’ causes it to embrace a wide range of familiar themes.
To loose them off together, scatter-gun fashion: Stavrogin says ‘I am making this statement, incidentally, to prove I am in full possession of my mental faculties and understand my position’; ‘I want to forgive myself, this is my chief aim, my whole aim’; ‘I want everyone to look at me’; ‘I fall back on this as my last resource’; ‘The thing about me then was I felt bored with life, sick and tired of it’; ‘I am seeking boundless suffering’; ‘I took it into my head to mutilate my life somehow’(not necessarily the same thing as seeking suffering, any more than seeking suffering need entail accepting it).
Let us pause for a moment over ‘I want everyone to look at me’.
And I would also like to add yet another ‘reason’ to the already formidable pile, which is that Stavrogin intends a ‘challenge to society’.
Now the first is one of Dostoevsky's alterations to the galley proofs of ‘At Tikhon's’, and the  second is a variant recorded by his widow.
I draw attention to their provenance because commentators have focused on the family-magazine question, on the attempt, that is, to get the chapter past Katkov in some shape or form, and I think this is only half the story.
I think in all this textual fussing Dostoevsky was also — and increasingly — troubled by the chapter's footnote status and by the problem which I picture as obstruction by Raskolnikov and Svidrigailov in his backward groping towards the underground man.
The sharpened exhibitionism of Stavrogin's wanting everybody to look at him will not have helped Dostoevsky with Katkov, but it does mark a step away from Crime and Punishment and closer to Notes from Underground .
The ‘challenge to society’ seems to fit Raskolnikov's Napoleonic idea — until we read on in Anna Dostoevsky's manuscript where it is at once and directly linked to ‘the governor's bitten ear’, that is to one of those sudden sallies of Stavrogin's elsewhere in The Possessed , sallies hovering between outrage and prank.
The instance here is of Stavrogin pretending to the provincial governor that he has a secret to communicate to him, and, when the unsuspecting old man ‘hastily and trustfully’ inclines his head, seizing his ear in his teeth and holding on to it, biting hard.
‘Nicholas, what kind of joke is this?’ moaned the governor mechancally in a voice unlike his own.
It is a Possessed kind of joke, inconceivable in Crime and Punishment , and there was no reference to it in the version of ‘At Tikhon's’ submitted to Katkov initially.
Once again the change can have nothing to do with making the chapter more acceptable.
This incident of the bitten car, presented explicitly as ‘a challenge to society’, has no tonal affinity whatever with Raskolnikov's murder, its home is with the underground man sticking his tongue out; the hesitant backward movement towards the world under the floor is also a forward fumble towards Stavrogin and The Possessed .
And what of the document itself?
Since ‘At Tikhon's’ is constantly referred to in Russia and the West as Stavrogin's  Confession, it occurs to me to note that the word confession does not appear anywhere in the chapter.
That the written statement and its publication add up to a true Dostoevsky confession, to repentance and acceptance of suffering, to ‘a wonderful podvig ’ in Tikhon's words, is one possibility among many.
Stavrogin s prodigal scattering of reasons does more than leave the question open.
It leaves all questioning behind.
It muddies the waters of speculation utterly.
If we take wanting everybody to look at him as the ‘real’ reason, then the case of Stavrogin is (in the lawyer's phrase) on all fours with that of the underground man's indecent exposure of consciousness.
However, ‘I invite nobody into my soul’ he declares, as if to banish the exhibitionist thought.44 And then if the search for suffering is allowed to eclipse the rest, we are back with Marmeladov squinnying into the bottom of his vodka jug; whereas Stavrogin saying he wants to forgive himself might be Raskolnikov pondering retrospectively, selfcritically, on his admission of guilt at the police station.
To Marmeladov, Raskolnikov, and the underground man, I now add Svidrigailov, because the chief enormity which is being confessed, or merely admitted to, or flaunted, or feigned, binds Stavrogin to the America-minded debauchee no less tightly than does the boredom theme of the ‘At Tikhon's’ chapter.
As with the highly misleading phrase Stavrogin's Confession, critics and commentators behave as if they had got into a huddle.
Everybody, including the present Soviet editor, talks about Stavrogin's forcing or rape of a young girl.
So to sort the thing out: Stavrogin has designs on the child; he kisses her hand, puts her on his knee, whispers to her.
She is in terror.
Then
At last there occurred, suddenly, a most strange event which I shall never forget ad which astonished me: the little girl flung her arms round my neck ad in a rush began kissing me frenziedly.
Her face expressed complete rapture.
I nearly got up ad went away out of pity, I found this so unpleasant in a slip of a child.
But I overcame my immediate fearful feeling, ad I stayed.
And that's that.
The next sentence begins a new paragraph: ‘When all was over, she was covered in confusion.’
Therefore no rape occurs.
The child is sexually responsive and perhaps dominant.
Hence her smile ‘as if ashamed, a kind of twisted smile’ after her terror and immediately before the passage I have just quoted.
Hence, later, her words ‘I have killed God’, and her suicide.
Getting this right obviously matters in itself, but also for its bearing on two further issues.
First, it drives Stavrogin even closer to Svidrigailov than I have suggested so far.
The episode with the child is a reworking of Svidrigailov's nightmare immediately before his suicide, in which he finds an abandoned little girl and carries her upstairs and puts her in his bed, and goes back later to see how she is.
Now, without any further concealment, she opened both her eyes; they turned a blazing, shameless glance upon him, they invited him, they laughed…
‘Damn you!’
Svidrigailov cried in horror, raising his hand to strike her.
But at that moment he woke up.
Second, it discredits those — and again the Soviet editor is among them — who seek to explain Dostoevsky's failure to reinstate ‘At Tikhon's’ solely by the prevailing conditions of censorship.
He got Svidrigailov's nightmare past the censor, and there is a good deal more to that horror than I have quoted; and ‘At Tikhon's’ could have been got past him too.
It is unsound to argue that Svidrigailov's experience was only a bad dream, because the manuscript variants prove that Dostoevsky was prepared at one stage to forego the actuality of the sexual outcome between Stavrogin and the child.
‘It was just a psychological misunderstanding,’ so Stavrogin reassures the bishop in Anna's text:
‘Nothing happened.
Not a thing.’
‘Well, God be praised,’ said Tikhon, and crossed himself.
Amidst this confusion, my view of ‘At Tikhon's’ as a hyperlucid footnote to Crime and Punishment , as misconceived crisis and clarity, needs justifying: the very point of Stavrogin's scattering of ‘reasons’is that he and his document  shall not come clear or clinch anything.
But, as to clinching things, Stavrogin is not Tikhon, which evokes another of my dicta: Dostoevsky could only satisfy his urge towards crisis and clarity by surrendering it to the enemy.
For sure he takes pains to make Tikhon a human puzzle so that he shan't in any obvious way speak God's truth.
He looks a bit ill, smiles vaguely, and has a strange rather shy expression.
His furniture is a jumble of good and bad; a magnificent Bokhara carpet lies next to straw mats, and engravings of fashionable society and sacred icons confront one another.
He appears to enjoy light reading.
Perhaps even salacious reading.
But nothing, and certainly not articulating his words ‘cheerfully and artlessly’, can muffle Tikhon's diagnosis which is that Stavrogin suffers from ‘indifference’.
At once the two of them fall into a kind of trance.
Stavrogin asks the bishop (in cool reason a preposterous question) if he has read the Christian Apocalypse.
He then directs him to the message to the angel of the church at Laodicea in the third chapter of Revelation.
Tikhon knows the passage by heart and recites it word for word.
Its burden is:
I know thy works, that thou art neither hot nor cold: I would that thou wert hot or cold.
So then because thou art lukewarm ad neither hot nor cold, I will spew thee out of my mouth.
The ‘lukewarm’ state is of course a biblical and transcendental and authoritative anchoring of ‘indifference’.
It isolates and ratifies the reason among so many reasons which Stavrogin himself gives: ‘the disease of indifference’.
Tikhon and Stavrogin have both got it right.
But this it cannot be said, can only be shown forth as in the suicide letter where Stavrogin writes ‘My desires are too weak; they cannot guide me.’
We aim straight at the art of The Possessed by observing that the follow-up, I'm a lukewarm man, or I'm an indifferent, an apathetic man, is beyond Stavrogin.
All self-definition, as Dostoevsky finally shaped and gave Stavrogin to the world, is beyond him.
That is why, instead of taking the weakness of his desires to himself, Stavrogin continues in figurative, musing vein, sad and free, very beautiful in context: ‘You can  cross a river on a tree-trunk, but not on a chip of wood.’
This is the same young man who bit the ear of the governor — and we can only meet and get to know him in the novel itself.
Get to know as opposed to get at.
The ‘At Tikhon's’ chapter, rejected by the editor and finally abandoned by the novelist, gets at, ponders the case of, somebody we never even meet there: the smiling man outside the monastery is Raskolnikov, and the document in his pocket recounts Svidrigailov's deeds.
The pondering, the getting at the absent Stavrogin, proves successful; many acute observations buttress the central ‘lukewarm’ truth about him, and analysis spills over into the notebooks where Tikhon's God's-voice function appears at its clearest.
‘Try to hold something sacred, no matter what it be,’ he exhorts Stavrogin who replies ‘What for?’
And then the punch line: ‘This isn't done for something , it is done just so .’
At which moment we can sense the warm breath of composition coming off the page, for Dostoevsky first had Tikhon continue ‘It carries its own reward’ and then crossed these words out in his notebook, no doubt because they are too obvious and touched by the world's wisdom.
They aren't worthy of the silent spiritual gesture made by that italicized ‘just so' .
Nor is Stavrogin's pert Svidrigailov-like ‘What for?’ worthy of it, or of himself.
And Tikhon's own further move isn't right either: ‘If you do not feel a need, and if you love nothing, it follows you are incapable of it.’
To this severe driving home of the issue in pursuit of crisis and clarity, Stavrogin might fairly reply that he didn't create himself lukewarm.
He would never have had it so.
‘I want to want’, the underground man's lonely cry, is also his though he doesn't utter it, and biting the governor's car, like sticking the tongue out, is a one-against-all drumming of the heels of consciousness — but again with a difference which is that the biting extends beyond the notional; it happens and it hurts, though it's a minor foray compared with Raskolnikov's spectacular eruption into actuality with the murder.
And at the same time, since Svidrigailov too has been brushed against in this reaching back which is also a  reaching forward, the incident of the governor's ear can be understood in all its matchless comedy as a desperate man's recourse against boredom.
(iv)
The mere mention of the biting in Anna's manuscript record of ‘At Tikhon's’ variants is enough to pull the reader back into The Possessed , and he can't experience the sudden fierce tug of that novel without realizing simultaneously that the whole ‘At Tikhon's’chapter belongs elsewhere, to a different masterpiece.
Its footnote status in relation to Crime and Punishment constitutes, I admit, a funny sort of belonging, as does the obstructive force of Raskolnikov and Svidrigailov upon Dostoevsky's attempt to give decisively new shape to the Great Sinner of his notebooks and letters and fondest creative hopes.
A negative belonging, if you like.
But narrative tone is a different and affirmative matter.
A minute later I looked at my watch ad noted the time.
Evening was drawing in.
A fly was buzzing over my head ad kept settling on my face.
I caught it, held it in my fingers and put it out of the window.
A cart drove very loudly into the yard below.
Very loudly (ad for some time before), a tailor had been singing as he sat at a window in a comer of the yard.
He sat at his work ad I could see him.
It occurred to me that as I had met nobody as I walked through the gate and went upstairs, there was no need to encounter anyone now, going down, and I moved my chair from the window.
I picked up a book, but put it down again and began looking at a tiny red spider on the leaf of a geranium, ad lost count of time.
I remember everything to the very last moment.
This sequence could not occur in The Possessed — a dangerous thing to say about a very long and diverse book, but true.
Despite the fact that spiders are all over the place in Dostoevsky, not just in Svidrigailov's dirty bathhouse vision of Eternity, and that urban potted plants go back to the beginning in Poor People , we are here firmly inside Crime and Punishment in its abandoned first-person narrative form (‘I am on trial and will tell all’): Petersburg evenings and their hanging summer light, noises from below, happy workmen, blessed ‘living life’ elsewhere, a lonely man in pain passing through gates, over thresholds, slipping up and down staircases, the buzzing By of Raskolnikov's dream and his awakening, intense time-consciousness alternating with time-oblivion.
‘At Tikhon's’ has strayed out of a metropolitan novel into a provincial one which won't accommodate it.
To take one's finger off the bounding narrative pulse of Crime and Punishment and to open The Possessed — to open it anywhere — is to find oneself out in the sticks once again: the ‘our town’ of the novel and the voice relating its affairs bring back the ‘we’of convict life in The House of the Dead and the more sketchy collective of that remote Siberian community outside the prison walls.
The same dilating and contracting principle informs both novels, a first-person narrator who moves between ‘we all thought’ and ‘it was just my hunch’, though the swing is greater in The Possessed and its figuration much more complex.
If any House of the Dead notebooks had survived I would expect them to contain sudden leaps of discovery and creative arrivals like ‘Most important —it's a chronicle 'and
‘I've had breakfast.
I'll keep the secret.
I am a character.’
By drawing a rectangle round ‘it's a chronicle ’ Dostoevsky suggests a framed narrative for The Possessed like the story found by the frame narrator among a deceased ex-convict's effects in The House of the Dead ; and by declaring ‘I am a character’(kharakter : a person, not a literary personazh ) he puts himself inside that frame.
The result, therefore, is a framed narrative without a frame narrator — not that he reached the two sides of this conclusion simultaneously.
The first came early and firmly, in February of 1870: ‘From a provincial chronicle….
The system I have adopted is that of a CHRONICLE.’
The second was an untidy and protracted business, stretching on through the spring and summer and coinciding with the refusal of The Possessed to be contained within the limits of a ‘tendentious’ sideshow.
The novel insisted on reverting to the ampler great-sinner pattern; hence Stavrogin's emergence as ‘chief character’, ‘tragic villain’ and so forth during this period, and Peter Verkhovensky's withdrawal to the second rank: Verkhovensky the mere wrecker, the nihilist, the man of the 1860s, the deeper realist's answer to Turgenev.
I look in the same direction to account for the charming note ‘Granovsky has got a bit out of hand’.
Taken more or less straight from life, Granovsky was to have represented the liberal 1840s in a crisp, neat, polemical generation-gap story.
In The Possessed he becomes Stepan Trofimovich Verkhovensky (hereafter Stepan), Peter's father and one of the best things Dostoevsky ever did.
But in the mean time, whose hand has Granovsky escaped from?
This pinpoints the issue of Dostoevsky as author and as ‘a character’ in the provincial chronicle, the framed narrative.
Again we are at the tip of his pen as he draws a box to put himself inside, and as the most private and informative area of the Possessed notebooks begins to open up.
At first he hadn't even settled on first-person narration; the voice from inside the frame is sometimes ‘the chronicler's’ or ‘the author's’, sometimes ‘mine’.
A double stance develops — inevitably, since the figure inside the frame can't wish away the novelist bent over his notebooks.
Thus: ‘ABOUT NECHAEV [Peter Verkhovensky]: NECHAEV PLAYS TWO ROLES, THE SECOND OF WHICH I, THE CHRONICLER, DON'T KNOW AT ALL AND AM NOT PRESENTING.’
Sometimes we catch the novelist positively shaping and manipulating the narrator: ‘The chronicler pretends for his part that he feels the sorrow of a Christian…
’ And from, or nearly from, the outset there is the hint of a three-cornered relationship in which the future reader of the as yet unwritten Possessed joins novelist and narrator in a conspiracy to uphold the truth of the fiction: ‘Altogether, when I describe conversations, even tête-à-tête conversations between two people — don't worry: either I have hard facts, or perhaps I am inventing them myself — but in any case rest assured that everything is true.’
The man being reassured is the reader.
The man reassuring him is, or has the authority of, the omniscient and omnipotent novelist.
The ‘I’ describing conversations he hasn't direct access to, which he wasn't present at, which he may not even have been told about and so may be inventing, is the ‘character’Dostoevsky has turned himself into for the purpose of narrating the provincial chronicle.
This one sentence from the notebooks goes straight home to the novel which eventually got written.
And the novel which got written breathes life into this sentence's very unpromising warrant for the ‘truth’ of what is being told, namely that there are hard facts or perhaps it is just being made up.
Reassurance is another matter, except at the level where all great art reassures; for a spirit of slippage presides over The Possessed .
In the opening paragraphs we are introduced to Stepan Verkhovensky:
Nevertheless he was a most intelligent ad gifted ma, even, so to say, a scholar, though, as far as his scholarship was concerned, well, in a word, his scholarship didn't amount to much, to nothing at all I think.
A scholar.
Not much of a scholar.
Really no scholar.
Recall Stavrogin's suicide letter.
Only negation.
Not even negation.
Nothing.
Doubling in Dostoevsky, which goes back to the very beginning, to Mr Devushkin living and not living in the kitchen, which has its post-Siberian developments in the underground man's now-you-see-me-now-you-don't ‘flashing’ of his consciousness, in Raskolnikov's and Svidrigailov's different ways of being among but not with us and Porfiry's torture tune of ‘There's nothing here, precisely nothing, perhaps absolutely nothing’— doubling takes on a new form in The Possessed , closer to the I/We/They/Everybody/Nobody shifts of The House of the Dead than anything else before it or to come.
The slippage sentence just quoted concludes with a ‘I think’.
This ‘I’ is the first-person narrator inside the frame of  the provincial chronicle, the ‘character’Dostoevsky has turned himself into.
He is a young friend of Stepan Verkhovensky, and when the notebooks record that Granovsky (Stepan's prototype) has got out of hand they are also heralding the novelist's escape into a fictional mode of enormous suppleness.
That Stepan's scholarship amounts to nothing is only what ‘I think’.
Others may and do think otherwise.
A freedom is generated which has its phases of indiscipline, licence, chaos.
The book is a stampede, faithful to its title and its Epigraph which is the story of the Gadarene swine possessed by devils and rushing into the lake of Galilee and drowning themselves.
The fury, the energy of The Possessed seems quite magicaally unconvenanted.
The slippage principle should make for enervation and a general whittling away.
But on the contrary, this world of ‘it was rumoured’ and ‘that may well have been so’followed at once by ‘it is more likely that nothing of the sort happened’— again in the opening paragraphs — is as exhilarating as the challenge of life's opacities to a healthy curiosity.
Indeed the overall triumph of art in this case is that the novel walks out into our fact rather than ourselves entering its fiction: a very primitive and absolute form of consumer capitulation.
Dostoevsky has an impudent way of making his narrator declare ‘As a chronicler I confine myself to presenting events exactly as they happened, and it's not my fault if they appear incredible’— like the son of the house writing home about his time on the North-West Frontier of India.
The imperial-provincial idée is a sovereign one.
We read about the governor's bitten ear with the fascination of doting remoteness.
Likewise the Audenesque opprobrious act which precedes it.
One of the most respected of our club members, on our committee of management, Pavel Pavlovich Gaganov, an elderly man ad highly esteemed, had formed the innocent habit of following anything he had to say with the vehement addition, ‘No, sir, you can't lead me by the nose!’
Well, there's no harm in that.
But one day at the club when he trotted out this phrase during some heated discussion in the midst of a  little group of members (all of them persons of some consequence), Nicholas Stavrogin who was standing to one side alone and unnoticed, suddenly went up to Mr Gaganov and, taking him unexpectedly and firmly with two fingers by the nose, managed to drag him two or three steps across the room.
Cantonment goings-on in Peshawar!
Goings-on of cruel and rootless hilarity.
This is how there is no getting at Stavrogin, and how getting to know him proceeds.
And this is what happens to the podvig tic which obsesses the notebooks and the ‘At Tikhon's’ chapter: it becomes deflected and surrealized into eruptive impenetrable little freaks.
Or Dostoevsky holds firm to a certain grandness and climactic force, while inverting the podvig and rendering it passive, when Stavrogin ‘endures’ a tremendous punch in the face from Shatov.
Stavrogin is a killer — or can be — but he does nothing: ‘the light in his eyes seemed to go out.’
Though untalkative, he is as inspectable as Hamlet, and no less inscrutable.
Quite late in his notebooks Dostoevsky puts the matter thus: Stavrogin ‘confides in nobody and is a mystery all round’.
Then a few lines further on: ‘Stavrogin reveals himself gradually through the action without any explanations’.
But the self that gets revealed in the novel's action is a bundle of contradictions, like some people we know well.
So there's no inconsistency when Dostoevsky says that what is ‘most important ’ is the ‘special tone of the narrative ’whereby ‘everything will be saved' , and that the tone of the narrative rests in Stavrogin ‘not being elucidated’.
Stavrogin's ear-biting and nose-pulling present two small samples of this all-important narrative tone.
The first of these revelations which elucidate nothing is introduced as ‘completely unthinkable but from another point of view and in one respect all too easy to envisage’.
Slippage again: the crumbling, self-thwarting surface of the prose.
From what ‘point of view’ and in which ‘respect’?
We are never told.
Furthermore, unthinkable to whom and envisageable by whom?
The chronicler wasn't present at the incident.
As with large tracts of The Possessed this is in effect third-person narrative, recalling the notebook assurance that whether ‘my’ story is based on hard facts or has simply been made up, it is all ‘true’.
Nor does the chronicler say whether he was present at the nose-pulling.
But nor does it matter; ‘our club’ will have been seething with talk for days, and ‘I’am bound to have heard about Stavrogin's escapade.
And the ‘they’ of more or less the whole town will have heard too.
Here The Possessed draws close to the I/We/They/Everybody shifts of The House of the Dead , and the tone of the narrative, which (Dostoevsky said) is to save everything, demonstrates its airy yet potent, rather Proustian anecdotal scope.
‘Our club’ presumably overlaps while being smaller than ‘the best circles’of this society, whereas the ‘they’of ‘the whole town’is sometimes, but only sometimes, the ‘we’of ‘our town’; and ‘our group’which springs out of‘my’special relationship with Stepan Verkhovensky and which gathers round Mrs Stavrogin, Nicholas's mother and Stepan's patroness, is different again and again overlapping; and the ‘all’buried inside the phrase ‘our ‘old man’— as we all used to call Stepan Trofimovich among ourselves’is probably though not certainly synonymous with this ‘group’; while Dostoevsky delights in sly collective evocations like ‘civic grief’and in parcellings-out like ‘the poorest expectant mothers of the town’, and in fouling the whole snobbish provincial nest with such carefully calculated absurdities as ‘almost the whole town, that is of course the entire top stratum of our society’.
So there is no difficulty in imagining how the news of the senior citizen's pulled nose got around.
In the general excitement — the novel has scarcely begun — it gets borne in upon the reader that Stavrogin's conduct is not the only thing to be puzzled by.
Not one of ‘us’ in the whole town ascribes his action to madness.
That means we were inclined to expect such behaviour even from a sane Stavrogin.’
That means — the unsettling authorial logic is neutrally deployed, with no follow-up.
Something has bitten ‘us’.
‘Our’ mentality is odd too.
The reader must make what he can of it.
Everybody in ‘our town’ feels indignant about the insult to the respected old gentleman, and a proposal gets off the ground  to give a subscription dinner in his honour; but finally ‘we’think better of it, ‘perhaps realizing at last that a man had, after all, been pulled by the nose, so there really wasn't any cause for a celebration.’
‘Social unsteadiness (shatost), as Shatov says.’
What has bitten ‘us’, the transpersonal Gadarene motif of The Possessed , manifests itself through the dotty plan for a dinner just as eloquently as through the murder in the park.
It's a mistake to have a narrowly political view of the novel, as it is to regard its comedy as somehow decorative.
The lightness of its light relief is shatost too.
‘We’, the provincial society, display all the loose-end symptoms of Peter the Great's reforms — though Dostoevsky's overt theorizing about Peter gets left behind in the notebooks.
The novel articulates the loose end as boredom, again transpersonalized.
‘I find it strange looking at you all,’ says Marya Lebyadkin, the crazed visionary cripple, the fool-in-Christ (yurodivaya), in a touchstone meditation; ‘I don't understand how it is people are bored.’
Uniting boredom, provinciality, the Gadarene stampede, and paper people, Peter Verkhovensky says: ‘I realize that in this godforsaken town you are bored, so you make a rush for any piece of paper with something written on it.’
This boredom rotates upon a frivolous-menacing, frenetic-slack, comic-terrible axis which is the book's living principle.
In itself the dim complacency of gossip and cards at ‘our club’ would seem harmless, familiar, merely social; but ‘in itself’denatures The Possessed where groupings dissolve or collapse into each other, and where the ‘merely’social has no place.
On his death-bed Stepan Vcrkhovensky returns to the swine of the gospel story and paraphrases the devils which enter them as a disease afflicting all Russia.
In Eternity, like the madman in the story who got rid of his devils when they were driven out of him and into the swine, Russia will sit healed at the feet of Jesus.
This dubious eschatology need not worry us because the novel makes no attempt to encompass it.
Jesus and Holy Russia at his feet remain harmlessly, hypothetically beyond the apocalyptic naturalism  which is everything the book is about: the devils, the disease, the all-pervading unsteadiness.
(v)
Those ‘poorest expectant mothers of the town’ are the objects of Mrs Stavrogin's competitive philanthropy.
She and the new governor's wife, Mrs von Lemke, enter upon a tussle for local ascendancy through their rival charitable undertakings.
In the end Mrs Stavrogin and her expectant mothers lose out — if indeed there was ever any winning — while Mrs von Lemke's needy governesses bring that determined woman victory, but then defeat.
The fund-raising fête for the governesses is the biggest set-piece skandal in all Dostoevsky.
Drunks and gatecrashers move in.
Grotesque isolated figures —‘a huge pock-marked retired captain’— loom out of the chaos and disappear again.
Humble clerks who have gone a bust on clothes for marriageable daughters are outraged but too timid to protest.
The book itself seems to go mad.
Its flickering epidemic relish at the expense of clerks and governesses and expectant mothers is wilder than irresponsibility and more furious than Saturnalian record.
Out of sight, shielded by riot and revelry and now a quarter of a century older, lurks the poet who boasted he had not shown his young mug in Poor People : the sober laborious craftsman determined that his tone shall save everything.
An extraordinary number of subscribers ad donors had turned up, all the select society of the town; but even the most unselect were admitted, provided they brought the cash.
Trouble ahead!
Trouble conveyed in one exactly placed slippage sentence.
That is before the fête begins.
And at the end, after twelve cancelled variants in one short paragraph, a single sentence, itself the third attempt, tells us ‘They would not let the orchestra go, and musicians who attempted to leave were beaten up’, which says all we need to know about the unstated ‘Keep playing!’ whereby the liveliness of the small hours will have been sustained.
On the other hand this skulking novelist told himself in a notebook, as we recall, ‘I am a character’; and there is every reason why the narrating ‘I’ of The Possessed should be perfectly visible.
Sometimes he is just a secondary figure floating in the novel's bloodstream, as at the fête where he has got roped in with a few other young men to be a marshal and make sure everything goes smoothly.
Of course he is incompetent, and as well as being swept along in the muddle and uproar he shares ‘our town's’ positive transpersonal complicities in what goes on here.
All over the place, not only at the fête, a psychic infection rages and erupts in small ugly-comic jests —‘They put a dead cat in my trunk’— but also in affronts to the human self as massive and immemorial as those Homer describes.
A very young man has shot himself and ‘we’ ride off in an inquisitive Gadarene ‘cavalcade’(‘our ladies had never seen a suicide’) to view the corpse; ‘everything's so boring’— recall Marya Lebyadkin's words —‘one can't afford to be squeamish about one's amusements so long as they are fun’; and Lyamshin, the man who gets himself asked to parties to mimic women in labour, new-born babies, and peasants in the confessional, steals a bunch of grapes from the room of death.
It's not easy to say what the narrating ‘I’ is doing at such a scene.
Again and again he seems to be in and yet dubiously of the party.
In fact the chronicle succeeds in having its cake and eating it, all the way back to the stir caused by Nicholas Stavrogin's arrival in ‘our town’, when it is recorded among other things that he seemed to know a lot —‘But of course it didn't take much knowledge to astonish us’.
Isolated, that looks like straightforward double focus: the first-person narrator inside the chronicle box, unaware of his provincial limitations; and Dostoevsky outside it.
One's overall sense of The Possessed absolutely refuses to confirm any such duality, and one can pay the novel no simpler or fuller tribute than by saying so.
The slippage principle which should, I remarked, enervate but in truth exhilarates, has a way of positioning the reader  on the side of the narrative against the narrator.
The troubles of the new governor are being described.
Cattle plague is life.
Fires keep breaking out.
Rumours — that Fama of The Possessed which can swell to a raging flood but equally can sink into a hoarse inward whisper — rumours of incendiarism abound.
‘Cases of robbery were twice as numerous as usual.
But all this, of course, would have been perfectly normal had there not been other more weighty reasons which disturbed the composure of the hitherto cheerful von Lemke.’
How can twice as many robberies as usual be perfectly normal?
Of course they can't.
Simultaneously the reader responds to the transpersonal unsteadiness, the possessed state of the book, and feels an urge to thrust aside the irresolute self-contradictory narrator and repose upon the story of von Lemke with his cut-out toys and yellow autumn flower.
‘However hard it may be to imagine, it was so.’
Thus speaks the fool narrator.
But this incomparable narrative needs no shoring-up by him.
He might as well ask the reader to believe in those supremely credible terrorized musicians scraping and blowing through the small hours.
The intrusive chronicling ‘I’ can't even make up his mind about numbers.
Once the rosetted marshals at the fête are six, and once they are twelve.
Very few readers will notice this discrepancy, but all are flicked and jabbed at and irritated — those circling insects — by contradiction, by undetermination followed by overdetermination of reasons, by the narrator's fuss over details which don't matter, his youthful sententiousness about women (‘the depths of the female heart’) and other irrelevancies, his moralizing, his way of wantonly bleeding a robust narrative with ‘However, that may only have seemed so’, his ‘I have already described’ when he hasn't, his promises to explain later which aren't kept when the reader doesn't want explanation anyhow, he wants the story.
Once and once only in six hundred and seventeen pages the narrator gives his readership a disconcerting, impertinent prod by addressing it directly as ‘Gentlemen’.
These things add up.
They add up to a novel of leaking secrets and amputated thoughts, of wildly comic material sometimes dully, almost dutifully deployed, as if the humour had escaped the teller; of people ‘missing’ each other in dialogue
‘Perhaps he didn't go out of his mind at all.’
‘Oh you mea because he started biting people?'
and clashing head-on unforgettably
‘But I'm your uncle; I carried you about in my arms when you were a baby.’
‘What do I care what you carried?
I didn't ask you to carry me.'
A novel scatty yet dense, as when events are badly related in real life.
A novel of little sprouting aphorisms: ‘Every man is worth an umbrella’.
And enchanted ghost-voice exchanges of extremest purity:
‘What's that?
An allegory?’
‘N-no — why?
Not an allegory, just a leaf, one leaf.'
A novel where actions get unhooked from their (or any) waking rationale:
The prince too looked at the German, turning his head and collar towards him and putting on his pince-nez, though without the slightest curiosity.
And words as well as actions:
‘Suppose you had lived on the moon,’ Stavrogin interrupted…
‘I don't know,’ replied Kirillov.
‘I've not been on the moon,’ he added, without any irony, simply as a statement of fact.
And here's another fact:
‘Nowadays they carry corpses by rail,’ said one of the most insignificant young men unexpectedly.
A toneless, disjunctive fact, droll and very uneasy, one of those amputated thoughts I have just mentioned and –so a sensation, a crawling sensation of the time being out of joint; there is more Hamlet to The Possessed than what is personal  to Stavrogin, ‘the Prince’ as he first appears, though on the surface of his mind Dostoevsky evidently meant Prince Hal, not the Prince of Denmark.
Nevertheless Stavrogin does contemplate suicide, and the notebook entry ‘to be or not to be’ bears the date 16 August, so it belongs to the summer when the ‘tendentious’political story gets tugged back into great-sinner orbit, growing physically and imaginatively larger and more formidable all the time.
Dostoevsky's main troubles were with Stavrogin himself, his new-found ‘chief character’.
His first and continuing urge was to drive him towards crisis and clarity, which involved, one might almost say which meant, finding a podvig that would satisfy his idea of Stavrogin.
And thus suicide comes in.
Now the underground man would have extinguished his consciousness if he could, but since the fable of life under the floorboards renders him bodiless and one can't kill consciousness without laying hands on one's body, the matter doesn't arise.
Svidrigailov possesses a body, and destroys it.
Whether the suicide who teases the murderer about his ability to do something is himself achieving anything deedy by going to his America — that question Crime and Punishment never voices, and it is a crucial and inspired omission.
And now, writing the same novel all his life, Dostoevsky finds himself doomed to confront suicide as deed, perhaps life's one deed and therefore the podvig he is seeking.
During his struggle to get The Possessed into shape he came to see that his conception of Stavrogin, as well as obsessed by crisis and clarity, was hopelessly overcrowded.
With cornucopian largesse and ramification the notebooks polarize the emerging hero into a man indulging all vileness and in love with the good.
In the novel he stays polarized, but without bulk and in a tragic sense without force; he goes through the motions (‘the habits of a decent man’ and so forth) while his great-sinner infamies are unloaded upon a past which he cannot even renounce.
The final letter declares: ‘Indignation and shame I can never feel; therefore not despair, either.’
His inability to despair makes the soaped rope and spare nail of his suicide at once meticulous and completely open-ended.
The doctors rule out insanity, God knows why, just as the club and other circles of ‘our town’ think a sane Stavrogin capable of ear-biting and nose-pulling.
One recalls the disease of indifference in the abandoned ‘At Tikhon's’ chapter and observes how odd its symptoms are; or one quotes Stavrogin's notebook rejoinder that simply to live is the hardest thing of all.
Anyhow, he kills himself and there is no more to be said.
Suicide as podvig , on the other hand, must drag a verbalized freight of theory behind it.
So the novel frees Stavrogin from ‘to be or not to be’ and all other trammels of the notebooks, and transfers them to Kirillov.
Like Svidrigailov, Kirillov comes to the fore very late and very fast in the process of composition, but unlike Crime and Punishment's self-slaughterer the man in The Possessed parades an entire philosophy and theology of suicide.
This theorizing is the last thing of all to arrive.
Initially, in November, which is three months after Stavrogin was quoting Hamlet, Kirillov's ‘ROLE IS A FACTUAL ONE ’— by which Dostoevsky means he ‘volunteered to shoot himself for the common cause’ and leave a letter claiming responsibility for Shatov's murder, thus diverting the attention of the police from Peter Verkhovensky and the quintet.
This framework of suicide and untruthful self-incriminating letter remains.
But at the last minute, apparently under the immediate pressure of writing the magazine version of the novel, Dostoevsky realised that ‘FACTUAL ’ is precisely what Kirillov's role must not, in essence and impact, be.
Kirillov is needed to give The Possessed its strand of theoretic absolutism.
He is as Gadarene, as possessed, as any one, but at the level of total ideal obsession.
While Shatov expounds and disputes ardently, and incidentally takes a lot of good- and God-focused material off the shoulders of the notebook Stavrogin (‘‘Shatov must be tied up before you can argue with him, '’ Stepan Verkhovensky sometimes joked'), only to Kirillov can it be said and is it said, ‘you haven't swallowed an idea, but an idea has swallowed you’— to which he responds delightedly with ‘That's good.
You've got a bit of sense.’
The idea which has swallowed Kirillov is suicide, not  suicide for the common cause of the quintet as Dostoevsky first proposed, but to achieve a metaphysical and religious purpose; and thus he plays a big part in the transformation of a neat political generation-gap story into a larger, more complicated object.
He writes the self-incriminating letter because he has promised to.
He kills himself, as innumerable commentators have paraphrased and elaborated, in order to kill God.
Suicide for this reason — to free mankind of the consoling yet imprisoning fictions of religion — is the highest expression of self-will, a perfectly free action, a divine gesture.
The man who kills himself thus , becomes god.
More exactly, he becomes man-god as opposed to God-man who is the Christ of Christianity.
There have been millions of suicides in the history of the world, but none, according to Kirillov, for this reason.
Therefore mankind, history, eternity, God, all wait upon him and his deed.
While doing rough justice to what Kirillov says, to his brand of mystical atheism, this more or less agreed summary is not convincingly inward with Dostoevsky's creation.
In trying to improve on it, perhaps the best plan is to enter where Kiriliov does.
He is introduced as a ‘structural engineer’.
I think we should prick our ears at that.
Dostoevsky's groping backwards past Crime and Punishment towards Notes from Underground is not just a matter of arriving at Stavrogin.
The seed-bed of Kirillov's structural engineering is the underground man's image of normal human beings as roadbuilders: being somebody, doing something, going somewhere.
Of course Kirillov is anything but a normal human being; and that is just the point.
His structural engineering never happens.
He has arrived from abroad, yet another bird of passage, ‘in the hope of getting a job building our railway bridge’.
But, so Stepan Verkhovensky tells him, ‘They won't let you build our bridge.’
Why not?
And who are ‘they’?
A sudden whiff of Kafka.
This is the world of the underground man's eruptive and unexplained ‘They won't let me — I can't be — good’; which world is itself continuous with that of the pre-Siberian stories, particularly The Double where Dostoevsky says he found his underground type.
As to‘our bridge’(which is never mentioned again), the reader can if he likes reflect that Kirillov is an odd fish and will no doubt prove himself persona non grata in ‘our town’, or that the local bureaucrats are an officious and/or corrupt lot, or that the central authority thousands of miles away in Petersburg enjoys throwing its weight about.
But this would be moving in and making up the message in the style of the ‘missing’ letters in Poor People , the first story of all.
The fact is that The Possessed , which can be circumstantial to a calculated fault when it chooses, in this case chooses to say nothing.
The novel proposes a man who has been swallowed by a theory of suicide.
He lives for us, we can feel him kicking inside the idea's belly, because the bridge-builder who does no bridge-building is vitalized by the nobody to be and nowhere to go of Dostoevsky's inexhaustible inventive fascination.
Here, self-exclusion from the feast of life takes a fresh turn.
And a new twist is given to the urge to be a Napoleon.
In the immediate context of The Possessed Kirillov delights even while he is dismaying us by pushing theory — the novel's Paper Person motif, that is — to the very limit, the born gambler's limit.
He may be mad.
Stavrogin says he is.
If so, he is incidentally mad in accord with Kafka's piercing throw-off.
He embraces suicide as deed, as the one true act in a false world, as supreme podvig , as feat to end feats, God-killing, god-making; and in doing so he exemplifies, as others before and Ivan Karamazov after him, the truth that Dostoevsky can only satisfy his hunger for crisis and clarity by bestowing it on the enemy.
No jokes about America from Kirillov.
He has actually been to the actual America — and come back.
It was a failure.
The novel handles the subject brusquely, whereas a notebook entry about Stavrogin back in the Spring of 1870 suggests a position midway between Svidrigailov and Kirillov: ‘Sometimes he complains all of a sudden: ‘I'm bored!'’
The S.S. Alabama: ‘I'll get there! '’(dream).’
But an unmetaphorical America in The Possessed does not mean an unwitty treatment of suicide.
What makes the commentators on man-godhood and related themes misleading, why they fail to evoke the real thing, is that they suggest an object which is stable and personal (as opposed to volatile and transpersonal).
The obsession has become Kirillov's alone.
But the sunrise of impending suicide bathes him and others in fiery metaphysical comedy;, ‘be as free as you like,’ Peter Verkhovensky tells him, ‘so long as you don't change your mind’— that is ‘so long as your entirely free intention is carried out’.
‘Free intention’ is the crux.
As Kirillov puts it, ‘I am killing myself to show my rebelliousness and my new terrible freedom.’
He asks rhetorically, apropos the idea which has swallowed him, ‘Who will prove it?’ and answers ‘I’.
But Kirillov has himself pointedly ruled out life after death: ‘the laws of nature did not spare even Him ’— Jesus, that is.
Then what of this proof and this freedom?
Kirillov alive has proved nothing, and Kirillov dead will himself be nothing.
Stepan Verkhovensky's naked transcendental ‘They won't let you’ turns out to be a very suitable preface to a logical joke about time and identity.
Stepan's forward-pointing negative ‘won't’ is no less important than his collective ‘they’.
As The Possessed is a novel  of groups, circles, sets, quintets, real and imagined, so it is a novel of empty or baffled futurity.
Bridge-building is empty because it never happens, God-killing and god-making suicide is baffled because there is only a corpse to point at, there is nobody to attach a fulfilled ‘free intention’ to.
Peter Verkhovensky attacks this bafflement from the other end, from the standpoint of afterwards, as well as that of the not-yet-dead Kirillov who is arguing with him here and now.
How is the world going to know it has received a boundless freedom at the hands of an obscure young man lying in some back room in a provincial Russian town?
Kirillov replies: ‘There is nothing secret that will not be made known.
He said so.’
And with these words he points towards an icon of the Saviour before which he has lighted a lamp —‘to be on the safe side,’ Peter suggests.
But in response to this Voltairean jest, the lonely, agonized, perhaps crazed man ‘made no answer’.
He was no doubt contemplating not futurity but baffled Eternity itself: a universal Revelation outside nature guaranteed by a Christ whom the laws of nature did not spare.
When Stavrogin, who ‘poisoned’ Kirillov, and who also kills himself, wrote that letter to Dasha Shatov asking her to come and be his nurse, his mind won't have been bent either on or away from suicide; he was neutrally wondering whether she hoped ‘to set up some aim for me at last’.
He is both rudderless and becalmed, and the futurity conjured by his letter blends the metaphysical frustration of a brilliant unhoused intellectual torpor with human impossibility: you can't cross a river on a chip of wood.
This single great emptiness before him has lots of smaller ones inside it.
For example, when Dostoevsky abandons the ‘At Tikhon's’ chapter but retains the brief exchange in which Shatov urges Stavrogin to go to Bishop Tikhon, and Stavrogin replies ‘Thank you, I will’, let nobody persuade us the novelist has made a mistake.
And the same future tense —‘I will’— has Shatov in its grip.
Stavrogin, needling away, elicits from him that he believes in Russia and the Orthodox Church and the body of  Christ.
‘But in God?
In God?’
Stavrogin persists.
‘I — I will believe in God,’ says Shatov.
While Stavrogin never gets to see Tikhon, the immediate future holds murder in store for Shatov.
One of his killers is the high-minded Virginsky who ‘will never, never abandon these bright hopes’(my italics), and another member of the quintet is Shigalov who pulls out of the affair at the very last moment, not from fear or pity or remorse but because the murder ‘is in direct contradiction of my programme’— of Shigalov's own brand of revolutionary ideology.
He's not going to warn Shatov or tell the police, he's going to make a statement ‘for general edification’— words but no deeds, a turn towards sanity and life that might have been , and a horrific-comic Possessed moment of subtlest art.
Shigalov does make his statement.
The murder goes forward.
Thus some things that are said to be going to happen, do happen.
‘But they will lose their reason,’ says Peter Verkhovensky's lieutenant when Peter has argued that the quintet will hold together after the murder ‘unless they've lost their reason’.
And sure enough they do panic and run amok, and ‘the almost mystical terror which suddenly took hold of our authorities’ completes the ruinous and negative side of the Gadarene story.
(vi)
It may be asked what other side The Possessed has.
For it's no use looking to this novel for even a premonition of a cleansed Russia sitting at the feet of Jesus.
Well now, to hand over crisis and clarity to the enemy is not to revile the hunger, not to mock the passion itself; the handing over resolves an otherwise intractable problem of art; it is not a disavowal; and in any case ‘enemy’ is only my image.
The broader truth is that Dostoevsky cannot foster any of his dearest values except obliquely, by stealth, by catching them napping.
In The House of the Dead he makes us feel that the grim actualities of prison life do this job for  him.
The Possessed works differently.
We have already met Lyamshin, the member of the quintet whose party act is to mimic women in labour and new-born babies.
Flanking him as it were is the wife of another familiar figure and quintet member, Virginsky.
Mrs Virginsky is ‘our town's’ midwife, a modern woman in Dostoevsky's reshaped generation-gap story, a nihilist and free-thinker.
Our official town doctor Rozanov, himself an accoucheur, declared quite positively that on one occasion when a patient in labour was screaming and calling on the name of the Almighty, a free-thinking sally fired off like a pistol-shot by Mrs Virginsky struck such fear into the patient that delivery was greatly accelerated.
In that sentence humour really is the only thing.
Not the next man's humour.
A strange wild land out the other side of mockery, even of irresponsibility, indeed beyond all attitude and judgment.
No other novelist can reach it.
And as I say, some absolutely precious quarry is being stalked by means of Lyamshin and Mrs Virginsky.
Opposite them stands Shatov, and when his wife's and Stavrogin's baby is delivered by Mrs Virginsky, the man who will believe in God declares
‘The mystery of the coming of a new creature is a great mystery ad incomprehensible, Mrs Virginsky, and what a pity it is that you don't understand it.'
He goes on
‘There — ere two ad suddenly there's a third human being, a new spirit, whole, complete, unlike the handiwork of men…’.
In this childbirth sequence the prose of an essentially devious and turbid writer clears like a tangled sky.
It's not that Shatov is somehow proved right and Mrs Virginsky wrong about new life and (by implication) God, but that the most natural hope begins to stir in the merely legal father's heart; so it would be pompous and artificial to go on  talking about futurity, this is the future in the mind's eye of one rejoicing man: shared, beautiful, fragile; and the whole novel seems braced to tear itself free of the devils possessing it:
‘Marie,’ he cried, holding the child in his arms, ‘the old nightmare is over — the shame ad the death things!
Let us work hard ad begin a new life, the three of us — yes, yes!
Oh yes, and what shall we call him, Marie?’
A new life.
The Dostoevsky voskresenie , at once regeneration and Resurrection.
The knocking off of fetters at the end of The House of the Dead.
Crime and Punishment's Epilogue.
Shatov's actual words are ‘a new road’, recalling man the roadbuilder and Kirillov the structural engineer.
In a novel where expectations are not so much unfulfilled as positively spited, Shatov's future, his hope, suffers simple tragic extinction with his murder.
But he has had his vision of family, home, and work, and that is as real as the thwarting of it.
Note work.
In The Possessed nobody does any work except Mrs Virginsky.
The sky clears in the childbirth sequence because of Shatov's sublime murmurings about the arrival of a new human being, but also because the midwife has her sleeves rolled up, because she is attacking a difficult and strenuous professional job, organizing essentials, masterminding the whole exercise, scolding Marie Shatov who allowed Shatov to get between her and the family in which she was a governess ‘with the egotistical object of marrying you, laughing at the distraught husband on his knees  unable either to bear the sound or block his ears before the birth; and when all is tidied up, ‘after some pleasant–es about ‘the happy couple'’ which were not without a touch of contempt and superciliousness, she went away as well satisfied as before.’
She has good reason to be pleased.
She has done something, something on a different plane from making a toy church or pipping a social rival at the post or committing a mindless atrocity.
Her actions are unquestionably deedy; they bear no theoretical burden, unlike Kirillov's suicide; they run deeper — while she is on the job — than the paper person in her, and they make a rigid, final opposing of the profane midwife and the God-seeking husband academic and quite inadequate to the novel.
Nor does it get us anywhere to learn from Anna Dostoevsky's Memoirs that the story of the frantic Shatov, where phrasing seems inevitable and images unsought — it doesn't help to be told by the novelist's widow that these flawless pages lean heavily on his own behaviour while their first child was being born.
It's all a question of what a writer can use, what the work in hand will let him use.
For example, there's a minor character in The Possessed , a quarrelsome eccentric lady, and she believes Lake Geneva gives people toothache.
Exactly right — for her.
So it produces an odd sensation to learn, again from Anna, that this superstition was in fact Dostoevsky's.
He also goes in for creative self-plundering by way of rhetorical and dialectical self-parody.
At the fête Stepan Verkhovensky, the man of the 1840s, makes a speech arguing that Shakespeare matters more than boots, and Raphael more than petroleum; whipping himself up in his peroration to declare that mankind can get on without bread but not without beauty.
This is another instance of the novelist promoting his dearest values by stealth.
Stepan's aesthetic convictions are Dostoevsky's, and Stepan's speech is an hysterical, summarizing take-off of Dostoevsky's journalism, itself no model of temperateness.
The narrative maximizes  Stepan's vulnerability, perching him on a platform amid the malcontents and troublemakers and the much larger number of those humble, obscure people who are enduring more or less passively the chaos of the fête.
He is holding forth about beauty to an audience which has been short-changed over food and drink and entertainment.
Therefore he is asking for trouble, and he receives it suddenly and in full measure, above the groundswell of heckling, at the hands of a divinity student who reminds him at the top of his voice about Fedka, a dangerous escaped convict now roaming ‘our town’ and originally a serf of Stepan's whom he sold into military service to pay a gambling debt:
‘If you had not lost him at cards, would he have got into prison?
Tell me, please.
Would he be murdering people now in his struggle for existence?
What do you say to that, Mr Aesthete?'
A knock-down blow to the beauty-before-bread man.
But far from the end of him.
He picks himself up and declares about Fedka, later in the novel, ‘I suffered for ten years on his account, more than he suffered as a soldier, and — and I'll give him my purse.’
Selling was more painful than being sold, a variant of this hurts me more than it hurts you and a comic resourcefulness worthy of Falstaff in his ‘let him kill the next Percy himself’ vein.
But there the likeness ends.
Stepan Verkhovensky is prissy, frenchified, very feminine though not at all homosexual.
On the one hand, ‘My friend, I have discovered something awful:je suis un ordinary hanger-on, et rien de plus!
Mais r-r-rien de plus !’; and on the other, and also out of his own mouth, ‘sponging has never been the guiding principle of my actions.
It just happened like that.’
It did.
Stepan Trofimovich Verkhovensky is the most  suggestive of all Dostoevsky's accidental men, and it is fitting that the phrase itself should never be used of or by him.
He lives and breathes fortuity.
Profoundly yet lightly and yet again oh so generously imagined, he turns the novel's transpersonal unsteadiness to joy for us and sheer astonishment, and its cancer-growth of rumour to life's health through art's freedom.
The thought of Dostoevsky fostering, however stealthily, his dearest values, through Stepan on beauty, as through Shatov on new life, must be entertained in the context of the journalistic piece on Dobrolyubov:
You must not prescribe aims and preferences for art.
Why prescribe anything for it…?
It will never get lost or lose its way.
It was always true to reality and always walked in line with man's progress and development.
The ideal of beauty and normality cannot perish in a healthy society; and for this reason you ought to let art go its own way ad be confident that it will not go astray…
A single ma cannot divine fully the eternal and universal ideal, were he Shakespeare himself, ad therefore he cannot prescribe either the ways or the aims for art.
The Possessed looked for a long time like losing its way, and Dostoevsky would surely concede that in so far as the design was, to use his own word, tendentious, this was bound to be so.
And yet a novel doesn't write itself, even if some of the very greatest ones appear to; it is written by a man with ‘aims and preferences’.
But these just happen to be his, he can't ‘prescribe’ them ‘for art’; what he wants to say must come to terms with what the form allows him; art refuses to be imposed upon, to be dictated to, and Dostoevsky's dictum will stand.
(vii)
Perhaps the most remarkable entry in the Possessed notebooks is the one which directly opposes Stavrogin and Stepan Verkhovensky.
The narrative tone ‘which will save everything ’ consists in ‘not explaining’Stavrogin but projecting him ‘through the action’, and equally (and on the contrary) it consists in presenting Stepan ‘always with explanations ’.
This belongs to the last days of 1870, more than a year after the murder in the park.
It signals the transformation of the large, lucid Great Sinner into the man who is beyond definition and self-definition, beyond calling himself bored, and whose actions — whether he is biting an ear or enduring a punch in the face or hanging by a well-soaped rope —explain nothing and nobody.
A sort of paring-down: in my analysis a surrender of the crisis-and-clarity urge, and an unloading of all the consecutions of theory upon others, principally Kirillov and Shatov.
And conversely, the same notebook entry celebrates the rounding-out of a comic conception miles away from the original, historic Granovsky, scarcely less free than Dostoevsky's ideal of art and lying too deep for tears.
‘He, too, saw through me; I mean he clearly perceived that I saw through him…
’ Stepan and ‘I’, his young friend, are locked in such mutualities throughout.
‘We’ are both characters inside the provincial-chronicle box, the framed narrative without a frame narrator, and out of this enclosure liberty proceeds.
Stepan reverses the news-from-Peshawar standpoint of the novel by wondering what ‘they’, those powerful officials in the metropolis, are thinking about ‘us’ and most especially about himself; the picture of Stepan Trofimovich Verkhovensky as a marked man because of the liberal views he held and very faintly expressed long ago, both frightens him and feeds his self-importance.
So that when, in an access of zeal, von Lemke has Stepan's house raided and some old-fashioned radical literature removed, the narrator finds him ‘in a surprising condition: upset and in great agitation, but at the same time unquestionably triumphant’.
A manuscript draft of this passage survives, and in the draft the narrating ‘I’ remarks the strange clash of Stepan's emotions.
The final text leaves this clash alone, free to speak for itself in a world where the reader believes he understands Stepan better than the narrator does.
Still not satisfied with the delicious idea of a soldier taking the doubtful reading matter away in a wheelbarrow, Dostoevsky adds, in Stepan's reportage, ‘and covered it with an apron;oui ,c'est cela , an apron’— as if in the eyes of Stepan there was something specially affronting or sinister, anyhow notable, about the apron.
Relatively weak description of the ‘he was very glad of my arrival’ sort is cut, and we are left with the histrionic handclasp of Stepan Verkhovensky the actor manqué whom no reader of The Possessed will ever forget.
He imagines he is going to be arrested and whisked off to Siberia.
After two fumbled attempts Dostoevsky lands with a leap upon ‘Il faut être prêt, voyez-vous ’— he gave me a meaningful look —‘chague moment — they may come and take me, and phew!— a man has disappeared!’
In the draft he has hidden thirty-five roubles inside a slit in his frock-coat pocket.
The final text substitutes waistcoat for frock-coat —‘I don't think they'll get as far as taking my waistcoat off’— even better for the pampered softy with his vein of oldwomanish guile.
And here the manuscript fragment ends, so we can't tell how much work lies behind such simple touches as Stepan's fear that ‘they’ will flog him.
The narrator objects that he has done nothing.
‘All the worse,’ replies Stepan.
‘They will find out I've done nothing and flog me for it.’
Nor can it be denied that he has done nothing.
Nor, unfading in our mind's eye, will this hanger-on and fantasist and self-dramatizer ever do anything, though it's difficult to say so without a chilling, denaturing hint of analytics.
Dostoevsky owed a lot to Molière who is to be met in the notebooks but not to be pinned down in the major fiction.
While it's true that nobody does any work in The Possessed except delivering babies, and true also that Stepan Verkhovensky flowers into a veritable presiding genius of sloth in the guise of footling bustle, nevertheless the reader's heart is not with Mrs Stavrogin, Stepan's patroness, when she hisses at him on his deathbed ‘you futile, futile, ignoble, chickenhearted, always, always futile man’.
The reader refuses to let it rest at that.
He has been with ‘our old friend’ too long.
It's not the severity that worries him but his inability to  universalize the verdict and therefore take it to himself as he can take ‘Vous l'avez voulu, Georges Dandin,’ the thing of Molière's Dostoevsky liked to quote.
Stepan's own pronouncement, again on his deathbed, strikes more devastatingly deep than Mrs Stavrogin's, and yet the reader inclines his head as to an act of natural justice.
‘My friend, all my life I have been lying.
Even when I spoke the truth.
Never did I speak for the truth's sake but for my own…‘
One judges better of others than that, but can only hope better of oneself.
And in observing and judging Stepan Verkhovensky one becomes aware that the novelist's selfadmonition to present him ‘always with explanations ’ has been both obeyed and transcended.
Details of background, opinions, foibles, are lavished on him as on nobody else.
His ‘peculiar gloating obsequious humour’, his ‘sort of capricious self-satisfaction’ lurking in the very midst of ‘plaintive protestations’, are described and pondered.
We learn that ‘he began to pay great attention to his dreams’.
We learn it, though, as a sign of his going to seed — and we wonder.
We pause and wonder.
We recall that the narrator is a young man.
Why going to seed?
Leave our friend alone!
Don't presume!
Why shouldn't he just be getting old?
(vii)
Dostoevsky owed even more to Cervantes than to Molière, and here again, as in his relations with Shakespeare and Pushkin, it's a visitation with no very palpable memorial.
An account of how Dostoevsky extrapolated his lifelong leading themes of somebody to be and somewhere to go from Cervantes's huge rhetoric of quest, would be doomed from the start.
In fact it is only with Mr Golyadkin very near the beginning of his writing career, and with Stepan Verkhovensky towards the end, that Quixotic features of courtesy and romance become prominent.
Mr Golyadkin's response to the elopement letter was a two-in-one attempt to assume a  chivalric role and reach a lovers' destination.
Stepan Verkhovensky has only himself to elope with, and it remains an open question whether he will go on enduring the indignities of his hanger-on position, or cut and run, somehow, somewhere.
He remarks to his son that unhappiness is just as necessary to mankind as happiness — one of those cherished convictions of Dostoevsky that get slipped in when our attention is elsewhere.
But, as Peter immediately tells his father, this is just the sort of bon mot to expect from an idler who is being kept in the lap of luxury.
Such taunts hurt.
They are bound to come to something, Stepan confides to the narrator; ‘usually in our world things come to nothing, but this will end in something, it's bound to, it's bound to!’
Stepan crystallizes this ‘something’ in Golyadkin and Quixote terms when he tells Mrs Stavrogin ‘You have always despised me; but I will end like a knight faithful to my lady, for your good opinion has always been dearer to me than anything.’
Also, in the same passage, he says he is going to pack his bag —‘my pauper's bag’— and end up either dead of starvation in a ditch or earning his keep as a tutor in some merchant's house.
This might seem to be moving away from Golyadkin, but in point of tone The Double and The Possessed draw closest to one another, and to Don Quixote , in the ludicrous materialities of preparation, and in their juxtaposing of very particular odds and ends with an airy universality which in lesser hands would be emptiness.
Mr Golyadkin has mustered socks, shirts, shirtfronts, flannel vests, uniform, spare trousers, sheets, blankets, pillows, and a featherbed; but he also tells his servant ‘And now, my friend, I am going away.
My dear chap, a different path lies before each man and no one of us can tell what road he may chance to follow.’
Stepan Verkhovensky kits himself up with umbrella, travelling-bag, walking stick, broad-brimmed hat, belted overcoat and top-boots like a hussar's; and — Quixote overlaid for English readers by Pickwick, the White Knight, Mr Toad — he talks the language of ‘high adventure’ and the open road: ‘there's a great idea in the open road too!’
But he avoids the language of destination.
Whereas Mr Golyadkin, incidentally mad, swaddled in a dream of silk ladders and Spanish serenades, aims for Schiller's happy-everafter hut on the shore, Stepan understands he has nowhere to go: ‘to order post-horses one must at least know where one is going.
But herein lay his greatest distress at this moment: he was utterly unable to name and fix on a place.’
And so he sets off on foot, aiming nowhere.
Even to have imagined a destination would have been to raise the question, why this place rather than that?
Therefore he keeps walking, ‘thinking of nothing so long as he could refrain from thinking’.
Golyadkin country.
Our novelist's intellectual humour is asserting itself beneath the narrative.
And what narrative!
Narrative of Conradian nobility at this suspended moment while Stepan Verkhovensky's road stretches mile upon mile ahead of him ‘like a man's life, a man's dream’.
There's a quick glance between novelist and reader in that ‘dream’.
Stepan is falling ill without knowing it; his unspoken, unimagined destination is delirium and death.
Chance brings the accidental man up short at a village across a lake from a place called Spasov.
The root of that word is ‘save’.
Chance also throws him together with the itinerant bible-selling woman who was outraged by the hooligans of ‘our town’ and whom Stepan now, just once, calls his ‘saviour’(spasitelnitsa ).
She reads him the story of the Gadarene swine, the novel's Epigraph.
Also the Revelation passage on the lukewarm spiritual state.
Thus Dostoevsky rescues the disease of indifference from the abandoned ‘At Tikhon's’ chapter, but also eases its throttling normative grip.
In fact there is no grip, it's all drift, in this sequence, as illness brings back Stepan's childhood Church Slavonic, mixed up with Quixotic politesse and flagrant falsifying of his own past, and cant about the Russian soul.
And as to Spasov and being saved —‘Il me semble que tout le monde va à Spassof ’— there is still some comic devillife in him as he quotes the Saviour against his bible-selling saviour because she is taking thought for the morrow, and as he turns the gospel on its head with ‘Happiness doesn't pay me because I start at once forgiving all my enemies.’
That's no way to set about being saved, so an entirely solemn reader would be bound to think.
But, in terms of the tragicomical life of the book, such a reader is himself a fiction, and an empty one.
We are all bound for Spasov, and all the fun as well as the sorrow lies in aiming that way.
Arrival has no reality in the updated, transposed Quixotic journeying whereby the forward-tilting existential present of The Double is rephrased in The Possessed .
Parajournalist and apocalyptic naturalist through and through, the novelist records anxious speculation in ‘our town’ as to whether the seventy representatives of the nine hundred workmen at the Spigulin factory are too many to constitute a delegation.
We might be reading this morning's dreary inconclusive state of play over secondary picketing.
And the sense in which there is no arriving in The Possessed is very like that in which there is no reading tomorrow's newspaper.
We can only imagine it.
When we do we tend to imagine outcomes.
For The Possessed , outcomes (including Dostoevsky's healed man at the feet of Jesus) are consoling myths.
Never trust the artist, trust the tale.
And the tale images tomorrow's newspaper as empty or thwarted futurity.
I would add open futurity, the future of the open road.
After the dying Stepan Verkhovensky has taken the sacrament he says ‘however, tomorrow — Tomorrow we shall all set off.’
Certainly we are all on the move, if only mentally, and perhaps the open road of Stepan's ‘gentle and unresentful heart’ will see him to Spasov before nous les autres .
But in its very nature a possibility is not an outcome.
