THEORY AMONG THE ENGLISH 
Theory is what is generated when some aspect or literature, its nature, its history, its place in society, its conditions or production and reception, its meaning in general, or the meanings or particular works, ceases to be given and becomes a question to be argued in a generalized way.
Theory is what inevitably arises when literary conventions and critical definitions once taken for granted have become objects or generalized discussion and dispute.
Gerald Graff
The related themes I am pursuing are difficult to keep apart, and really require a contrapuntal or fugal exposition.
But that would not make for easy writing, still less reading.
In practice one can only talk about one thing at a time, and in this Chapter I shall risk a distorting simplicity by looking at questions of theory largely in isolation from institutional matrices and situations, and concentrating on British activities to the exclusion of the American ones that accompanied or preceded them.
I defer those contexts to later Chapters.
The word ‘theory’ has always aroused suspicion amongst the English, who see themselves as practical people and sound empiricists.
Indeed, it is often assumed by Continental and North American commentators that there has never been any significant literary theory in England.
This ignores I. A. Richards, a pioneer modern theorist, who was very much an Englishman.
Michael Edwards, taking a paradoxical approach, has argued that the English have always been strong on literary theory, instancing a distinguished succession of poet-critics: Sidney, Dryden, Johnson, Wordsworth, Coleridge, Shelley, Arnold, Eliot.
Most of their important critical texts, Edwards remarks, are theoretical, in that they prompt fundamental reflections about the basic nature of writing, even if, ‘One notices about such writing that it does not necessarily offer itself as theory, that it is directed towards what we now call literature and not towards something else.’
Edward's comment is clearly correct, and could be extended: Hopkins's letters and notebooks, for instance, contain a weight of original theorizing that is more substantial and more interesting than much recent writing.
But present-day theorists are likely to be dismissive of what has been called ‘writers' speculation about their art’, finding it impressionistic and unsystematic.
‘Theory’, to be intellectually respectable, has to be presented as such, and to be a product of the academy, not of the amorphous institution of literature.
In the early 1970s, academic literary theory established bridgeheads in Britain, entering at first directly from France, and then via American translation and intermediaries.
When conservative academics eventually became aware of the supposed invasion, they viewed it with alarm, as a threat to their, and their students', proper activity of reading, studying, and enjoying literature.
Increasing resistance to the alien forces led to the clashes and controversies described in an earlier Chapter.
In my judgement, the advent of theory was not a cause of disruption, but a symptom of it, for reasons suggested in the above quotation from Gerald Graff.
For as long as the ‘English’ synthesis was adequately functioning there was no need or place for theory.
Once the consensus began to fragment, theoretical challenges found room to enter.
There is an approximate parallel in the history of religion: precise theological definitions of doctrine are called for only when doubters and heretics enter the picture.
Until then, shared traditions of worship and devotion are sufficient to unite the believers.
It is often argued, as Graff does in the final chapter of Professing Literature , that all literary activity is really if implicitly theoretical, and that a self-respecting critic will be specific about theory sooner rather than later.
This was René Wellek's position in his debate with Leavis in 1937.
But there are other ways of looking at the question.
Christopher Ricks, trailing his coat in the wake of the MacCabe Affair, claimed that the critic should have ‘principles’ rather than‘theory’, while Stanley Fish has made a comparable distinction between ‘theory,’and ‘belief’: ‘A theory is a special achievement of consciousness; a belief is a prerequisite for being conscious at all .
Beliefs are not what you think about but what you think with …
‘. Theory emerges as and when texts or  issues are theorized, usually by academics who are dissatisfied with the status quo .
The idea of ‘theory’ has now become so pervasive, so much a part of the terms of current debate, and so visibly incorporated into institutions, that I shall not resist using it.
There has, indeed, been a change from traditional, empirical, English ways.
Nevertheless, the idea of theory may itself need to be theorized and regarded with a measure of scepticism, like other honorific terms in contemporary discourse, such as‘politics’ and ‘history’.
My present use of the word can be understood as being, in Derridean terms, lightly sous rature .
What Stanley Fish calls ‘belief’ is close to what Wittgenstein denotes by a ‘form of life’, where practice and guiding assumption form a seamless unity.
In the recent history of British culture the study of English Literature in secondary and tertiary education comprised a recognizable form of life, principled but not theoretical.
In institutional practice, ‘English’ in public schools tended to be marginal and somewhat disregarded, but became central in the culture of the grammar schools, in ways adumbrated and advocated in the Newbolt Report.
That culture presupposed a high degree of what E. D. Hirsch calls ‘cultural literacy’, particularly in respect of English history and the Christian and classical heritages, requiring competence in Latin and at least one modern language, as well as wide reading in English Literature over and above the demands of the curriculum.
This form of life was shared by the sixth forms of grammar schools and the universities to which their students proceeded, and it did not greatly differ whether the frame of reference was ‘Cambridge’ or ‘Oxford’, or to import an Arnoldian variation on this model, Hebraic or Hellenic, directed towards ‘criticism’or ‘appreciation’.
(Leavis, a forceful opponent of traditional literary education, indicated in Education and the University just how much cultural competence he took for granted in the student.)
Judith Grossman's novel,Her Own Terms , published in 1988, looks back at a working-class scholarship-girl in the 1950s, who goes to Oxford from a South London Grammar school; Grossman shows in passing how formidably well-read and linguistically equipped her heroine was.
The basic assumption of this form of life, extending from school to  university, was that imaginative literature was inherently valuable, and that it was valuable because it pleasurably conveyed emotion and profound insights into the life of things.
True to the Romantic tradition from which this belief sprang, the imagination was valued more than the analytical intelligence, the specific more than the general, experience more than discourse,connaitre more than savoir .
If ideas as such were discounted, it was because imaginative literature, in its richness and blend of diversity and harmony, had other things to offer.
It is arguable that the disappearance of grammar schools was a further factor in the weakening of the English synthesis, in addition to those I have discussed.
At all events, when the innovative literary theory derived from structuralism began to arrive about twenty years ago it found actual or potential fissures in the form of life and it sought to enlarge and penetrate them.
An adversarial stance appeared in literary study.
It is evident in a curious book, edited by Stephen Heath, Colin MacCabe, and Christopher Prendergast and published in Cambridge in the early 1970s:Signs of the Times: Introductory Readings in Textual Semiotics .
It was a collection of essays designed to introduce la nouvelle critique to ignorant English readers: apart from the editors, the contributors included Julia Kristeva and Philippe Sollers, and there was an interview with Roland Barthes.
A polemical note is sounded in the unsigned preface.
It acknowledges that the following texts and their arguments are difficult, but
the difficulty is not to be hidden — we ourselves have no right to hide it.
Nor, however, is it to be submitted to the terrorism or plain language, that mythical weapon or those who prefer the comforting repetition or the ideological caress; who do not want to READ.
Or, in the slogan of American aerobics teachers, ‘No Pain, No Gain’.
It was a note often sounded in battles to come.
MacCabe and Heath had studied in Paris, and Signs of the Times has its niche in postwar cultural history, marking the first major re-entry of French intellectual influences since Eliot's adherence to Remy de Gourmont and the French neoclassicists, half a century earlier.
For the sake of convenience I shall apply the term la nouvelle critique to the complex  of ideas emerging from the Paris of the 1960s, including many diverse strands: the ‘classical’ structuralism of the early Barthes, the poststructuralism of his later work, the deconstructionism of Derrida, and whatever name one gives to the work of Foucault and Lacan, in taxonomic historiography and dissident psychoanalysis respectively.
Frank Kermode was the first senior academic in English studies to take a sympathetic interest in la nouvelle critique , particularly its analysis of narrative.
For some years before his move to Cambridge he chaired a seminar at University College London, which discussed the literary implications of structuralism, semiotics, and emergent poststructuralism.
He has remarked, ‘No other phase of my academic life has given me so much pleasure and instruction.’
Kermode's seminar established a useful informal link with the work going on at Cambridge, and the participants included Stephen Heath, Jonathan Culler, who was at that time teaching at Cambridge, and Culler's then wife, Veronica Forrest-Thomson.
Other literary, theorists who attended were Christine Brooke-Rose, Christopher Norris, and Shlomith Rimmon, and the novelist, B. S. Johnson.
Once, Roland Barthes himself came.
Kermode recalls the seminars as occasions of good humour and tolerance, despite sharp intellectual disagreements, and he laments that their humane spirit did not survive later events.
By the late seventies some British academics were displaying a wary but sympathetic interest in early or classical structuralism, particularly as it was expounded in Culler's widely read Structuralist Poetics , a lucid, urbane work which suggested that structuralism might, without too much difficulty, be adopted to existing academic practice.
I was partly convinced by Culler's power of persuasion, and for some time thought that the kinds of analysis he described could be assimilated to practical criticism and the English synthesis.
Eventually I decided that assimilation was not possible, given Culler's lack of interest in the interpretation of particular texts and his commitment to the uncovering of the generalized principles of literariness.
In Structuralist Poetics Culler took an unenthusiastic view of deconstructionism, but he shortly  returned to the United States and succumbed to the deconstructive wave that swept through the American academy in the late seventies, and into which I did not feel inclined to plunge.
David Lodge was another established British academic and writer who took an early interest in formalist and structuralist methods and principles.
In 1977 he published The Modes of Modern Writing , an illuminating and original application of Roman Jakobson's distinction between ‘metaphor’ and ‘metonymy’to the criticism and history of twentieth-century literature.
My main reservation about the book, which is more evident to me now than when it first appeared, is that Lodge has too direct and univocal an understanding of the elusive concept of ‘literature’.
His book showed that new ideas were in the air, and senior academics began to drop passing references to Barthes or Derrida, not always accurately.
Others, more inward with la nouvelle critique , adopted a polemical rhetoric.
Veronica Forrest-Thomson — a brilliant though unstable poet and critic, who died tragically young in 1975 — referred in a review to the work of Barthes, Foucault, and Derrida ‘which has led to a literary revolution in France and will lead — at last— to revolution in our theory and practice of literature in this country.’
The breathless phrase, ‘at last’, is revealingly placed.
The idea of ‘revolution’ can set the pulses racing, for a time at least, and in 1980 it was invoked by Catherine Belsey: ‘Only by closing the doors of the English department against theoretical challenges from outside can we continue to ignore the ‘Copernican'’revolution which is currently taking place, and which is radically undermining traditional ways of perceiving both the world and the text.’
Belsey's Critical Practice , like MacCabe's study of Joyce, is fairly aggressive in its tone.
I would agree that the doors of the English department should not remain closed to theoretical challenges, and in this book I am trying to respond to them.
But applying a mildly deconstructive reading to her words, it is worth remarking that ‘revolution’ is an ambivalent trope.
On the one hand, it denotes an absolute, once-and-forall change: the Copernican revolution, or the French or Russian Revolutions.
On the other hand, if we think of a wheel or turntable, ‘revolution’ implies a mere turning, continual movement without progress.
Nearly ten years after Belsey's book appeared, there has been no revolution in the first sense, and it does not look as if there will be.
Critical Practice was one of the early titles in the ‘New Accents’ series published by Methuen, under the general editorship of Belsey's colleague at Cardiff, Terence Hawkes.
The series aimed to introduce to English readers la nouvelle critique and literary theory, along with associated areas such as linguistics, translation, and the study of mass culture.
It was from the beginning very successful, which I take to be evidence of the growing sense that the established English synthesis was weakening, with a corresponding desire among students and teachers for new orientations.
The series did not have a uniform intellectual line and many varieties of opinion could be found in the contributors.
But it appeared at precisely the right moment to catch the poststructuralist tide associated with Derrida and the later Barthes, and several of the most influential titles brought together, rather uneasily, poststructuralism and Marxism.
This is true of Belsey's book, of Hawkes's own Structuralism and Semiotics , of Tony Bennett's Marxism and Formalism , of many of the contributions in Peter Widdowson's Re-Reading English , and of Anthony Easthope's Poetry as Discourse .
These texts share a fighting tone and a conviction that established forms of literary study, and in some cases even the concept of literature itself, have to be overthrown.
There is a great readiness to invoke the French, and a conviction, drawn from Saussure and classical structuralism, that language has no necessary connection with reality.
In a poststructuralist development of the idea, it is claimed that the most literary texts can offer is the endless ‘free play of signifiers’.
In the late seventies some people in the mainstream of literary study were inclined to believe, or halfbelieve, these ideas, or to try them on for size.
David Lodge was one; in his inaugural lecture as Professor of Modern English Literature at Birmingham in 1976 he slid from the supposed arbitrariness of language as defined by Saussure to the way in which the masterpieces of modernist literature emphasized form rather than content.
This is at best a corrective belief, for whatever else Ulysses or The Waste Land are doing, they are also invoking for us the Dublin of 1904 or  the London of 1921.
Lodge himself, in his own admirable novels, has never been hampered by any lack of conviction that the language he employs is really about the social realities that he wittily records.
Frank Kermode in The Genesis of Secrecy seemed to be engaging in a severance of world and word, and was called to account by Helen Gardner for doing so.
It is significant that neither Kermode nor Lodge have inclined towards the more radical deconstructionist road.
Kermode has set out his reasons for refusing it in Essays on Fiction , and Lodge has remarked, ‘To open a book or article by…
Derrida or one of his disciples is to feel that the mystification and intimidation of the reader is the ultimate aim of the enterprise.’
There was less caution in the ‘New Accents’ camp where the incapacity of language to convey anything about the ‘real’world was eagerly asserted.
Belsey wrote:
From this post-Saussurean perspective it is clear that the theory of literature as expressive realism is no longer tenable….
If discourses articulate concepts through a system or signs which signify by means or their relationship to each other rather than to entities in the world, and ir literature is a signifying practice, all it can reflect is the order inscribed in particular discourses, not the nature or the world.
No more seeing into the life of things, in short.
Belsey attempts to unite the poststructuralist and the Marxist parts of her mind by invoking Lacan, Althusser, and Macherey, but signs of strain or outright contradiction are not hard to find.
One can compare the passage just quoted, which insists on the unknowability of the real world, with some of her subsequent remarks; as, for instance, when she refers to her argument ‘that literature represents the myths and imaginary versions of real social relationships’, and claims that ‘a form of criticism which refuses to reproduce the pseudo-knowledge offered by the text provides a real knowledge of the work of literature’, or says that ‘the task of criticism, then, is…to produce a real knowledge of history.’
My italics: some reality, at least, is knowable, it seems.
The contradictions in Belsey's text have been examined sharply and at some length by Patrick Parrinder.
One notes in passing that the passages just quoted from Belsey contain abstract nouns, ‘literature’ and ‘criticism’, which take active verbs, ‘represent’and ‘refuse’and ‘provide’.
This is a common rhetorical device in contemporary theoretical writing, and has been usefully analysed — and condemned — by Roger Poole as ‘Hegelian grammar’, which is ‘the use of verbs of decision, movement, or responsibility which are illegitimately coupled to grammatical subjects which are neither animate nor conscious.’
In fact, it is a latter-day version of the figure known in classical rhetoric as prosopopoeia.
The observant reader may have noticed that I used this construction myself above on p. 98; this was done consciously.
I have sometimes whiled away idle moments in speculating how far one could elaborate this figure before the reader became suspicious.
Consider, for instance, the following string, and see where implausibility enters: ‘the text makes no response…the text evades the reader's interrogation…the text is frequently silent…the text is idle and will not get up in the morning.’
Or this: ‘At this point ideology makes a forceful intervention…the voice of ideology is frequently heard…ideology never stops talking.’
The effect of the device is to remove or reduce human agency, making events seem the consequence of impersonal forces such as ideology, the unconscious, history, or language itself.
Terence Hawkes's Structuralism and Semiotics appeared in 1977 as a timely primer on la nouvelle critique and it presents much information in a readable form.
It is, however, written in a crusading spirit, without any critical distance, and it is informed, like Belsey's book, by the assumption that language — or literature — can give us no certain knowledge of the world.
Hawkes's polemical purpose becomes more and more apparent as the book develops: it is to undermine, not only established literary study, but liberal humanism itself.
His arguments are fast-moving but inexact, and he engages in some wild flourishes of Hegelian grammar: ‘Writing, in short, does not ‘reproduce'’ a reality beyond itself, nor does it ‘‘reduce'’that reality.
In its new freedom, it can be seen to cause a new reality to come into being ’(Hawkes's italics).
Or consider the density of trope and implication in the following: ‘New’ New Criticism would thus claim to respond to literature's essential nature in which signifiers are prised utterly free of signifieds, aiming, in its no-holds-barred  encounter with the text, for a coherence and validity of response, not objectivity and truth’(Hawkes's italics).
Raymond Tallis has described this passage as being ‘of great interest to the pathologist of modern literary theory.’
In certain respects, what Hawkes calls the ‘New’ New Criticism’had what looked like connections with the older version.
Both were directed towards the formalist reading of literary texts, and some anglophone academics tried to minimize the strangeness of French imports by saying that la nouvelle critique was only offering a new version of what had long been familiar in the Anglo-American academy.
This assumption ignored great differences in contextual forms of life and conceptual foundation.
Nevertheless, Lodge was able to use classical structuralism and aspects of Russian Formalism to refine and extend the existing approaches of formalist criticism.
Resemblances were apparent between Northrop Frye's system of archetypes and structuralism; indeed, Hawkes refers, without qualification, to Frye's Anatomy of Criticism as a ‘classic of North American structuralism’.
As I have remarked, Culler's Structuralist Poetics encouraged some readers to think in terms of rapprochement between the New and the Newer Criticism.
Anthony Easthope's Poetry as Discourse offers a complex blend of old and new.
He takes poststructuralist assumptions about the death of the author and the disappearance of the self-subsistent ego, and applies them to the history of English poetry, in a work which combines ingenious close reading, impressive knowledge of metre, and an overall argument of stratospheric thinness and remoteness.
Easthope believes that the modernist concept of ‘impersonality’, later systematized in the New Criticism, and theorized by Wimsatt and Beardsley in their famous essay ‘The Intentional Fallacy’, was on the right lines, but did not go far enough, as the author was not really banished.
Some of Easthope's approach recalls that of C. S. Lewis in The Personal Heresy .
He does not mention this book, but he does quote Lewis to the effect that ‘nearly all our older poetry was written and read by men to whom the distinction between poetry and rhetoric, in its modern form, would have been meaningless.’
In this aspect, at least, there is a traditional slant in Easthope's argument.
He sets up poetry, rhetoric, and textuality, as against the myth of presence, the poem as the life-blood of a master spirit, and the Romantic ideal of expressiveness.
Thus far Easthope's ideas have affinities both with the New Critical applications of modernism, and Lewis's independentminded traditionalism.
Yet this is only part of his argument.
He goes much further, in taking Pound's phrase about the need to break the pentameter, and projects it back over six hundred years of English poetry.
Easthope has his own version of the myth of catastrophe that has possessed so many critics and theorists.
His villain is the iambic pentameter, often seen as basic to English poetry, but according to Easthope an alien and bourgeois importation, brought in by Chaucer, to the detriment of the truly native measure of the four-beat-line with a varying number of syllables, found in the old alliterative verse.
This survived only in an underground way in folk song, nursery rhymes, children's counting verses, and so on.
From the Renaissance onwards, metrical repression reigns: ‘Once established as national poetic institution pentameter becomes a hegemonic form.’
Only in our century has relief come, when modernist poetry, particularly pound's Cantos , breaks away from the pentameter.
Easthope's objections are entirely political, focused on the objectionableness of the ‘bourgeois’, that great unexamined transcendent signified of marxisant theoretical writing.
In Easthope's hands it becomes a particularly malleable concept.
He believes that the bourgeois epoch of history is in its terminal crisis, but concedes that this crisis may have been going on since 1848, which stretches not only ‘bourgeois’ but ‘crisis’to breakingpoint.
Easthope acknowledges that the pentameter line had qualities which made it more resourceful than the older accentual metre, since one could achieve a great range of poetic effects by counterpointing intonation against metre, which is what nearly all the major English poets have done, though supposedly imprisoned in this bourgeois strait-jacket.
Easthope concedes, ‘Spoken performance of pentameter is accordingly open to variation in a way accentual verse is not’, and this points to the massive lacuna at the heart of his book.
There is no mention at all of Elizabethan poetic drama, where the pentameter line is used with increasingly greater freedom and  flexibility.
Shakespearan drama is usually thought of as the embodiment of a truly popular art, whatever ‘bourgeois’ or aristocratic dimensions it also possesses.
But Shakespeare remains something of an embarrassment to contemporary theorists of levelling tendency.
One contributor to Re-Reading English wants to deconstruct Shakespeare and his texts into the socio-economic-cultural-political contexts in which they originated.
He writes, ‘The notion of the sacrosanct text is alien to the period and yet it is central to the literary criticism of Shakespeare.’
In what spirit, then, was the First Folio produced in 1623?
The work of recent British theorists does have lines of connection with older forms of discourse, whether the New Criticism, traditional scholarship, earlier Marxist criticism, or the Cultural Studies approach given a fresh impetus in the 1950s by Richard Hoggart and Raymond Williams.
Even Terry Eagleton, the eminent Marxist now installed at Oxford to teach critical theory exclusively, has, as I have elsewhere argued, never completely escaped from the Leavisite Cambridge of the sixties.
His most rebarbative work,Criticism and Ideology , is an Althusserian rewriting of The Great Tradition .
As an American commentator has remarked of Eagleton, ‘You can take the boy out of Cambridge, but you can't take Cambridge out of the boy.’
Yet whatever continuities there are, the general impression, whether pleased or panicky, that recent theoretical work represents something new is broadly correct.
The newness is apparent in manner as well as in matter; a rude, derisive tone is noticeable, particularly in the prose of Eagleton and Hawkes.
The latter concluded an argument with Graham Hough in the correspondence columns of the London Review of Books with the suggestion that Hough should ‘piss off’.
Some readers may have been shocked that one professor of English should thus refer to another, but these are robust times.
The objects of derision may be placed, in order of increasing generality, in the following list: the institutional study of English Literature in British higher education; English Literature; Englishness; literature; bourgeois society (which includes racism and sexism); late capitalism; Western culture.
These items are all connected, and any of them may be used  as analogies or homologies for each other.
The polemic is supported by an implicit mythology, in which English culture is presented as insular, complacent, empirical, philistine, unreflective, untheoretical, and generally slumped in dogmatic slumbers.
Against the dominant dullness and grossness a growing band of lively and intelligent spirits have embarked on a hopeful struggle, calling in aid the power of ideas from other parts of the world, particularly, France.
This looks very like the rerun of a scenario first enacted in the early years of this century, when two unknown expatriate American poets attacked a torpid English literary establishment in the name of nascent modernism, looking to France for their intellectual inspiration and their models of literary achievement.
Eliot and Pound did establish a poetic revolution, and in the seventies and early eighties the rhetoric of revolution became attractive to anglophone poststructuralists.
But it remained rhetoric, language rather than achievement.
The breakdown of English intellectual insularity is welcome in principle, but a few things need to be said about this new turn to France.
It has become common form to invoke the magic names of the French theorists, as if the names alone would cause a torpid academic establishment to collapse.
The use of names rather than arguments as ammunition has become noticeable in such exercises, on both sides of the Atlantic, as Chris Baldick remarks in a review of Frederick Crews's Skeptical Engagements :
One lamentable practice which Crews rightly scorns is the increasingly revived trick or medieval rhetoric in which one attempts to substantiate one's theoretical argument not by anything so vulgarly empirical as a fact or a text but merely by invoking a name from the sacred pantheon.
Derrida, Foucault, Kristeva, Lacan, Barthes: just reeling off their names is (as Auden said in a very different context) ever so comfy, since it safely defers the issues at hand to nothing less than a transcendent signified: in short, to a star.
This clinging to authority has, in my experience, become noticeable in graduate students and young academics in the past ten years or so.
I take it to be a product of the myth I described above: ‘I am fighting against the entrenched forces of insular stupidity, and I call upon the French to aid me!’
Such invocations are, in fact, very vulnerable.
French  intellectual debates and revolutions are part of a specific history and culture, expressing their complex dynamics.
Thus, classical structuralism, with its cold, formal impersonality, occurs as a reaction to the 1940s existentialist emphasis on the individual ego; and becomes itself overturned or deconstructed by poststructuralist ‘playfulness’.
Marxists become nouveaux philosophes ; Julia Kristeva, lecturing at Warwick in 1987, speaks scornfully of the Left…
English poststructuralists, when wearing their Marxist hats, would undoubtedly want to insist that ideas belong in larger contexts, social, cultural, and political, and cannot easily be abstracted and appropriated to other ends.
Terry Eagleton came some way to acknowledging this, in a quasi-refutation of his Althusserian phase, when he included himself among the English Marxist intellectuals who ‘managed the difficult dialectical trick of appropriating certain Althusserian concepts in blithe ignorance or disregard of their guilty political context.’
This is not to say that the English cannot absorb or debate French or other foreign ideas.
This was evidently done in the friendly but sharp exchanges in Kermode's seminar in the early seventies.
But it is another matter to use these ideas, or rather the names of their originators, primarily as weapons against an insular establishment.
How thoroughly, one wonders, have the ideas been understood?
Some English academics are genuinely at home with them, in a way that is directly related to their familiarity with French intellectual culture.
Christine Brooke-Rose, for instance, is a bilingual English critic and novelist, who taught in a Paris university for many years.
Her substantial and brilliant book A Rhetoric of the Unreal uses the work of French intellectual stars in a familiar and matter-of-fact way, without any of the bedazzlement that surrounds them on this side of the Channel.
Stephen Heath has some claim to be the only begetter of the English version of la nouvelle critique .
He studied with Barthes in Paris when Barthes was unknown in England, and later wrote a book on him in French (‘Barthesian French’ Hough has observed).
However much some people at Cambridge disapproved of him, there can be no doubt of Heath's high professional competence in the understanding of structuralism and poststructuralism.
Heath has appended a pertinent note to his translation of Barthes's collection of essays,Image-Music-Text , in which he scrupulously discusses the problems in lexis and idiom of translating Barthes.
This raises the large question of the role of translation in the transmission of French ideas to English readers.
In her book Beautiful Theories , the late Elizabeth Bruss made a revealing examination of the way in which Barthes's different translators carried out their task; she shows that whereas Heath did not disguise the difficulty and opacity in Barthes's texts, his American translators turned them into smooth narratives.
Other translations from modern French theorists are, one hears, very inadequate.
One would not want to suggest that the academics who contribute to the New Accents series (or who write similar texts) cannot read French with ease.
Nevertheless, it is noteworthy from the annotation of their books that they use translations wherever possible (as indeed I do myself, life being as short as it is).
And, as Marjorie Perloff has remarked, ‘in the case of writers like Derrida, Lacan and Barthes, for whom the materiality of the signifier is central, translation is nearly a contradiction in terms.’
The use of translation is the most obvious but not the only problem in the transmission of what are cultural as well as intellectual texts.
There are French qualities — of irony, wit, cerebral play — that are remarkably difficult to get across, even in a good translation.
Nicolas Tredell has said of some New Accents contributors, ‘despite their ostensible Gallic sympathies, they crash down on French jouissance like a ceiling-full of cold showers.’
More importantly, there is the possibility that ideas have been simply misunderstood in their transmission from one cultural context to another.
This is the position of Christopher Norris, who modestly but firmly maintains that all anglophone readers except himself have misunderstood Derrida.
I am all too ready to admit that I may have misunderstood what I have read in modern French theory; the problem is in getting any minimal intellectual purchase on it at all.
David Lodge, who was prepared to go public as one who ‘worked with’ structuralism, nevertheless wrote in a newspaper article in 1980:
As an academic critic and university teacher specializing in modern literature and literary theory, I spend much or my time these days reading books and articles that I can barely understand and that cause my wife (a graduate with a good honours degree in English language and literature) to utter loud cries of pain and nausea if her eye happens to fall on them.
Young academics and critics do not seem to have had the same difficulty, or if they do, are not letting on.
Indeed, ‘lucidity’ is liable to be condemned as a form of bourgeois mystification.
The struggle to decipher has been presented as a good thing in itself, though construing sentences is not the same thing as achieving intellectual understanding.
This, however, raises obscure and vexing questions about the nature of ‘textuality’.
There is no thesis without an antithesis, and polemic called forth counter-polemic, and mockery, counter-mockery, in works by conservative academics, such as George Watson's Modern Literary Thought , Helen Gardner's In Defence of the Imagination , and some of the contributions to Reconstructing Literature , a collection of essays edited by Laurence Lerner.
More interestingly, theory called forth counter-theory, in the late Geoffrey Thurley's Counter-Modernism in Current Critical theory , A. D. Nuttall's A New Mimesis , Patrick Parrinder's The Failure of Theory , and Raymond Tallis's not Saussure: A Critique of Post-Saussurean Literary Theory .
All of them argue, in different ways and with different emphases, for the realistic and expressive functions of literature; or, in philosophical terms, for the validity of the idea of reference.
Agreeing that naïve empiricism is insufficient and that language does not tell us about the world in any simple, unmediated, or transparent way, they still believe that a sense of reality can be conveyed by language (the position derided as mere ‘common sense’ by the Newest Criticism).
Thurley locates la nouvelle critique in a particular French intellectual tradition, which makes its uncritical adoption in the anglophone academy peculiarly problematical:
If it is the defining error or empiricism to assume that only statements meant to be checked up on deserve serious attention, it is the defining error or the new French criticism (Foucault, Piaget, Barthes, Derrida and others) to assume that because some statements cannot be verified, no statements can, and hence that all statements rail to refer, leaving us with discourse — language without anchorage in time, psyche or history.
Nuttall makes similar points.
The first part of his book is an extended essay in counter-theory, intended as a prolegomenon to the second part, which offers a study of Shakespeare in terms of moral and psychological realism.
Hawkes had dismissed the ideas of ‘objectivity’ and ‘truth’in Structuralism and Semiotics , but Nuttall insists that such dismissals are pragmatically self-refuting.
We may assert that there is no such thing as truth, but we regard that as a true statement.
The point has a particular relevance to the work of those who believe, like Foucault, following Nietzsche, that truth is a mere rhetorical device, employed in the interests of oppression, and say so at length.
What then is the status of Foucault's saying so?
Nevertheless, the very concept of truth seems to be an irritant for some.
Nuttall has elsewhere given a mischievous account of an academic occasion in which a speaker insisted on asserting, ‘It is a truth that the workers are oppressed.’
This, Nuttall remarks, ‘acted as a red rag.
It was as if the ‘logical conservatism'’ of his remark was more significant and more offensive to his (predominantly left-wing) audience than its thoroughly socialist content.’
In A New Mimesis Nuttall accused Hawkes of ‘collective cultural solipsism’.
Hawkes, in turn, gave the book a mockingly dismissive review in the TLS , without mentioning Nuttall's accusation against him.
Nuttall, like Thurley, writes with a polemical edge, but both of them present their cases in a seriously philosophical fashion.
What emerges from recent counter-theory is that French-inspired theory tends to destroy straw men in its attack on reference, insisting that the relation between words and meaning is entirely arbitrary, a matter of difference only.
The point has been frequently made that there is no necessary reason why ‘dog’ should mean the familiar, faithful, barking, domestic quadruped, which in other languages, gets referred to as chien, Hund, cane , etc.
And within the language-system of English, the sounds and letters of d-o-g are recognizable as such simply because they are not d-i-g, or d-o-n, or l-o-g.
Nevertheless, if we say not ‘dog’ but ‘My — dog-Rover-with — the — white — spots- and — the-stumpy-tail’, there can be no doubt that we intend not only a specific but a unique reference.
There is still a sense in which the relation between words and object can be called ‘arbitrary’, since we  are not dealing with onomatopeia, but it is quite unproblematical.
These questions are central to Raymond Tallis's recent book,not Saussure , which is concerned with the relation between signs, meaning, and reference in the critical and intellectual tradition deriving from Saussure.
Tallis is a witty and combative writer, who is opposed to la nouvelle critique but who is prepared to take it seriously and engage with it at length.
He recognizes the mythology of its English adherents, in which all criticism of their ideas attracts the charge of ‘a characteristically insular suspicion of nasty foreign ideas’, but he is prepared to risk it, continuing:
Those who feel hostile to much recent literary theory but are unwilling or unable to formulate their objections often lazily dismiss it as merely another Parisian fashion, citing the rapid displacement or structuralism by poststructuralism as evidence that the writings or Barthes, Derrida, Lacan and their American epigones constitute a craze rather than a serious intellectual movement.
There may be some justification for the (insular) suspicion that when the Emperor is restocking his wardrobe he usually shops in Paris; but the rashionability or ideas does not or itself constitute an honest argument against them; indeed, to offer this as one's main response is to betray intellectual bankruptcy.
It is less easy, but more interesting, to try to understand why ancient radical doubts about the ability or language to express a genuine extra-linguistic reality have been revived in recent decades to the point where they seem to have achieved an almost popular appeal.
Tallis sets himself the task of showing that much of the structuralist and poststructuralist enterprise is based on a misreading of Saussure.
Two aspects of Saussure's thought that have become well established in popular-academic consciousness are the distinctions between (a)langue and parole , a language-system and its particular manifestations; and (b)‘signifier’ and ‘signified’.
It is the latter which, Tallis argues, has been generally misapplied.
In Saussure's original exposition, signifier and signified, though distinct and only arbitrarily related, were supposed to be as indivisible as the two sides of a piece of paper.
We recognize a sign as a set of letters on a page, or an intelligible series of sounds, or an iconic device, and in the same perception we grasp what it stands for: signifier and signified together make up the sign.
GDO or ODG are random collections of letters, not signs (unless we  suspect that they are unfamiliar acronymics, or words in an unknown language), but DOG is the signifier of a sign whose signified is what is elsewhere understood by chien , etc.
This has nothing to do with reference to any particular dog, or even whether dogs actually exist at all.
One could do the same thing with ‘unicorn’, which has sense but no verifiable reference.
Tallis invokes Frege's distinction between ‘The Morning Star’ and ‘The Evening Star’, which are different expressions with different senses or meanings, as would be apparent if we tried to translate them into another language, but they have the same referent (the planet Venus).
‘Meaning’ is a slippery term, since it can cover both sense and reference.
In the poetry of Mallarmé the words ‘mean’ what a French dictionary tells us they mean, but they also take on the private and idiosyncratic meanings that Mallarmé gives them.
Poststructuralism, deriving from Mallarmé as well as Saussure, has developed a heady rhetoric in which signifiers are prised apart from signifieds, in Hawkes's phrase, and then fly away in all directions in their ‘free play’.
Tallis argues that people talk of ‘signifieds’, when they should say ‘referents’; there is nothing new or unfamiliar in the idea of verbal signs having multiple or even clashing references, and they have long been exploited by poets and punsters, as Tallis does in the title of his book.
Interestingly, Anthony Easthope acknowledges the distinction at one point in Poetry as Discourse : ‘Failure to distinguish clearly between signified and referent, the object it may refer to, has led to serious confusion in some accounts of the ideogram.’
Yet it is a confusion he frequently falls into elsewhere, as do other ‘New Accents’ writers.
Tallis's case is convincing, though he has certainly not said the last word on the matter, and there may well be further arguments from those who are professionally engaged in linguistics.
There is interesting supporting material in a book by the American critic Robert Scholes,Textual Power , published in 1985 and not consulted by Tallis.
In Tallis's reading, Saussure did not move from the sign, which comprised signifier + signified, to reference, because he was not interested in doing so, being concerned only with the internal aspects of a language-system.
He did not intend to exclude  reality.
The error lies with Saussure's expositors.
Scholes, however, believes that Saussure is himself inconsistent, and responsible for later confusion, but the thrust of his argument is very close to Tallis's, and both of them are concerned — as were Thurley and Nuttall — to reinstate the validity of reference and to deny that language is a system of ‘pure differences’, without relation to reality.
Scholes provides a useful table, divided into three columns, showing how linguists and philosophers have agreed in making a tripartite division between signifier, signified, and reference, though they present it in a variety of terminologies.
For Frege, it was Expression, Sense, Reference (Ausdruck, Sinn, Bedeutung).
For Carnap, Expression, Intension, Extension.
For Ogden and Richards, Symbol, Thought, Referent.
For Pierce, Sign, Interpretant, Object.
But in Saussure's system there are only the two terms, Signifier and Signified, with nothing in the third column.
Scholes comments,
The Saussurean formulation, like many ‘linguistic’ views of language, eliminates the third term and with this gesture erases the world.
For Saussure this was perhaps mainly a methodological convenience, a way of concentrating on the aspects of language that interested him.
For deconstruction, however, this erasure of the world is crucial.
Scholes's case is the more telling in that he is far from being a conservative opponent of all recent developments in theory; he has written favourably of structuralism, and unsympathetically about fictional realism (for which, indeed, he has been attacked by Tallis), and elsewhere in Textual Power he finds deconstructive reading — as opposed to the theory underlying it — a useful critical method.
The arguments of Tallis and Scholes against a major aspect of poststructuralist theory and practice should be attended to on the level at which they are advanced.
But one rather doubts if they will be.
Those who are addicted to the vertiginous rhetoric where language tells us nothing about reality, merely about other language, and where signifiers float in endless unattached free play, are apt to be contemptuous of demonstration and logic, seeing them as forms of bourgeois intellectual oppression.
Dropping reference is not a matter of tentative acceptance of an unlikely position, but of  doctrinal insistence.
A. D. Nuttall recalls an occasion when ‘an authoritative figure in the world of critical theory announced to a submissive informal circle of coffee-drinkers: ‘Reference is out .'’
I thought at the time: ‘Is Sinn really conceivable with no Bedeutung at all?'’
But I said nothing.’
The connection between poststructuralist conviction and political radicalism is both arbitrary and tenuous, but it is insisted on by some contemporary theorists, with their readiness to invoke analogies between cultural processes, however disparate.
Thus, a critical theory seminar engaged in the deconstructive analysis of a poem (or, more likely, of another theoretical text) is seen, in some muffled way, to be striking a blow against Thatcherism.
Patrick Parrinder has looked sardonically at this comforting but self-deceiving state of mind.
In the Preface to The Failure of Theory , he observes, ‘To judge by a good deal of recent writing, the following resolutions would attract majority support at a conference of devotees of literary theory.’
Among the resolutions are these: ‘The theorist is no longer a servant of the literary critic.
Theory and criticism should not take second place to imaginative writing’…
‘All utterances are implicitly theoretical.
All theory is political.
The task of the theorist is to uncover, and where necessary to denounce, the theoretical-political implications of all discourse whatever’…
‘The enemies of theory are politically conservative.
Theory is radical, and so are its advocates.
Pragmatists are not to be trusted.’
Parrinder's attacks are justified.
The insistence on the supremacy of the political has become a cliché of recent thinking.
But if everything is political, as is often proclaimed, then nothing is; one can invoke Saussure in the assertion that meaning is a matter of differentiation.
‘Red’ is only meaningful in a world where other colours exist.
Admittedly, the politically radical implication of poststructuralist and deconstructive theory is a highly problematic idea, and has been resisted by some on the Left such as Terry Eagleton and Frank Lentricchia, and the contributors to a largely Marxist collection of essays,The Theory of Reading .
Most recently, the discovery that the late Paul de Man, the doyen of American deconstructionists, had been a young collaborationist journalist in Nazi-occupied Belgium has made the issue painfully  acute in the United States.
Given the sources of deconstructionism in Nietzsche among others, it is just as likely to have a nihilist-reactionary dimension as a progressive one.
In practice, left-wing theorists tend to form part of a rainbow coalition where poststructuralist or deconstructionist positions exist alongside Marxist, Freudian, and feminist ones.
Such disparate allegiances are more likely to agree on what they oppose than in what they support.
The different colours of the rainbow of theory are evident in ‘New Accents’ titles, and in the various journals devoted to theoretical discourse.
Some of this writing is acute and interesting, the product of lively minds with genuine insights into the state of contemporary culture.
I would often rather read it than more conventional forms of literary scholarship.
Yet it is frequently open to pragmatic self-refutation: it argues against reason by the processes of reason, and a political cause, however radical, cannot be advanced without the traditional processes of argument and attending to evidence.
There is admittedly the playfulness of some versions of deconstructionist rhetoric, which read like prose-poetry.
But such texts are subject to the limitations of purely aesthetic discourse, with no through road to action, and must become politically suspect.
In fact, one does not have to be a committed deconstructionist to find a split between meaning and rhetoric in the work of recent theorists.
The rhetoric may point to extreme scepticism or Pyrrhonism but its users, if pressed, are likely to retreat to positions which are no more than a modified version of traditional ones.
As Nuttall has remarked, they claim that,
the dissolution of truth does not mean that no statements are true but only that there is no stable, unchanging absolute truth, and that certainty is persistently elusive.
And the embarrassed questioner retreats, apologising profusely, wondering why he ever fell into such absurd anxiety about this luminously sensible body of doctrine…
In that case, where is the theoretical revolution?
Patrick Parrinder, focusing on such contradictions and inconsistencies, has concluded that theory is a failure.
My own position is rather different.
Believing that the recent emergence of theory in literary education is a symptom of disorder, I find the contradictions as symptomatic as the coherences.
A high  temperature and a rash may be signs of a failure in the functioning of the organism, but cannot themselves be termed a ‘failure’.
Of the elements composing the rainbow coalition, Marxism is the most prominent and intellectually respectable.
It has been a major political and cultural force for a hundred years.
A large part of the world is notionally governed according to Marxist principles.
Yet the people in those countries show little sign of believing in Marxism in the way that some Western intellectuals do.
Globally, Marxism has run out of steam, persisting merely as sentiment and tradition, despite its conspicuous presence in parts of the Anglo-American academy.
The dominance of right-wing ideas has done little to avert the decline; to invoke Marxism against Thatcherism is to employ an obsolete weapon.
The present generation of British and American literary Marxists remind me of the small boy in Joyce's story, ‘Araby’, who got to the bazaar just as it was closing.
After a century of immensely influential life, Marxism is becoming a dying culture, to adapt the phrase of an earlier Marxist thinker, Christopher Caudwell.
Things looked different about a generation ago, when the New Left was still new and the texts of the young Marx were in fashion.
Then Marxism did seem to represent a serious and dynamic challenge to liberal assumptions.
French intellectual life, largely marxisant if not wholly Marxist, provided a substantial and supportive hinterland to the New Left.
That has now disappeared, and anglophone Marxists are subject to a disabling isolation, despite their energetic activity in the realm of literary theory.
They need their allies in the rainbow coalition, it seems.
In a longer perspective, the contribution of Marxists to literary criticism is considerable.
It is sufficient to invoke the names of Lukàcs, Benjamin, Goldmann, and, with reservations, Raymond Williams.
Throughout his career Williams had an uncertain relation to Marxism, sometimes adversarial, sometimes allied, and was uncomfortably conscious of paradoxes and difficulties in his establishment position as a professor at Cambridge and a leading British intellectual.
On balance, Williams probably gained more than he lost from his attempt to bring — and keep — together the separate traditions  of Marxism and British cultural criticism, though as Parrinder has shown in a sensitive discussion of Williams, he made needless difficulties for himself by abandoning the concept of literature.
Without doubt, a Marxist approach can be very illuminating when directed at particular cultural and intellectual phenomena.
Francis Mulhern's study of Scrutiny is a case in point.
In fairness, too, one has to admit that Marxism is not monolithic, and that in literary and cultural criticism it provides many possible positions.
Terry Eagleton, the leading Marxist critic in England, has occupied most of them in his time.
Recently, Eagleton, in denying the total centrality of the class struggle, reached a point that some might claim was no longer compatible with Marxism.
Eagleton's Althusserian phase of the mid-1970s was strongly attacked by a Marxist academic, Kiernan Ryan, who has since taken issue with another Marxist, Alan Sinfield, on the extent to which the great literary works of the past can transcend the reactionary ideologies that produced them.
Sinfield believed that they were often irredeemably tainted by ideology, at best to be read only in historical terms, or subject to symptomatic readings, seeking the fractures and fissures in the mystified surface of the text that showed the ‘true’ ideological conditions in which it was produced.
Against this, Ryan advanced the humanistic belief that the major canonical texts are not inherently reactionary, and that they contain implicit images and models of human freedom which transcend their immediate historical context and which later readers can respond to.
This is an interestingly eclectic argument which recalls Gadamer on the ‘fusion of horizons’(the reader's and the text's), Marcuse on the utopian possibilities of high culture, and Sartre on the necessarily progressive implications of major literature.
Ryan represents a kind of Marxism that non-Marxists might do business with, in the sense that one can make a rational engagement with it.
This is not always the case.
Marxists have the dogmatic assurance that comes from possessing a world-view that offers total explanations of social and cultural processes, and which is mysteriously immune to the ideological determinism ind deformation that they diagnose in others.
It is not easy to engage in discussion with someone who regards other opinions as no more than  symptomatic of the way a bourgeois intellectual thinks under late capitalism.
Ryan is representative of that traditional kind of Marxism, variously represented by Trotsky or Lukàcs, that regards the great literature and art of the past as a common human inheritance, which should be wrested from the exploiting classes and made available to the whole of humanity.
Set against it is the Marxist-structuralist position, that finds the concepts of art and literature inherently oppressive.
Here, ‘symptomatic’ reading is central: the literary text does not offer aesthetic or moral value, but is to be interrogated for its ideological implications.
In some respects, this is a return to a very traditional kind of cognitive reading, in which the literary work is not read for its ‘beauties’ but its message, though the ‘message’is now likely to be diagnostic rather than uplifting.
In the spectrum of contemporary theory, Marxist symptomatic reading has something in common with the deconstructive reading which discovers in the end, not harmony and organic unity, but contradiction and aporia .
Deconstructionists, though, tend to make the triumphant exposure of aporia a goal in itself, whereas Marxists incorporate their findings into a political and ideological system.
Nevertheless, this apparent similarity of method has been used as the basis for attempts, tentative and unlikely as they are, to find a rapprochement between Marxism and deconstruction.
But it is with psychoanalysis that the more obvious affinities of symptomatic reading lie.
The Marxist critic reading a text for the ideological traces that it attempts to conceal —‘Hegelian grammar’ is inescapable in such contexts — by its evasive gaps and silences, has an obvious resemblance to the Freudian analyst examining the manifest content of a patient's dream for the repressed realities that are concealed within it.
Moving on to psychoanalytic, by which I understand Freudian, criticism, I am in a difficulty.
Though neither a Marxist nor a Freudian, I find Marxist criticism deeply interesting, but not the Freudian equivalent.
The revival of psychoanalytic criticism, usually in its Lacanian version, has been a disconcerting surprise to someone who came to intellectual maturity in the 1950s, when Freud seemed a  figure of increasing remoteness.
I have no difficulty in accepting certain supposedly key Freudian notions, such as the existence of the unconscious mind and its effect on our daily living, and the self-contradictory and self-defeating quality of much human behaviour, but these are far from being original discoveries.
Freud himself said that the poets, not he, discovered the unconscious.
Beyond this, I do not accept much of the Freudian mythological apparatus, though Civilization and its Discontents has always seemed to me a penetrating if deeply pessimistic work of cultural analysis.
Sometimes psychoanalysis claims to be a genuinely scientific activity, in contrast to, say, Jungian mystagogy; at other times, when confronting the proponents of a hard scientific approach to psychology, like behaviourism, psychoanalysis presents itself much more in terms of myth and metaphor and explanatory fictions.
It is never very apparent what Freudian claims are based on, though they are widely accepted in our culture.
My scepticism has been reinforced by the recent work of Frederick Crews, who for many years was a leading psychoanalytic critic in America.
During the 1970s he began to lose faith in the whole Freudian programme, and in his recent book,Skeptical Engagements , he provides detailed and substantially supported arguments for abandoning it.
Freud is not, however, likely to be generally rejected, since he is so much part of the valued cultural furniture of the West.
Furthermore, attacks such as Crews's are, as he acknowledges, not taken seriously and replied to in their own terms, but treated as symptoms of repressed disturbance.
Freudians, like Marxists, cannot step outside their own forms of thought to admit that they might be wrong (unless, like Crews, they undergo a deconversion).
The recent revival of interest in psychoanalysis among literary theorists has come from France, and in particular from the work of Jacques Lacan, who brought together Freud and Saussure and produced the slogan, ‘the unconscious is structured like a language’.
Lacan has been very influential, although he is an almost impenetrably obscure writer.
The obscurity is not incidental, a product of carelessness or incompetence in writing, but a deliberate attempt to enact  the wayward processes of the unconscious.
As his admirer Malcolm Bowie acknowledges, Lacan's style is marked by,
disturbances of conventional word order, literal and metaphorical senses interwoven, periphrasis, ellipsis, leading notions alluded to rather than declared, abstractions personified, persons becoming abstractions, widely different words becoming synonyms, synonyms being given widely different meanings…
This is a literary use of language rather than an expository one, though poststructuralists frequently try to blur the distinction.
Indeed, Lacan was much influenced by surrealism, and Bowie compares his writing to Finnegans Wake .
Lacan is a revisionist Freudian, whose effect is to dissolve terms and concepts that Freud, with his positivistic formation, kept clear and distinct.
Lacan's work is not subject to empirical verification, and indeed is not meant to be.
Nevertheless, Raymond Tallis, whose own training is in medicine, has shown to what extent one of Lacan's key concepts, the importance of the ‘mirror stage’ in the development of the infant's sense of self, has no base in clinical experience.
As far as Tallis is concerned, Lacan is a charlatan, the L. Ron Hubbard of psychoanalysis.
Yet his system, like others on the contemporary scene, is constructed so as to repel argument or contrary evidence.
Bowie, whose admiration is tinged with honest caution, has summed up the Lacanian system in these words:
Just as you can gain access to the cave of the unconscious only by being inside already, he seems to be saying, so you can gradually reach towards an understanding of my work only by understanding it in advance.
Lacan offers us a new conception both of science and of truth, and asks us to abandon many of the procedures for verification or falsification on which the credibility of scientific enquiry traditionally rests.
Not everyone wants to enter the cave on such terms.
Lacan wished to get back to the original subversive spirit of Freud's writings, which had been simplified or distorted by their vulgar popular currency, and by the professionalism of psychoanalysis.
But a similar vulgarizing process has been applied to Lacan's own ideas, first in France, and then in the English-speaking world.
In Bowie's words, ‘Future sociologists of knowledge will no doubt study the mechanisms whereby an enfeebled ‘Lacanism'’…has come to loom larger within the intellectual life of a society than the original  ideas and texts.’
In England, Lacanian ideas have been linked with Marxist ones, as in MacCabe's James Joyce and the Revolution of the Word ; Catherine Belsey's Critical Practice , which identified Lacan's ‘symbolic order’ of language, into which the infant enters, with the Althusserian realm of ideology; and Anthony Easthope's Poetry as Discourse which related Lacan's dissolution of the ego to New Critical impersonality and structuralist ‘dropping of the author’.
One would have thought that Marxism and Lacanism would inhabit wholly disparate worlds of thought; the former is rationalistic and teleological, whereas for Lacan, as Bowie says, ‘arguments directed towards a terminus are falsehoods’.
Yet there are affinities, as Frederick Crews points out:
In Althusser's and Lacan's hands, then, both Marxism and psychoanalysis exchange an adaptive materialism for allegory.
There is no point at which they unambiguously intersect experience and therefore no point where one of their contentions could be modified by behavioural data.
They have become, not critiques of inhuman arrangements or guidelines for practical interventions, but master transcoding devices which will sort any text or problem into sets of formally opposed categories.
Both belong to what Geoffrey Thurley diagnosed as the sealed world of French rationalism; the difficulty of convincingly transplanting such forms of intellectual discourse from a French to an English context remains formidable.
The last component of the rainbow coalition that I want to refer to is feminism.
Here the difficulty I found in talking about psychoanalytic criticism is compounded, not because I am an unbeliever, but because anything that the middle-aged male commentator says about feminism is liable to be wrong: to be approving may be condemned as patronizing, and to be critical is to be sexist.
Compared to the movements I have discussed, feminist criticism has little theoretical coherence, though it draws eclectically on poststructuralism, Marxism, and psychoanalysis.
The lack of a single recognizable approach has been acknowledged by Kathleen McLuskie:
Every feminist critic has encountered the archly disingenuous question: ‘What exactly is feminist criticism?’
The only effective response is ‘I'll send you a booklist’, for feminist criticism can only be defined by the multiplicity of critical practices engaged in by feminists.
An obvious characteristic of feminist practice in the academy, unlike the other approaches I have discussed, is the extent to which it immediately does intersect with experience.
Classes or discussion groups on women's writing command an enthusiastic response that is often lacking in mainstream teaching.
The enthusiasm has, of course, been exploited, in the opportunistic launching of courses in women's studies, and by the publishing industry which has filled the shelves of bookshops — general as well as academic — with books with ‘women’ in their titles.
One of the most interesting and welcome results of literary feminism has been the reprinting of forgotten texts, usually by women but occasionally by men.
In an earlier Chapter I argued that the canon is ‘bursting’, because of the advent of other anglophone literatures, and the increasing interest in contemporary writing.
Undoubtedly, the new availability of earlier texts of feminist interest is helping the explosion.
At the same time, at the level of practical pedagogy, there is a counter-tendency in the study of the national canon to concentrate more and more on a small and diminishing number of texts.
Anything which attempts to reverse this by bringing in unfamiliar work from the past which students have a positive motive for wanting to read must be a good thing, and strikes a blow against cultural amnesia.
At the same time, there is an ambiguity in this backwards opening of the canon.
Much of the work that is rediscovered may have the literary qualities that will satisfy readers without particular feminist interests: the poems by women that Roger Lonsdale included in The New Oxford Book of Eighteenth-Century Verse are a small-scale, easily accessible instance.
Nevertheless, in a feminist academic context writing may well be studied, not primarily for its literary but for its cultural interest.
This question provoked arguments in America about the Norton Anthology of Literature by Women , some of the contents of which were said to have had little value as literature.
A common feminist response is to say that the whole idea of ‘literary standards’, even ‘standards’ as such, is a form of male domination.
I refer to this significant dispute in passing, without engaging in it, except to say that feminists are divided on whether they want to establish a countercanon or extend the existing one.
But the distinction between  literary texts and cultural texts is important, and I shall return to it.
A further consideration about feminist criticism, is that it is more practical than theoretical, in a familiar English way, and that unlike other schools in the rainbow coalition, it is actively concerned in producing readings of particular texts.
Most of them are produced by women, who provide insights that come from relating female experience to a body of writing; logically, there is no reason why these insights should not be available to male critics with the right sympathies and sensibility, but in practice most of this criticism is by women.
Such criticism, it is worth noting, is basically mimetic; literature is assumed to relate to experience.
Feminist criticism, like Marxist, is avowedly evaluative, which sharply distinguishes it from the generality of current academic criticism, of whatever school.
This is desirable in itself, though I do not warm to the feminist MacCarthyism which subjects texts to a close, hostile interrogation in a search for sexist attitudes.
I have attempted to take a rapid view of developments in critical theory, or criticism with a theoretical consciousness, as they have appeared in British culture in the past twenty years.
There is an immediate contrast with the literary criticism and theory of the early twentieth century, in that most recent work begins and ends in the academy, and has little contact with current literary practice.
Both the New Criticism and Scrutiny were products of the modernist literary revolution, and drew on it for their methods and their assumptions.
The American critics were usually poets themselves; Leavis made no attempt to be a creative writer — though he has been claimed as such by Ian Robinson — but his own criticism emerged from the Cambridge milieu of the twenties, where Eliot was a dominant influence.
A little earlier there was the remarkable work of Edgell Rickword as poet and critic, and, as editor of The Calendar of Modern Letters , a setter of the agenda for modern criticism.
Earlier still, in Russia, the Formalists had close connections with the Futurist poets, and attempted to provide a rationale for their revolutionary work.
Within the academic theory of the present time, approaches may either begin with literature, or with disciplines external to it.
Nicolas Tredell has usefully developed this distinction:
There are, broadly speaking, two kinds of theories which now bear on literary studies.
First, there is the kind specifically concerned with literature, or with an aspect of it: for example, the Russian Formalist notion of ‘literariness’ as linguistic defamiliarization; Bakhtin's view of the novel as ‘heteroglossic’, a carnival of competing voices; Todorov's poetics of narrative, German and American reader-response theories.
Against such theories, Tredell sets those which emerge from other disciplines, and which have lately been more commanding and influential.
Such theories, he remarks, ‘are not centrally concerned with literature; indeed, they may marginalize or abandon it as a category’, and he instances their source in such fields as philosophy, psychology, sociology, anthropology, linguistics.
In literary theory they emerge as Marxism, phenomenology, existentialism, structuralism, poststructuralism, deconstruction.
Tredell's analysis is perhaps too synchronic, suggesting that the various modes of literary theory coexist, whether easily or uneasily.
And so they do, on the shelves of libraries, or in the pages of textbooks.
In practice, though, in terms of what people are currently interested in, a diachronic model is needed.
Consider the implications of successiveness and change in the titles or subtitles of some recent books:After the new Criticism by Frank Lentricchia;On Deconstruction.: Theory and Criticism After Structuralism by Jonathan Culler;Displacement.: Derrida and After , edited by Mark Krupnick;Beyond Deconstruction by Howard Felperin;The Contest of Faculties.: Philosophy and Theory After Deconstruction by Christopher Norris.
Significantly, most of them are by Americans, for it is in the American academy that the pressure for change, for constantly new forms of newness, is greatest.
Things move more slowly in Britain, but the same pressures exist among that small but active segment of the academy that is concerned with critical theory.
This state of affairs has complicated my present task, since what was current when I began thinking about this book a few years ago, and, indeed, when working on earlier drafts of it, is now ceasing to be so.
In the present Chapter I have written of movements in theory in the present tense, whereas what is ideally required is something grammatically subtler — perhaps there are languages where it exists — like a special tense in which the present extends back  to include actions or events that are already in the recent past.
This would be the appropriate tense for the writing of that paradoxical genre, ‘contemporary history’.
What I have presented as analysis of current movements may well have acquired a historical flavour by the time these words are read.
If so, I am not abashed.
Contemporary intellectual history is an element in my present enterprise, though the very recent past is hard to see clearly.
I move towards the conclusion of this Chapter by invoking a further term in the sequence of titles quoted above: a recent paper by David Lodge called ‘After Bakhtin’.
Bakhtin is a latecomer on the anglophone critical scene.
His major work was done in Russia in the 1930s and 1940s, he suffered Stalinist repression, was partly rehabilitated, and died in 1975, at a time when very few people in the West had heard of him.
But, as Lodge says, ‘he was thinking his way, with the minimum of intellectual and material support, through the questions which preoccupy us, decades before we even thought of them.’
Bakhtin is a theorist in Tredell's first category, those whose work originates in literature itself.
In contrast to the poststructuralists, whose concern with actual literary texts is perfunctory or marginal, Bakhtin's work is focused on two major European authors, Dostoevsky and Rabelais.
Though Russian, Bakhtin wrote in a tradition of Germanic scholarship, and his work, particularly in the collection of theoretical essays,The Dialogic Imagination , can be prolix, repetitive, and opaque.
But the opacity, unlike the ludic obscurities of French poststructuralists, is not intended to undermine traditional meaning.
Bakhtin means to mean something, however difficult the meaning, and reading him is recognizably like reading the great critics of the past.
As is becoming well known, Bakhtin's central ideas are basically straightforward, and prominent among them is ‘dialogue’.
Speech implies other speech, either preceding it, or as an anticipated rejoinder.
As Lodge puts it, ‘According to Bakhtin, language is essentially social or dialogic .
The words we use come to us already imprinted with meanings, intentions and accents of others, and any utterance we make is directed towards some real or hypothetical Other.’
Bakhtin established the kind of binary opposition that is almost commonplace in  modern critical theory; it was between the ‘monologic’ and the ‘dialogic’.
The former was dominated by a single mode of utterance, as in the traditional literary genres, the lyric, epic, and tragedy.
The ‘dialogic’, which involves a plurality of voices, was particularly characteristic of the novel.
At first Bakhtin found this quality, otherwise ‘polyphony’ or ‘heteroglossia’, to be particularly characteristic of Dostoevsky, but he later extended it to typify the novel as a genre.
Bakhtin is unusual among literary critics in making the focus of his activity the novel rather than lyric poetry or drama.
In practice, binary oppositions are very liable to favour one term at the expense of the other, and there can be no doubt that Bakhtin preferred the dialogic to the monologic (a bias that is evident in everyday English, where to engage in dialogue is good, and to utter a monologue is rather bad).
This emphasis made the so-called ‘monologic’ forms of literature problematical, and Lodge quotes from an interesting late essay by Bakhtin which seems to suggest that all literary discourse is to some degree dialogic.
To remove the distinction completely would seem to undermine the insights that had given force to Bakhtin's earlier criticism.
Lodge suggests that this need not happen, if one sees the monologic and dialogic as dominant tendencies rather than mutually exclusive terms.
‘Dialogic criticism’ can provide new ways of reading.
It is distinct from the methods of the old New Criticism, which though believing that lyric poems were dramatic utterances, still read them as the utterance of a single voice.
Even when applied to the novel, as in Leavis's writings on novelists or Lodge's own early critical book,Language of Fiction , the New Criticism looked for passages of quasi-authorial description, or the exploration of consciousnesses that seem to carry authorial support.
Dialogic reading can also defuse poststructuralist scepticism about the possibility of meaning.
To quote Lodge again, ‘instead of having desperately to defend the possibility of a fixed or stable meaning in isolated utterances, we can cheerfully accept that meaning exists in the process of intersubjective communication, since no utterance ever is truly isolated.’
One has the sense that everyone now thinks well of Bakhtin, whether a Marxist like Terry Eagleton, a historical scholar such as Jerome J. McGann, or a practising  novelist and critic of fiction, David Lodge.
One must resist seeing Bakhtin as the US Cavalry, riding in to rescue a threatened humanism from howling poststructuralists.
Bakhtin was, I think, a humanist, but not in any obvious traditional mould.
He remained some kind of Marxist, and his concept of the ‘carnivalesque’, drawn from Rabelais, was presented as a mode of ideological subversion, a pulling down of the mighty from their seats.
It will take time for the implications of his work to be properly assimilated and understood; the process involves transposition from a cultural context that is more remote than the French.
But the growing interest in it suggests that it offers both a possible way out of present impasses and a way forward.
WHO IS DERRIDA, WHAT IS HE ?
During the 1980s the stars of French thought fell from the heavens at a disconcerting rate.
Louis Althusser, the severe exponent of anti-humanist Marxism, lapsed into uxoricidal depression and was placed in confinement.
Then came the deaths of Barthes, Lacan, Foucault.
The currency and power of ideas does not depend on their authors' continued physical presence.
Indeed, Bakhtin provides an example of someone whose thought has only become influential in the years following his death.
Nevertheless, the versions of structuralism and poststructuralism associated with these French masters have not advanced since they left the scene, and if anything have tended to decline.
This may be coincidence, or it may be that the star system in French intellectual culture requires its major performers to be visibly on stage.
And what was true of France has also been true, a little later, of the English-speaking world.
The major exception to these considerations is the vigorous Jacques Derrida, an admired figure in both the French and the American academic worlds, and a man whose dominance in contemporary critical theory is inescapable.
He deserves separate attention, though I shall not attempt an exposition or interpretation of Derrida's thought, which I am incompetent to undertake.
My concern is with the nature of his reputation, and the striking extent to which both his admirers and his detractors are unable to agree on what kind of writer Derrida is, or even what he is actually saying.
The one thing all readers are likely to agree on is that Derrida is a very difficult writer, whether he is read in French or in English translation.
This charge might be dismissed, of course, as one more example of Anglo-Saxon empirical ignorance, complacent insularity, intellectual laziness, and so forth .
Yet the philosopher John Searle has recorded that Foucault once described Derrida's prose style to him as ‘obscurantisme terroriste ’.
From such a quarter this is significant testimony (though it prompts in me the reflection that it takes one to  know one).
Searle glosses Foucault's comment by saying, ‘The text is written so obscurely that you can't figure out exactly what the thesis is (hence ‘obscurantisme ’) and then when one criticizes it, the author says, ‘Vous m'avez mal compris; vous êtes idiot '’(hence ‘Terroriste ’).’
The counter-move to such complaints is to say that the concept of lucidity is itself repressive, and that unravelling Derrida's meanings is itself a deconstructive act, directed against hegemonic ideological positions.
Yet despite the obscurity, Derrida's reputation has spread remarkably.
In 1983, visiting a university in provincial Norway, I found students of English grappling perplexedly with Derrida, having been encouraged to do so by their British professor.
A year or so before that I was at a conference in America where deconstruction bulked largely on the agenda.
Between formal sessions I asked an amiable American academic precisely how he managed to familiarize his students with it, given the difficulty.
He admitted that it was not easy, and said that, in effect, what one did was to get them to read the first chapter of any book by Derrida.
In such ways, fashion and triviality can go hand in hand.
It is noticeable that though Derrida is a philosopher, albeit one interested in literature, and has always worked in an academic-philosophical context, even if on the margins of the subject, his major impact in North America has been in literature departments.
Though some of his followers have philosophical training and interests, and are acquainted with the matrices of Derrida's thought in Hegel, Husserl, and Heidegger, his transmission in literary and cultural contexts has meant that his ideas have become simplified, his paradoxes and contradictions tamed and diminished.
One writer, whose interest in poststructuralism is primarily philosophical, has commented:
the reception of Derrida's work, perhaps more than that of any other recent French thinker, has been marked by an astonishingly casual and unquestioning acceptance of certain extremely condensed — not to say sloganistic — characterisations of the history of Western thought, as if this history could be dismissed through its reduction to a set of perfunctory dualisms.
People in literature departments are not used to handling ideas, it not being their métier , and traditionally they were not  required to, beyond such elementary tokens as the Elizabethian World Picture or the Death of God.
So it is not surprising that deconstruction was reduced to what could be easily handled and passed on.
Why Derrida has had such a vogue in America is indeed a puzzle, as Searle and others have acknowledged.
His name has been moderately conjured with by British academics, but there have been few attempts to systematize his work for the classroom, as has happened in the United States.
One obvious explanation is that deconstruction provided a convenient successor to the New Criticism in mass higher education, providing a form of detailed close analysis of texts which does not require much in the way of contextual cultural literacy.
But Norris has given a further and suggestive explanation: ‘The possession of a written Constitution whose principles are yet open to all manner of far-reaching judicial review…gives a political edge to questions of textual and interpretative theory that they do not have in the British cultural context.’
It is true that deconstructive approaches have emerged in American law schools as well as in literature departments.
The more simplistic versions of Derrida are common both to those who admire him and those who detest him.
In admiring expositions revolutionary rhetoric is apparent: Derrida is said to have subverted Western thought, and called in question the customary concepts of philosophy, literature, and criticism.
A key text is his early essay, ‘Structure, Sign and Play in the Discourse of the Human Sciences’, which concludes that there are two possible interpretations of interpretation: ‘The one seeks to decipher, dreams of deciphering a truth or an origin which escapes play and the order of the sign, and which lives the necessity of interpretation as an exile.
The other, which is no longer turned toward the origin, affirms play and tries to pass beyond man and humanism…
‘. Derrida says that these two interpretations are absolutely irreconcilable, even though, he adds in his gnomic fashion, ‘we reconcile them in an obscure economy’.
It is his second interpretation, deriving substantially from Nietzsche, that has become dominant in deconstruction as popularly understood, where all meaning is turned into ‘play’.
And it is this approach which leads to denunciation of Derrida as a  nihilist; in Frederick Crews's words, ‘an intellectual nihilist, though a learned and exuberant one’.
Raymond Tallis expands the charge, towards the end of his long negative analysis of Derrida's thought:
His is in some ways a tragic case: a man of immense talent and massive erudition, gifted with profound insights, who could not say the things he most wanted to say but who, nevertheless, has gone on to say them.
The publicity his ideas have attracted has only deepened the tragedy: the bad influence of those he has himself influenced has added frivolity to the obscurity…
Derrida's admirers, and perhaps some disinterested observers, would reject such charges as based on misunderstandings of his work.
This, indeed, is the most common defence of Derrida, whether advanced by himself or by his disciples.
And yet what does it mean to understand the formulations of someone for whom, on the face of it, final understanding is impossible, or never to be fully achieved?
It is this built-in contradiction and barrier to explication that leads to so much discussion of what Derrida really means by those riddling notions that have become slogans: such as, there is no such thing as perception; writing is prior to speech; there is nothing outside the text.
These phrases, and others like them, have been debated and pondered, interpreted and reinterpreted, as though they were the formulations of the great philosophers of the past, like Plato or Kant, rather than the work of a living thinker in mid-career.
There is a sense in which interpretation without conclusion is a mode of ‘play’; deconstruction insists that philosophical texts must be read as though they were literary texts, with full attention to their ambiguities and irresolutions.
In this light, arguments about Derrida's ‘meaning’ have the fascination and intractability of arguments about the interpretation of, say, Eliot's poetry.
Indeed, it is a central assumption of deconstruction that the distinction between literature and philosophy is exaggerated, or arbitrary, or even meaningless.
Certainly, some of Derrida's later work, such as The Post Card , looks more like ‘experimental’ literature than philosophy in the normal sense.
But provisionally granting the premiss that philosophical texts should be interpreted like literature, with careful attention to their textuality, then the question of language intervenes.
Arguments in anglophone circles about Derrida's  possible meanings are usually based on translations, without reference to the French originals.
Perhaps Derrida's most famous slogan, from Of Grammatology , is ‘il n'y a pas de hors-texte ’.
This can be, and has been, taken in all sorts of ways.
At one extreme, it is regarded as self-evidently nihilistic, a dissolution of reality into textuality.
At the opposite extreme, an English philosopher has tamed it to a position of common-sense moderation:
If meaning is brought to birth within the text, the text itself is the bearer of all the Reality that inheres in meaning; and that, when one thinks about it, is, while by no means all the Reality there is, quite a good portion of that part of Reality which matters to us.
Allan Megill has pointed out that an alternative ‘meaning’ of the phrase is, ‘there is no inserted plate’(a French dictionary defines ‘hors-texte’as ‘Gravure, planche tirée á part et intercalée dans un livre’).
Those who take Derrida seriously fall broadly into two camps.
There are those who accept him as a subverter of meanings, including his own, an anti-philosopher, a disconcerting jester, gleefully overturning accepted habits of thought.
In the second camp are those who regard him as a true philosopher, however provocative his manner, who is restating traditional philosophical problems in a new way.
This position is evident among English writers such as Bernard Harrison, Peter Dews, and Christopher Norris.
The first approach is more common in the United States.
It was brashly exemplified by Geoffrey Hartman, in his tediously playful book,Saving the Text:— Literature/Derrida/Philosophy .
Hartman presents himself in a complicated relationship with Derrida: engaging with him, succumbing to him, imitating him, and trying to resist him.
In the last of these veins, Harman acknowledges, ‘The problem, on the surface at least, is the persistence, the seriousness, with which an intelligence of this order employs devices that seem to be at best witty and at worst trivial.’
Here Hartman is also covertly speaking of himself, for his puns and wordplay and his jokey chapter headings are seldom far from the trivial.
Hartman is in the forefront of those deconstructionists who want to abolish the distinctions between philosophy, literature, and criticism, reducing them all to a rich textual stew.
In so far as Hartman's book wants to be read as a form of fiction, one can make the adverse literary-critical point that the prose is dense and cloyingly arch, with a crooning, caressing quality about it, suggesting the tone of a man talking quietly and earnestly to himself rather than trying to communicate anything to others.
Hostile critics have given Hartman a hard time.
Crews has referred to ‘a self-congratulatory hermeticism whose purpose seems to lie somewhere between the dropping of names, the displaying of tidbits of esoterica, and the muddling of agency’, and Tallis has written a cruel parody of Hartman's prose.
There is a more serious account of Derrida as subverter in Allan Megill's elegant and impressive book,Prophets of Extremity: Nietzsche, Heidegger, Foucault, Derrida .
Megill writes not as a literary critic but as a philosophically trained historian of ideas.
He regards Derrida as an ‘artist-philosopher’, owing much to Nietzsche, who saw the world as a work of art.
Megill discusses Derrida's early interest in French imaginative writers — Mallarmé, Bataille, Sollers, Ponge, Blanchot — whose work was directed to calling the idea of literature in question.
He points to Derrida s fascination with fourfold elements, evident in his deconstruction of the Hegelian triad — thesis, antithesis, synthesis — to add a fourth element, which is deconstruction itself.
Beyond this specific instance, fourfoldness has a life of its own in his thought; it appears in card-games —‘le jeu des cartes’ relates to ‘le jeu Descartes,— where there are four suits, plus a joker, whom Megill identifies with Derrida himself.
Derrida as joker undermines all practices and ideas, including his own.
Megill stresses Derrida's debt to Mallarmé and Nietzsche, two strange masters from the last fin de siècle who are exercising such an influence in our own.
Nietzsche is Megill's first and greatest example of the ‘artist-philosopher’, who has been followed by other ‘prophets of extremity’.
By the time one gets to Derrida, the latest and youngest of the sequence, Nietzsche's myth of art has itself been dissolved by Derrida's pervasive irony: ‘If Nietzsche is an ironic mythmaker, Derrida seems only ironic: the radicality of his irony undermines any pretension to myth.
Thus instead of articulating a justificatory art, he chooses to  question the myth of art itself.’
And yet what Derrida writes is as much art as philosophy; Megill compares his glas to Finnegans Wake .
He remarks, ‘the movement of a text by Derrida is directed less by the logic of an argument than by word play, free association, and an almost obsessive recurrence of a limited number of motifs.’
Megill himself, in his discussion of Derrida, as in the whole of his book, combines detailed knowledge of the texts, sympathetic treatment of his subject, and an ultimate detachment from it, so that it is not easy to discern his own attitudes.
Indeed, he brings his own delicately poised irony to bear at the end of his book when he writes,
If, upon hearing of the manifest truth of the work of art or of the textual, fictional character of the world, the reader will let a knowing smile play upon his face where previously he maintained an attitude of high seriousness, then the aim of this book will have been in part achieved.
Finally, for Megill, the artist-philosophers are more concerned with interpreting reality as an aesthetic phenomenon than with traditional truth-telling.
Their value for the reader lies in enlarging or changing our perceptions, in helping us to break out from a deadening routine; in short, the carnivalesque: ‘The prophets of extremity put up a distorting mirror against our world — but one which properly attended to, can tell us something about that world, and about the possibilities of changing it, or changing ourselves.’
This hortatory and vaguely uplifting conclusion is out of key with the body of Megill's book, which is distinguished by the penetrating quality of its readings, and which, among much else, offers a very persuasive presentation of Derrida as joker.
It is, however, the philosopher rather than the joker who is in evidence in Imre Salusinsky's interview with Derrida, conducted in 1985.
It is straightforward and lucid, in great contrast to Derrida's impenetrable interviews with French interlocutors in the late 1960s and early 1970s which are collected in Positions .
Derrida comes across as seriously concerned with philosophy and the problems of teaching it; and he is non-committal in his response to a question about the possibility of introducing deconstruction into high schools.
At one interesting moment he reflects on his responsibilities as a teacher in a very serious-minded way:
I wouldn't advocate a university that would be cut off from society.
We know that we have to train people towards a profession.
I'm against some sorts of professionalization, but it would be silly to think that the university should have nothing to do with any profession.
You have to train people to become doctors or engineers or professors, and at the same time to train them in questioning all that — not only in a critical way, but I would say in a deconstructive way.
This is a double responsibility: two responsibilities which sometimes are not compatible.
In my own teaching, in my own responsibilities, I think I have to make two gestures simultaneously: to train people, to teach them, to give them a content, to be a good pedagogue, to train teachers, to give them a profession; and at the same time to make them as conscious as possible of the problems of professionalization.
These admirable sentiments are certainly not those of a nihilist.
Elsewhere in the interview Derrida invokes his key word ‘play’ in much the same sense in which Arnold employed it in the ‘free play of mind’.
Those who take Derrida seriously as a philosopher can either agree or disagree with him.
John Searle is one of the latter.
In the late 1970s he clashed with Derrida in the pages of the poststructuralist yearbook,glyph , where Searle made some sharp remarks, such as that Derrida ‘has a distressing penchant for saying things that are obviously false.’
Derrida's reply did not take the form of a reasoned rebuttal but of ninety pages of verbal clowning, which put Searle in his place by referring to him throughout as ‘Sarl’, an acronym for ‘Societé à responsabilité limitée’, which means a limited company.
Derrida thus turned his opponent from a person into an institution, and his piece was called ‘Limited Inc abc’.
Searle returned to the attack in 1983, in a review of Jonathan Culler's On Deconstruction .
He claimed that Derrida was in error in his claim that throughout the history of Western philosophy speech had been privileged above writing.
He further argues that Derrida's fundamental claim that speech is really writing, and that writing is prior to speech, is based on a redefinition of terms, and that by such methods one could prove anything, that the rich are really poor, that the true is really false, and so on.
Searle characterizes Derrida as a genuine philosopher, who, because modern philosophy had undermined the transcendental grounding for reality offered by traditional metaphysics, concludes that there is nothing left but the free play of signifiers.
Searle finds this an unwarranted conclusion.
Christopher Norris also reads Derrida in philosophical terms, even though professionally he teaches English in the University of Wales.
Unlike Searle he admires Derrida, and believes that he is genuinely concerned with major philosophical questions.
Indeed, Norris looks for a possible rapprochement between deconstruction and the Anglo-American philosophical tradition exemplified by Searle, though he finds that Derrida has more possible affinities with Searle's master, Austin.
Norris is at some pains to extricate Derrida's meanings from the American literary critics whom he believes have misappropriated them.
An unfamiliar Derrida emerges from Norris's book on him, not a nihilist, an artist-philosopher or a joker, but a profound thinker who does not uphold the positions that are popularly ascribed to him: irrationalism; interpretation as an unending free-for-all; meaning disappearing in a cloud of dispersing signifiers; the abandonment of reference and the disappearance (or death) of the author.
Norris writes:
Certainly it has been a main object of Derrida's texts to show how philosophers, from plato to Husserl, have striven and failed to suppress the signs of rhetorical disruption in the discourse of philosophic reason.
But he has also been careful to repudiate that facile misreading of deconstruction — prevalent among literary critics — which thinks to turn the tables on philosophy by proclaiming that ‘all concepts are metaphors’, or that philosophic truth-claims are really metaphorical through and through.
Such readings or misreadings tend to originate in Nietzsche.
For Norris, and, as he claims, for Derrida, deconstruction is
a rigorous attempt to Think the limits of that principle of reason which has shaped the emergence of Western philosophy, science and technology at large…the activity of deconstruction is strictly inconceivable outside the tradition of enlightened rational critique whose classic formulations are still to be found in Kant (Norris's italics).
Norris's book is, in its own terms, persuasive and carefully argued.
He shows himself to be here, as he did in his earlier Deconstruction: Theory and Practice , an admirably lucid and urbane expositor of difficult ideas.
Anyone who can say so clearly just what Derrida is saying, or doing, immediately puts the reader in his debt.
Yet the clarity and rigour may in themselves be problematical.
This was the position argued some years ago by practitioners of la nouvelle critique , who  believed that clarity in argument was a form of ideological mystification, reinforcing the status quo .
Put in such extreme terms, the position is clearly absurd and self-defeating.
But, for Derrida, whose fusion — or (con) fusion — of obscurity and playfulness is an essential element in his textuality, Norris's exposition may represent a process of intellectual tidying up which leaves out something important.
Working hard against the prevalent impression of Derrida as some kind of irresponsible comedian, Norris continually insists on his ‘rigorous’ and ‘scrupulous’reading of philosophical and literary texts.
One takes the point, whilst insisting that scrupulosity and rigour are matters of means not ends.
A generation or so ago, New Critics and Scrutineers did assume that scrupulosity and rigour were selfjustifying ends in criticism.
Since then much theoretical work has been directed at this short-sighted empiricism, uncovering the pattern of cultural or ideological assumptions that supported it.
Norris falls short of isolating or defining the actual end to which Derrida's scrupulous and rigorous readings are directed.
This is perhaps inevitable since deconstruction resists teleology, and it is this resistance that has enabled its enemies to call it nihilist.
Leaving intellectual content aside, there is an obvious contrast between Norris's manner, which is in the best English academic tradition, clear, cautious, attentive to evidence, moving from one conclusion to the next, and Derrida's exuberant obfuscation.
In his introduction Norris acknowledges the difficulty of writing about him at all in such a context:
That he should now figure as an addition to the Modern Masters series is yet another irony of Derrida's ascent to intellectual stardom.
No philosopher has done more to disown the idea that his writings embody some kind of masterly or authoritative wisdom.
And the irony is compounded by the fact that Derrida goes out of his way to resist any kind of adequate treatment in a book like this.
Norris's book is, in fact, more than adequate as a title in a series on Modern Masters.
Yet it is likely that he has imposed a colour-filter on Derrida, which lets through the rational elements and occludes the irrational ones.
Norris virtually admits as much from time to time.
Discussing Of Grammatology , he says he will treat it as a book with a theme, even though Derrida wants to discourage such an approach to it.
Derrida's famous paper ‘Structure, Sign and Play’ aroused much excitement when it was delivered at a conference on structuralism at Johns Hopkins in 1966, and has since acquired a mythological significance as the fountainhead of American deconstruction.
In so far as that essay gives some warrant to the idea of free-for-all hermeneutics, then, concedes Norris, ‘‘Structure, Sign and Play'’ is a text which, at least in its closing paragraphs, falls below the highest standards of Derridean argumentative rigour.’
Despite these occasional reservations, Norris writes as a disciple, who believes that other disciples, as well as Derrida's enemies, have got him wrong.
Arguing for what he believes to be the right way of reading Derrida, Norris makes what is essentially a forensic case.
What does emerge from it is that Norris's way of reading Derrida is likely to make considerable demands on the reader.
The texts are to be read and reread, with all the scrupulosity and rigour that Norris attributes to Derrida, and if not wholly in French, at least with frequent references to the original.
For Norris the provocative sloganistic phrases by which Derrida is best known will make true sense only when restored to the contexts from which they have been taken.
Norris may well be right that Derrida deserves such attention, but he is not often likely to receive it in the conditions of actual pedagogy, or in the random public exchanges of higher cultural life, which put a premium on the simplifying and the reductive.
It is, nevertheless, interesting that Norris should say, in passing, of Nietzsche; ‘there are many competing versions of Nietzsche, none possessing any absolute claim to articulate the ‘truth'’ of his text, but all of them — and this is Derrida's point — made possible by something in the logic, the syntax or the structural resources of his writing.’
What is true of Nietzsche is surely true of Derrida, of whom there are many competing versions; Norris presumably believes that his contains the truth, without distancing quotation marks.
But the other versions, admiring ones like Hartman's or Megill's, and hostile ones like Tallis's, are all based on something in his writing.
And it is their Derrida, the nihilist or joker, who has been so influential in literature departments.
There are other possible interpretations.
Michael Ryan has looked for a  rapprochement between deconstruction and Marxism.
Edward Said discovers a kind of negative theology in Derrida's writing, and Nicolas Tredell says something similar, ‘one might draw some interesting comparisons between, for instance, deconstruction and Nagarjunan Buddhism, which dissolves a metaphysics of presence into a metaphysics of absence, the Void.’
One may, in Derridean terms, play with these conflicting versions of ‘Derrida’, but sooner or later, if one is writing about him, or teaching him, then one has to choose, since they are competing versions.
It may be that to choose is to distort so protean an entity.
If so, this is yet one more of the paradoxes attending this remarkable figure, who, disavowing mastery has become a Master, and who undermines his meanings in advancing them.
SPLENDOURS AND MISERIES OF THE ACADEMY 
I 
Traditionally, people who wrote criticism often also wrote poetry or novels, and engaged in the discussion of politics and public affairs.
Things are now otherwise.
As Frank Kermode has put it,
You won't find it easy to name an important critic who was a critic, and nothing else; that is, until quite recently.
The world is now full of literary critics, some held to be important, who do nothing else but write literary criticism, and they all work in universities.
Kermode is referring to the demise of the man of letters, or the ‘bookman’ as he became known in late-Victorian England, and his replacement by the professionalized university critic.
Kermode sees this change — which is at the heart of what I am writing about — as having radical implications for letters, comparable to such things as the advent, first of printing and then of cheap paper; the bourgeoisie's greater leisure for private reading; and the abandonment by circulating libraries of the three-volume novel, which had been the favoured vehicle for fiction during much of the nineteenth century: Kermode exaggerates a little, I think; nothing in the establishment of university English is as important as the innovations in culture and technology which established the book in its modern form.
But he is right in seeing the movement of criticism from literature to the academy as having large cultural implications.
Kermode thinks that this process, with all that it implies, is a fact of life, which has to be lived with, whatever we think of it.
We may have no choice but to do so, though I believe that the change has been more damaging than beneficial.
There is the further consideration that universities may not indefinitely be secure havens for literary criticism, in the cold economic climate and rampant anti-intellectualism of Thatcherite Britain, and of many other parts of the world.
When English was established in British universities criticism played at best a minor part in it.
There was a ‘critical paper’ in the Oxford degree, but the emphasis was substantially on scholarship of a tough traditional kind, without much concession to the Arnoldian free play of mind.
For a long time Oxford English was directed towards scholarship and was suspicious of criticism, and this attitude was reflected in its house organ,The Review of English Studies .
Helen Gardner, for many years an Oxford luminary, did not believe that the purpose of ‘English’ was to turn out critics, any more than it was to produce poets and novelists.
The graduate in English was to be to some extent a scholar, in so far as he or she had a sense of the past and the capacity to understand literature in its historical contexts, particularly linguistic; beyond that, what was looked for was wide reading, an appreciation of masterpieces, and a capacity to write well, attend to evidence, and disentangle sense from nonsense in argument.
It was not, in fact, a bad educational programme, but it did not have the glamour of Cambridge English, where the idea of criticism was central, as instanced by the great success and influence of Richards's Practical Criticism .
Gardner, like other Oxford Anglicans, resisted ‘the religious and missionary approach to the study of literature evident in the Newbolt report and the Cambridge pioneers.
She was not positively hostile to criticism, indeed, she produced a book called The Business of Criticism .
But her concept of criticism was that it should be elucidatory and illuminating rather than evaluative.
Her assumptions are broadly Crocean; value appeared in the individual's response to the particular work, but should not be erected into hierarchies, and the reader should cultivate ‘the receptiveness and disinterestedness which are the conditions of aesthetic experience.’
Non-evaluative criticism, as propounded by the successive Merton professors, Gardner and Carey, has long been a popular ideal at Oxford.
But another Oxford professor, John Bayley, sees things differently.
Discussing a book on Dostoevsky, he remarks that while the author has much of interest to say about The Idiot ‘she does not quite persuade one that it comes off, indeed she does not really try, because like many scholars  today she is more concerned with showing how the thing works than with judging if it works well.’
From the beginning academic literary study was divided between those who saw it as inevitably involved with making judgements and those who did not.
Cambridge English represented the former: Richards and Leavis wanted an evaluative criticism, because they did not believe that literature was simply a matter of disinterested individual response; it was an index to the condition of civilization, which made judgements imperative.
Wherever Leavis exerted an influence, either directly, on his pupils, or via Scrutiny , then criticism was emphatically evaluative.
In practice this often meant that immature minds would take over Leavis's own evaluations without relating them to their own experience of literature, resulting in the diffusion of callow or inept judgements that has been condemned from the right by C. S. Lewis and from the left by Catherine Belsey.
Although the New Criticism in its later American manifestations generally pursued a purely formal and elucidatory analysis, Gerald Graff reminds us that the original New Critics were evaluative, since they wrote as conservative Southerners who were much concerned with ideals of cultural health.
They were also, for the most part, practising poets and men of letters, who would want to make judgements.
Similarly, Cambridge English was originally sustained by the achievements of literary modernism which had a new agenda to write.
In later academic criticism, it is only among Marxists and feminists that we had an overt evaluative pressure.
Elsewhere the idea of a supposedly non-evaluative criticism has become general.
I have remarked on its dominance in Oxford English, and a generation ago it was given magisterial expression in Northrop Frye's Anatomy of Criticism , which aspired to a ‘scientific’ criticism where there would be no place for evaluation, since it is not nobler to study stars than earthworms.
In the recent work of the global anglophone academy, evaluative criticism has largely disappeared.
In its simpler, popularizing aspects the emphasis is on illumination and elucidation, and in its more advanced interpretative reaches the critic is concerned to trace unnoticed patterns of coherence and unity, or, more probably these days, incoherences and aporias.
Yet vestigial  gestures towards value persist, usually at the end of an exposition, where the critic in a final flourish claims, or at least hopes, that something valuable has emerged from the analysis; a revelation of the quality of the author's imagination; or of the inevitable tendency of all texts to be about their own processes of composition, or to come apart in the reader's hand; or of the aesthetic fascination of the patterns of imagery that have been revealed; or, at the very least, and least interestingly, that something ‘interesting’ will have been said.
Most of this academic activity is not, in fact, criticism as traditionally understood but something else, which is fundamentally a form of technical description.
Helen Gardner was aware of the problem, observing that the pursuit of image patterns, or of the ideas in a poem, can be useful to the interpreter, but cannot ‘be more than auxiliary in leading us to the true ‘meaning'’ of the work, which is the meaning which enlarges our own imaginative life.’
What Gardner calls ‘meaning’ is, I take it, the work's unique expression of value, which we grasp intuitively.
John Bayley, after the remark quoted above, goes on to complain about ‘the almost purely technical nature of this modern criticism, even more unsuited to how we actually respond to Dostoevsky than it is to most authors.’
Long ago, in the heyday of Cambridge English, Richards was making a similar distinction between the ‘critical’ and the ‘technical’: ‘All remarks as to the ways and means by which experiences arise or are brought about are technical, but critical remarks are about the values of experiences and the reasons for regarding them as valuable, or not valuable.’
Geoffrey Thurley claimed that much modern criticism, so-called, was mainly concerned with ‘scansion’, which is the description, often very close and attentive, of the structural, formal, and technical features of a text.
Such criticism Thurley argued, very convincingly, never bridges the gap between description and interpretation, which for Thurley involves evaluation.
In practice, much academic interpretation — whether New Critical, archetypal, deconstructive, or whatever — is really, in his terms, a more or less refined form of description or ‘scansion’.
He is very dismissive about the famous reading of a Shakespeare sonnet by Jakobson and Jones, which minutely analyses its linguistic features, and emerges with a banal paraphrase which, Thurley remarks, ‘any schoolboy would scorn to produce’.
If we take criticism out of its academic context and apply it to more things than literature, it is evident that comparisons of value are fundamental to it.
Consider, for instance, informed discussions of sporting events, which are always displays of evaluative analysis: who played well, who disappointingly, and why and how; or whether a team has played better at home or away, this season or last.
It is true that in such discussions the judgemental element does not exist in isolation, since it is interwoven with description, technical assessment of moves in play, and so forth, in ways suggested in Wittgenstein's lectures on aesthetics.
But to remove this element results in, at best, a decaffeinated criticism.
It has been taken for granted for a long time that criticism and the academy go naturally together, and a large pedagogic and publishing industry has been built on that assumption.
Nevertheless, I believe that the marriage, whatever its public appearance, is a difficult one, and results in bad faith and deception.
Helen Gardner was not a deep thinker, but she saw certain things more clearly than many sharper minds.
She was wrong to think that genuine criticism could be severed from evaluation, but right to think that there was no place for such criticism in the academy.
The ‘criticism’ which is copiously produced and read in literature departments eschews judgement for ‘scansion’, technical analysis, and elaborate interpretations which nevertheless remain fundamentally descriptive.
This state of affairs is not, I think, an aberration, but is inevitable in the structures of higher education.
The example of Leavis and Scrutiny may suggest otherwise.
Leavis was a major critic and a very influential educator, who was convinced both that criticism was essentially evaluative and that it was at the heart of English studies.
Yet Leavis was in many respects not a man of his time; though himself a dedicated university teacher, he was in spirit the last of the Victorian sages, who were men of letters and of affairs, not academics (prescinding from Arnold's and Ruskin's marginal tenure of chairs at Oxford).
Scrutiny had an enormous influence on English studies, particularly in England, but its  immediate model was the non-academic Calendar of Modem Letters , and more remotely the great Victorian reviews, whose contents might be described as the higher literary journalism.
In its early years Scrutiny was a fine embodiment of the spirit of criticism, literary and cultural.
Leavis's judgements were very much his own, laboriously arrived at, and presented with subtlety and rigour.
But these judgements were then taken over and pre-packaged for pedagogic purposes, so one had the spectacle of the Leavisite schoolmaster or university teacher who presented his students with duplicated copies of, say, sonnets by Hopkins and Rossetti, which they were invited to compare and contrast in evaluative terms.
There was no doubt that they were expected to admire the former and scorn the latter; anyone misguided enough to get the preference the wrong way round, would be regarded as at best naïve and misguided, and at worst corrupted in sensibility.
Denys Thompson's Reading and Discrimination (1934) is a collection of such comparative exercises.
Leavisism assumed that its rewriting of the canon had a once-and-for-all quality, so that it was inconceivable that anyone could come to admire Shelley again, though this is precisely what has happened under the influence of Harold Bloom, who is dedicated to overturning the Eliot-Leavis version of poetic history.
The attempt to enforce an evaluative criticism in the academy inevitably results in rigidity and dogmatism and, ultimately, a form of brainwashing.
Leavisites, of course, claimed that they were committed to discussion, argument, the free play of mind; in so far as they were, it was contained within the enclosing form of life, not directed against it, rather like arguments within Marxist-Leninist ideology.
It was this aspect of Leavisism that Oxford English, with its broad though often flaccid eclecticism, was most opposed to.
Venturing to propound a law of intellectual life, I suggest that evaluative criticism enters institutional literary study under the influence of practising writers, or of critics who have a close discipular relation to them, but that in time it is rejected, like an alien organ.
Writers, whose criticism arises directly from the problems and possibilities of their art, are inevitably evaluative; Baudelaire showed how being a poet also involves being a critic.
Eliot's early and best criticism  was what he called ‘workshop’ criticism, an attempt to realign literary tradition in the interests of the kind of poetry he wanted to write.
Leavis, at the beginning of his career a whole-hearted admirer of Eliot, took over Eliot's tentative critical models and systematized them.
Later he responded in a similar way to D. H. Lawrence's criticism, as well as to his creative achievement.
In America, as I have remarked, the original New Critics were evaluative, in ways closely connected to their own poetic practice.
Also in America there is the singular example of Yvor Winters, sometimes seen as an equivalent of Leavis, who was a poet of conservative but original talents, and a fiercely judgemental critic, who weirdly redrew the canons of English and American literature, so that T. Sturge Moore and Elizabeth Daryush emerged as major twentieth-century poets.
Unlike Leavis's, Winters's deconstruction of tradition proved too extreme to have even a temporary lodgement in the academy, though his readings of sixteenth-century poetry have had some influence, and a theorist such as Gerald Graff acknowledges a debt to Winters, who was his teacher.
It remains to show why genuine criticism is not at home in the academy; or, more precisely, why it is irreconcilable with pedagogic practice.
Criticism, I take it, is an activity that occurs between equals, whatever its object.
The critic is an unusually acute and well-informed reader, but there should be equality of esteem between the critic and other readers.
What he or she has to say is always open to comment, questioning, refutation.
This is apparent in the correspondence columns of those publications where the tradition of public criticism continues, like the Times Literary Supplement and the London Review of Books .
There is, of course, an immense amount to be learned from good critics, but the critic's role and tone are not those of a teacher.
Critical seminars within the university may sometimes blur this distinction if they contain elements of genuine intellectual exchange.
Leavis defined critical discussion as taking the form, ‘This is so, isn't it?’ expecting the answer, ‘yes, but…’(though never, ‘I very much doubt it’or ‘No, in thunder!’).
This formula may characterize the best form of discussion.
But it is disingenuous for academics to pretend that they can participate in such  discussion on terms of complete equality with their students, for there are questions of power and authority involved; at the end of the day, grades and marks, assessing and examining, come into the picture.
Students do not forget these overshadowing realities even if academics, caught up in the euphoria of a ‘really lively discussion’, sometimes do.
The reality is often closer to that memorably described by David Lodge:
occasionally one feels, as a teacher, rather like a soccer referee who, having blown his whistle for the kick-off, finds the players disconcertingly reluctant to make a move and is reduced to dribbling the ball himself furiously from end to end, scoring brilliant goals in undefended nets, while the motionless players look curiously on.
Not only should there be equality of esteem and status between critic and readers, though the former may appear as first among equals, they should all be in possession of the subject of discussion.
They should all have read the book, in short.
This is why reviewing is not properly speaking criticism, though it calls for critical qualities, and an extended review-article, looking at a whole oeuvre, may well be.
This is true in all aspects of culture.
If we are discussing a football match or a meal in a restaurant, then at the very least we should all have seen the match or eaten the meal.
Furthermore, we should have a shared understanding of the rules of discourse about such subjects.
A proper discussion of a football match cannot occur if one of the participants is quite ignorant of the rules of the game; and the kind of assessment of a restaurant meal that would involve the possible insertion of the establishment into a good food guide (or perhaps its deletion from it) will not get very far if one of the diners does not care for the meal because his idea of a gastronomic treat is a cheeseburger and french fries (though within the order of the burger discriminations are possible).
The critical reader of a poem needs to have some idea of what a poem is, which need not be a theoretically sophisticated idea, and some acquaintance with poetry already.
In this context I want to refer to a brief but highly significant passage in Richards's Practical Criticism .
In the latter part of the book Richards discusses the reports on the  ‘protocols’, the anonymous reports on the anonymous poems or extracts the respondents had been given to read.
He examines their various kinds of failure in reading, arising from the reader's susceptibility to personal fantasy, dominance by dogma, over-literalness, careless construing, and so on.
Most of these failures are in the order of mental operation, which is in accordance with Richards's dominantly psychologistic approach.
This is still true when he says that some of the respondents lacked the emotional maturity to respond adequately to poetry.
But he then goes on to remark that a further cause of inadequate response is the reader's unfamiliarity with poetry: ‘A lack of experience with poetry must be placed next to general inexperience of life in this list of deficiencies.’
Here Richards switches from a psychological to a cultural factor.
The remark has not been much noticed, but its implications must undermine the way in which ‘practical criticism’ is often employed in literary education.
It has long been common practice to give students isolated passages of poetry or prose, often but not always anonymous, to analyse, discuss, and respond to, in the manner of Richards's original undertaking.
In this exercise students are urged to clear their minds of presuppositions, to concentrate on ‘the words on the page’, and then to write down their responses.
The reading is deliberately contextless, and the mind is assumed or encouraged to be a Tabula rasa .
(More traditional pedagogy went for appreciation rather than analysis, urging the reader to a direct experience of the poem, perhaps inhaling its beauty like the scent of a flower; but the underlying process was similar.)
Such assumptions are quite contrary to what we know of how perception works.
The practice of ‘practical criticism’ in fact unconsciously takes it for granted that the readers already know enough about poetry to have a grasp of rules and conventions sufficient to make adequate sense of the passage.
Richards had to acknowledge that what he called ‘the relatively cultivated youth of our age’ were not very familiar with poetry.
If that was true, then, how much more true is it now, given the vast changes in education, society, and culture that have ensued since 1929?
I am not now going to engage in lamentations about the ignorance and lack of reading of present-day undergraduates, though I have done  so in my time, and could be easily provoked into them again.
I merely want to make the limited point that many of these students — who may be highly intelligent — do not have the existing familiarity with poetry, not to mention the general knowledge and cultural literacy, that would enable them to engage as equals in genuinely critical discussion.
Leavis held firm to the idea that any kind of responsible discussion of literature was a critical act, so that the academic was inescapably engaged in criticism when lecturing or conducting a seminar.
In reality this is unlikely to be true, as student and teacher do not have an equal possession of the text.
In other academic areas it is assumed that the teacher knows more than the student, and is there to convey this knowledge, whether as a corpus or a skill.
The conveying need not, indeed should not, be done in an authoritarian way.
In seminar teaching it should elicit feedback, questioning, the bringing out of implications or contradictions, and the opening up of fresh aspects of the subject.
Nevertheless, teaching implies an imbalance of knowledge, otherwise it would not be necessary.
The formal lecture, that archaic but strangely persistent mode, makes this apparent.
In literature teaching the emphasis is on shared experience rather than the conveying of information; a lecture is supposed to provide knowledge, elucidation, or interpretation of texts on the assumption that the auditors have already read them.
As anyone who has worked in an English department will know, many of those listening to the lecture will not have done the necessary reading, and are so reduced to hearing about and taking notes on something of which they have not had direct literary experience (even passing on their notes to friends who were absent from the lecture).
In a Crocean or Leavisite perspective this conveying of knowledge without experience is a useless activity.
It is, however, a common one, and a kind of collective bad faith.
Attempts are still made to introduce an element of evaluative criticism into academic teaching, whether from a surviving Leavisism, or under Marxist or feminist auspices.
My own efforts to do so have been instructive, but discouraging.
Judgements made in the course of a lecture will be taken down in notes as if they were facts, whereas it is in the nature  of critical judgements that they cannot be taken over by others; it is on this dilemma, I believe, that Leavisism ultimately foundered.
In the habitual contexts of English Literature teaching, students assume that if a work is on a reading list then it must be of approved quality, otherwise why is it there?
Attempts to provoke adverse judgements on canonical works tend to be resented as ‘finding fault with’ or ‘picking holes in’these works of established merit, the result of a tiresome foible on the part of the teacher, and leading to disorientation if persisted in.
In these matters, I think the students may have a more realistic sense of the situation than the teacher.
There has been much discussion recently of the nature of literary canons; university teachers of English are seen as both initiators and guardians of the canon (as, for instance, by Kermode in his essay, ‘Institutional Control of Interpretation’).
The academic institutionalizing of literary study inevitably leads to the establishing of canons (made necessary, among much else, by the logistic requirements of reading lists and bookshop orders), and where there are canons evaluation is, in the context of pedagogy, either impossible or unrewardingly difficult, since canonization implies merit.
And what is true of undergraduate teaching in England is equally true,mutatis mutandis , of the high-pressure environment of American graduate schools.
Furthermore, the great mass of academic critical writing produced in the United States is elucidatory, analytical, descriptive, scansional, not evaluative.
What is everywhere assumed, if not always made explicit, is that literary judgement has no place in the academy.
This is a correct assumption, since the institutional conditions preclude its effective existence.
Academics can still write evaluative criticism of course, and in so far as they do they are producing the kind of criticism practised by men of letters.
John Bayley provides an interesting instance.
Remarking that Dostoevsky's The Idiot does not altogether ‘come off’, he is making a coherent and discussable point, whether or not one accepts it.
Samuel Johnson might have said something similar, though in a very different idiom, about some accepted masterpiece of European literature.
But it is possible that the Dostoevsky scholar whose book prompted Bayley's comment might not have understood it — how could an acknowledged great novel, worth writing about at length, be said not to ‘come off’?
Bayley is a senior academic who has kept his distance from institutional pressures and writes in the manner of the traditional man of letters.
The despised belletrist criticism of an earlier day could make radical judgements in an off-hand manner; those articles, for instance, with titles like ‘On Rereading Stendhal’, which come to the conclusion that Stendhal has been much overrated.
An established professor of French Literature might nowadays privately believe as much, but would probably think it unprofessional or damaging to argue the case publicly.
Leavis, who notoriously had no hesitation about attacking canonical figures, was closer to this tradition, however much he detested the belletrist spirit, than he was to later developments in academic criticism.
His iconoclasm about Milton, for instance, was anticipated by Walter Bagehot.
Conversely, men of letters have always been ready for exciting literary discoveries.
The young T. S. Eliot, coming across Laforgue as a Harvard undergraduate is a celebrated instance; there is André Gide, well on in middle age, registering his delight and astonishment at James Hogg's Confessions of a Justified Sinner .
Donald Davie, in a dispirited essay called ‘Criticism and the Academy’, ruefully acknowledges that the belletrist criticism of men of letters such as Edmund Wilson and Cyril Connolly (unequal figures, these, one has to remark) might have more to be said for it than he, as a lifelong academic, would be happy to acknowledge:
Edmund Wilson and Cyril Connolly were as ready to talk of Ovid as of the memoirs of Ulysses S. Grant, and indeed ready to illuminate the one by shafts of light thrown from the other…
Connolly and Wilson, we may agree, lived dangerously; they took risks, knowing full well that they were not au fait with the latest scholarship, had not mastered ‘the secondary material’.
And we tell our graduate students that they must never take such risks, construing as scruple what in fact is timidity.
Davie himself provides the example of a dedicated university teacher, who is at the same time a fine poet, a practitioner of rigorously evaluative criticism, and a judicious reviewer.
He is, in fact, a rare surviving embodiment of those long-vanished  ideals of the 1950s, when it briefly seemed that University English might provide a terrain where all these practices could converge.
Morris Dickstein has contributed an excellent essay to the collection in which Davie's piece appears, called ‘Journalism and Criticism’.
Acknowledging the apparent opposition between these two terms, he goes on to argue, and to show from historical evidence, that throughout the nineteenth century, and into the early twentieth, much of the central function of criticism was carried by literary and cultural journalism, most of it, admittedly, of a more spacious and literate order than is common today.
It is to this tradition, I have suggested, that Scrutiny was indebted.
At the present time, it has become attenuated but not extinct, and it continues in the long review-articles in the new York Review of Books and London Review of Books , and a few other periodicals.
Academics contribute to it, certainly, but writing as critics, not academics, for it involves judgement as much as elucidation.
To take a particular instance, Martin Amis's The Moronic Inferno , published in 1986, is a collection of reprinted journalistic pieces on life, literature, and culture in contemporary America, a country for which he has mixed feelings of attraction and repulsion.
It is the work of a novelist and Journalist, not an academic, and notwithstanding the sometimes excessive brightness of the prose and the shortwindedness of the articles it seems to me a brilliant late embodiment of the Anglo-American tradition of literary and social criticism.
A central figure in Dickstein's essay is Henry James, a great critic, who could be subtly descriptive, elucidatory, analytical, and judgemental within the same piece of writing.
As Dickstein points out, much of James's critical writing was produced according to the exigencies of journalism and magazine publication; nevertheless, as now brought together in two large and handsome volumes in the Library of America series, it must be the finest body of literary criticism in English from a single author.
The whiggish notion that such writing might be somehow improved on or even supplanted by the critical mass-production of the anglophone academy is quite self-delusory.
II 
Richards, as we have seen, thought that in order to be a good reader of poetry one must already be a reader of poetry.
This is true, to a lesser extent, of all forms of imaginative writing, but poetry is the most obviously governed by convention and genre, and in the eyes of both the Russian Formalists and of non-literary readers the most likely to display linguistic deformation.
In many academic disciplines no prior knowledge is required or assumed.
It is possible for sixth-form students in British secondary schools to take the Advanced- (‘A’—) level examination for school-leavers in such subjects as philosophy or economics or sociology, but it is not at all common, and incoming university students of these subjects usually begin at the beginning, with open minds but with the necessary commitment to learning.
In principle it would be quite possible for the study of English poetry to begin in a similar ab initio fashion, except that it would be fruitless for someone to embark on it who did not have at least some familiarity with poetry and a wish to read more.
This is because the study of poetry as poetry — rather than as historical or cultural material — is a matter of intuitive and affective response, not just of willingness to accept an intellectual discipline, as might be the case with philosophy, economics, and so forth.
(I grant that the difference is not absolute, and there may be elements of the affective and the intuitive in the pursuit of any intellectual discipline, but they are likely to be marginal.)
It could be a rewarding form of teaching to help an uninformed but well-motivated student to come to terms with poetry, but it would involve time and leisure.
The student would need to read as widely as possible in different kinds of poetry, to learn something about literary history, genre, and convention, and to acquire the practical-critical skills of close reading.
All this might well be accomplished in the comparatively open-ended context of adult or continuing education, which is not dominated by the teleology of the examination system.
In the high-pressured and directive context of undergraduate teaching it may be desirable, but is not practically possible.
Too often, even the desirability is not recognized.
It is my experience that many students of English Literature with good A-level results dislike poetry, or at least feel baffled by it, and can go through a three-year degree course without this attitude being radically changed.
There are elements of a vicious version of the hermeneutic circle involved: people don't like poetry because they haven't read enough to come to terms with it, and they haven't read enough because they don't like it.
Several factors are involved in this unhappy state of affairs: a general decline in cultural literacy, and in skill and practice in reading.
Poetry demands a form of reading that, though rewarding, is unusually intensive, and it is often avoided in sixth-form English teaching.
Work for the A-level examination in English Literature means a narrow concentration on a limited number of texts, and curricular pressures do not leave time for the undirected contextual reading that would provide broader literary experience.
Furthermore, I suspect that many sixth-form English teachers have acquired an Honours degree in the subject without ever coming to like or appreciate poetry, and they pass on their incapacities.
Hence the concentration on plays and novels, often modern ones, which is made increasingly possible with A-level syllabuses governed by the specious lure of relevance.
There are, of course, complex social and cultural factors to consider.
It is a common leftist belief that poetry is an ‘élitist’ mode, precisely because of the cultural literacy it presupposes, which gives an unfair advantage to students from middle-class homes with books.
The advantage is undeniably there; but what of the ever-increasing number from middle-class homes without books?
The grammar schools once provided the necessary culture of learning, as well as specific instruction, for students from under privileged homes, as we see in Judith Grossman's Her Own Terms , or Anthony Burgess's autobiographical recollection of reading English at Manchester University in the late thirties (some twenty years before I started teaching there myself).
Many things have changed since then.
Not only have the grammar schools disappeared, but the number of students going into higher education to read English has greatly increased, the social catchment is wider, and reading has come to seem more difficult.
It was a recurring motif in the Newbolt Report, echoed by Leavis, that English was not just another school or university subject, to be placed alongside geography or geology.
There is some truth in this, but not altogether in the sense that was there intended.
Unlike other academic disciplines, English in higher education presupposes both an existing knowledge and an existing competence, which in practice is often lacking.
As I have suggested, up to a generation ago a common form of life united sixth-form and university English, regardless of whether their orientation was ‘Oxford’ or ‘Cambridge’, since the latter made much the same assumptions about literacy and competence as the former.
That shared culture has gone, though its traces have persisted for a long time, at least among those unworldly older academics who assume that students of English will have read the whole of Shakespeare in the sixth form, or that they can readily identify classical or biblical references.
The belated realization that these things are no longer so leads to the embittered and baffled reaction that they ought to be so.
However, that is a declining reaction; the experience of regularly interviewing would-be entrants to an English degree course soon induces a sense of realism.
In the state of affairs that still obtained when I entered the profession in 1959 the grammar school teacher and the university teacher of English were not radically different kinds of person; indeed, contingent or accidental factors might have determined which career path was followed.
Since then there has been a marked divergence between school and university; students have become less well equipped, and academics, particularly young ones, have become more high-powered, ambitious, and professionalised.
I am convinced that many students often do not understand what is being said in teaching situations, though they become adept at pretending to, as they do not wish to lose face.
There is a further factor that feminists have drawn attention to, which is that the majority of students of English are women, whereas the majority of academics teaching it are male, and that the female students have a built-in deference to male teachers and to the minority of male students.
This is broadly true, and has long distorted the group dynamics of seminars, though I have the sense that things are changing as women become more self-confident (the arrival in increasing  numbers of female mature students has been helpful).
At the same time, I have noticed that women academics can be ruthless bullies of girl students, with the possibly laudable motive of giving them the equivalent of a good shake.
David Lodge, whose experience as novelist, critic, and professor of English has given him many insights into the situation I am describing, provides in his recent novel Nice Work , a neat instance of the gap between students and teacher.
Dr Robyn Penrose is a recognizable type of advanced young academic, leftist, feminist, poststructuralist:
She probably knows more about the nineteenth century industrial novel than anyone else in the entire world.
How can all that knowledge be condensed into a fifty-minute lecture to students who know almost nothing about it?
The interests of scholarship and pedagogy are at odds here.
What Roby, likes to do is to deconstruct the texts, to probe the gaps and absences in them, to uncover what they are not saying, to expose their ideological bad faith, to cut a cross-section through the twisted strands of their semiotic codes and literary conventions.
What the students want her to do is to give them some basic facts that will enable them to read the novels as simple straightforward reflections of ‘reality’, and to write simple, straightforward, exam-passing essays about them.
In an American context, E. D. Hirsch has remarked on a similar conflict of interest between students who want to know the basic meanings of texts, in their historical contexts, and junior academics who believe there are no basic meanings, only a multiplicity of interpretations.
Such divisions are not, so to speak, purely academic.
They lead to confusion on the part of students, and it may be too glib to say, as one sometimes hears, that such confusion and disorientation are an inherently desirable part of the educational process.
It does not always work like that, for they can lead to real difficulties in study, and sometimes to pastoral problems.
III 
One of Lodge's earlier novels,Changing Places , hilariously exploits a series of typological oppositions.
The fundamental one is between a famous university on the American West Coast, Plotinus, and a more modest but still self-respecting one in the English Midlands, Rummidge.
These places are not, as the phrase goes, a million miles away from Berkeley  and Birmingham respectively (each of whose campuses is dominated, as it happens, by a tower copied from the Palazzo Publico at Sienna; in the novel these are transformed to upright versions of the Leaning Tower of Pisa).
The two central characters are both academic teachers of English: Morris Zapp is one of the biggest guns in the Plotinus faculty, who elects to take a visiting professorship at Rummidge in order to escape from his marital problems; his place is taken by Phillip Swallow, a naïve, amiable, unambitious Rummidge lecturer.
As the novel moves, with much formal inventiveness, back and forth between Plotinus and Rummidge, we observe Zapp and Swallow coping with different forms of local culture shock.
They go on to exchange roles as well as jobs, and finally, for a time, wives.
In sociological terms they are ‘ideal types’ and the differences between them have all kinds of thematic and representative significance.
They enact a polarity between American and British academic life in general, and English studies in particular .
Zapp is the supreme professional, who embodies, albeit comically, those ideals of professionalism that have long been dominant in the North American academy and are becoming so in the British.
His aim is simple: to write a series of commentaries on the novels of Jane Austen which would say everything that could be said about them, from every conceivable angle:
historical, biographical, rhetorical, mythical, Freudian, jungian, existentialist, Marxist, structuralist, Christian-allegorical, ethical, exponential, linguistic, phenomenological, archetypal, you name it; so that when each commentary was written there would be simply nothing further to say about the novel in question.
The object of the exercise…was not to enhance others' enjoyment and understanding of Jane Austen, still less to honour t e novelist herself, but to put a definitive stop to the production of any further garbage on the subject.
The commentaries would not be designed for the general reader but for the specialist, who, looking up Zapp, would find that the book, article or thesis he had been planning had already been anticipated and, more likely than not, invalidated.
After Zapp, the rest would be silence.
Zapp is impatient of other academics with tentative minds, who begin articles, ‘I want to raise some questions about soand-so.’
‘Any damn fool…could think of questions; it was answers that separated the men from the boys.’
He regards the  Splendours and Miseries of the Academy 1 59 study of literature as quite separate from life, with evaluation and affective responses rigorously excluded:
The failure to keep the categories of life and literature distinct led to all kinds of heresy and nonsense: to ‘liking’ and ‘not liking’books for instance, preferring some authors to others and such-like whimsicalities which, he had constantly to remind his students, were of no conceivable interest to anyone except themselves (sometimes he shocked them by declaring that, speaking personally on this low, subjective level, he found jane Austen a pain in the ass).
Changing Places , published in 1975, is set in 1969; when Zapp reappears in a later novel,Small World , set ten years later, he has changed his attitudes, in accordance with major shifts in the Zeitgeist .
He is now a poststructuralist and has abandoned the great Jane Austen project, as he disbelieves in the possibility of any kind of definite textual meaning or interpretation: ‘every decoding is another encoding.’
Zapp is simply keeping up with the state of the art; he is more convinced than ever that professionalism is its own justification and reward.
When an anguished Phillip Swallow asks him what, in Zapp's scheme of things, is the point of engaging in literary study, he serenely replies, ‘The point, of course, is to uphold the institution of academic literary studies.
We maintain our position in society by publicly performing a certain ritual, just like any other group of workers in the realm of discourse — lawyers, politicians, journalists.’
In Changing Places the Englishman Swallow is Zapp's opposite in all possible respects.
If Zapp believes that writing about literature has nothing to do with liking it, Swallow likes it all too much to be able to write about it:
This undiscriminating enthusiasm…prevented him from settling on a ‘field’ to cultivate as his own.
He had done his initial research on jane Austen, but since then had turned his attention to topics as varied as medieval sermons, Elizabethan sonnet sequences, Restoration heroic tragedy, eighteenth-century broadsides, the novels of William Godwin, the poetry of Elizabeth Barrett Browning and premonitions of the Theatre of the Absurd in the plays of George Bernard Shaw.
None of these projects had been completed.
Seldom, indeed, had he drawn up a preliminary bibliography before his attention was distracted by some new or revived interest in something entirely different.
He ran hither and thither between the shelves of Eng.
Lit. like a child in a toyshop — so reluctant to choose one item to the exclusion of others that he ended up empty-handed.
Swallow's predicament is a very familiar one in British academics of his generation, as is his non-possession of a Ph.D., that basic certificate of academic professionalism in American eyes (and now in English ones).
This is remarked on in an exchange between Zapp and Luke Hogan, chairman of the Plotinus English Department, before Swallow arrives:
‘any clown with a Ph.D.
should be able to teach English 99.’
‘He doesn't have a Ph.D.,’ Hogan said.
‘What?’
‘They have a different system in England, Morris.
The Ph.D.
isn't so important.’
‘You mean the jobs are hereditary?’
The Americans are professionals and Swallow is an amateur, which, we recall, has the primary sense of ‘lover’.
Yet there is one sense in which Swallow has thoroughly assimilated the professionalism of the academy.
Though he has difficulty in writing anything for publication, he is a scrupulous and painstaking examiner, and his own examination papers are carefully pondered, finely drafted works of art.
He even dreams of publishing a concise, comprehensive survey of English Literature in the form of examination questions: ‘Collected Literary Questions , by Philip Swallow.
A book to be compared to Pascal's Pensées or Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations …’.
Older academics, of whatever persuasion, were hostile to the idea of overt professionalism in literary study.
Their position was not altogether consistent, since they were committed to professional standards of achievement within the discipline, and, as they were paid to engage in it, were themselves professionals.
Yet, without doubt, they would have been horrified by Morris Zapp and what he stood for.
In Britain university English was developed with undergraduate teaching primarily in mind, in a culture that included the sixth forms of schools.
Until recently, graduate teaching was a very marginal activity.
In the United States the graduate school is the major arena of pedagogic activity and intellectual life.
It is here that research papers are generated and read and discussed, and where the academic superstars go through their paces and inspire their dedicated students.
As early as 1921, the Newbolt Report, summarizing the evidence of  Professor Ernest de Sélincourt, expressed deep unease about the American approach to literary research:
Many of the elaborate theses on English Literature produced by American students for their Doctorate, and afterwards published, were monuments of misdirected effort; in short, a true sense of literature as a living thing was lost, and in its place was substituted an investigation after the worse pattern of German ‘research’, deadening alike to those who wrote and those who read it.
The anti-Germanism reflects the Report's composition in the aftermath of the First World War; at the same time, this passage looks far ahead, already foreshadowing the opposition between Zapp and Swallow as representative figures.
In 1963, Leavis published an essay called ‘Research in English’, attacking what he called ‘a menacing academicism against which we have to be militantly upon our guard — a form of academicism institutionally established in America, and one the tendency towards which in this country — the developments of civilization favouring it — is much strengthened by American influence…
‘. One particularly undesirable consequence of this tendency was the ‘proliferation of the blankly or brutally crass kinds of doctoral manufacture’.
Leavis was suspicious of the PhD, though he acknowledged that good work could, in the right circumstances, be produced in that medium, such as his wife's Fiction and the Reading Public .
He is insistent that the only students who should work at doctoral level are those of first-class ability, who are independent of mind and inner-directed, so that they can work without much supervision, apart from‘a standing relation with a congenial senior to whom he can go now and then for criticism and advice.’
Leavis accepts that this admirable but stern ideal was already under threat:
the university has a new duty, we are told: there is a besieging host, everincreasing, of Indians, Africans, Commonwealth people in general, Levantines, who aspire to become university teachers of English literature, and must therefore have a PhD — preferably a Cambridge one (though it is admitted that a large proportion of them couldn't hope to take the English Tripos with much credit — even if they could pass).
As a university teacher of English, one reads this abrasive passage, twenty-five years on, with a painful sense of recognition.
There can be no doubt that the PhD, no longer seen as  a sign of unusually high scholarly achievement, has become simply a certificate of professional competence, and that intellectual standards have declined accordingly.
The decline has been inconspicuous rather than dramatic, and is patchy; the existence in British academic life of external examiners is something of a safeguard (they are unknown in American universities, where quality control is even less secure).
Even so, potential examiners are known qualities: some are likely to be severe, some lenient, and the experienced and canny supervisor or head of department is likely to make nominations accordingly.
Nevertheless, weak candidates still get failed, which is always a bitter and embarrassing business, negating the value of several years' work, often leading to anger within a department, internal enquiries about the quality of supervision, and even threats of legal action from the disappointed candidate.
I have declined to act as external examiner to candidates whose subject or thesis title seemed to be so dubious that a successful treatment of it could only be done by a candidate of exceptional brilliance; in such cases it is likely that the candidate has had inadequate or misguided supervision.
In a busy life, it is easier to avoid embarrassment than to have to extricate oneself from it.
Much difficulty could be avoided if the only candidates permitted to work for a PhD were those who were virtually certain to obtain it, but that is not a feasible option in the modern university.
Similar considerations make me sometimes decline to examine students from foreign parts.
This is not because of xenophobia, still less ‘racism’; prudence is the principal consideration.
Leavis's tirade against such students was an insensitive treatment of what was already a sensitive topic, and is now far more so.
In the 1980s, following on government cuts in finance, British universities have been engaged in a desperate scramble for overseas students and the more-or-less economic fees they are required to pay.
It is an undignified business, but survival demands it.
Higher degrees in English are an obvious target for foreign students who have been trained in the subject in their own country, and who wish to obtain a doctoral qualification in an anglophone university before themselves becoming teachers.
The university welcomes them as a source of income; some students are funded  by their own governments to obtain a doctorate and enter public service.
There is, in one way, an admirable balance of supply and demand, and some applicants are good by any standards.
Nevertheless, this situation presents hard decisions to those responsible for graduate admissions.
Should one turn away weaker candidates, and so lose the university income, or admit them, with the possibility of academic, cultural, and pastoral problems ensuing for several years?
Furthermore, there can be no absolute certainty that a candidate's thesis will pass in the end, however carefully the examiners are selected.
In such cases failure is even more painful than with a home student, and one has heard rumours of failed candidates having to return several years of fees to their government, and suffering even worse penalties.
The problems are not universal, one must emphasize.
Some students, particularly those from the Indian subcontinent who have been selected for Commonwealth Scholarships, are capable of performing very well at higher degree level, and then returning to an academic career in their own countries.
When overseas students do present difficulties — and I am sure many academics will be familiar with distressing or scandalous cases — it is not because they are lacking in industry or intellectual ability.
Many of them would do perfectly well in disciplines which are less idiosyncratic than English and have a more obvious international currency, like linguistics or economics or marketing.
But in this respect, at least, English in the English academy, as Leavis liked to emphasize, is not just another subject.
It expresses a mystique, is to a high degree culture-specific, can seem elusive, and is not easily reduced to the rules and agreed procedures of other disciplines.
It is not just overseas graduate students who have problems.
We must all have known home undergraduates who have worked very hard on an English course, who may be ambitious to do well, and who still, to their intense disappointment, end up doing badly.
This is not a matter of poor teaching, for such students can be the despair of conscientious teachers.
What is involved is an inability to penetrate the culture of the subject and to achieve the appropriate blend of knowledge, analysis, and affective response that is needed to  perform well in an English course.
Their minds are somehow not right for it; in some other discipline they might have performed quite respectably.
Protests about professionalization also came in the 1960s from the prominenti of Oxford English.
C. S. Lewis wrote:
What is…surprising and disquieting is the fact that those who might be expected ex officio have a profound and permanent appreciation of literature may in reality have nothing of the sort.
They are mere professionals.
Perhaps they once had the full response, but the ‘hammer, hammer on the hard, high road’ has long since dinned it out of them.
I am thinking of unfortunate scholars in foreign universities who cannot ‘hold down their jobs’ unless they repeatedly publish articles each of which must say, or seem to say, something new about some literary work…
By foreign universities Lewis presumably meant American ones.
A few years later, Helen Gardner, in her inaugural lecture, lamented the ‘pressure to publish’ on people working in English studies: ‘there is something peculiarly distasteful and peculiarly absurd about forced labour in my field.
A real deformation of values is suggested by the common use of such terms as ‘productive scholars'’ and ‘‘scholarly output'’.'
Gardner suggested that there was nothing wrong with apparent idleness, since it could often in the long run prove to be ‘the true seed-plot of thought’.
Twenty years on, the phrases which she saw as indicating a deformation of values have become commonplace in the Thatcherite academy, where contemplation is regarded as idleness, rather than the other way round, and Leavis's abominated ‘technologico-Benthamism’ is firmly in the saddle.
Despite the contempt expressed in the past for the American principle of ‘publish or perish’, British universities are more and more looking at volume of publication — otherwise, ‘performance indicators’— as a sign of virtue.
Quantity is easier to consider than quality, of course, and I have found that a promotions committee can be thrown into bemusement and mild disarray by suggesting that many of the publications on a candidate's CV might better have not been published.
To express such thoughts is to feel oneself uncomfortably situated between opposed concepts of what a university is.
Leavis, Lewis, and Gardner shared traditional values, even though Cambridge and Oxford spoke with different accents.
Common to the passages quoted above is the assumption that it is possible to denounce ‘academicism’ or ‘professionalism’whilst being a member of the academic profession.
That spirit persists, particularly in Oxford; witness John Bayley: ‘Most of the theories Eagleton expounds may soon seem outlandish curiosities, cooked up by teachers of literature who need to feel professional, in the sense that philosophers or scientists do, or powerful, like politicians.’
As I have remarked, the Warton Professor habitually adopts the attitude of a traditional man of letters rather than a paid academic.
It takes enviable sprezzatura and self-confidence to perform as a teacher of literature who does not need to feel professional.
There is, of course, nothing to prevent an academic from criticizing professionalism, which is indeed what I am doing now.
But I am conscious of a sense of contradiction that clearly did not afflict those illustrious figures.
When literary criticism moved into the academy, it received obvious privileges and status.
Critics and scholars had access to libraries, and the paid leisure to think, read, and write during university vacations, and, sometimes, sabbatical leave.
There was the intellectual stimulus to be gained from discussion with colleagues, and the challenge of teaching lively young minds.
And for some there were conferences and congresses in glamorous places, the glittering prizes satirically displayed in Lodge's Small World .
None of this was available to the hard-pressed scholarly hacks in Gissing's new Grub Street , or to the real-life Francis Thompson, keeping himself just alive by high-quality literary journalism, which involved working for twelve hours every day and taking no holidays.
But, in the words of the old Spanish proverb, ‘Take what you want, said God, and pay.’
There was a high price to be paid for these amenities and privileges, which was, quite simply, professionalism.
This was not the relaxed professionalism of the man of letters, but the stringent new professionalism of the academy.
For a time teachers of literature could assume that they were in but not of the academy, and keep a healthy distance from institutional pressures.
But universities have changed immensely in recent decades, and because of their close, complex and sometimes difficult relations with the public world, their procedures have become standardized and  uniform, reflecting concern about justification and accountability.
In this situation, the teaching of English Literature has not, on the face of it, done badly.
It is a large subject, much in demand, and is very cheap to teach.
Within the modern academy, English is treated with respect, though those teaching it may feel themselves impaled on the perennial dilemma of making it appear either a soft option or inhumanely technical and jargon-ridden.
The Newbolt — Leavis claim that English was not just one more academic subject does not survive well in this climate.
English is treated as one subject among many, albeit an important one, and has to assume institutional responsibilities as well as accepting privileges.
The task of the academic is to teach and engage in research, and, if required, to take on administrative duties.
Although there is parity of esteem among academic subjects, and dog is careful not to eat dog, at least in public, a scientific model of knowledge has, I believe, come to dominate the modern academy, and to affect attitudes to and within humanistic learning.
Such knowledge is progressive, rendering earlier versions of itself obsolete, and it circulates quickly and visibly through the accepted professional channels, like journals and conference-papers.
It is also subject to quantifiable assessment, in terms of volume of publication, frequency of citation, amounts of research funding, and the calibre of referees.
In English Studies this is the world of Morris Zapp, not of Phillip Swallow.
It has long been established in American universities; hence the acute consciousness of period, and the rapidity with which, in the state-of-the-art graduate schools and research establishments, critical approaches have followed one another: New Critical, structuralist, poststructuralist, deconstructionist, feminist, Marxist, New Historicist, dialogic.
It is not that academic critics make a conscious effort to imitate their colleagues in the sciences, it is that they have come to adopt their concept of knowledge, and its professional servicing and supportive structures.
The path that the young academic must follow who wants tenure, and still more advancement and fame, is clearly marked.
Morris Zapp had published four books before he was thirty.
‘Research’ in English has never been easy to define.
There are still many able academics who see their activity as  research in the traditional sense, by engaging in biographical, historical, or editorial work.
But where English departments are concerned ‘research’ is more usually understood in the broader sense of adding conceptual rather than factual knowledge, which in practice means the proliferation of interpretation.
The brighter sort of aspiring academic is more commonly found marking up paperback copies of standard texts in different coloured inks than delving in libraries.
Indeed, Terence Hawkes has defined and defended what he calls ‘paperback research’ as a proper activity for those who lack the scholarly resources of the ancient universities.
The advent of poststructuralism has given a great impetus to interpretive productivity, since all the literary texts that were once interpreted to show organic unity and complexity of meaning can now be interpreted to reveal underlying clashes.
Research in this sense and teaching can be in conflict, for the reasons suggested by Hirsch.
In an article reviewing Culler's On Deconstruction , Hirsch flatly rejects the idea that knowledge in English is continually developing.
He observes,
‘English’ in American schools and universities has always been a cultural, not a progressive, intellectual subject.
Although ‘English’ does have connections with the genuine disciplines of history and philosophy it came into being for cultural rather than disciplinary reasons.
English, for Hirsch, is basically to do with educational and cultural values, helping ‘to provide the myths and values we live by’, rather than generating ever new and more narrowly directed interpretations.
Hirsch is here defiantly looking back to something like the spirit which, in England, inspired the Newbolt Report and Scrutiny in its heyday, and which no doubt still evokes a sympathetic response in teachers on both sides of the Atlantic.
But it is hard to see it making much headway against the ideology that now pervades academic institutions.
The fundamental model is the physical sciences, but in the current transactions and debates in and around English, social studies offers a closer and more approachable example.
Michael Edwards refers to
the assumption that only enquiry into literature that is founded on the state of the art in sociology or other adjacent disciplines is valid, the rest being impressionist and subjective.
I once asked a colleague in linguistics if this  meant that the criticism of, oh, Addison, Keats, Hopkins, Forster, was valueless.
I thought of the question as rhetorical, but his reply was ‘Yes’.
The assumption that the cultural achievements of the past are actually obsolete is more likely to be implied than so explicitly stated, but it is a logical implication of a progressivist concept of knowledge.
Less radically, intellectual fashion means that some names are in, and others out.
Marjorie Perloff has remarked that young American academics and students have a shared culture based on having read or studied the same books: ‘they have, by and large, taken courses that expose them to writers like Freud, Nietzsche, and Marx, whereas the odds are that they have not taken a course in, say, the lyric poetry of Goethe, the fiction of Stendhal, or the theatre of Molière.’
In America fashion can actually be enforced.
A few years ago, as part of an annual round-up of critical books for Encounter , I reviewed an interestingly speculative work on modern fiction by an American academic.
My feelings about the book were positive rather than the reverse, but I complained in my review that it was studded with references to fashionable French gurus that were purely cosmetic, adding nothing to the author's argument.
A year or so later I chanced to meet him and he acknowledged that this was just criticism, but that he had been obliged to insert these names so that his book would look like a truly up-to-date, intouch work of scholarship.
In 1982 at Stanford I heard similar accounts of academic publishers requiring appropriate names and references in books.
Despite the protective embrace of professionalism and the general mutuality of respect and acceptance that pertains between disciplines, the academic teacher of literature is in a peculiar position in relation to his colleagues elsewhere, in ways that have been remarked on by John Bayley and Raymond Williams, and no doubt by others; in certain respects English does remain an essentially different subject.
We see history produced in history departments, philosophy in philosophy departments, sociology in sociology departments, and so on, by academics for whom teaching and research are two aspects of a unified activity.
This is not true of literature departments; what they produce is criticism and  scholarship, not literature, leaving out of account the occasional scholar-poet or writer in residence.
This situation has left literature teachers with the sense that compared with their colleagues they are not masters in their own house, since they are dependent for their material on a product manufactured elsewhere by shifty and unreliable suppliers.
The attempt to remedy this deficiency and achieve a true professionalism may be one reason for the rapid growth of literary theory in the anglophone academy.
If the academy cannot itself produce literature, and if even criticism can be written outside of it by novelists, poets, and literary journalists, then what it, and only it,can produce is theory.
Here is the authentic product of the English department, parallel to the history and philosophy which are generated down the corridor.
It is an error to assume, as I did myself at one time, that theory necessarily exists in an ancillary and elucidatory relationship to criticism, which is in turn at the service of literature.
That is a common-sense way of looking at it, but in practice literary and critical theory has become an autonomous subject.
Poststructuralists aspire to remove what they regard as the arbitrary distinctions between literature, criticism, theory, and philosophy, and Geoffrey Hartman has made it clear that he believes what he writes to be worthy of the esteem and attention normally given to ‘creative’ writing.
So, looked at in some lights, theory becomes literature.
This was the contention of Elizabeth Bruss's perverse but deeply interesting book,Beautiful Theories .
She writes:
And if the reading public as a whole is shrinking, if literature is increasingly relegated to the schools as something ‘to be studied’— if, in a word, the majority of readers now are scholars (whether students or professional academics)— then the claims of literary theory to be our representative literary genre become stronger still.
What better inspiration could a literature of theory have than an audience composed of theorists and critics?
This is not, I think, meant to be ironical, and it represents a quite logical development from the premiss that the whole production, definition, and reception of literature has now become intramural to the academy.
In this context, what goes on outside, what is actually written by poets and novelists, is of minor interest.
Paul de Man is reported to have said that a  literary work is merely an event in the history of interpretation.
A natural response to this state of affairs would be to say that theory cut off from the writing of literature is no more than a sterile academicism.
But that misses the point, if theory can be identified with literature.
These are the symptoms of a triumphant professionalism, which is sustained by the particular conditions of American academic life: the intensely competitive environment of the prestigious graduate schools, the free market in salaries which entices the superstars of the profession from one campus to another, the large funds available for research, journals, and conferences.
Admittedly, conditions in the American academy are a little tighter than they once were, but what looks like stringency by American standards is still lavishness by British ones.
Britain can never hope to compete with all this.
Nevertheless, professionalism on American lines is still the ideal that academic administrators uphold, since it can indicate to sceptical politicians and the public at large that universities are engaged in the visible activity which generates ‘performance-indicators’.
In this climate, the academic in English and other subjects in the humanities, who is busy, who publishes a lot, who goes to conferences, cannot but be preferred to the quiet scholar, who keeps a low profile, even seems rather idle, but is taking his time over a major piece of scholarly writing that may involve many years' work and which he does not intend to give to the world until he is ready.
Such people have in the past been left to go their own way without interference.
Nowadays they may be esteemed by their peers who know something of their work, but this esteem has little currency value in the committee-rooms where performance is appraised.
These academics may be respected, but they are also regarded as tiresome.
The culture of science looks for rapid and visible results, and it is this, despite occasional formal disavowals, that is setting the agenda.
Wittgenstein, widely thought of as the greatest philosopher of the twentieth century, published very little in his lifetime, and is unlikely to have got tenure in a modern British university.
To see these activities as representing the apotheosis of Morris Zapp and the eclipse of Phillip Swallow is tempting but too simple.
British versions of Zapp are probably now in  America anyway, finding a proper market-based reward for their talents and energy.
American professionalism may be the ideal, but differences between the British and American academic systems are noticeable.
The greater spread of American higher education means that, proportionate to population, there are far more universities, all with English departments; if they were as proportionately numerous in Britain, we would have about 1,000 universities.
Hence the wide and generally understood variations in academic calibre between American universities.
Furthermore, the greater commitment to undergraduate teaching gives English studies in Britain a different character.
And, least definably, there is the cultural nationalism, the concept of ‘Englishness’ that, from the beginning, has been a major element in the subject.
It produces a mystique which obstructs total professionalism and separates British from American attitudes.
Yet despite these differences, English English has gone quite a long way down the road of a more-or-less Americanized professionalism, as identified and rejected in the 1960s by Leavis, Lewis, and Gardner.
From the point of view of those who are currently in charge of higher education, English must be an awkward subject.
It is popular, in demand, and cheap.
Yet its quasi-mystical elements prevent it from fully using its potential.
It is the heir of a nineteenth-century ideology that, though supposedly liberal and contemplative, is also élitist, anti-vocational, antimarket, and indeed downright hostile to the idea that higher education should prepare young people to take their places in a wealth-producing economy.
An excessively elevated sense of standards means that there are difficulties about English Departments taking on overseas research students in numbers sufficient to help the university in its financial difficulties.
Academics in English are loners reluctant to engage in team projects or pull together in research centres.
They can be irritatingly slow to publish, and it is often difficult to know how they spend their time.
On the brighter side, there are those younger and more active lecturers who do their duty and generate performance-indicators in the form of books and articles.
It is true that in some cases these publications may be of extreme radical tendency, attacking the established  practices of academic English teaching, but that is no objection, since it is the fact of publication that counts, not its content.
The real problem is that the writers of such texts may make political difficulties within a department, or teach in ways difficult for students to understand.
Again, English departments can be unhelpful about participating in schemes for training academics how to teach, claiming that teaching literature is less easily defined and methodologized than teaching engineering or economics.
At a time when a good public image is essential for universities, English is unable to explain itself in ways immediately intelligible to the outsider, is notoriously riven with doubts and disagreements that prevent it from having a shared sense of purpose, and may at intervals erupt into crises that attract the wrong sort of publicity.
It is time, it is thought, for English to organize itself in ways that make it more like a proper academic discipline, with clear procedures and goals.
The adjacent social sciences provide the model for a genuine professionalism and accountability.
As long ago as 1969 a small committee asked to report, from outside the Faculty, on the perennially troubled state of Cambridge English concluded,
we believe that undergraduates in English would benefit from more ‘systematic’ and less ‘inspirational’instruction and that this systematic instruction and its associated reading lists should be agreed by the teachers concerned and closely related to the needs of the Tripos course.
I have never heard this case made in anything like the explicit fashion in which I have just outlined it, and I do not think it ever would be publicly made.
Yet one picks it up, in hints and implications, in the not-quite-concealed exasperation of polite administrators, in the raised eyebrows and brief knowing smiles of senior academics on committees; indeed, it is as much a matter of what is significantly not said, as of what is said; in poststructuralist terms, of lacunae,vides , silences.
The people who teach in English Departments are certainly aware of a lurking, inchoate threat to their peace of mind, and there is no successor to Leavis as a force to strengthen morale and defy institutional pressures.
Traditional English teaching is also under attack from the rainbow coalition of the left.
There are curious parallels and  similarities between bureaucratic calls for gleichschaltung and radical subversions of bourgeois humanism.
Both have the effect of weakening still further the synthesis of approaches that have characterized academic English since its inception.
We can again turn to Morris Zapp as the embodiment of a thorough-going professionalism.
(It may be objected that I am taking far too earnest a view of a wonderfully comic fictional character.
But Lodge's sociological understanding is considerable, and Zapp serves very well as an ‘ideal type’ of a present-day academic.
Dempsey in Changing Places and Small World is an approximate British equivalent.)
Zapp wants the subject to be organized, systematic, objective, in a word — though it is not a word he uses — scientific.
There is to be no nonsense about value, preferring some books or authors to others, or personal responses, which have a merely anecdotal or autobiographical interest.
Working on Jane Austen was not all that different from working on trade cycles, or lowtemperature physics; these were the kind of things that went on in the modern university.
Admittedly, in his later appearances Zapp has gone poststructuralist, and abandoned system and objectivity; but his commitment to professionalism is greater than ever.
Traditionally, the notion of personal response and what the Newbolt Report called ‘literature as a living thing’ were regarded by all schools as at the heart of English study, but there is no place for them in Zapp's perspective.
They would be signs of an unprofessional subjectivism and impressionism; in recent radical discourse they indicate an undesirable mystification.
Alan Sinfield, in a revealing Marxist analysis of the way Shakespeare is treated in public examination papers, remarks that they ‘construct Shakespeare and the candidate in terms of individual subjectivity through their stress upon Shakespeare's free-standing genius, their emphasis on characterization and their demand for the candidate's personal response.’
Elsewhere, Sinfield makes the cogent point that the idea of a personal judgement that nevertheless has to approximate to an accepted opinion involves the candidate in learning tricks.
This is true, and points to one of the central problems in institutionalized literary pedagogy.
Nevertheless, it is not clear from current Marxist criticism and theory, which in the  rainbow coalition is often buttressed by Lacanian ideas of the decentred self, whether it is prepared to accept any form at all of a personal, subjective or affective response, or whether all that must wait until after the revolution.
In the latter case, it will meanwhile have the effect of turning literary study into something much closer to the sociology that Marxists have colonized in the modern academy.
I argued in an earlier section of this Chapter that questions of value have always had an uncertain place in institutional literary study, and Catherine Belsey explicitly seeks to banish them.
She argues for a study of reading that would work towards political ends and ‘replace the mysterious objectives of aesthetic satisfaction and moral enrichment.’
In such a perspective, ‘literary value becomes irrelevant: political assassination is problematized in Pickering's play,Horestes (1567) as well as in Hamlet .’
Bureaucrat and radical have no time for each other, but they are both undermining traditional humanism.
IV 
The so-called New Historicism provides a curious fusion of academicism and radicalism.
In 1986, J. Hillis Miller, than whom no one is better placed to judge, told the Modern Language Association of America that by the mid-1980s critical theory had shifted from invoking ‘language’ as a prime foundational term to a cluster of words which included ‘history’, ‘politics’, ‘society’, and ‘culture’.
‘History’ has been given prominence by the New Historicists, while for some graduate students and younger academics ‘politics’has come to seem, as the Goldsmiths Professor at Oxford lately remarked to me, a kind of vital protein, without which a literary work is fatally impoverished.
In Britain the other terms referred to by Miller, ‘society’ and ‘culture’, have been familiar at least since the 1950s, which saw the early work of Hoggart and Williams and the cultural climate of the New Left, which in turn drew on Scrutiny and the Victorian debates on the Condition of England.
At a superficial glance, the New Historicism can seem, especially to an Oxford graduate of my generation, rather like  old-style historical scholarship.
When Fredric Jameson exhorts the reader, ‘Always historicize!’ one recalls Helen Gardner's assertion, 'All art, including contemporary art, is historical.’
But there are important differences.
The older scholarship treated history as the march of events, combining change and continuity, but without a mind or will of its own.
The contemporary historicism, fuelled by Marx and Foucault, presents history as a force in its own right, ceaselessly dramatizing clashes of class and power.
It has particularly focused on Renaissance literature and the struggles for dominance which are enacted in it, or are assumed to be.
The New Historicism refuses to treat the literary works of the past as transcendent entities, removed from social and historical contexts, and embodying supposedly timeless values.
Yet it contains a contradiction, since the class-struggle, or more generally the struggle against oppression, is thought of as always visibly at work in history in a clearly timeless way.
Freud, in Civilization and its Discontents , advanced the profoundly historicist suggestion that we should be cautious about interpreting the miseries of earlier times, since what now looks like unacceptable suffering may have felt less so in a different culture.
If one rejects Freud's suggestion — for instance, by quoting contemporary accounts from the victims — then one is inescapably positing a transhistorical human nature.
In practice the Marxist practitioners of the New Historicism tend to interpret Shakespeare plays in accordance with the political interests of the late twentieth century.
Thus,The Tempest is about colonialism; not only The taming of the Shrew but King Lear and Measure for Measure are a focus for feminist readings; while Henry V encodes a contemporary Elizabethan colonialist endeavour, ‘the fantasy of a successful Irish campaign’.
These readings are intermittently illuminating, if reductive, and basically they are doing what criticism has always done, which is to interpret the works of the past in the terms and concepts of the critic's own age.
It is precisely this capacity for renewed interpretation that makes literature of more than simply historical interest.
Latterday Marxist interpreters of Shakespeare are doing much the same as the conservative proponents of the Elizabethan World Picture did thirty or forty years ago, though with a different  conceptual model.
The contemporary New Historicists, however, are unlike interpreters of the past, in that they are concerned with exclusively political readings, without any possibility of aesthetic or affective responses.
Shakespeare provides a particular problem for radical critics who ideologically object to eminence.
Sinfield observes that Shakespeare is made ‘to speak mainly for the right…as the great National Poet whose plays embody universal truths…
‘. Yet Shakespeare has more than a merely national reputation, kept in being by those who manipulate ideological power.
He has, to a remarkable extent, a global reputation.
Despite the barrier of translation, his plays are known and enjoyed and regularly performed in many countries.
This is a phenomenon which I find impressive and mysterious.
It suggests that there are universal human qualities, and that people can recognize them in Shakespeare's dramas, over the centuries and through many cultural mediations.
Sinfield, I imagine, would decline to accept this.
The problem about Shakespeare for critics of his mind-set is that to take him seriously at all is to accept an alien agenda.
A truly revolutionary approach to Shakespeare would be to dismiss him, on the lines of the Dadaist and Futurist campaigns against the venerated high art of the past.
But that might be going too far for academic professionals, however radical their stances.
The more feasible alternative is to dismember his plays between the history of his own day and the ideologies of ours.
Marxists invoke ‘History’ as a ‘transcendent signified’, the ultimate in terms of which everything else is to be explained; but there are many histories, not one, and we choose those which suit us.
As Edward Pechter puts it, ‘History does not tell us what the text is, because we decide what history is, and then put history into the text, rather than the other way round.’
Something similar is true of ‘politics’, another transcendent signified and argument-stopper.
Since politics is traditionally one of the major defining activities of a rational humanity, the discussion of literature in political terms is not only possible but desirable, as the major critics of the past have shown.
But the word ‘politics’ itself needs to be deconstructed, since politics is to do with our ideals of what human life should be, about which there has never been agreement; indeed, it is out of the disagreement that politics arises.
In point of fact, when radical theorists invoke ‘politics’ they mean Marxist politics, in the paradoxically timeless fashion I have just referred to.
An awkward truth though is that in the twentieth century some of the most committed political criticism has come from conservatives, like Eliot and the Southern Agrarians.
An erudite work by an Oxford New Historicist, David Norbrook's Poetry and Politics in the English Renaissance , illustrates the structuralist truism that in a binary grouping one of the two terms tends to assume dominance.
Norbrook's interest is clearly far more in politics than in poetry.
The most significant aspect of the New Historicism, political questions apart, is that it represents a move away from the contextless, intensive concentration on particular texts equally characteristic of the New Criticism, classical structuralism, and deconstruction.
This has major pedagogic implications, since students can no longer hope to make sense of poems or plays just by reading them carefully, but must spend time in libraries getting up on the historical context.
Or, if they do not, they have to take on trust the material that the New Historicist scholar-critic hands them.
This seems to me retrogressive, and in some respects a return to the kind of thing I heard in my younger days in Oxford: ‘One cannot hope to understand A, unless one also knows about B, C, D, etc.’
A literary text is, manifestly, the product of a particular historical situation, and may be interpreted in the light of its origins and initial reception, as has been done in the discussions of Romantic literature by Marilyn Butler and Jerome J. McGann, who can be called New Historicists minus the ideological charge.
Yet historical interpretation of literature fairly easily loses sight of literary interests; if it goes far enough, the interpreter may assume that the idea of poetry or drama as art can be abandoned, since what counts are cultural traces, of whatever kind, and the ideological impressions they appear to bear.
In which case ‘history’ becomes a force to be resisted by readers who like literature, and who may also like history, but have never thought they were one and the same thing.
V 
No discussion of the institutionalizing of literary study in higher education would be complete without a mention of the academic publishing that exists in a close, indeed symbiotic relation with it.
‘Publication’ is increasingly important, not just to secure advancement in an individual academic's career, but as a sign of an institution's status.
I think it true to say that at the present time it is not at all difficult for academics to appear in print.
I am not thinking primarily of the well-established learned journals, which have high editorial standards and a long queue of articles waiting to appear.
(In the pursuit of performance-indicators, publication in ‘refereed journals’ counts for much, though I am not sure if I have ever appeared in a refereed journal in my life.)
However, new academic journals are regularly launched, devoted to one or other of the many specialisms into which English is fragmenting, and in their earlier issues, at least, are likely to be looking for contributions.
It is, however, in the vastly expanded world of academic book publishing that the greatest opportunities lie.
I do not claim to understand the economics of this system, which depends on small print-runs and numbingly high prices, and the assumption that institutional libraries will ‘want’, or need, to buy these books.
But it is evident that publishers, to stay in business, need to bring out a large number of titles every year.
This is true in other academic areas, of course, but English is one of the largest earners, since books in this area can be hopefully addressed to ‘general readers’, in a ritual recognition that there is a world elsewhere, as well as to students (though I suspect they are mostly read by teachers).
University teachers of English are regular recipients of visitations from hopeful, fresh-faced publishers' editors trawling for new titles.
Even PhD students can be approached before they have finished their theses, though the publication of unrevised theses seems to me undesirable, common though it has become: a thesis is written, as a rule, for two examiners, whereas a book, however specialized, should have a rather wider readership in mind.
Certainly, any academic who wants to write a book on a canonical author, topic, or period, is likely to get a contract  without very much formality (particularly if it has to do with ‘women’ or ‘theory’, or ideally both).
This is not the case, though, if the proposed subject is outside the catchment area of school and university examinations, as Terry Lovell discovered when she offered to write a book on Gissing for a leftwing series, which had asked for one on Jane Austen.
There is, I have found, some gentle entertainment to be had in discussion with publishers' representatives, observing the wide-eyed eagerness with which they greet potentially saleable ideas, and their clenched, wary, glazed-eyes response to proposals they feel negative about, or perhaps do not understand.
The discussion may be restricted to impeccably intellectual topics, but the play of market forces is going on all the time just below the surface.
In one sense, everyone benefits from the buoyancy of academic book publishing.
The academic gets the publication record that leads to tenure or advancement, and his or her name becomes known in the profession; the institution gains performance-indicators; and the publisher keeps a full and interesting list.
It is hard to speak against a situation that makes everyone happy, but one has to say it represents a form of intellectual inflation that is just as pernicious in its way as monetary inflation.
Far too many inferior or unnecessary academic books are published each year.
Some publishers maintain traditionally stringent standards, but others, in a competitive market, are relaxed about quality control.
It is far from unknown for an expert reader who provides an unfavourable report on a book in manuscript to find it nevertheless being published a year or so later.
The book from its invention has been a commodity, dependent on patronage or the market for its circulation, and this is a fact of history that there is little point in complaining about.
But in the present economic state of academic publishing the encounter between market forces and intellectual value tends to subordinate the latter to the former.
This situation is common in many academic areas, as I have discovered talking to colleagues, and it may be that this state of inflation and over-production is economically unavoidable, that many inferior books have to be published in order to let the good ones appear.
But what is unavoidable may still be  undesirable, and one might as well say so.
Where literary criticism is concerned, we are faced with the depressing reality that this is now just one more academic specialism, a large specialism, admittedly, produced by and consumed within the academy.
The price of books of academic criticism indicates that they are not aimed at the educated general reader (once they cost about the same as a bottle of whisky; now they cost three to four times as much).
So many books, to pick up a point once made by Malcolm Bradbury, are published primarily to be stored, moving smoothly from publishers' warehouse to library stacks without arousing much disturbance on the way, and are discussed, if at all, only in scholarly journals.
I have already remarked on the different situation thirty years ago, when criticism still occupied a traditional place as part of public discourse, and the first books of a distinguished generation of British critics — Bayley, Davie, Hoggart, Kermode, Wain, Williams — were reviewed in the daily and weekly press.
At the present time interpretation, often of a narrow and unrewarding kind, flourishes, usually though falsely claimed on publishers' blurbs to be saying something completely new and important.
Many interesting works of English Literature of the past remain unedited and unavailable, and it is a pity that the ingenuity and assiduity that goes into the labour, or play, of interpretation could not be directed to the truly useful work of editing these texts.
Meanwhile the publishers' catalogues arrive regularly, with their copious listings not just of new titles, but of new series, aimed to appeal to the collecting instinct.
I dutifully read through them with sinking feelings and, sometimes, a touch of nausea.
I do not seem to be alone in this response.
The writer of an admirable article on research in the humanities published in the TLS in 1987 wrote, ‘I believe passionately in the value of those activities we call ‘the Humanities'’, yet when I see a compilation like the British Library's Current Research in Britain (1986): The Humanities …
I feel sick.’
CULTURAL STUDY, POETIC ART 
I 
Consensus is too much to expect in the present state of English Studies, but I detect a convergence of ideas among those whose starting-points and ideological assumptions are very different.
There is an emerging belief that the study of ‘literature as literature’ needs to be replaced by, or incorporated into, a form of cultural studies.
On the Left it was advanced by Raymond Williams; Dollimore and Sinfield, in their introduction to Political Shakespeare , argue for ‘cultural materialism’, which brings together historical context, theoretical method, political commitment, and textual analysis in an effort to overturn established readings of Shakespeare.
In America, there are similar moves from Marxists, but also from those who are in cultural terms centrists or moderate conservatives.
As we have noted, literary study in the United States involves a large quantitative spread of the subject, intensive professionalism, and a virtual absence of the national mystique that characterizes English English.
There is a variety of approaches in graduate schools and change is more easily envisaged.
Robert Scholes writes in Textual Power :
interpretation is not a pure skill but a discipline deeply dependent on knowledge.
It is not as much a matter of generating meanings out of a text as it is a matter of making connections between a particular verbal text and a larger cultural text, which is the matrix or master code that the literary text both depends upon and modifies.
In order to teach the interpretation of a literary text, we must be prepared to teach the cultural text as well.
Such an approach is, of course, counter to the contextless concentration on the single text that characterized the New Criticism, and which served American literary education for many years.
Nevertheless, Scholes is right to say that ‘interpretation is not a pure skill but a discipline deeply dependent on knowledge’; as much was conceded by Richards in Practical Criticism , a fundamental text of the New Criticism, when he acknowledged that those who had not already read  enough poetry would read poems badly.
Scholes makes useful and practical suggestions for helping students to read better in this situation.
Like the English Marxists, though for more pragmatic reasons, he wants to demystify literary study, and to substitute ‘textual study’ for it.
This would not abolish literature but would remove its exclusivity as a category; the task of the English Department is to be redefined as ‘studying texts’ rather than‘teaching literature’.
Gerald Graff, in Professing Literature , is sympathetic to Scholes's approach, quoting him to the effect that what we call skill in reading involves ‘a knowledge of the codes that were operative in the composition of any given text and the historical situation in which it was composed.’
Graff also invokes the Bakhtinian concept of dialogue, where every utterance implies another utterance, which it answers, attacks, continues, or relates to in some way.
Such contextualizing tends to do away with the modernist and New Critical elevation of the Poem in Itself, the verbal icon, the well-wrought urn, the jar upon a hill in Tennessee.
In a return to the Latin origin of the word, ‘textuality’ weaves everything together.
When Scholes proposes ‘studying texts’ he invokes the terminology of semiotics, but he is, in effect, working in a tradition of rhetorical analysis that has always been an element in institutional English study, and which in the 1930s resulted in the work of Leavis and Thompson and other Scrutineers on contemporary culture and its artefacts.
Scholes's proposal to teach the ‘cultural text’ as well as the ‘literary text’makes good sense; but, for the best of motives, he tends to a brisk simplification in his approach.
In truth, there is not one cultural text, but a multiplicity of them, both concentric and overlapping.
As Henry James so memorably put it in his great essay, ‘The Art of Fiction’, ‘Experience is never limited, and it is never complete…
‘. If we assume — and it is probably the right assumption — that students can no longer easily read isolated literary texts, but need to make sense of them in a variety of contexts, much power is given to the teacher who decides which are the relevant cultural codes to be invoked and expounded; Marxists, at least, are specific on the matter.
Graff acknowledges the problem and proposes an openly dialectical and adversarial form of teaching.
Literary theory, he says, should not just be one more academic  subject, to be taught by a ‘theory-specialist’, but should inform the way in which an English Department organizes itself.
It should acknowledge that there are conflicts between critical approaches, and should make the students' confrontation of them part of the pedagogic process.
As an example, Graff raises the relation of a feminist literary canon to more familiar ones.
Such a canon has been attacked for proposing ‘political’ rather than‘literary’values as its foundation.
Graff suggests that students should be familiarized with the conflict by being asked to compare The Norton Anthology of Literature by Women with a traditional anthology and come to their own conclusions.
He makes the reasonable point that the upholders of traditional positions might achieve a new plausibility if they could be seen actually arguing for them, rather than merely asserting them.
I like Graff's proposals, but they seem to me utopian.
They might work in the graduate school of a good American university, where a variety of methods already abounds.
I cannot see how they could be established in British literary education, where there are no graduate schools as such, and the narrow, uphill tunnel of A-level work leads on to the rocky, cloudy uplands of the undergraduate degree, with its confused mixture of practical criticism and thematic study, analysis and literary history, coverage and special subjects.
Undergraduates of moderate ability do not much like being asked to choose between differing judgements on the same text; I can imagine them becoming confused and resentful if they were asked to choose between different critical approaches and all their attendant ideological baggage.
Certainly, I have known some undergraduates who would rise brilliantly to such a challenge; but they are an exception, and one cannot base a course on what would suit the exceptional student, much as one would like to.
Indeed, ‘mixed ability teaching’ is a major if not often acknowledged problem in higher education, particularly in English, where the extent of prior knowledge is so variable.
Graff's proposals for a structured pluralism are admirable in theory, but in practice they would, I fear, merely increase the demoralization of students and teachers.
E. D. Hirsch, in his recent book,Cultural Literacy , has  moved far beyond the problems of literary study to provide an agenda for American society itself.
He raises large issues: how much does one need to know to understand and engage in the dialogues within society, and between past and present, on the simplest level of knowing what is being talked about?
Even casual acquaintance is better than total ignorance, and ‘it's acceptable to take one's entire knowledge of Romeo and Juliet from Cliff Notes .
That is because cultural literacy is a canon of information not texts.’
Hirsch is trailing his coat, but he is concerned with what takes place in society at large, not in college courses.
Yet within the context of organized literary study, it is true that much of the difficulty students have in making sense of texts comes from a lack of information, or to use the older term, a deficiency in general knowledge.
As a scholar and theorist, Hirsch is known, apart from his unfashionable but vigorously argued advocacy of intentionalism, for his conviction that literature is not a coherent concept, and has no definable essence, and that by extension ‘English’ as a discipline has no absolute method.
He believes that literary study has a cultural and humane rather than an intellectual value; and the implication of his recent work is that there are other ways of attaining cultural value.
This has some affinity with the Marxist position.
In a published argument between Scholes and Hirsch, the former made the following statement, on the assumption that the conservative Hirsch would disagree with it:
At the heart my belief…is the conviction that no text is so trivial as to be outside the bounds of humanistic study.
The meanest graffito, if fully understood, can be a treasure of human expressiveness…
The best texts for this purpose should be determined locally, by local conditions, limited and facilitated by local wisdom.
Above all, they should not be imposed and regulated by a central power.
Nevertheless, Hirsch responded that (apart from a phrase which I have elided), ‘There is not a single one of these platitudes that I don't subscribe to wholeheartedly…‘.
There are continuities between the positions I have so far outlined, despite their differing ideological biases.
Scholes is not a Marxist, but his American cultural populism has affinities with recent Marxist writing; at the same time, Hirsch and Scholes find themselves in unexpected agreement.
One might reach out to other affinities.
When Scholes writes that ‘no text is so trivial as to be outside the bounds of humanistic study’, I am reminded of C. S. Lewis's argument that any piece of writing has a claim to being literary if someone can read it in a ‘literary’— i.e. an absorbed, attentive, loving — fashion.
The effect of all these approaches is to remove ‘literature’, as conventionally defined, canonized, institutionalized, and taught, from the exclusive and isolated position which it has long occupied in the anglophone academy.
Even the modest proposal that literature should be read in its cultural context has large implications.
I am very sympathetic to it, and have tried to put it into effect in some of my own writing, but there is an accompanying danger that literature becomes absorbed by culture, and that literary values are superseded by cultural ones.
This may seem innocuous and acceptable, but the implications should be understood.
The kind of poem that a literary critic would regard as banal, ill-written, shallow in feeling, and platitudinous in sentiment, might have major human interest for the cultural historian.
Granted that there is an absolute need for humanistic values to prevail in a neo-utilitarian and materialistic age, one is faced with a significant divergence in the nature of these values.
The experience of reading major works of literature can have an overpowering effect on the responsive reader (usually, but by no means invariably, the young reader).
Kafka wrote that a book should be an axe to shatter the frozen sea within us; Eliot said that we should properly ‘find Othello or Lear frightful’.
The right sort of literary experience can be like a nuclear explosion, whereas the ‘human expressiveness’ that Scholes detects in the humblest graffito is more like the low-level radioactivity that is always present in the natural environment.
There is, in fact, a good case for resisting the takeover of literature by culture, though it is not as strong as I once thought it was.
My doubts have grown during the years I have been thinking about and then writing this book, but for the moment I will concede that for many scholars and teachers a clarion-call to defend ‘literature as literature’ would prove rousing and timely.
It was sounded a few years ago by Helen Gardner in In Defence of the Imagination , by the contributors  to Laurence Lerner's Reconstructing Literature , and in America by Gerald Graff's Literature Against Itself (Graff's position has shifted somewhat in his more recent Professing Literature).
It was heard loud and clear in the unedifying battles of the early eighties.
And turning away from calls to battle and the accompanying rise in blood pressure, it seems reasonable for teachers of literature to go on teaching what they have been trained to teach, and what they like, understand, and are familiar with, without also having to take on many varieties of history — intellectual, cultural, political, social, economic, artistic, and musical — not to mention sociology, the study of popular culture, including the merest graffito, and, inevitably, literary theory.
The contextualizing of even the simplest poem has no obvious point to end at, once begun.
And the process by which the contextualizing is carried out would itself invite interrogation and theorization; Marxists committed to ‘cultural materialism’ would be impatient of a form of contextualizing founded in the history of ideas.
Similarly, to look at our activity in the self-reflective consciousness provided by ‘theory’ can be salutary; it is a good thing to know what we are doing, and, if possible, why.
But as Morris Zapp puts it in his poststructuralist phase, ‘every decoding is another encoding.’
When we have given, or been given, a seemingly adequate theoretical account of our processes, then that account may itself need to be understood and analysed in a further, meta-theoretical discourse, and so on.
Why stop?
Although literature is increasingly explained by ‘culture’, in an instance of the principle that one of the terms in binary opposition always becomes dominant, the process might be reversed.
A thoroughgoing deconstructive analysis would show culture being absorbed into literature, or at least into textuality and verbal play.
It is for this reason that deconstruction remains a fundamental threat to Marxism, and by implication to other culturalist and contextualizing approaches.
Experienced teachers ought to be able to deflect the naïve foundationalism that insists that literary works ‘can only be understood’ in such-and-such a cultural, social, or ideological context, by contextualizing the proponent's own discourse.
One can invoke, too, Ricks's insistence that the language of the agenda sets the terms of the debate: to speak  of ‘principles’ and ‘faith’is to offer an alternative discourse to the invocation of ‘theory’and ‘ideology’.
To speak personally, I might have found life easier, though possibly less interesting, if the English synthesis had continued to exist in approximately the same state as when I became a university teacher at the end of the 1950s: a genuine humane discipline, self-respecting, enjoyable, expanding, with methods that were established and familiar, if subject to variation between the different emphases associated with Oxford and Cambridge.
As we know, this agreeable stasis did not continue; the synthesis started to come apart for reasons which I have tried to explain.
A further disrupting factor was the academy's assumption that knowledge did not stand still but was advancing and progressive; if English accepted the security and opportunities of academic institutionalization, then it had to accept its concept of knowledge, and generate appropriate forms and volume of research.
If this meant there were potential conflicts between research and pedagogy, that was a price that had to be paid.
With the passing of time, the subject expanded further, institutional pressures became greater, and a gap widened between the professionals who taught literature and the poets, novelists, and dramatists, somewhere out in society, who wrote it, notwithstanding the increasing presence of contemporary literature as a university subject.
In this last respect, American experience is significantly different; writers-in-residence are common on campuses as teachers of creative writing, though literary theorists show little interest in what is being written.
Donald Davie has suggested that one reason for the explosion of theory is that it provides ‘a stamping ground for the innumerable people in departments of English (also of French, of German, of Classics) who have energy and intelligence but no literary sensibility.’
Davie's provocative point is well taken.
‘Literary sensibility’ is easier to recognize than to define, but it is analogous to having an unusually good ear for music, and has something in common with the creative faculty, even when the critic who possesses it is not an imaginative writer.
It has never been de rigueur for academics who rise to high places in English departments, and, conversely, students who possess it may not do well in formal  examinations.
The idea of literary sensibility would probably be dismissed by the culturalists of the Left as a piece of mystification, and certainly few of them have shown signs of possessing it, on either side of the Atlantic.
It implies that capacity for personal affective response that is dismissed by those who wish to transform literature into a purely cognitive discourse.
The most visible and vocal theorists have high energy and intelligence; they also seem to find imaginative writing rather boring before it is processed into theory.
The drift of my rhetoric might seem to be taking me towards a traditional defence of literature, of the imagination, of creativity, of humane values in general.
I believe profoundly in all these things, it goes without saying; my difficulty lies in knowing how defensible they are in the form in which they are visibly institutionalized in the anglophone academy.
My reflections are not encouraging, though they are not altogether negative.
The first line of defence of established literary study against culturalist pressures is to emphasize ‘literature as literature’ rather than as a version of philosophy, history, sociology, and so forth.
Hirsch has rejected this phrase as delusive and logically meaningless, and this rejection might itself be rejected as an instance of the rat-trap logic to which he is inclined, an improper attempt to define a subject in more rigorous terms than the subject requires.
Utterances about literature make sense, and are generally understood, within the form of life in which they are habitually made.
Nevertheless, long before Hirsch, C. S. Lewis wrote that many discussions about ‘literature’ are discussions of a nonentity; for Lewis, literature was about as non-specific a term as ‘talking’or ‘utterance’.
It was what was said that was important.
If we look at what is located at present under the general heading of ‘literature’ we find an extraordinary variety of texts, with only very tenuous family resemblances between them.
How far, for instance, do Middle-March and an imagist haiku resemble each other ?
Very little, I would have thought, though the student of nineteenth- and twentieth-century literature is likely to encounter both of them.
The idea of literature that currently informs English teaching makes arbitrary associations and exclusions.
Novels, for instance, have less in common with lyric poetry than with  other forms of extended narrative, such as historiography, biography, autobiography — a genre of which there have been some interesting studies lately — or even some kinds of essay.
Conversely, poetry is in many ways closer to music than to the more extended and discursive literary forms.
The canon of literature as currently studied has, in some respects, expanded enormously, by the introduction of contemporary literature, of American and other anglophone literatures, and of work by marginalized social groups.
But in other ways the core canon has shrunk, by being limited to the obviously fictive genres, poetry, drama, and the novel.
This represents a much narrower view of the subject than was common in the early days of institutional literary study, when works of history, biography, philosophy, and divinity were part of the canon.
Today, even the most traditional courses in English Literature do not, as a rule, include the English Bible, reasonably thought to be one of the masterpieces of our literature.
Underlying the restriction of the canon are a number of interrelated factors, unified by the institutional need to give the subject a proper identity.
In a view of the subject radically different from Hirsch's or Lewis's, ‘literariness’ emerges as an essential concept, akin to ‘philosophy’or ‘history’.
A text of the past may be of interest to a critic, a philosopher, and a historian, and each would discover his appropriate interest within it.
‘Literariness’ is to be found as a basic principle in the work of the Russian Formalists and the New Critics, and, elaborately formulated, in Frye's Anatomy of Criticism .
It inevitably presents itself in formalistic terms, and sometimes in overtly aesthetic ones.
The latter presentation is not so common, because of the generally unfavourable associations of ‘aesthetic’ in our culture, though it is implied whenever students are asked to approach a poem as a work of art, rather than as an historical document or a philosophical argument.
Indeed, a diluted Croceanism underlies much of our critical and pedagogic discourse, with its references to ‘expression’, ‘feelings’, ‘intuitions’, and ‘unique personal responses’.
Poems are more plausibly referred to as works of art than novels; the latter may have obviously aesthetic qualities, but have many other things in them as well.
Some  of the greatest novels ever written, James's ‘great fluid puddings’, are hard to make much of in purely aesthetic or formalistic terms.
Nevertheless, the ultimate defence of literature against the culturalist or contextualizing pressures which want to turn it into something else is usually along aesthetic lines.
At this point I shall return to Hirsch, who argues that there can be no intrinsic understanding of literature, only a variety of understandings: ‘Aesthetic categories are intrinsic to aesthetic inquiries , but not to the nature of literary work.
Exactly the same can be said of ethical and psychological categories, or any critical categories whatever.’
This points the way to the culturalist approach to which Hirsch has elsewhere shown himself sympathetic.
Music, I take it, could be defended in essentialist and aesthetic terms, but not literature; this point, also, was made by Lewis in The Personal Heresy .
Hirsch's formulation does not exclude the possibility of understanding literature in aesthetic terms, it merely prohibits us from claiming that this is how literature is, essentially, to be comprehended.
In practice, it weakens the claim of literary study to be a coherent and self-sufficient discipline.
One may choose to adopt a broadly aesthetic approach to texts, as is often done, perfectly appropriately, but one then encounters what seems to me a potentially disabling contradiction.
In practical pedagogy the student is encouraged to read, carefully, attentively, sensitively, a particular text.
As we have seen, there may be cultural barriers to such reading, but leaving aside that potential difficulty, we invite the student to make a unique, personal response to the text, to tune in to the true voice of feeling, to participate in its expressiveness; in short, to have an aesthetic experience.
This is true even of the seemingly tougher-minded Cambridge approach.
Williams has referred to ‘a conception of literature as a series of authors to whom there must,must be ‘personal evaluative response'’ or its available facsimile.’
In Romantic-Crocean terms, the experience is assumed to be both unique and ineffable, to be undergone in a form of negative capability, without, in Keats's words, any irritable reaching after fact and reason.
Croce, in the ninth chapter of Aesthetic , attacks the idea of applying rhetorical or critical terms to the unique act of  aesthetic expression.
Nevertheless, this, in one way or another, is what we then require the student to do; the ineffable is to be transformed into efficient communication, whether in seminar discussion, an essay, or an examination answer.
Fact and reason are to be reached after.
The contradiction has long been lived with in practice, and students become adept in faking responses.
Nevertheless, it points to a flaw in the aesthetic defence of literary education, and one which implicitly encourages culturalist claims to take it over.
I should add that my own understanding of literature is largely in aesthetic terms; at least, of poetry; where fiction and drama are concerned, aesthetic approaches can, at best , only be partial.
The idea of aesthetic education, as formulated by Schiller, seems an entirely noble one; the difficulty is in accommodating it to contemporary pedagogy.
This dilemma has been present since the beginnings of institutionalized literary study.
It was nicely illustrated in F. H. Townsend's satirical addition to Wordsworth's address to the cuckoo:
O Cuckoo! shall I call thee Bird,
Or but a wandering Voice?
State the alternative preferred
With reasons for your choice.
It largely disappears when literary texts are treated as cultural traces in a cognitive rather than an affective reading.
I am conscious that to question publicly the established methods of English study is to lay oneself open to the charge of giving aid and comfort to the philistines and utilitarians who want to remake higher education according to their own ideals, if that is the word for them.
My position is, I hope, straightforward.
I am a firm believer in extending higher education and in preserving the humanities, by all possible means, against technologico-Benthamite attacks.
But the humanities comprise a number of disciplines and subjects, of which English is only one; the Leavisite attempt to turn it into the Queen of the Sciences never looked like succeeding.
To identify English as peculiarly problematical should not weaken the general defence of humane values in education, and may in the longer run help to strengthen them.
A successful military campaign may require giving up some  tactically untenable territory.
Having taught English Literature for a long time in universities, on both sides of the Atlantic, and having spent some years pondering the questions raised in this book, I have come to some very tentative conclusions about what might be done; they are not, I might add, of the kind I thought I would come to when I began working on it.
In the wake of the MacCabe affair in 1981, an editorial in the Times Higher Education Supplement said that a fissiparous discipline such as English had a number of hard choices in front of it: it could become even more pluralistic and diffuse, with accompanying pedagogic problems; it could repressively impose one favoured approach; or it could split.
Raymond Williams came to think that a splitting of the discipline was increasingly likely, since cultural materialism and radical semiotics were not compatible with the dominant paradigm of literary study: ‘For these necessarily include the paradigm itself as a matter for analysis, rather than as a governing definition of the object of knowledge.’
In this situation, the question had to be raised:
can a radically different work still be carried on under a single heading or department when there is not just diversity of approach but more serious and fundamental differences about the object of knowledge (despite overlapping of the actual material of study)?
For reasons which are much more pragmatic than ideological, I have come to think that a separation of Cultural Studies from English, though not easy, would be the least damaging way forward for both parties.
It would represent a realignment within the humanities, not a diminution of them.
Cultural Studies would be visibly plural and fragmented, involving the study of literary texts, alongside others in history, philosophy, politics, sociology, film, and other disciplines.
Students' expectations would be shaped accordingly, and they would be spared the struggle to grasp the elusive ‘point’ of the subject which is a feature of life in English Departments.
There are quite good educational reasons for believing that a diverse spread of subjects is more suitable for the late twentieth-century academy than the traditional single-honours degree, as is suggested by experience in America, and in Britain in polytechnics and colleges of higher  education.
(Not to mention PPE, otherwise Modern Greats, at Oxford.)
In so far as literature would inevitably play a substantial part in any such course, the students reading it would learn the appropriate cultural codes rather than being expected to know them already.
They would also be spared the fall-out from damaging academic debates about the nature of the canon, and the virtues of coverage versus concentration.
There would be no fixed canon, and no coverage.
Such a degree course would not suit everyone, but it might well be attractive to the late entrants and mature students who are increasingly common participants in higher education, particularly in the humanities, and who bring valuable experience of life and work to their study, but may have rather little formal preparation.
It would also be more appropriate for the unambitious students of moderate talents who currently apply for an English degree, but would be more at home in a less intensive programme of liberal study.
Cultural Studies would provide a more productive environment for the radical aca-English Departments, who have conspicuous energy and intelligence, but little literary sensibility or aesthetic interests.
Literature, when taught in such a context, would, no doubt, be given a culturalist and contextualist treatment, and I believe that there is nothing inherently objectionable about this.
But I am also attracted by Graff's suggestion that those who favoured a ‘literary’, aesthetic, affective way of reading would then experience the satisfaction of working against the prevailing grain.
Once established, ‘Cultural Studies’ might show structural affinities with Social Studies and move closer to that area.
It might also become dominated by Marxists and cultural materialists, but not inevitably so; academic sociology offers points of comparison here.
And in any case, Marxism looks like a declining force.
My proposal will, I know, appear as selling the pass, to traditionalist teachers of English Literature, and perhaps upset them, which I am sorry for.
I will point out, though, that it is in some ways a very conservative proposal, inviting a return to origins.
When ‘English’ first came on the scene in the nineteenth century, it was precisely as a form of Cultural Studies, involving not only language and literature, but history, geography, philosophy, and so on, requiring the first professors of the subject to be polymaths.
It was only later that the aesthetic dimension of literary study became emphasized, with an accompanying concentration on the fictional genres.
The other part of my proposal will probably prove annoying to radicals, thereby ensuring a proper balance.
If Cultural Studies goes its own way, what happens to what is left?
I would certainly not favour a rump version of one of the current forms of English degree, with their recurring arguments about canons and coverage, the definition of literature, and the place of theory.
Instead, I propose taking the logic of generic concentration as far as it can go, with a degree which would study, in detail, a single genre, poetry.
There are certain academic precedents, particularly the uncontroversial establishment in a number of universities of degrees in drama, which do work previously thought of as belonging to an English degree.
The other model I have in mind is the degree in music, which is intensive, technical, and demanding, and attracts a small number of well-qualified entrants.
A degree of a comparable kind, directed at poetry, is, I think, feasible, and would be more coherent and rewarding than existing degrees in English Literature.
It would attract the automatic charge of ‘élitist’, but so, potentially, do many worthwhile kinds of intellectual activity.
The reason for concentrating on poetry is that it is the most visibly ‘literary’, formal, and conventional of the major genres, and would provide the best scope for study within an aesthetic frame of reference.
‘Poetry’ is itself a very flexible term, extending from Elizabethan lyrics to Don Juan , and from Paradise Lost to imagist epiphanies.
In my suggested scheme it would certainly include Elizabethan and Jacobean poetic drama.
By dropping the novel and other kinds of drama, more time would be provided for the extensive reading of poetry which is so essential if one is to make sense of any one poem.
There might be regrets over giving up the novel, but after having been deeply interested in that form for many years (even to the extent of writing one) and often teaching courses on the novel, I have come to the conclusion that the pedagogic difficulties involved are extreme.
Percy Lubbock, at the end of The Craft of Fiction , acknowledged that as soon as we have finished reading a novel we begin to forget  it, and what is left to talk about is a vague cloud of fading impressions: ‘the book vanishes as we lay hands on it.’
In the face of this central problem, the valuable work that has gone on in recent years in narratology, and other aspects of fictional form, is curiously difficult to apply in practice.
Teaching often involves looking in detail at particular passages, in the hope that the part will relate coherently to the whole, but the doctrine of the hermeneutic circle reminds us that we cannot understand the parts until we understand the whole (and vice versa).
Fredric Jameson has made a vigorous statement of this difficulty:
Every serious practising critic knows a secret which is less often publicly discussed, namely, that there exists no ready-made corridor between the sealed chambers of stylistic investigation and that equally unventilated space in which the object of study is reconstituted as narrative structure.
In practice, whatever the solution adopted there is always an uncomfortable shifting of gears in the movement from one of these perspectives to the other: nor does the assertion of this or that ‘homology’ between style and narrative do much more than to pronounce resolved in advance the dilemma for which it was supposed to provide a working answer.
If novels are to be studied as part of an exclusive course, they might be better located in Cultural Studies.
The teachers on such a programme would have to confront the difficulty I have just raised, as well as questions about the mimetic values of fiction in the face of structuralist and poststructuralist assertions that word and world have no necessary relation.
Something of the problem defined by Jameson would also apply to the reading of longer poems, but I believe it would be more manageable; with poetry, a better case can be made for homologies between style and structure.
A course dealing with poetry would certainly raise theoretical problems, whose discussion would be part of the programme.
The most demanding would be one I have previously raised: namely, that though the successful encounter with a poem may result in a unique aesthetic experience, academic practice demands that it be turned into non-aesthetic discourse.
Furthermore, not everyone who is invited to respond to an admired poem will have any such experience.
And although talking about poems ‘as poetry’ will imply an aesthetic reading rather than a culturalist or historical one, it must be acknowledged that  there is inescapable culturalist and historical underpinning of the idea of a canon; not all the poems to be read will have much aesthetic value.
What one hopes for is for the student to remain open to the possibility of aesthetic experience, to accept and enjoy it when it occurs, but not to fake responses if it does not.
Such a course would be primarily concerned with the formal, technical, and conventional aspects of poetry, considered both synchronically and diachronically; in a word, ‘rhetoric’.
Its starting-point might be Hopkins's definition of rhetoric as ‘the common teachable part of poetry’.
Such a statement implies that there are aspects of poetry which may not be so easily teachable.
Indeed, Hopkins distinguished between ‘rhetoric’ and ‘poetical insight and inspiration’.
The model, as I have said, would be a degree in music, and would include history and theory as well as analysis.
Most importantly, it would also include exercises in composition, of the kind once common in the study of classics.
I prefer not to call this ‘creative writing’, since the late-Romantic ideological implications of ‘creative’ are irrelevant, even undesirable.
The intention is that students of elaborate structures in language should be able to construct them as well as receive and consume them, if only to achieve a better understanding of how poems are made.
Something of the sort has already been introduced into some English degrees, under the aegis of the Verbal Arts Association, who have made a welcome start with such work.
The reading of English poetry would be accompanied by a consideration of historical as well as current theories of poetry.
These would include the arguments of the major poet-critics of the past: Sidney, Jonson, Dryden, Johnson, and on to the Romantics, Victorians, and modernists.
I cannot see how the canon of poetry could avoid being constructed along historical lines, though the problem and implications of canon-formation should be faced, as part of theoretical study.
It could take account of recent attempts to enlarge the canon, particularly by the addition of poetry by women, and other marginalized groups.
Indeed, such an academic structure might provide a good opportunity for the exercise suggested by Graff, in which students (many of whom would probably be women) would consider a feminist anthology of women poets  of the past, and discuss how far they are admissible into the existing poetic canon, and what theoretical criteria might govern such admission.
The canon would be largely English, not for a priori nationalistic reasons, but because it is written in English, and until fairly recently most poetry written in English was also written in England, or at least, in the British Isles.
There is no reason why American poetry, or poetry from other anglophone literatures, should not be read, given a minimal amount of culture and contextual instruction (which may also be needed, of course, in the reading of English poems).
To what extent students on such a degree would also need to read poetry in another language is a difficult question.
In principle it is extremely desirable, not only because of the basic ‘otherness’ of foreign poetry, but because such knowledge gives one a better sense of what English poetry can and cannot do.
In practice, given the monoglot tendency in secondary education it might be difficult to recruit students with the necessary competence.
The University of Warwick has for some time provided the possibility of studying both English and foreign texts in a comparative way at undergraduate level.
The lessons have, however, been inconclusive.
It is certainly the case that a student with, say, a moderately good pass in A-level French may have little capacity for the responsive reading of French poetry.
Within the Warwick structure students have the possibility of learning another language intensively from scratch in the first year, so they can read straightforward literary texts at the end of it.
That, at least is the assumption, but there have been disagreements about how well it works.
Some years ago the teachers of one language pronounced themselves satisfied that at the end of a year the students of it had the capacity for literary reading; the equally competent and concerned teachers of another language were convinced that their students had achieved no such capacity, and that the process was rather a waste of time.
Much, of course, depends on individual motivation and capacity.
Many people who are accomplished linguists have no literary sensibility.
On the other hand, there are those who have only an imperfect formal competence in a language but  who by a combination of guesswork and intuition can somehow make contact with the aesthetic qualities of a foreign poem.
Impressive translations have been made on such a basis, though usually by poets.
It is not a quality that it is sensible to expect in the generality of students.
For those who do not have much real competence in other languages, there is the possibility of coming to terms with poems in the older, more remote forms of English.
Chaucer, I assume, would form part of such a programme anyway.
Langland and the Gawain poet, read in the original, would extend both poetic experience and linguistic understanding.
Indeed, the historical study of language together with contemporary stylistics, probably ought to feature in any such course.
Personally, I reject the Oxford claim that English Literature begins with Anglo-Saxon, and would not make it a required subject.
But an option in it might be provided for those who were curious about what English poetry was like before, so to speak, it became English.
I already seem to be overloading a non-existent syllabus.
There is an element of utopianism in drafting such proposals, though I believe these ideas are worth pursuing.
The student intake would be limited to those who have a genuine literary sensibility, who are interested in poetry, and are already in the habit of reading it.
This might exclude many students who are currently enrolled in English degrees, even those with good A-levels which can now be obtained very largely by studying drama and fiction.
Indeed, I am not sure what the correlation would be between formal attainments and the right qualities needed to take a degree in poetry.
Some students entering it could have quite other claims and qualifications than A-level English.
It might well appeal to poets or would-be poets, who, contrary to popular myths about inspiration, are usually keenly interested in the technical aspects of composition.
What I have proposed in the foregoing pages is a conscious surrender to the culturalists of much of the activity that now goes on in English degrees, in order to retain something more coherent, defensible, and inherently valuable.
Culturalists will point out — as C. S. Lewis once did — that much poetry of the past was not written for aesthetic ends, but for religious, political, or other social purposes.
This is true; but such poems have outlived their original purposes and now survive as aesthetic entities.
We may, following Hirsch, accept that there is no such thing as a poetic or aesthetic essence; but we can say that such texts are rewarding when approached in aesthetic terms, or, in Lewis's words, are read in literary ways.
The parallel with studying music has more than structural significance.
Music is the most obviously aesthetic of the arts — to whose condition they all aspire, according to Walter Pater — yet it submits easily to formal and technical analysis.
Interestingly, music, though a major cultural form, has not attracted the attention of contemporary culturalists.
It may be that there is literally nothing they can say about it in the terms they are accustomed to using.
The sociologists of art who discuss music have to restrict themselves to the conditions in which it is performed, produced, or received, rather than the music itself.
The affinities between music and poetry have been familiar since antiquity, though they are largely ignored in the current intellectual climate.
Poetry, of course, can never become music, despite the dream of nineteenth century symbolists, since, as Eliot's Sweeney put it, ‘I gotta use words when I talk to you.’
But a restatement of that ancient affinity should strengthen poetry against political and culturalist claims.
The academic study of music may be a specialist field, but music, of every kind, is widely diffused and performed; only a small percentage of those attending concerts or recitals will have taken degrees in music.
Similarly, one would like to see a state of affairs in which many more people read and enjoyed poetry than had taken a degree in it.
The degree in poetry I have outlined would attempt to be open about its theoretical assumptions.
I do not believe there is any absolute virtue in such openness, in fact, I think that education is ideally carried on in a shared form of life where there is agreement about fundamentals and attention can be concentrated on the task in hand.
But no such state of affairs exists in our culture, and it is self-delusory and damaging to pretend that it does.
The challenge to one's premisses and assumptions will be made and has to be faced, though one might prefer to reply in terms of‘principles’ rather than of  ‘theory’.
The reply I envisage is likely to prove unsatisfactory to radicals and utilitarians alike, since it would state that poetry is ultimately its own justification, like music or games.
One hopes that reading it may have good effects, of the kind described by Wordsworth in the 1800 Preface, or more succinctly summed up by Lewis in the conclusion to An Experiment in Criticism , where he says that literature heals the wound without undermining the privilege of individuality.
Yet to study literature, or poetry, in the hope of achieving these effects is perverse, like playing a game, not for the pleasure of the game, but simply in order to keep fit.
The latter is a desirable by-product, but it is not what the game should be about.
The humanizing and moral effects of reading literature must be left to occur as and when they will, which will be different in every individual.
They certainly cannot be turned into the stated goal of an academic programme.
The attempt to do just this, pursued with inappropriate insistence, ultimately vitiated the Leavisite campaign.
II 
I have tried to show in this book that though the academic institutionalizing of vernacular literary study which began about a century ago had good, even inescapable reasons in its origins, its later progress has not had the effects the founders hoped for.
This is largely because, once incorporated into the academy, this study had to adopt the values and principles of the academy, and develop as the institution developed.
An ideal of professionalism became dominant, and teachers of English did their best to adopt it, producing an ever greater volume of critical and scholarly writing whose motive was as much career development as the expansion of knowledge.
And yet, they could never become as truly professional as their colleagues in other disciplines, since ‘literature’ did not belong in the academy and was not generated there, though criticism and scholarship might be.
English, as the Newbolt Report and Leavis had insisted, was not like other academic subjects, though all the pressures of the modern academy, which include both privileges and responsibilities, have tried to make it come in line.
The professionalized academic critic  wanted to forget that there had been a time when criticism was part of literature; and the belief that criticism or theory could be literature in themselves was perhaps part of the process of exorcizing other values and attitudes.
Poets and novelists see the situation differently, and so, indeed, do many students, who tend to want something different from what their ablest teachers wish to give them.
The complex of disparate elements comprising academic English was always unstable, though they might have stayed together longer if it had not been for the demands of the academic environment.
In the 1950s, it seemed as if there might be a place for literature in the academy, so that the writing of fiction or poetry, of criticism, and the teaching of literature would become a unified form of life.
As we know, it did not happen.
Thirty years on, English is a large and entrenched subject, and there is no likelihood of putting the clock back, and starting again in some other way: my proposal for a division between Cultural Studies and a degree in poetry is a pragmatic proposal for a way out of current difficulties.
Other factors, like the institutional need to advance knowledge, to publish, to engage in research, and generate performanceindicators, would remain, whatever new academic structures emerged.
There is, however, another way in which a useful advance might be made.
Again, one looks back to the nineteenthcentury origins of English literary studies, when the first pioneers and missionaries, men such as Morley and Furnivall, travelled all over the country to talk about English literature in adult education classes and working men's clubs.
Indeed, it was the pressure from this large and disadvantaged constituency that helped to establish vernacular literary education.
There has always been a vigorous tradition of English studies in adult education, and indeed it was through such classes that I was myself able to become a mature student in the early 1950s.
In the present situation, there is more and more scope for adult or continuing education, with an older or academically late-developing constituency.
In such work there is an opportunity for English to, in a sense, escape from the academy, literally to go extra-mural, and to re-establish those connections with the larger society that were originally  part of its raison d'être .
Literature classes with older people can be rewarding; they bring a longer experience of life to bear on the subject, and often a wide range of reading.
They are also exempt from the demands of examination passing, assessment, and certification, that I believe have a more distorting effect in the teaching of literature than in other academic areas.
The subject can be pursued for its own satisfaction.
However, a difficulty with extra-mural study is that teachers have to work very hard in order to keep classes in being, since there are no external compulsions on students to attend, and their motivation and level of interest are very variable.
Malcolm Bradbury's story, ‘The Adult Education Class’, nicely dramatizes the difficulties and dangers.
Adult classes, in fact, require exceptionally good teaching, of a kind that may be remote from the professional ideals of many presentday academics.
At the present time, there is much interest in the English past, evoked in exhibitions commemorating historical events, and evident in the spread of museums and the great popularity of visiting country homes.
This interest has several aspects.
One of them, as the Left disapprovingly points out, is a mythologized version of past greatness which obfuscates the disagreeable realities of the present.
Certainly there are many bogus images of the national past around, culminating in the dream world peddled abroad by the British Tourist Board (though this is, alas, what Americans and others want to visit).
But people need myths of one sort or another, and the Left has its own, in memories of Wat Tyler, Cromwell, the Tolpuddle Martyrs, and the heroic industrial struggles of the past.
Mythology, however partial, is better than blank amnesia.
This current feeling for the past might provide a way in adult classes of shifting the emphasis from popular modern writing to earlier literature.
Chaucer looked at in isolation can seem daunting, but Chaucer read in a cultural and historical context, with visual and other aids, could come alive as a great poet, speaking across six centuries, in a Gadamerian fusion of horizons.
I am not, though, recommending the ideological antiquarianism of the New Historicism, which has little interest in poetry as such.
This is a speculative proposal, merely, and it may fall foul of the fact  that in our image-ridden culture reading is difficult, and literary texts still demand to be read , rigorously and carefully.
In cultural history reading ‘about’ something may be good enough; in studying literature it is not.
There is a good deal more to say, and to think about, concerning the relations between the intra- and extra-mural teaching of literature.
The above considerations are simply meant to signal my conviction that a change of balance is desirable, with a move away from the narrow professionalism of the academy, and a modest return to the original motives of the discipline of English.
Something similar is true of literary criticism.
At the moment the academy has a nearmonopoly of the subject, and I would like to see it broken, in a recognition of the traditional cultural truth that good criticism can be written by poets and novelists, and indeed by people whose professional concern is not with literature at all.
Reviewing and criticism are separate activities, but the best literary journalism can provide genuine and valuable criticism, as Morris Dickstein has pointed out.
What is needed are more journals that are prepared to publish long, serious, reflective essays or review-articles, as the London Review of Books does.
Victoria Glendinning, writing as a biographer and literary journalist, has offered some judicious thoughts on the question, which summarize much of my argument:
No one could doubt that the application of the academic mind to literature has been salutary in bringing rigour and discipline into criticism: cleaner texts, scholarly annotations, precise analysis, intelligent — even transforming — interpretations and readings; and an intolerance for woolly emotional responses, vague inflated recommendations, and subjective wallowings of all kinds.
But the academic mind, and the exigencies of the academic career, have had the effect of splitting off academic approaches to literature from the ‘reading’, in that word's widest sense, of ordinary people…
An ambitious lecturer in an English Department is writing for his peer group, not for the general public.
The tenor of this book has been pessimistic, but not, I hope, despairing.
Some readers will find its arguments unconvincing, believing that what I see as problems are not problems at all.
I can conceive of such a response coming from two quite different kinds of reader.
The first would be moderate conservatives of placid and unreflective temperament who are happily engaged with their research and their  teaching, and who believe that the discipline of English is in good heart, with lots of interesting books coming out and buoyant student demand.
They support a genial pluralism in English studies, encouraging a hundred flowers to bloom, though putting up a cautious resistance to the extremes of foreign ideology and theory.
The other kind would be academics who are committed to a tough professionalism on the American model, who believe that knowledge advances and becomes obsolete, that theory is essential, and that nothing of interest can be said about literature outside an institutional framework.
In Lodge's characterology, they are Robyn Penroses aspiring to be Morris Zapps.
What I have deplored or been sceptical about they would find admirable.
They tend to be young, energetic, and ambitious, but there are by now professors of that outlook.
All I can say to the objectors in both categories is that those who do not see a problem do not have a problem, and they can happily ignore what I have written.
But other readers will, I imagine, accept the general drift of what I have said, whilst disagreeing on many points of detail.
Not wanting to seem too negative, I have outlined ways in which the discipline of English as currently constituted might divide, to the benefit of both parties.
But knowing how the academic mind works, I am not optimistic about change.
As Noel Annan wrote in his life of Leslie Stephen: ‘The ingenuity in argument, the subtlety in drawing distinctions, the dexterous prevarications, the imperative reasons for procrastination, perpetually bewilder and confound the novice in university administration.’
In this respect, at least, little has altered since the nineteenth century.
The most likely future is no overt change, with the discipline of English becoming less and less coherent, riven by feuds and revolts, but still presenting the external appearances of a large, well-established and respectable academic subject.
It could go on for a long time in this condition, like the Spanish Empire in its centuries of decline.
