Chronicle
The Cantos:Towards a Pedestrian Reading 
Pound appears the most crucial case, at least among poets writing in English, of those whose poetry — for those who value it — has to survive a self-evidently and perilously wrong understanding of history, and hence of politics.
And yet, as may be seen from the cardinal importance he attaches to a Herodotean term like the peri -plus , Pound can be invoked by poets for whom the natural subjectmatter is topographical rather than historical, or at any rate historical only so far as history is checked against, and embodied in, and qualified by, topography.
This indeed is the burden of Pound's own poem, ‘Near Perigord’, which argues that the puzzle of a particular poem by Bernard de Born — a historian's puzzle about the reasons for certain historically recorded vents — is to be solved only by realizing the strategic implications of the location of Born's own fortress of Hautefort.
At a time when Pound was principally a student of Provençal poetry, he appears to have been as good as his word, and to have travelled on foot over the terrain in question.
This seems to have been, at least in part, the motive behind a walking-tour which Pound took in 1911, of which we learn in chapter 16 of his Guide to Kulchur , written twenty years later:
If a man can't afford to go by automobile, and if he is content with eating and architecture, the world's best (as I have known it) is afoot from Poitiers, from Brives, from Perigord or Limoges.
In every town a romanesque church or chateau.
No place to stay for any time, but food every ten miles or fifteen or twenty.
When I say food, I mean food.
So, at any rate, was it.
With fit track to walk on.
This experience is referred to many times in the Cantos: what its author most values in theory, the weighing of syllables in the line and the leading on of the reader's breath from one syllable to the next.
As for the case made against the versions in the Classic Anthology — that by using rhyme they align themselves with the closed poetry of print and not with the open poetry of the speaking breath — the obvious retort is that, although in these poems Pound often rhymes, he writes them in free verse, and in a free verse where the syllables are weighed, and the varying pace controlled, as scrupulously as in anything else he has written.
The freedom is earned and justified by the poet's acceptance of this responsibility, a responsibility more onerous than any incurred by the writer in regular meter.
And the verse is accordingly irregular and gnarled and yet sappy, far more like growing timber than like steel rails.
As for the rhyme, these are poems that characteristically celebrate the decorous in private and public life, and the verse must be in keeping; rhyme, when it occurs, is one of several concessions to decorum.
But there seems no room for any notion of the decorous in Olson's ‘objectism’, any more than there is room for it in the lawless world of the Cantos , or in Pound himself when he is without a master to translate, whose example makes him surpass himself.
When we turn from the Rock-Drill cantos to the Classic Anthology , something is lost but much is gained.
And the Classic Anthology shows, therefore, that Williams was in the right when, to close his sour and justifiably contemptuous statement of 1945, he wrote:
When they lock the man up with Jim and John and Henry and Mary and Dolores and Grace — I hope they will give him access to books, with paper enough for him to go on making translations for us from the classics such as we have never seen except at his hands in our language.
First published by Oxford University Press (New York), 1964.
The valley is thick with leaves, with leaves, the trees,
The sunlight glitters, glitters a-top
Like a fish-scale roof
Like the church roof in Poictiers
If it were gold.
(4/14:18)
And a quarter-century later, in the Pisan cantos, when the poet is imprisoned in the American Army detention-camp at Pisa, these are among the memories which come back to him most poignantly.
In Canto 74 for instance, there are lines which allude to the Magdalenian cave-paintings discovered at Lascaux and elsewhere in this region of Perigord and Limousin:
and at Limoges the young salesman
bowed with such french politeness ‘No that is impossible.’
I have forgotten which city
But the caverns are less enchanting to the unskilled explorer
than the Urochs as shown on the postals,
we will see those old roads again, question,
possibly
but nothing appears much less likely
(74/428:455)
And in Canto 76, altogether more plangently:
But to set here the roads of France,
of Cahors, of Chalus,
the inn low by the river's edge,
the poplars; to set here the roads of France
Aubeterre, the quarried stone beyond Poitiers
(76/455:482)
It seems to have been this last line which caused the editors of the Annotated Index to the Cantos of Ezra Pound to provide one of the few pieces of misinformation in that admirable work.
For they give, against ‘Aubeterre’, ‘A church just outside Poitiers, France’.
In fact the Aubeterre that Pound means is Aubeterre-sur-Dronne not in Poitou at all but southward, in Perigord.
The proof is in the very beautiful early poem, ‘Provincia Deserta’:
At Chalais is a pleached arbour;
Old pensioners and old protected women
Have a right there —
it is charity.
I have crept over old rafters,
peering down
Over the Dronne,
over a stream full of lilies.
Eastward the road lies,
Aubeterre is eastward,
With a garrulous old man at the inn.
I know the roads in that place:
Mareuil to the north-east,
La Tour,
There are three keeps near Mareuil,
And an old woman,
glad to hear Arnaut,
Glad to lend one dry clothing.
Anyone who opens before him Carte Michelin No. 75, can see the places named, related just as Pound says: Chalais, on the main line from paris to Bordeaux; Aubeterre in the valley of the Dronne, twelve kilometres to the east; then thirty kilometres north-eastward a little place called La Tour Blanche; and perhaps fifteen kilometres further, just on the edge of the map, Vieux-Mareuil.
The Michelin guide to Perigord will reveal a castle either preserved or in ruins at each of these places, though one would need to go off the map to Mareuil-sur-Belle, as well as Vieux-Mareuil, to identify all the three donjons which Pound speaks of in that vicinity.
Equally, one needs to have walked these roads oneself if one is to locate ‘the inn low by the river's edge’.
That inn is what Pound always remembers of Aubeterre, for instance in Canto 80:
and at Ventadour and at Aubeterre
or where they set tables down by small rivers,
and the stream's edge is lost in grass.
(80/509:544)
And yet that inn, the Hotel de perigord, being set down by the Dronne, is on the outskirts of Aubeterre. for Aubeterre is a hilltown, set on a chalky cliff above the river (whence the name — Aubeterre, Alba Terra).
I suspect that Pound never went further into Aubeterre than this inn, and one needs to have walked in his footsteps from Chalais to Aubeterre to see how he could well have done this, skirting the hill, stopping for perhaps a mid-day meal  in the inn, and then pushing on at once for La Tour Blanche.
If he did this, Pound missed a great deal, for Aubeterre is one of the most beautiful and delightfully peaceful places in the whole of old Aquitaine.
(In the days of Bertrand de Born, Aquitaine of course was a province of the English crown; Eleanor of Aquitaine, the princess whose marriage to an English King brought this about, is one of the femmes fatales of the Cantos; and Richard Coeur de Lion, trying to make good his claim to all this part of France, was killed at Chalus — a place in this area to which the Cantos refer repeatedly in connection with the King's death.)
If Pound in this way did bypass Aubeterre, he missed something after his own heart.
For one of the curiosities of Aubeterre is a church in the form of an artificial cave hewn in the face of the chalk cliff.
The Michelin Guide to the Côte de l'Atlantique says that this eerie and impressive cavern, which communicates by a passage through the cliff to the château on the summit, was probably made in the twelfth century to shelter the relics of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem brought back from a Crusade by Pierre II of Castillon, who at that time held the château.
Now Pound has interested himself a great deal in the order of the Templars, to which Pierre of Castillon belonged.
In fact it is the Templars, some of whose ritual survives in the practices of modern Freemasonry, who account for Pound's interest in Poitiers, one of their principal centres.
In the thirteenth century the King of france, abetted by a weak Pope, very brutally suppressed the Order of Templars and appropriated their enormous wealth.
The Grandmaster of the Order at this time was Jacques de Molay.
And that name, Jacques de Molay, is evoked by Yeats in Section VII of his ‘Meditations in Time of Civil War’:
‘Vengeance upon the murderers’, the cry goes up, ‘Vengeance for Jacques Molay’.
In cloud-pale rags, or in lace, The rage-driven, rage-tormented, and rage-hungry troop, Trooper belabouring trooper, biting at arm or at face, Plunges towards nothing, arms and fingers spreading wide For the embrace of nothing; and I, my wits astray Because of all that senseless tumult, all but cried For vengeance on the murderers of Jacques Molay.
Yeats learned about Jacques de Molay in Thomas Wright's Narratives of Sorcery and Magic (1851).
Pound's source, on the other hand, was almost certainly chapter 6 of The Law of Civilization and Decay (1896) by Brooks Adams, Henry Adams's brother.
In Canto 90 we read:
to the room in Poitiers where one can stand
casting no shadow,
That is Sagatrieb,
that is tradition.
Builders had kept the proportion,
did Jacques de Molay
know these proportions?
and was Erigena ours?
Mr Noel Stock, who speaks as one who had Pound's confidence in recent years and was in daily contact with him, explains that this passage derives from a hint thrown out by Jessie L. Weston in her from Ritual to Romance , to the effect that the charges of heresy brought against the Templars were not wholly unfounded, since some of the practices of the Eleusinian mystery-cults from the pagan Near East survived in the heart of Christendom in the rituals of the Templars, a survival to be traced in literature in the stories and poems about the quest of the holy grail.
From Ritual to Romance came out in 1920, and was a new book when T.S.
Eliot borrowed from it for The Waste Land , thus making it permanently famous; Pound could not have known of it in 1911, but if he had then visited the Templars' cavern-church in Aubeterre he could hardly have failed to remember it in the light of jessie Weston's argument.
Certainly in recent years Pound's interest in mystery-cults has been more than antiquarian; in ‘was Erigena ours?’ he asks whether the philosopher Scotus Erigena was one of the Eleusinian brotherhood, and ‘ours’can be given full weight — Noel Stock goes so far as to claim (op. cit. p.22) that some of the obscurity of these later Cantos is deliberate and arcane —‘he writes about them as an initiate in words that are both ‘published and not published’…’.
Fascinating as this is, it is surely with relief that we return from thus checking printed source against printed source, cross-referring and tentatively identifying, to the open air of ‘the roads of France’.
And indeed I would insist on this: the first requirement for a study of Pound is a set of maps (preferably half an inch to the mile) of at any rate certain regions of France, Italy and England; the second requirement is a set of Michelin Green Guides for France and Italy, and (if one is American) similar guides to the South of England.
In this, the case of Pound is no different from other writers, or it is different only in degree.
Yet, oddly, the only authors for whom we are ready to make this provision nowadays are the Irish ones, Joyce and Yeats.
Everyone knows that a Street Directory of Dublin is essential to the reading of joyce.
There would be general agreement  that maps of County Sligo and County Galway are essential aids to the study of Yeats.
And perhaps most people qualified to judge would concede that there comes a time early in any study of Joyce where the student has to beat the Dublin streets on foot.
Similarly no one who has attended the Yeats Summer School in Sligo will deny that the seminars and lectures are less profitable than driving to Glencar, or Gort, and walking in those places, or wandering in the demesne of Lissadell and under the shoulder of Ben Bulben.
And yet we are shamefaced about this.
It smacks of the Dickensian Society making pilgrimages to Rochester and Dover and Yarmouth; or of ‘poetry-lovers’ haunting Grasmere and Coniston Water.
Perhaps it does.
But I incline to think that our grandfathers and grandmothers were in the right of it, and that no one can claim to understand Wordsworth who has not been to Hawkshead and Ambleside.
The reason why we are embarrassed to admit this is that we have lived in an age when the self-sufficiency, the autonomy of poems has been elevated into dogma.
Poems can be self-sufficient, leaning on no reality outside themselves other than the history and usage of the words out of which they are made.
But in every age there have been poets who were uninterested in thus cutting their poems free of any but a linguistic reality, poets who are ‘realistic’ and ‘mimetic’in the most straightforward senses of those two complicated words.
In our age Pound, far more than Eliot or Yeats, is such a poet.
And yet we have seen that the topography of Sligo (to which one should add the topography of at least one part of London, Bedford Park) is illuminating for the reader of Yeats.
And who is to say that the topography of the Somerset village of East Coker is unimportant to a reading of Eliot's four Quartets ?
And yet how few of us have made that pilgrimage!
Chalais and Aubeterre figure at least once in the Cantos that Pound has written more recently.
In Canto 101, which was published in the volume Thrones (1960) we read:
Finding scarcely anyone save Monsieur de Rémusat
who could understand him
(junipers, south side) M. Talleyrand
spruce and fir take the North
Chalais, Aubeterre
snow-flakes at a hand's breadth, and rain.
Trees line the banks, mostly willows
(101/722:75)
Here only the place-names refer to france; the junipers, the spruce and fir, and the falling snow are taken over by Pound from a  landscape at the other side of the world.
So are ‘the willows’.
What is amusing and significant about this latest reference to ‘the roads of france’ is the name of Talleyrand.
For Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Perigord, Bonaparte's grand chamberlain, is one of several new heroes who have appeared in the Cantos written since 1945.
He appears once or twice in earlier cantos, but not flatteringly; whereas in Canto 105 for instance we are told, by no means persuasively:
Talleyrand saved Europe for a century
France betrayed Talleyrand;
Germany, Bismarck.
And Muss saved, rem salvavit,
in Spain
il salvabile.
(105/746:98)
(‘Muss’ is Mussolini.)
Now, the Talleyrand-Perigords have, as their name implies, been mighty lords in Perigord since the early Middle Ages, and in the early poem ‘Near Perigord’ Talleyrand is one of the powerful and menacing neighbours whom Bertrand de Born has to play off one against another, thus earning (so Pound's poem suggests) the title which Dante gives him in the Inferno , ‘sower of strife’.
The château of Chalais has been a stronghold of the Talleyrands from that day to this, and when Pound in recent years read about Napoleon's grand chamberlain, notably in the memoirs of Madame de Rémusat (a principal source for Canto 101), this new association with Chalais re-activated his memories of that place, which accordingly is named afresh, bringing ‘Aubeterre’ with it, but in a quite different tone and spirit from ‘to set here the roads of France’.
The trees that ‘line the banks, mostly willows’ are still there, and there are places in the town of Chalais crouched underneath its château, where Pound might still creep over old rafters in search of‘a stream full of lilies’.
Pound seems to have misremembered, however, for at Chalais the river is not the Dronne but a smaller stream, the Tude.
And although the Tude has plants in its waters, I am reluctant to believe that any of them are lilies; for Chalais has suffered from the twentieth century as Aubeterre has not, and the Tude is polluted whereas the Dronne runs clear.
Already in 1915 Pound was making this mistake about the rivers, for in ‘Near Perigord’, which he published in that year, he declares:
Chalais is high, a-level with the poplars.
Its lowest stones just meet the valley tips Where the low Dronne is filled with water-lilies.
A map could have put Pound right, as it can put us right.
But no map, nor guide book either, can vindicate for us, ‘Chalais is high, a-level with the poplars’.
To confirm this we have to pause and look back from the road to Aubeterre as it climbs the eastern slope of the valley of the Tude, just as Pound must have paused in 1911; and then we see that, whereas the modern town of Chalais is in the river bottom, old Chalais, a manorial village grouped round the gate of the château, does indeed stand on the ridge behind, so that the tops of the tallest poplars by the river wave just below the walls of the château.
Some poetry is ‘true’ in just this literal fashion.
And in the case of a poet like Pound, who presses upon as as ‘truths’ so many readings of history which in fact are dangerous errors, truths like these are precious.
To take one last example, when we read in Canto 101 (and many other places) about ‘Mont Ségur’, the gloss we need is in the Michelin Guide to the pyrenees, where we learn that the Château of Mont Ségur saw the last stand of the Cathars or Albigensians, another heretical movement of the Middle Ages which is mysteriously connected with the quest of the grail.
But I feel sure that only by going to St Bertrand de Comminges (another name that crops up in the Cantos), and from there to Mont Ségur, shall we see the point of: ‘at Mont Ségur the chief's cell /you can enter it sideways only’(101:725:77).
Place and spirit of place is the inspiration of more poetry than we nowadays like to admit; and to do that poetry justice, the critic needs to turn himself into a tourist.
Paideuma I: 1 (Spring-Summer 1972); reprinted in The poet in the Imaginary Museum , ed.
Barry Alpert.
Manchester: Carcanet New Press, 1977.
Six Notes on Ezra Pound
Ezra among the Edwardians
If I wanted to be pretentious, I might call this paper an investigation of the sociology of literature.
It is at any rate a sketch of what might be involved in restoring a writer — in this case, the young Pound — to the highly specific social milieu, that of Edwardian England, in which he moved and on which he impinged.
It is thus a contribution to biography, not to criticism.
Among Pound's associates in that vanished world, the most instructive figures, I'm inclined to think, are Frederic Manning and Allen Upward; but unfortunately we're still very far from recovering from oblivion the lineaments of either of these men.
(Recovering them is a matter of great urgency; and a start has been made, but there's a long way to go — especially with Upward, whom oblivion has enveloped with a completeness that is startling and significant.)
Since Manning and Upward are in this way for the moment denied us, I shall make do with two other names: Maurice Hewlett and Laurence Binyon.
And Hewlett is the one to start with, probably the best peg on which to hang a necessarily rash characterization of that literary world of late-Edwardian England which Fred Manning entered from Australia, and Pound from the United States.
Not that Hewlett was a representative figure, if by that we mean a sort of undistinguished average.
On the contrary he was taken to be something of a maverick and flutterer of dovecotes.
Or so it appears from the valuable memoirs of Mrs Belloc Lowndes, in chapter nine of her Merry Wives of Westminster :
On the whole he had a poor opinion of human nature, and he felt an angry contempt for politicians.
Indeed he was apt to take violent prejudices against certain men and women in public life with whom he was not personally acquainted.
On many a winter morning I jumped out of bed and put a letter of his in the fire, feeling it would be wrong to allow it to survive; and when some years ago I was asked by a distinguished man of letters if I could help him to write an account of Maurice
Hewlett, I rashly said I would send him some of the letters I had received from him.
But when I looked over those I had kept, I decided I could not do so.
If many of Hewlett's correspondents felt as Mrs Lowndes did, this explains why Hewlett's letters as edited by Laurence Binyon (1925) make such unexciting reading; she herself records that of the three hundred letters printed by Binyon there was only one ‘which I felt to be characteristic of the man I knew so well’.
Binyon's volume does however bear out quite touchingly one point that Mrs Lowndes makes: that Hewlett's ambition was to be known as a poet rather than novelist, though it was his historical romances in Wardour Street prose that brought him fame and money.
(And some of those romances were set in medieval Aquitaine of the troubadours — which certainly constitutes one common interest that drew Pound and Hewlett together.)
Hewlett and Mrs Lowndes moved in the same influential circles.
And Pound was not above using his connection with Hewlett so as to get entry to those circles.
Thus in a letter to his father of 3 June 1913, all the names are of people who figure in Mrs Lowndes's memoirs:
We had a terribly literary dinner on Saturday.
Tagore, his son and daughter-in-law, Hewlett, May Sinclair, Prothero (edt.
Quarterly Rev .)
Evelyn Underhill (author of divers fat books on mysticism),D .
and myself.
The name to give us pause here is that of G.W. Prothero.
For Prothero is the demon-king of the Poundian pantomime, ever since Pound cast him for this role by printing, at the end of his essay on De Gourmont — originally in the Little Review , then in Instigations (1920)— the letter which Prothero wrote him in October 1914:
Dear Mr. Pound, Many thanks for your letter of the other day.
I am afraid that I must say frankly that I do not think I can open the columns of the Q.R. — at any rate, at present— to any one associated publicly with such a publication as Blast .
It stamps a man too disadvantageously.
Yours truly, G.W. Prothero
Of course, having accepted your paper on the Noh , I could not refrain from publishing it.
But other things would be in a different category.
And Pound understandably gets all the mileage possible out of the ill-starred history of ‘QR ’:
I need scarcely say that The Quarterly Review is one of the most profitable periodicals in England, and one of one's best ‘connections’, or sources of income.
It has, of course, a tradition.
‘It is not that Mr. Keats (if that be his real name, for we almost doubt that any man in his senses would put his real name to such a rhapsody)’— wrote their Gifford of Keats' Endymion .
My only comment is that the Quarterly has done it again.
Their Mr. A. Waugh is a lineal descendant of Gifford, by the way of mentality.
A century has not taught them manners.
In the eighteen-forties they were still defending the review of Keats.
And more recently Waugh has lifted up his senile slobber against Mr. Eliot.
It is indeed time that the functions of both English and American literature were taken over by younger and better men.
As for their laying the birch on my pocket, I compute that my support of Lewis and Brzeska has cost me at the lowest estimate about £20 per year, from one source alone since that regrettable occurrence, since I dared to discern a great sculptor and a great painter in the midst of England's artistic desolaton.
(‘European and Asiatic papers please copy.’)
Waugh's ‘senile slobber’ against Eliot — he as good as called Eliot ‘a drunken helot’— has been remarked on several times, notably in his son Evelyn's autobiography,A Little Learning .
Prothero the demon-king has never bounded on to the stage more sulphurously than in Hugh Kenner's The Pound Era :
Abstract and remote though the contents of Blast might be, the establishment had bared its fangs and invoked its ultimate weapon, the boycott.
To men who lived on what they could pick up from articles and reviews, the ultimate weapon implied more than lack of a showcase: it implied starvation…
. Prothero was snarling like a guilty thing surprised.
Of what was he guilty?
Of reverence for death, or perhaps decorum…
. The long-term psychic damage Pound underwent is beyond calculation.
On the continent men were soon killing each other.
A third of a million Frenchmen died in the first five months…
Hugh Kenner doesn't need to be told how much I admire The Pound Era .
Accordingly I ought to be able to say that at this stage his comments seem to me beside the point, or more exactly in excess of it.
What with all this baring of fangs and of ultimate weapons, these snarlings and ‘long-term psychic damage’, how is one to protest mildly that Prothero is — with an engagingly archaic elegance (‘stamps a man too disadvantageously’)— telling Pound that he needn't waste his time submitting manuscripts to the Quarterly Review for the time being?
Would it have been more honourable for Prothero to let Pound go on submitting, when there was no hope of his being accepted?
It helps, I think, to take note of Conrad Aiken on ‘Ezra Pound: 1914’(Ezra Pound: Perspectives , ed.
Stock, 1965):
But it was typical of Pound's kindness, even to a potential enemy or rival, that he should have so persisted in trying to give me the right contacts.
Contacts: yes, these, as I was to discover, were of prime importance: they were part of the game .
And for Pound it was a game, a super-chess game, and not without its Machiavellian elements.
For example, this was the summer of the famous Blast dinner for the Vorticists, in which Wyndham Lewis was of course much involved.
Pound sent me a card, which I still have, naming place and date, and saying, rather peremptorily, ‘I think you had better take this in.’
This put my back up.
I had no intention then, or ever after, of joining any group or ‘movement’ and I therefore sidestepped the Vorticists just as I sidestepped both the Imagists and the Amygists.
I didn't attend the dinner, for which in a way I'm now sorry, and Pound never forgot or forgave.
Nineteen years later, in an angry letter from Italy about some review I'd written which began: ‘Jesus Gawd Aiken, you poor blithering ass’ he concluded by saying: ‘I've never forgotten that you wouldn't go to the Blast dinner.’
It was a game, which Pound had played trickily and with zest When he joined in with Blast , he miscalculated and overplayed his hand.
And just that, nothing more, is what Prothero is telling him.
If the game was for high stakes, if Pound's livelihood was at stake, the more reason for playing the game circumspectly.
He didn't; and he paid the price.
What is there in this to evoke the shades of a third of a million dead Frenchmen?
Or to make a Lucifer figure out of G.W. Prothero?
It could be argued that Blast was a miscalculation all round, even for Wyndham Lewis.
Certainly it was for Pound.
And Violet Hunt, loyally selling copies at half-price in her drawing room, confesses in her memoir I Have This to Say that she was at a loss to explain why the damned were damned, and the blest were blest.
Among the  blest, ‘Lady Aberconway was put in to please me’, and ‘Madame Strindberg, who ran the Club of the Golden Calf for the sake of the set, could hardly escape a favourable mention.…’
But ‘Mrs Belloc Lowndes felt, I am sure, that she needed no blessings from anyone but her Church’.
On the other hand, among those blasted, if one understood well enough about ‘Rabindranath Tagore, from whose recitations ad infinitum we all suffered a great deal about this time’, why pick on Thomas Beecham, who at this time with the backing of Lady Cunard was embarking on a lifelong crusade for English opera?
Hugh Kenner veers unexpectedly into the idiom of the British schoolboy: ‘Blast should have been a great lark’.
But even a schoolboy's jape is supposed to have some ascertainable point; and Blast had none.
As for Hewlett, how far he knew that he was being ‘used’ by Pound is what at this point no one can determine.
I'd guess that he knew, and didn't resent it.
For ‘the game’ was one that everyone played, and that was all right so long as you took your losses without squealing.
In any case it didn't preclude, on Pound's part, genuine affection.
As we see from Canto 74:
Lordly men are to earth o'ergiven
these the companions:
Fordie that wrote of giants
and William who dreamed of nobility
and Jim the comedian singing:
‘Blarney castle me darlin'
you're nothing now but a stOWne’
and Plarr talking of mathematics
or Jepson lover of jade
Maurie who wrote historical novels
and Newbolt who looked twice bathed
are to earth o'ergiven.
(432:459)
Later in the Pisan Cantos (80/515:550) we read of ‘that Christmas at Maurie Hewlett's’— Christmas 1911 in Hewlett's fifteenth-century house outside Salisbury — to which Pound was driven from Southampton across a tract of Hardy's Wessex which his imagination peopled with phantoms out of Under the Greenwood Tree .
Henry Newbolt was at this time Hewlett's neighbour in Wiltshire, and it seems to have been at this Christmas time that Hewlett took Pound to see Newbolt, who figures elsewhere in Canto 80:
‘He stood’, wrote Mr Newbolt, later Sir Henry, ‘the door behind’ and now they complain of cummings.
(507:541)
But the Pisan ordeal had shocked Pound into recovering a compassion and tenderness which we look for mostly in vain in the Pound of the years preceding.
And in the 1930s he had been unforgiving towards these friends of his youth.
In 1939, for instance, in an obituary of Ford for The Nineteenth Century and After , he had written of ‘the stilted language that then passed for ‘good English’ in the arthritic milieu that held control of the respected British critical circles, Newbolt, the backwash of Lionel Johnson, Fred Manning, the Quarterlies and the rest of ‘em’.
And this echoed a letter of 1937 to Michael Roberts, extolling Ford and saying, ‘The old crusted lice and advocates of corpse language knew that The English Review existed’.
In Ezra Pound: The Image and the Real , Herbert Schneidau reasonably enough names three of the ‘crusted lice’ as Henry Newbolt, Frederic Manning, and G.W. Prothero, and with a proper scrupulousness he notes that all these ‘were treated with great deference in Pound's early letters and writings’.
Schneidau follows Pound's own broad hints by tracing his gradual alienation or liberation from these early admirations according as Ford's demands for a prosaic strength in verse writing gradually won Pound over from the Wardour Street language of his own early poems (such as‘Canzone: The Yearly Slain', written in reply to Manning's ‘Korè’).
The story is an intricate one, as Herbert Schneidau acknowledges; and Pound's holding out against Ford for the Dantesque principle of a ‘curial’ diction (see his introduction to the poems of Lionel Johnson) represents to my mind an objection that can still be raised to Ford's principles of diction, salutary as Ford's polemics undoubtedly were for Pound at this time.
Moreover Prothero, a historian, perhaps had no ideas about poetic diction one way or the other; Pound, as we have seen, thought himself victimized by Prothero not for anything to do with writing but for having championed Lewis the painter and Gaudier the sculptor.
All the same Schneidau's argument is just and illuminating, so far as it goes.
But does it go far enough?
It is worth looking again at Pound's letter to Michael Roberts, strident though it is.
Pound there, it is plain — for instance, in his comment on Hilaire Belloc — is as unwilling as any Marxist to abstract a question like the proper language for poetry from the whole social matrix and milieu in which such a subject may get itself debated.
Pound speaks of the ‘order of a pewked society’.
And indeed it is, for us too, evasive and misleading to abstract the manageably limited issue from the larger one.
For instance, nothing is more likely than that Prothero, when he said that association with Blast ‘stamped a man too disadvantageously’, had in mind among other things Ford's connection with the magazine  and the scandal of Ford's relations with Violet Hunt — a scandal that had already made a breach between Violet Hunt and the cruelly timorous Henry James, as told painfully in I Have This to Say .
This is where Mrs Belloc Lowndes is so illuminating.
She writes well, though carelessly.
And in The Merry Wives of Westminster , knowing just what she is doing, she recreates a world as exotic as that of the Andaman Islanders: the world of cultured Edwardian London.
I am not concerned to defend that world; I am merely trying to understand it, and the rules by which it lived.
Some features of that world are nowadays entirely inscrutable — notably, what it was in Frederic Lowndes's self-effacing position on The Times which gave him and his wife access to a society of international aristocracy and even royalty, and to the inner circles of the cabinet, as well as the society of novelists and playwrights.
What is clear is that this was all one society, in which the wives — like Mrs Lowndes herself — wrote books or maintained salons, while their husbands were functionaries, some of them much in the public eye as ministers of the Crown, others — like Frederic Lowndes — no less influential and esteemed for operating under wraps, as grey eminences.
Barrie and Arnold Bennett, Hewlett and Henry James, were free of this society whenever they chose.
It was ‘the establishment’, or one very thick and influential layer of it; but it certainly was not made up of stuffed shirts and Colonel Blimps along with their twittering wives.
Indeed, if we can suppress the automatic ‘liberal’ prejudice which indexes ‘Newbolt, Sir Henry (1862–1938)’as ‘English imperialist poet’(in Ezra Pound.
Penguin Critical Anthology , ed.
Sullivan), we have to acknowledge that it was in many ways an attractive society, and an admirable one.
That we are dealing with a privileged élite goes without saying; as also that it depended on the institution of domestic service.
But there appears not to have been, for instance, any of that sterile rivalry between man and wife which is now the bane of middle-class society with any claims to cultural or intellectual interests; plainly Mrs Lowndes and the young matrons who were her friends did not seethe resentfully at having their intellectual and imaginative capacities shackled to kitchen and nursery, whereas their husbands could exercise theirs in the great world.
Moreover — and more to the point — if as literary intellectuals we feel frustrated at having no channel of access to the figures who exercise decision-making power in our societies, Mrs Lowndes shows us a society in which literary intelligence had direct access to such centres of power, by way of the conjugal bed as well as over the dinner table.
Pound — thanks to Hewlett probably more than anyone else — had, at the time of his dinner party for Hewlett and Prothero and the rest, the chance of moving into that society.
His espousal of Blast closed to him just  those doors that were on the point of opening; and twenty years later, when he desperately wanted such access to the power-wielding centres of society, he was condemned to the world of fantasy in which he thought he could influence United States policy by way of such unlikely intermediaries as Senators Borah and Bankhead, and Italian policy by way of Ubaldo degli Uberti.
(This is not to say that Pound's decision was wrong.
For Eliot, who chose the other way, earned entry into nothing more seriously influential than the circles of Bloomsbury, where the Edwardian pattern survived only in an attenuated and largely illusory version.)
If we ask what it was about this society which made Pound and also Lewis affront it more or less deliberately, to ensure that its doors were closed to them, I think only one answer is possible: it was ineradicably vowed to the idea of the artist as the amateur.
It is true that Arnold Bennett, for one, refused to conform to that stereotype; and doubtless one could find other exceptions.
But it is plain than in Mrs Lowndes's society, writing, for instance, was conceived of as typically a spare-time activity.
It could not be otherwise if literary intelligence was to make itself available in drawing-rooms to administrative and political decision making.
That English tradition of the amateur is of course a long one, and by no means ignoble, reaching back as it does through John Morley to Walter Bagehot, to Burke, to Addison, and so all the way to Philip Sidney and the Renaissance all-round man.
But both Pound and Lewis were American or Americanized enough to have on the contrary a professional attitude to their respective arts, in the quite precise sense that they saw the continuity of art traditions ensured by the atelier , the master instructing his prentices.
The renegade or maverick Englishmen with whom they allied themselves — Ford, and at another level A.R.
Orage — shared this un-English conviction and habit.
And this difference between them and such initially sympathetic Englishmen as Hewlett and Newbolt went very deep; for ultimately it meant that, when the question arose whether the artist's first responsibility was to his art (his trade ) or to his society, Pound and Lewis and Ford would opt for the first alternative, Hewlett and Newbolt for the second — as indeed we soon see them doing when both of them answer the call of First World War patriotism by writing moralebuilding poems and stories.
It is not hard to see that in Homage to Sextus Propertius Pound is centrally concerned with just this question, and is defending his own scale of priorities against Hewlett's or Newbolt's.
Something had certainly gone wrong — gone soft and mawkish — with the English tradition of the amateur, when we find Hewlett on facing pages of Binyon's volume of Letters , writing in 1916 to  E.V.
Lucas, ‘My Dear Lad, That will be jolly indeed’, and to J.C.
Squire, ‘Dear Squire, I am very glad to have your quire of poetry…which is in jolly type and on jolly paper….’
It is not thus, one cannot help feeling, that the serious artist addresses a fellow practitioner.
And even before the War, though Hewlett in correspondence with Harold Monro and Newbolt could give and take hard knocks by way of semi-technical criticism, yet it is enveloped and emasculated by similarly anxious camaraderie.
Still, Newbolt at any rate was able to understand something of what was at stake.
In his ‘A Study of English poetry’, which ran in The English Review from March to June 1912, Newbolt refers to Pound as ‘a critic, who is himself a poet, and whom I always read with great interest’.
Those who think of Pound as a great liberator from stiff and hidebound conventions will be disconcerted to find that Newbolt on the contrary treats him as an academic formalist.
Newbolt says:
The vast majority of what are generally called well-educated persons in this country have, in the very process of their education, been impressed with the belief that metre is an arrangement of language which can be judged by the application of a mechanical test, and that the poet who produces a line which does not answer to the test is a fit subject for correction by any critic who can point out the discrepancy.
It is true that we are more enlightened than we were; there is a public which has learnt to smile at the reviewer who declares that a line ‘will not scan’, or that it contains a ‘trochee’ where it should have had an ‘iamb’, without considering whether it was ever intended to ‘scan’, or whether there is anything in English verse which can be treated as the absolute equivalent of a Greek or Latin trochee.
But…the fallacy does appear, in much subtler forms.
In the Poetry Review for February, 1912, a critic, who is himself a poet, and whom I always read with great interest, speaks of the struggle ‘to find out what has been done, once and for all, better than it can ever be done again, and to find out what remains for us to do’….
But if every work of art is simply the expression of the artist's intuition, it is evident that an absolute or complete pattern would be useless, since the intuitions of two different minds could never be expressed by the same form: nor can anything in art be said to have been ‘done once for all’, since if it were ‘done again’ by another hand — used, that is, to express the intuition of another spirit — it would be no longer what had been done before.
Newbolt's attitude is still very common — not only among the British  (especially those who have come under the influence of F. R. Leavis), but also among American free versifiers who think they are an avantgarde and who are muddled enough to think that they have Pound's authority to back them.
Whether they know it or not, they are in fact endorsing Henry Newbolt against Pound!
All the same, there is by and large a crucial difference here between British and American attitudes, and one that is today every bit as marked as it was in 1912.
For on nearly every American campus there is an atelier in the shape of a ‘Creative Writing programme’, whereas on no British campus is there any such thing, and indeed the British scoff at the mere possibility — on precisely the grounds that Newbolt here puts forward.
Pound's exasperated bewilderment before the spectacle of British loyalty to the amateur, and British readiness to pay the price in tolerance of the amateurish, is nowhere so evident as in his lifelong esteem for Laurence Binyon, the editor of the Hewlett Letters .
According to Noel Stock's Life , Pound first met Binyon in the second week of February 1909, and early in March he found ‘intensely interesting’ a lecture by Binyon on European and Oriental art, for which the lecturer had sent him a ticket.
Some time that year there occurred a famous meeting at the Vienna Café, in New Oxford Street near the British Museum, when Pound as Binyon's ‘bulldog’ met Wyndham Lewis as the ‘bulldog’of T. Sturge Moore.
This, nearly forty years later, was celebrated in Canto 80:
Mr Lewis had been to Spain
Mr Binyon's young prodigies
pronounced the word: Penthesilea
There were mysterious figures
that emerged from recondite recesses
and ate at the WIENER CAFE
which died into banking, Jozefff may have followed
his emperor.
‘It is the sons pent up within a man’,
mumbled old Neptune
‘Laomedon, Ahi, Laomedon’
or rather three ‘ahis’ before the ‘Laomedon’
‘He stood’ wrote Mr Newbolt, later Sir Henry,
‘the door behind’ and now they complain of cummings.
So it is to Mr Binyon that I owe, initially,
Mr Lewis, Mr P. Wyndham Lewis.
His bull-dog, me,
as it were against old Sturge M's bull-dog,
Mr T. Sturge Moore's
bull-dog, et
meum est propositum, it is my intention
in tabernam, or was, to the Wiener cafe
you cannot yet buy one dish of Chinese food in all Italy
hence the debacle
‘forloyn’ said Mr Bridges (Robert)
‘we'll get ‘em all back’
meaning archaic words….
(506:540)
For ‘prodigies’(‘Mr Binyon's young prodigies’) surely we ought to read ‘protégés’; and then it becomes possible to wonder whether the jocularity about bulldogs doesn't mark a wistful or resentful sense that Binyon and Sturge Moore (‘old Neptune’) might have done more with their respective protégés than merely set them to sniff and snarl at each other 's heels; to question whether the two senior writers could not have established themselves — at least for some purposes — as masters of ateliers in which the two young hopefuls might have enrolled as apprentices.
Instead, the outcome of what seems to have been an uncomfortable occasion was merely that Pound and Lewis took that much longer to find out that they were natural allies.
It was probably on this occasion that Binyon said something that Pound, misdating the event 1908, recalled in the postscript to a letter to Binyon in 1934:
I wonder if you are using (in lectures) a statement I remember you making in talk, but not so far as I can recall, in print.
‘Slowness is beauty’, which struck me as very odd in 1908 (when I certainly did not believe it) and has stayed with me ever since — shall we say as proof that you violated British habit; and thought of it.
Who thought of it?
Binyon, or Pound?
Hugh Kenner is no doubt right to suppose that it was Pound who had been thinking of it.
For it crops up in the Rock-Drill Canto 87, in the 1950s:
Only sequoias are slow enough.
BinBin ‘is beauty.’
‘Slowness is beauty.’
(572:608)
The mingled exasperation and admiration that Pound felt for  Binyon are nowhere so explicit and appealing as in what he wrote for Blast (July, 1915), so as to introduce into that inappropriately vociferous context nine quotations from the demure prose of Binyon's The Flight of the Dragon.
An Essay on the Theory and Practice of Art in China and Japan (London, 1911):
We regret that we cannot entitle this article ‘Homage to Mr Lawrence (sic) Binyon,’ for Mr Binyon has not sufficiently rebelled.
Manifestly he is not one of the ignorant.
He is far from being one of the outer world, but in reading his work we constantly feel the influence upon him of his reading of the worst English poets.
We find him in a disgusting attitude of respect towards predecessors whose intellect is vastly inferior to his own.
This is loathesome (sic).
Mr Binyon has thought; he has plunged into the knowledge of the East and extended the borders of occidental knowledge, and yet his mind constantly harks back to some folly of nineteenth century Europe.
We can see him as it were constantly restraining his inventiveness, constantly trying to conform to an orthodox view against which his thoughts and emotions rebel, constantly trying to justify Chinese intelligence by dragging it a little nearer to some Western precedent.
Ah well Mr Binyon has, indubitably, his moments.
Very few men do have any moments whatever, and for the benefit of such readers as have not sufficiently respected Mr Binyon for his, it would be well to set forth a few of them.
They are found in his ‘flight of the Dragon’, a book otherwise unpleasantly marred by his recurrent respect for inferior, very inferior people.
It isn't hard to see here, once again, Pound's baffled exasperation that, instead of setting up shop as maître d'école , ‘the very learned British Museum assistant’ should resolutely duck back into doing such a worthy and humane but undoubtedly over-modest activity as editing such of the letters of his old friend Hewlett as could not conceivably give offence.
Yet Binyon knew the unformulated rules of the society that he moved in, and played the game consistently as the amateur that that society required him to be.
It is true to this day in England that, if one has learning, one must wear it so lightly that it is unnoticeable.
It would be tedious to quote and consider every one of the tributes that Pound paid to Binyon.
One is at the end of Gaudier-Brzeska (1916); another is in a Criterion article of 1937, ‘D'Artagnan Twenty Years After’; in that year appeared Polite Essays , which includes Pound's review of Binyon's translation of the Inferno (originally  in The Criterion for April 1934); there are two tributes to Binyon in Guide to Kulchur (1938); in 1948 at St Elizabeth's Pound was still pressing Binyon on the attention of Charles Olson; and as late as 1958 he took the opportunity of Pavannes and Divagations to get back into print his appreciative note on The Flight of the Dragon .
None of these items is without interest.
But ‘Hell’, the review of Binyon's Inferno , is particularly important; for it may well be one of the most careful and illuminating acts of criticism that Pound ever performed.
It includes this passage:
I do not expect to see another version as good as Binyon's…
Few men of Binyon's position and experience have tried or will try the experiment.
You cannot counterfeit forty years' honest work, or get the same result by being a clever young man who prefers vanilla to orange or heliotrope to lavender perfume.
‘La sculpture n'est pas pour les jeunes hommes.’
(Brancusi)
A younger generation, or at least a younger American generation, has been brought up on a list of acid tests, invented to get rid of the boiled oatmeal consistency of the bad verse of 1900, and there is no doubt that many young readers seeing Binyon's inversions, etc., will be likely to throw down the translation under the impression that it is incompetent.
The fact that this idiom, which was never spoken on sea or land, is NOT fit for use in the new poetry of 1933–4 does not mean that it is unfit for use in a translation of a poem finished in 1321.
Pound may be right or wrong about the merits of Binyon's version, as about the sorts of language that are acceptable in verse translation; what is certain is that he's here applying to diction a sort of sliding scale or set of variable standards such as Ford's principles didn't allow for.
At any rate, Pound's enthusiasm for Binyon's version had led him to re-open correspondence with Binyon.
And a letter of 30 August 1934 is particularly interesting, since it is rather plainly a reply to protests from Binyon about Pound's contemptuous treatment of Rubens.
Pound's humility under Binyon's supposed rebuke is very striking:
Dear L.B: When one has finally done the job and found the mot juste , I dare say violent language usually disappears.
Rubens' technique (at least in one painting about 4 ft. square) is not stupid.
I dare say I damned him, for the whole grovelling imbecility of french court life from the death of Francois premier to the last fat slob that was guillotined.
…And my use of ‘idiotic’ is loose.
You are quite right about that.
Have always been interested in intelligence, escaped the germy epoch of Freud and am so bored with all lacks of intelletto that I haven't used any discrimination when I have referred to ‘em….
If, as I'm inclined to believe, this unwonted willingness to kiss the rod represents one last offer by Pound (at this time, aged forty-eight!) to enrol in Binyon's seminar if Binyon would only call it into being, Binyon once again knew better than to understand what Pound was driving at.
Oddly enough, the last word — though a mournful one — can be with Maurice Hewlett.
For in 1920, when Binyon began work towards his version of the Inferno , he exchanged letters with Hewlett, who had translated the first canto years before, and now urged Binyon to shorten his measure to tetrameters, pointing out that this was what he himself had done in his ‘Song of the Plough’, a long poem in terza rima in which he had invested a great deal.
Hewlett remarked: ‘Another thing: putting in eights compels the terseness of Dante, wh. amounts sometimes to a vice in him.
Still, there it is, and you must reproduce it’.
How could Binyon have failed to remember this, when Pound complimented him by saying, ‘He has carefully preserved all the faults of his original’?
In Guide to Kulchur (chapter 30) Pound was to say, again with Binyon's translation specifically in mind, ‘Honest work has its reward in the arts if no other where’.
How one would like that to be true!
But turning over the pages of poor Hewlett's unreadable but honest ‘Song of the Plough’, one wonders about that.
One does indeed.
Paideuma 5: 1 (1976).
Ezra Pound Abandons the English
Ezra Pound's long love affair with England, and his angry and wounded turning against her in 1917 or 1918, cannot of course bulk so large in an American's sense of him as in an Englishman's.
It is an American, Herbert Schniedau, who has asked:
Can any man who identifies himself with the British world of letters, however independent and tolerant he may be, write a fair-minded book about Pound?
What Pound did to English literature and British sensibilities doesn't seem forgivable, and I really think that the English were more offended by Pound's political obsessions than were the countrymen he ostensibly betrayed.
This is fair comment; and the last clause in particular is, surprisingly, manifestly true, explain it how we may.
And yet an Englishman's relation to English culture and its traditions may be more tormented than Schniedau allows for, especially if the Englishman in question defines himself as, or aspires to be, an English artist .
Such a one may feel that Pound's ‘writing off’ of England, his abandonment of her — physically in 1920, in imagination some years earlier — was abundantly justified, to the extent indeed that it was not so much his justified rejection of her, as her unjustifiable rejection of him .
And yet such an Englishman must wonder: Was there once virtue in England, which subsequently went out of her?
If so, when did this happen?
In the casualty lists from the Battle of the Somme?
(Or is that merely rhetoric?)
And can the virtue that thus went out of the spiritual reality called England ever be restored?
Has there been such a restoration, since 1920?
If so, when did it happen?
And if not, when will it ever happen?
When, and how?
These are serious and painful questions.
At all events there are Englishmen who find them so.
To take one example out of many, the native Englishman D. H. Lawrence reached just the same conclusion  as Pound at just the same time, and Lawrence's letters record it; he concluded, just as Pound did, that England after the First World War was, for the artist, uninhabitable.
The names of Robert Graves, W.H. Auden, and Christopher Isherwood may serve to remind us of English writers who seem to have reached the same dismaying conclusion over the years since.
However that may be, there are reasons for thinking that the abandonment of England, and of any hopes for her, was not much less momentous for Pound than it is for his English readers.
After all, Pound had married England — not figuratively, but literally, in the person of Dorothy Shakespear; and Ben Hecht in 1918 reported that Pound was ‘a doting monogamist’.
It didn't last; his alienation from England seems to have coincided with an alienation from Dorothy, for within five years he had a child by Olga Rudge.
And this is not altogether surprising; for Dorothy Pound seems to have been English in a singularly entire and uncompromising fashion.
The daughter of Olivia Shakespear, who had been briefly Yeats's mistress and had bought Wyndham Lewis's canvases and Gaudier's drawings, Dorothy told Hugh Kenner in 1965, ‘I read poetry only with difficulty.
I never did much care for it’.
She said also, recalling Pound translating Noh plays on their honeymoon at Stone Cottage in Sussex, ‘I was not then preoccupied with plays and characters.
I was trying to make out what sort of creature I was going to be living with’.
Moreover, Dorothy's Englishness was centuries old: among her cousins was one Charles Talbot —‘one of the Shakespear names’, she said — who owned a medieval abbey, ‘and once Ezra and I crawled over the roof in a turret to see a copy of the Magna Charta, kept there in a glass case’.
In 1945, in an American prison camp near pisa, Pound remembered that (Canto 80):
To watch a while from the tower
where dead flies lie thick over the old charter
forgotten, oh quite forgotten
but confirming John's first one,
and still there if you climb over attic rafters;
to look at the fields; are they tilled?
is the old terrace live as it might be
with a whole colony
if money be free again?
Chesterton's England of has-been and why-not,
or is it all rust, ruin, death duties and mortgages
and the great carriage yard empty
and more pictures gone to pay taxes
When a dog is tall but
not so tall as all that
that dog is a Talbot
(a bit long in the pasterns?)
When a butt is ½ as tall as a whole butt
That butt is a small butt
Let backe and side go bare
and the old kitchen left as the monks had left it
and the rest as time has cleft it.
(Only shadows enter my tent
as men pass between me and the sunset)…
If, as Hugh Kenner believes, Pound never ceased to love Dorothy even while he loved Olga, this is surely part of what he loved in her, an aspect of what she meant to him; and so Pound's feelings for and about England were, right to the end, not much less tormented than any English reader's can be.
And the English reader who does not understand that the punning on ‘Talbot’ is painful and all but hysterical, like the punning of Shakespeare's Hamlet, does not understand Pound at all.
As for Dorothy's loyalty, it proved equal to any occasion; and in particular through the years of Pound's incarceration in St Elizabeth's her devotion was exemplary.
Certainly she was no philistine, but a graphic artist herself.
And yet…
‘I read poetry only with great difficulty.
I never did much care for it’.
It is at any rate possible that in her a certain ethical rightness and decency coexisted with aesthetic stiffness and suspicion.
It was a not uncommon combination in a certain breed of Englishman and Englishwoman — a breed perhaps now vanished, which is not to say, improved upon.
As for Canto 80, it continues, and closes upon, ‘the matter of England:
beyond the castern barbed wire
a sow with mine boneen
matronly as any duchess at Claridge's
and for that Christmas at Maurie Hewlett's
Going out from Southampton
they passed the car by the dozen
who would not have shown weight on a scale
riding, riding
for Noel the green holly
Noel, Noel, the green holly
A dark night for the holly
That would have been Salisbury plain,
and I have not thought of
the Lady Anne for this twelve years
Nor of Le Portel
How tiny the panelled room where they stabbed him
In her lap, almost, La Stuarda
Si tuit li dolh ehl planh el marrimen
for the leopards and broom plants
Tudor indeed is gone and every rose,
Blood-red, blanch-white that in the sunset glows
Cries: ‘Blood, Blood, Blood!’ against the gothic stone
Of England, as the Howard or Boleyn knows.
Nor seeks the carmine petal to infer;
Nor is the white bud Time's inquisitor
Probing to know if its new-gnarled root
Twists from York's head or belly of Lancaster;
Or if a rational soul should stir, perchance,
Within the stem or summer shoot to advance
Contrition's utmost throw, seeking in thee
But oblivion, not thy forgiveness, FRANCE.
as the young lizard extends his leopard spots
along the grass-blade seeking the green midge
half an ant-size
and the Serpentine will look just the same
and the gulls be as neat on the pond
and the sunken garden unchanged
and God knows what else is left of our London
my London, your London
and if her green elegance
remains on this side of my rain ditch
puss lizard will lunch on some other T-bone
sunset grand couturier.
‘That Christmas’(not that it matters) was Christmas 1911, which Pound spent as a guest of Maurice Hewlett's at the Old Rectory, Broad Chalke, Salisbury — a house which had once been a nunnery, dating back to 1487.
Hewlett, author of The Queen's Quair , brings to mind another writer who had similarly concerned himself with Mary Queen of Scots (‘La Stuarda’)— that is to say, Swinburne in his Mary Stuart .
Swinburne is alluded to, here as elsewhere, by the place-name ‘Le Portel’, where — so Pound seems to have believed (wrongly, for the name is ‘Yport’)— Swinburne on a famous occasion was saved from drowning by French fishermen.
At Holyrood House in Edinburgh one is still shown the room where Rizzio was stabbed ‘in her lap almost’.
The line in Provençal is from Bertran de Born's ‘Planh for the Young English King’, which Pound had translated splendidly as early as 1909.
The ‘leopards and broom plants’, Plantagenet emblems, signify the dynastic reasons for which Henry the young king was killed, as were Rizzio and Mary's husband Darnley centuries later.
Anyone is free to decide that life is too short for such unriddlings; others (I speak from experience) may develop a taste for them.
A more important point is that passages of this sort, spliced as they are with images like the lizard from the immediate foreground of Pound's tent inside the wire-mesh cage of the prison camp, do not come into being out of the free associations of idle reverie, though in these Pisan cantos Pound exploits the illusion of that, as Joyce did in Ulysses when he pretended to transport himself and us into the mind of Leopold Bloom.
The reason we are reminded of these historical episodes, rather than any of a hundred others, comes clear only with the surprising and congested line that closes the quatrains about the Wars of the Roses: ‘But oblivion, not thy forgiveness, FRANCE’.
The England that Pound mourns the loss of is, as it had been for him from the first, an integral province of western Europe, sharing a common culture with France and always reaching out, through France, to the shores of the Mediterranean.
This emphasis will not commend itself to the English reader whom Herbert Schniedau envisages.
Such a reader is likely to define his Englishness as precisely that which continental Europe is not.
And in fact, of recent years Dickens's Mr Podsnap has walked again, cherishing insularity as a patriotic duty.
But of course there are other things in this passage which will put English teeth on edge.
Colonel Blimp today is likely to be a Roundhead colonel, in his professed sentiments a Leveller, though not of course in his practices.
And his egalitarianism will be offended by ‘the great carriage yard empty’, and by ‘more pictures gone to pay taxes’.
Especially as voiced by an  American who had disloyally taken the wrong side in a war just successfully completed ‘for democracy’, the sentiments must have seemed — in 1948, when The Pisan Cantos appeared — nothing short of shameless!
An English writer who went into self-exile just when Pound and Lawrence did, Ford Madox Ford, had always been denied serious consideration (as he is denied it still), in part for having, in No More Parades at the end of a previous war, envisaged the England he was leaving in just such manorial terms: and if the Englishman could not be forgiven, how forgive the American?
(Lawrence, it is true, envisaged the England he was relinquishing very largely in the image of Garsington Manor; but then, Lawrence's origins are so impeccably proletarian that the aberration can be overlooked!)
And then there is the insolence of the last line: ‘sunset grand couturier’.
Isn't that the giveaway?
It will certainly seem so to the Englishman (as I take him to be), who found in the ‘Envoi’ to Hugh Selwyn Mauberley — Pound's most explicit farewell to England, as he prepared to leave her in 1918 —‘externality: an externality which, considering what Mauberley attempts, is utterly disabling’.
This is the same reader who, having decided that the ‘Envoi’ is ‘literary , in a limiting sense’, is provoked by the word ‘magic’in the middle stanza into deciding that ‘the term ‘literary’becomes a good deal more limiting, for the term ‘aesthetic’rises to our lips, and so, perhaps, does ‘American’' And there we have it!
For this sort of Englishman, ‘externality,— to things English — is what any American is condemned to; and per contra ‘inwardness’— with things English — is what an Englishman quite simply has, painlessly, as a birthright.
From this point of view, the only good American is one who stays shamefacedly mute about his English cousins, however many years he may have lived among them.
The same rule does not hold, it will be noticed, when there is any question of Englishmen talking about Americans.
The comment I have been quoting from appeared in 1965.
The vocabulary is different from the comments of fifty years earlier which wounded and infuriated Pound, and drove him out of England, but the sentiments are identical.
And indeed even the vocabulary is  sometimes the same.
The horrifying thing about, for instance, Robert Nichols's review in the Observer for 11 January 1920 —‘Mr Pound, indeed, serves his lobster â l'Américaine’— is that it could perfectly well have appeared in the Observer last Sunday.
It is entirely possible to think that if ‘literary’ and ‘aesthetic’are words that go naturally with ‘American’but not with ‘English’, so much the worse for the English.
Ah, but we mean ‘literary’— presumably ‘aesthetic’ also ‘in a limiting sense’.
Yet from those English lips which utter this face-saving locution, one has yet to hear the words uttered in any sense that is not ‘limiting’.
And from a set of preconceptions like that there is no way into Pound's universe at all.
As regards‘externality’, for instance , Pound may be thought to admit the charge, and to glory in it.
for he applauded Wyndham Lewis's alter ego in Tarr , when the latter explained that it is a condition of art ‘to have no inside, nothing you cannot see.
It is not something impelled like a machine by a little egoistic inside’; and again, ‘deadness, in the limited sense in which we use that word, is the first condition of art.
The second is absence of soul , in the sentimental human sense.
The lines and masses of a statue are its soul’.
Between a limiting sense (for ‘literary’) and a limited sense (for ‘deadness’), we are here navigating in light and tricky airs.
And Pound had later to explain what he meant, and what he did not mean, by his endorsement of Lewis.
After all, he was later to applaud Hardy's poetry for having precisely, ‘the insides’.
Yet he never retracted this avowal; nor — given what he meant by it — did he need to.
The clue to what he meant is the last sentence from Lewis: ‘The lines and masses of a statue are its soul’.
That ‘inwardness’ so prized by some English readers, and characteristically found by them (implausibly) in Lawrence, is an attention directed so far ‘inward, that it can never come to the surface for long enough to notice how the sunlight breaks upon the edges and volumes of a piece of sculpture; and that is why indeed such readers cannot use the word ‘aesthetic’except ‘in a limiting sense’.
Accordingly, the most instructive gloss on ‘externality’ is to be found where we might expect it, in Pound's 1916 memoir of the sculptor, Gaudier-Brzeska, where he writes of Gaudier and Lewis and other ‘vorticists’, painters, and sculptors:
These new men have made me see form, have made me more conscious of the sky where it juts down between houses, of the bright patterns of sunlight which the bath water throws up on the ceiling, of the great ‘Vs’ of light that dart through  the chinks over the curtain rings, all these are new chords, new keys of design.
It is in this profoundly grateful and reverent sene, certainly not with any heartless flippancy, that forty years later in the prison stockade Pound greets the sunset as a designer —‘grand couturier’.
Plainly the man who wrote this was the man who in Hugh Selwyn Mauberley took as his model and master Gautier, who described himself proudly as a man ‘pour qui le monde visible existe’.
But the English reader has a label ready to tie on to Theophile Gautier; and by this time we can guess what is written on it —‘arid aestheticism’.
When Schniedau says, ‘What Pound did to English literature and British sensibilities doesn't seem forgivable’, he doubtless has in mind certain passages from How to Read , which was originally addressed to the American readers of the New York Herald Tribune Books on 13, 20, and 27 January 1929. for instance:
The Britons have never shed barbarism; they are proud to tell you that Tacitus said the last word about Germans.
When Mary Queen of Scots went to Edinburgh she bewailed going out among savages, and she herself went from a sixteenthcentury court that held but a barbarous, or rather a drivelling and idiotic and superficial travesty of the Italian culture as it had been before the debacle of 1527.
The men who tried to civilize these shaggy and uncouth marginalians by bringing them news of civilization have left a certain number of translations that are better reading today than are the works of the ignorant islanders who were too Proud to translate.
Whereupon Pound applauds, as he had done before and was to do again, Gavin Douglas's translation of Virgil and Arthur Golding's and Marlowe's translations of Ovid.
Again (where Pound's addressing himself to Americans is especially evident):
We are so encumbered by having British literature in our foreground that…one must speak of it in disproportion.
It was kept alive during the last century by a series of exotic injections.
Swinburne read Greek and took English metric in hand; Rossetti brought in the Italian primitives; Fitzgerald made the only good poem of the time that has gone to the PeoPle; it is called, and is to a great extent, a translation or mistranslation.
There was a faint waft of early French influence.
Morris  translated sagas, the Irish took over the business for a few years; Henry James led, or rather preceded, the novelists, and then the Britons resigned en bloc ; the language is now in the keeping of the Irish (Yeats and Joyce); apart from Yeats, since the death of Hardy, poetry is being written by Americans.
All the developments in English verse since 1910 are due almost wholly to Americans.
In fact, there is no longer any reason to call it English verse, and there is no present reason to think of England at all.
This is unfair?
Yes, of course it is.
Elsewhere in How to Read Pound remembers Landor and Browning, and has to make special provision to exempt them from these strictures.
Moreover, when Pound revised and expanded How to Read , to make ABC of Reading (1934), he obliquely admitted the unfairness of these passages.
But they are not manifestly unfair; there is a case to answer.
We English have never answered the case, because we have refused to recognize that the case was ever made.
And so the case against us has gone by default.
Among serious writers and readers in the United States (as distinct from shallow and modish Anglophiles mostly around New York), it is taken for granted that Pound's caustic dismissal of us in 1929 was justified, and that nothing has happened in the forty-five years since to alter that picture significantly.
Hugh Kenner, for instance, in a work of massive scholarship,The Pound Era (1971), can write: ‘By the mid-1920s a massive triviality, a failure of will on a truly forbidding scale, was allowing English culture to lapse into shapes characterized by childishness, self-indulgence, utter predictability’.
And throughout Kenner's book ‘English’ is taken to imply arrogant obtuseness, complacent inertia, and effeminate enervation.
If we resent this (as we should), we ought to realize that it is we who are to blame for it.
For neither Kenner nor Pound is a professional or obsessive Anglophobe.
Both men are reporting what seem to them the facts of the case, and they are the more confident about doing so because no Englishman has arisen to rebut their arguments.
For us to respond with sneering anti-Americanism is the merest childishness.
After this, Pound's relations with England and the English were for the most part an aspect of his relations with that one of his erstwhile protégés who had become, surprisingly, a pillar of the English establishment — Eliot, editor of the Criterion .
And these negotiations are mostly conducted in a tone of high comedy; after 1930 Pound's anger is virtually monopolized by Roosevelt's USA, and English culture is for him just something that he can't take seriously.
This does not prevent him from honouring English  writing when it is honourable; for instance Binyon's Dante, Rouse's Homer, the early books of Adrian Stokes, and the poems of Basil Bunting.
But the preferred tone is one of indulgent banter.
(And at the risk of labouring the obvious, let it be said that Pound is often a very funny writer, in verse and prose alike.)
If the English reader doesn't like this, let him ask himself if Housman's Name and Nature of Poetry , or — touching as it is, and as Pound acknowledges — the career of Harold Monro, is not treated with as much compassionate indulgence as possible in the Criterion articles by Pound which he reprinted in Polite Essays (1937).
Still more to the point is another essay in that volume, ‘Mr Eliot s Solid Merit’(originally in the New English Weekly for 12 July 1934).
Considering that this was written at a time when Pound's reputation was eclipsed as Eliot's rose towards the zenith, the generosity of this essay, its lack of rancour, is admirable.
And Pound's generosity towards Eliot did not fail through subsequent decades, when nothing was more common among the English intelligentsia, especially the academic part of it, than to assail Pound with weapons picked from Eliot's armoury.
This strategy is still in high favour among us.
It consists of making categorical and systematic certain distinctions made, and preferences expressed, by Eliot in his essays; and then dismissing Pound merely because he writes with a measure of respect of certain writers (Swinburne is one example) on whom Eliot, the arbiter of taste, is supposed to have conclusively turned down his thumbs.
At its most ludicrous, this makes the ‘Envoi’ to Hugh Selwyn Mauberley suspect, or worse than suspect, simply because it alludes to Edmund Waller, whereas the okay authors from Waller's period, among pedestrian readers of Eliot's essays, are taken to be Donne and Marvell.
Eliot, needless to say, never countenanced these devious manoeuvres.
We should now be in a position to answer Herbert Schniedau's question: ‘Can any man who identifies himself with the British world of letters…write a fair-minded book about Pound?’
The answer is: Yes, this can be done, and it has been done — by G.S.
Fraser, for one.
If the English writer stops short of uncritical adulation, and also has a longer memory than the Americans for the loathsome politics that Pound was infected by, that is all to the good.
There are British Poundians, and they are among the best.
If there are few of them, we have seen why.
It is because trying to give credit to this great poet commits a patriotic Englishman (or Scotsman for that matter — Fraser is a Scot) to very tormenting and unwelcome questions and reflections about the spiritual state of England or Scotland today, and over the last fifty years.
It is therefore inevitable that our Poundians will be exceptions, and that majority opinion for the foreseeable  future will be more or less hysterically hostile to Pound.
This would not matter so much if Pound had not been a great technical innovator in verse writing.
Because the British world of letters as a whole has refused, and still refuses, to consider Pound temperately, it refuses to acknowledge — indeed, it cannot even understand — the poetic forms that Pound invented, or the principles of form which he enunciated.
And in saying this, one has in mind not the Cantos but the much more straightforward and generally serviceable forms which Pound put into currency in collections like Ripostes (1912) and Lustra (1916).
One thinks, for instance, of imagism, and of the treatment which the TLS meted out to Peter Jones's anthology of imagist poetry.
In short, what happens is that in England — and here one does mean England, rather than Scotland or Ireland — the non-academic makers and moulders of literary opinion are judging poetry by standards which are sixty years out-of-date.
The rest of the world surveys this spectacle with amused disbelief.
Poetry Nation (Manchester) no. 4 (1975)
Pound and The Exile 
If we look at Pound in 1927 and 1928, when he instituted from or through Paris his periodical,The Exile , and sustained it through four issues, we get the impression of a man yawing about without direction, as at no time either earlier or later in his career.
The very pages of his own magazine express the discernibly patronizing indulgence that it seems the American expatriate community extended to him.
Robert McAlmon, writing reportage in The Exile number 2, noted: ‘At the Stryx, I found Ezra Pound talking to an English girl, and describing America as it never was, is not, and never will be.
I was glad to see Ezra, because what biased attitudes he has are so biased that he manages to be, all round, a more generous-minded and discriminating person that others who spread their capacity for bias over their entire mental outlook’.
This is certainly not the language that one uses of a resident sage or recognized ‘master’; and it seems that in Paris at that time there was in fact no one who esteemed Pound in either of those ways.
For just this reason the issues of The Exile , though they provide only conflicting evidence about Pound's acumen as an editor, are very instructive about the cast of his sensibility.
Particularly interesting is the fact that, after backing so many winners, Pound in The Exile backed unmistakably at least one loser.
This was Ralph Cheever Dunning, whose ‘Threnody in Sapphics’ appeared in The Exile number 2, and was strenuously defended by Pound in number 3:
My present feeling is that any one who cannot feel the beauty of their melody had better confine his criticism to prose and leave the discussion of verse to those who understand something about it….
It still seems to me that the acting critics of poesy are for the most part incapable of looking for more than one thing at a time, having got started about 1913 (I mean a few of ‘em got started about 1913 and a lot have started since) to look for a certain plainness and directness of speech and simple order of words; and having about 1918 got started  looking for Mr Eliot's rather more fragile system (a system excellent for Mr Eliot but not very much use to any one else), they now limit their criticism to inquiring whether or no verse conforms to one or other of these manners, thereby often omitting to notice fundamentals, or qualities as important as verbal directness and even more important than ‘snap’.
The meaning of ‘snap’ in relation to Eliot's ‘rather more fragile system’is at this date, I suppose, irrecoverable; but the general drift of these remarks is clear.
And this is not the only place in The Exile where Pound shows himself restive inside the image of himself that had been built up among initiates by his propaganda of fifteen years before, when he had taken over ‘imagism’ and championed Ford Madox Ford's ideas about a diction for poetry that should be ‘plain’and ‘direct’.
At the end of this same issue of The Exile there appears from Pound a page headed ‘Desideria’:
Quite simply: I want a new civilization.
We have the basis for a new poetry, and for a new music.
But this ringing declaration is no sooner issued than it has to be qualified virtually out of existence.
In the first place,
I say new civilization, I don't know that I care about its being so very different from the best that has been, but it must be as good as the best that has been.
And secondly, much more to our present purposes:
(Parenthesis.
No, dearie, when I say, the basis for a new poetry, I don't mean the vers libre movement as it was in the year 1912.)
Of course the most cursory glance at Dunning's ‘Threnody in Sapphics’(not to speak of more miserable performances like ‘Isabelle of Hainault’ in The Exile number 3) shows that Pound had, as it were, no alternative; there was no way to vindicate Dunning by imagist principles.
He could not be vindicated by any other principles, either.
But before we jump to the conclusion that Pound had simply had a brainstorm, or had been trapped by misplaced compassion for Dunning as a lame duck, we ought to consider another possibility — that imagism, and Pound's endorsement of Ford's insistence on ‘the prose tradition’, had never been for him more than an aberration, though in the short term a very profitable one, from a  way of feeling that impelled him always toward the cantabile , a proclivity that would, in the interests of melody, tolerate notably eccentric diction.
It is thus that he declares himself for Dunning's sapphics, flashing out at ‘any one who cannot feel the beauty of their melody ’(my italics).
And within six years, wanting to register (in The Criter -ion for 1934) the distinction of Binyon's version of the Inferno despite its consistent inversions of prosaic word order, Pound found himself in the same situation, having to contend with those who had learned too well or too inflexibly the lessons he himself had taught them:
Before flying to the conclusion that certain things are ‘against the rules’(heaven save us, procedures are already erected into RULES!) let the neophyte consider that a man cannot be in New York and Pekin at the same moment.
Certain qualities are in OPPOSITION to others, water cannot exist as water and as ice at the same time.
Moreover these were the years when Pound was writing Canto 30:
Compleynt, compleynt I hearde upon a day,
Artemis singing, Artemis, Artemis
Agaynst Pity lifted her wail:
Pity causeth the forests to fail,
Pity slayeth my nymphs…
and Canto 36:
I have no will to try proof-bringing
Or say where it hath birth
What is its virtu and power
Its being and every moving
Or delight whereby tis called ‘to love’
Or if man can show it to sight.
To be sure, both of these cantos are special cases — as was, we may suppose, the ‘Envoi’ to Hugh Selwyn Mauberley , written many years before.
Yet in one sense the circumstances of any and every poem are ‘special’; and at any rate all these instances show that, in his own writing as in the writing of others, Pound was prepared to recognize circumstances which justified departing very far indeed from Ford's and the imagists' precepts about diction, indeed flying in the face of them.
But what, then, are we to make of it when, in 1939, writing an obituary of Ford, Pound lumped together two old associates of his, Fred Manning and Henry Newbolt, and excoriated them for continuing to use the ‘poetical’ diction from which Ford's timely polemics had weaned Pound himself?
Is this inconsistency?
Is it worse — positive dishonesty?
And what's to be said of his declaration, as late as 1964 (in Confucius to Cummings , the anthology he put together with Marcella Spann), that Ford's insistence on ‘the limpidity of natural speech, driven towards the just word, not slopping down…into the more ordinary Wordsworthian word’ was ‘the most important critical act of the half-century’?
How could Pound continue to proclaim this, when his own writing for decades before had belied it?
(For undeniably, the cantos are not limpid ; much of them isn't ‘speech’ at all, but ‘song’; and of the parts that are speech, by no means all are ‘natural’.)
Have we convicted Pound of inconsistency, or worse?
I think not.
Pound knew enough of his own gifts, and of the protracted strenuousness of his apprenticeship, to know that what was safe for him was not safely available to others, least of all to those he called ‘the neophyte’.
He knew too that the poem he was engaged upon,The Cantos , was unprecedented and (he must have thought)sui generis .
(He was not to know that Charles Olson, after next to no apprenticeship at all, would recklessly try to emulate him.)
But in any case, the best proof of the pudding is in the eating — by which I mean that any one who has tried to help young poets over the years, whether in Britain or America, knows that Ford's and the imagists' precepts about diction are what most of them most need to learn — no novelty, after all, since they can learn the same lessons from the preface to Lyrical Ballads , if they choose to.
What they learn in such a case is, of course, only a rule of thumb; for if criticism sometimes has to be prescriptive, its prescriptions are never applicable except ‘by and large ’.
Rules of thumb are the only rules there are, in the atelier .
But experience has taught me that this is the rule of thumb that can be most profitably proposed and acted upon.
I dare to go further: some of the most gifted and earnest among my contemporaries — I think of Edgar Dowers in the United States and Geoffrey Hill in the United Kingdom (though I except Hill's wonderful Mercian Hymns )— fall short of pleasing me as they might, because they seem not to have followed this rule of thumb, and their language is habitually for my taste a shade, or several shades, too grandiloquent or ‘literary’.
I conclude that Ford's ‘critical act’ was indeed (by and large, always by and large ) the most important of the first half of this century, and that it is, moreover, irreversible.
Sicily in The Cantos 
When was Pound in Sicily?
How many visits did be pay to the island?
What particular cities and districts did he visit?
For which of these excursions was he in the company of Yeats? presumably from the Pound papers now at New Haven it would not be hard to come up with answers to these questions.
But in the meantime the printed sources are hazy, if not quite contradictory.
According to Noel Stock (The Life of Ezra Pound [1970], p.251), ‘about the middle of February 1923 the Pounds went to Sicily with Yeats and his wife’.
On the other hand, in Joseph Hone's W.B. Yeats, 1865–1939 (1942, p.367) we read that the Yeatses went to Sicily in November 1924 and stayed for two months, ‘the attraction there being, besides the sunlight, the presence of Ezra Pound on the island, and the Byzantine mosaics of Monreale and the Capella Palatina at Palermo’.
Certainly Pound was writing from Taormina in December 1924, and writing to Joyce from Syracuse on 21 January 1925 (Pound/Joyce ed.
Forrest Read, 1967).
And Richard Ellmann, in New Approaches to Ezra Pound (1969), names 1925 as the year in which the two poets, with their respective wives, were together in Sicily.
All one can say with any certainty is that the Pounds (and probably the Yeatses also) paid at least two visits to Sicily in these years, and that on at least one occasion — probably on more than one — they stayed there for some weeks, if not months.
If we look in The Cantos for traces left by this experience, we are surprised to find how few they are, and how meagre.
We might think that ‘Naxos’ in Cantos 2, 24, and 78 is the place of that name beneath Taormina, the site (lately and partially excavated) of the earliest Greek colony in Sicily, and thereafter the port whence the teams from all the Sicilian Greek cities made a ceremonial departure to compete in the Olympic Games; but the Annotated Index is doubtless right to identify Naxos, on the contrary, with an island in the Aegean.
Apart from that, we have (at 25/1 15)‘that serene Lord King Frederic of Sicily’— which is to say, Frederick of Aragon (1272–1337), who was Frederick II, king of Sicily (1296–1337).
At27/129, we hear  of ‘the earthquake in Messina’(28 December 1908), but this is merely incidental to the vast blague perpetrated by Romains, Vildrac, and others in Paris — to be nostalgically remembered years later in the Pisan Canto 80 (see Richard Sieburth in Paideuma 2, p.280).
At 77/467 and again at 80/512, reference to the ‘quai’ or ‘quais’at or of ‘Siracusa, seem not much less adventitious, in the sense that location in the Sicilian city of Syracuse seems, at first sight anyhow, not to be significant.
Rather more arresting is 80/503:
hurled into unstillness, Ixion
Trinacrian manxman
— where ‘Trinacria’, the ancient Greek name for Sicily, is related to the legend of how Vulcan the divine smith, somewhere in the island, solved the problem of perpetual motion, by a wheel with three dogleg spokes, its never ceasing to roll recalling the wheel that was the hellish and interminable torment of Ixion.
(The same threespoked wheel is the heraldic emblem of the Isle of Man.)
There remains the joke, at 82/524, on the name of Frederic W. Tancred, a member of the Hulme-Flint circle (c. 1909), chiming with that of Tancred, Norman king of Sicily (d. 1194).
This is a poor harvest from those weeks or months that the Pounds spent in Sicily; and indeed it is no harvest at all, since none of these allusions depends in any way on the poet's having been physically present in the island.
The same is true of a passage in the Rock-Drill Canto 94 (640–41):
Acre, again,
with an Eleanor
who sucked the venom out of his wound,
and came up via Padua,
for a balance of wine &wool,
distraint and tolls not unbridled
and in 1288 a thunderbolt passed between them
this wd /be in the time of Federico Secondo,
Alfonso, St. Louis, and Magnus of Norway
and two years later she died and his luck went out,
Edwardus, who played Baliol against the Bruce
and brought the stone down to London
where it is seen to this day
PACTUM SERVA
Be Traist.
Here the Sicilian reference, in itself a very slight one but worth pointing out for reasons that will emerge, is in ‘Federico Secondo’, who is identical with the ‘Frederic’ of canto 25, glossed above.
It is essential not to confound him with the greater Frederick II (Hohenstaufen), holy Roman emperor from 1215 to 1250, and before that (1198–1212) king of Sicily as Frederick I. For this great figure, author of The Book of the Falcon and a hero for Dante as well as Pound, is to figure portentously in the Thrones cantos to come as we shall see.
By the same token, we have to keep a watch on dates so as to see that this Eleanor is not Eleanor of Aquitaine, but her great-greatgranddaughter, Eleanor of Castile, wife of Edward I of England.
The possibility of confusion is very great; for just as Eleanor of Castile landed at Acre in 1270, accompanying Edward on the seventh crusade, so Eleanor of Aquitaine had landed there 120 years before, accompanying her husband (that is, her first, Louis VII of France) on his crusade — which is presumably what Pound means by ‘Acre,again ’.
(This ‘rhyme in history’ between namesakes is doubtless meant to strengthen the already well-established conflation of these Eleanors with their near namesakes, Helen of Troy and Helen of Tyre.)
Most of the details about Eleanor and her relations with Edward, including his attempts to subjugate Scotland, symbolically signified by his removing the Stone of Scone to London, are found in the first volume of that small classic, Agnes Strickland's Lives of the Queens of England (1864).
At 97/681–2, we get:
PUER APULIUS
‘Fresca rosa’ sang Alcamo.
Of Antoninus very little record remains
That he wrote the book of the Falcon,
Mirabile brevitate correxit, says Landulph,
of Justinian's Code.
And here is the other Frederick, the Hohenstaufen emperor, he who wrote The Book of the Falcon (The Art of Falconry, being the De Arte Venandi cum Avibus , tr.
C. A. Wood and F. Marjorie Fyfe, 1943).
He appears under the name he was given in his orphaned youth — the Boy from Apulia.
And with him comes Ciullo d'Alcamo, whose ‘Rosa Fresca aulentissima’ was translated by D.G. Rossetti: ‘Thou sweetly-smelling fresh red rose/ That near thy summer art….’
This poem, and its author, figure in The Spirit of Romance , as showing that Italian poetry taking up from Provence originated not in Tuscany but Sicily.
Though Ciullo by Rossetti's reckoning composed  the poem in the 1170s, at least twenty years before Frederick Hohenstaufen came to the throne of Sicily, Pound in The Spirit of Romance juxtaposes the two names, presumably as ‘an instigation’— though to what, it is not easy to say.
Fifty years later, in Thrones , this is still the best he can do — juxtaposing the two authors, and the two compositions, as here, so also at 98/689, 100/719, and 103/736.
If significance is supposed to accrue with each repeated conjunction, it fails to do so for me.
However, at Canto 106/753–54 (there is a brief allusion at 104/745 to the mosaics at Monreale), we do at last find a Sicilian allusion in the context of writing that we can recognize as distinguished:
That the goddess turn crystal within her
This is grain rite
Luigi in the hill path
this is grain rite
near Enna, at Nyssa:
Circe, Persephone
so different is sea from glen that
the juniper is her holy bush
between the two pine trees, not Circe
but Circe was like that
coming from the house of smoothe stone
‘not know which god’
nor could enter her eyes by probing
the light blazed behind her
nor was this from sunset
Enna, traditional location of the rape of Persephone (see Milton), is in mid-Sicily.
But the location is, as it were, accidental, and contributes nothing to the tension between Circe and Persephone as it has been teased out, in this passage along with others, by Guy Davenport (see his ‘Persephone's Ezra’, in New Approaches to Ezra Pound ).
In Canto 107, the Sicilian references suddenly come quite thick and fast, spliced into numerous quotations from Sir Edward Coke.
This makes sense to the degree that one of the legal authorities whom Coke most often cites is Bracton (Henry de Bracton, De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae ), who dies in 1268, having flourished under Henry III of England and during the minority of Henry's son, the future Edward I. Moreover Edward and Eleanor spent the winter of 1270–71 in Sicily, en route to the Holy Land, and returned there in 1272 for Edward to learn that, his father having died, he was king of England.
These are frail reasons, but the best I can find, for canto 107 to begin with a flourish of Sicilian place-names:
The azalea is grown while we sleep
In Selinunt',
in Akragas
Coke, Inst. 2.,
to all cathedral churches to be
read 4 times in the yeare
20.
H. 3.
Like so much else in these cantos, the last line is midleading , since it suggests it was by an edict of Henry III that the Magna Charta was sent to all cathedrals and read four times a year, whereas Coke's Institutes make it clear that this was on the contrary an enactment of Edward I. ‘Selinunte’ and ‘Akragas’(the old name of Agrigento) are ancient Greek cities in Sicily.
Later in the canto (107/757–58) we come upon:
OBIT Coke 1634 &in ‘49
Noll cut down Charlie
Puer Apulius…ver l'estate
Voltaire could not do it;
the french could not do it.
they had not Magna Charta
in ver l'estate, Queen of Akragas
resistent,
Templum aedificavit
Segesta
I think I know what this might mean, or what it might be made to mean.
But I can hardly care.
For this is wretched writing by any standards.
I said as much when Thrones first came out, remarking on the insanely pointless jocularity of ‘Noll’ for Oliver Cromwell and ‘Charlie’for Charles I. Harsh words!
But I repeated them in Ezra Pound.: Poet as Sculptor , and nothing that has come to my notice since, including an erudite and adulatory article on these cantos by David Gordon in Paideuma 4 (1975), has made me want to retract my words or change my mind.
Those of us who want to champion Pound do him no service at all when we try to excuse the inexcusable.
And writing like this, if not indeed the writing of Thrones in general, I take to be inexcusable.
Moreover the style faithfully mirrors the  puerility of the content: to think that the barons who faced King John at Runnymede were anything like the Cokes or Hampdens who challenged the royal prerogative of the Stuarts in the seventeenth century, or that these in turn had much or anything in common with Sam and John Adams or Tom Paine, is to adopt the notorious ‘Whig interpretation’ of English history in a sort of parody version for grade school.
At 107/759, lo and behold, yet another Eleanor!
In fact she has made a cryptic entrance already in the fifteenth line of this canto: ‘…of Berengar his heirs was this Eleanor’.
This points to Eleanor of Provence , Edward's mother and consort of Henry III, whose reputation is as bad as that of Eleanor of Castile is good — though not for David Gordon, who seems to think that because she's said to be ‘of Provence’, this puts her above suspicion.
At any rate, this identification is now confirmed:
&this Helianor was of the daughters, heirs
of Raymond Berengar
and sister of Arch.
Cantaur
‘Cantaur’ should of course be ‘Cantuar’, the Latin abbreviation by which the primate of England signs himself.
For we read in Agnes Strickland: ‘The death of St. Edmund, archbishop of Canterbury, furnished Henry with a further opportunity of obliging Eleanor, by obtaining the nomination of her uncle Boniface to the primacy of England’.
Pound, it will be noticed, gets the kinship wrong, as well as the spelling.
If there were not this evidence that at this point he is only hazily in command of what he is doing, we might ask — though to no purpose, I think — whether Eleanor's fiddling of her uncle into the see of Canterbury is presented to us for our approval, or the reverse.
I don't believe Pound knows any more than we do.
And so to the last of the Sicilian references, 109/774:
Clear deep off Taormina
high cliff and azure beneath it
form is cut in the lute's neck, tone is from the bowl
Oak boughs alone over Selloi
This wing, colour of feldspar
phylotaxis
And doesn't this give us — faintly indeed, but unmistakably — just what we've looked for in vain in all the other Sicilian allusions: that's to say, evidence that when Pound was in Sicily he didn't go around with his eyes closed, his ears and nostrils stopped?
For that surely is the disconcerting, downright depressing, reflection that this sorry catalogue must leave us with.
Sicily for Pound never but once had  any existence that wasn't either verbal (as in the wordplay on ‘Trinacria’ or the Eleanors), or else notional , ideological (as providing a sort of slender mnemonic crutch for a tendentious reading of history).
The contrast with Yeats is instructive, and it doesn't work in Pound's favour.
The effect of the Sicilian experience on Yeats is disputed by Yeats scholars, but it is generally agreed that some effect there was.
Certainly, when Yeats chaired the Irish Senate committee that commissioned the Irish coinage (so wonderfully handsome as it turned out to be), it was photographs of Sicilian Greek coins that went out to prospective designers to show them what the committee had in mind.
In Pound, on the other hand…are we to believe that he, the long-time admirer of Pisanello, when he was in Syracuse never visited the unrivalled collection of ancient coins in the museum there?
Apparently we must believe that; at least there is no evidence that, if he did visit the collection, it impinged on his consciousness.
And indeed what evidence is there that Sicily as a physical presence, a quite insistent presence as generations of travellers have found it, ever modified Pound's sensibility in the least?
We are not looking for additions to the canon of ‘sacred places’.
We can accept that by 1923 or 1924 the sacred places had been settled on, and there were quite enough of them.
What we seek is merely evidence that Pound didn't go to Sicily with a closed mind.
Pound was to mock Yeats indulgently for seeing in Notre Dame not a physical presence in worked stone, but only a symbol; yet in Sicily Pound's seems to have been the mind that was symbologizing .
I do not like being forced to this conclusion.
It pushes back, to a disconcertingly early period in Pound's life, the first signs of that aridity, that closing of the doors of perception, which — drastically arrested and reversed though it was, at Pisa and through the first years at St Elizabeth's — reasserted itself and wreaked the desolation of Thrones .
Does not the use of the Na-Khi material in those cantos tell its own tale?
This was material which the poet did not and could not perceive .
Between the verbal and the notional, the perceived and perceptible were dropped out of his world.
When he wrote in the last fragments
‘That I lost my center
fighting the world’—
this was the centre that he had lost.
And when he wrote ‘Tho’ my errors and wrecks lie about me', I believe that cantos like 107 and 108 were those that he had in mind; and that he was right to judge them thus harshly.
Paideuma 6: 1 (1977).
Two Kinds of Magnanimity
‘Olson saved my life’.
Thus Pound in January 1946, in his first days at St Elizabeth's, appealing in terror at the prospect of losing whatever sanity remained to him.
How that life was saved live can now know, thanks to Catherine Seelye who has put the story together, mostly out of Olson's posthumous papers at the University of Connecticut.
Her tact and scrupulousness are beyond praise, and the book she has made cannot be recommended too urgently — even (perhaps especially) to those who have no special interest in, or liking for, either Charles Olson or Ezra Pound.
What to do in a democratic society with the errant or aberrant citizen of genius — this question, fumbled at or glossed over by everyone who has written on Pound's case (jurists and psychiatrists, as well as biographers and critics), is here posed more starkly, and explored more searchingly, then ever before.
We might have guessed that Olson would do it, if any one could.…
And yet this probably is the first point to make.
To take the force of this testimony that none of us deserves to avoid, it's not necessary to like either Olson or Pound, but it is necessary that we respect them.
And it's not always easy to respect the author of The Maximus Poems , marred as they are on nearly every page by solecisms and gaucheries, by arbitrary coarseness in diction, punctuation, syntax, lineation.
This endemic failure at the level of execution is counterbalanced, for those who are patient and sympathetic, by the audacity and grandeur of the conception.
But for the moment, that's not the point — which is rather that those who have been, legitimately or at least understandably, affronted by the pretensions of Olson as poet should not therefore write him off as anything but what he was: an exceptionally earnest and magnanimous man, and a man moreover who knew, as few poets since John Milton have known, what the polity looks like from the point of view of those who administer it  day by day.
It's because of this — the magnanimity even more than the political expertise — that Olson's appalled and self-questioning reflections on Pound's arraignment and incarceration make all others seem puerile at best.
By ‘magnanimity’ the last thing one means is a willingness to forgive and forget.
On the contrary Olson is to be praised in the first place for the relentless hostility with which he presses the charge home:
Pound can talk all he likes about the cultural lag in America…but he's got a 200 year political lag in himself.
It comes down to this: a rejection of the single most important human fact between Newton and the Atomic Bomb — the sudden multiple increase of the earth's population, the coming into existence of the MASSES.
Pound and his kind want to ignore them.
They try to lock them out.
But they swarm at the windows in such numbers they black out the light and the air.
And in their little place Pound and his kind suffocate, their fear turns to hate.
And their hate breeds death.
They want to kill.
And, organized by Hitler and Mussolini, they do kill — millions.
But the breeding goes on.
And with it such social and political change as they shall not understand.
Pound's admirers will protest at this, but they will be wrong.
If they ask for proof, let them look into their own hearts.
Do they not find there (I know I do) just that suffocation Olson speaks of?
Just that panicky fear, always on the verge of turning into hatred until we shamefacedly choke it back?
The Masses!
How can we not fear them, and fearing them, how not hate them?
Olson, in several illwritten but splendidly honest verse diatribes against MUZAK, showed that he knew that fear and hatred as well as any of us.
For we cannot feel what we know we ought to feel — that ‘the masses, are ‘just folks’.
(It isn't true anyway.)
The fear and the incipient hatred are something that we impenitent elitists must learn to live with, not anything we can deny.
For this is part of what ‘democracy’ means, or has come to mean.
And yet we haven't come to terms with that.
Which is partly what Olson meant when, linking Pound with Julius Streicher, he declared:
Our own case remains unexamined.
How then shall we try men who have examined us more than we have ourselves?
They know what they fight against.
We do not yet know what we fight for.
That is as true now as it was in 1945, when Olson wrote it.
What Olson drives at in Pound is his Fascism, not his anti-Semitism.
Of the latter he gives horrific examples, which sicken him and enrage him (though as much in Mrs Pound's genteel English version as in Pound's red-necked American).
But he always treats the Fascism and the anti-Semitism as two separate heads on the bill of indictment; and this I think (again 1 speak for myself) is what most of us stopped doing long ago.
We act as if the anti-Semitism comprehended the Fascism — which would be true only if all Fascists were anti-Semites (they aren't), and if all anti-Semites were Fascists (even less true).
Hatred of Jews is something that the Fascist is especially prone to, but it isn't a necessary consequence of his Fascism, and in any case it's only a symptom, certainly not the root cause of his disease.
(In Italian Fascism it showed up only quite late, as Giorgio Bassani may remind us.)
When we denounce the anti-Semitism and let the Fascism take care of itself, we are fastening on what is prepolitical or sub-political, and refusing to engage ourselves on the plane of politics where, as Olson insists, we're required to vindicate our own sorts of polity against the Fascist sorts.
What we gain from this is obvious: our own consciences are clear, and we're no longer implicated.
Or if we are implicated a little(since doubtless some Gentiles and even some Jews have anti-Jewish feelings that they're ashamed of), the implication I would guess is altogether more manageable than what happens when — Jew and Gentile alike, black as well as white — the educated elite is forced to confront its feelings about ‘the Masses’.
And Olson won't let us squirm off the hook — for him the anti-Jewishness is symptom, not cause:
There it is.
It stops you.
You feel him imagining himself as the last rock of culture and civilization being swept over by a wave of barbarism and Jews (communism and commercialism), the saviour of more than the Constitution, the saviour of all that has been culture, the snob of the West.
For he is the AESTHETE, as I had Yeats speak of him.
All — his pride in his memory, his sense of the internationale of writers, painters, musicians, and the aristocrats, his study of form as technique (no contours, no edges, intellectual concepts, but rounding, thrusting, as a splash of color, as Yeats described his aim in the Cantos…) it is all a huge AESTHETICISM, ending in hate for Jews, Reds, change, the content and matter often of disaster, a loss of future, and in that a fatality as death-full as those for whom the atom bomb is Armageddon, not Apocalypse.
Again, Pound's admirers will protest; and they will be right, insofar as Yeats's account of the Cantos isn't so definitive as Olson takes it to be.
But the main thrust of Olson's argument is unaffected, and it can't be set aside: this great American poet (and Olson knows that Pound is all of that) was a Fascist, profoundly, and no amount of talk about his affinities with Whitman will save him for democracy, nor will any attempt to treat his anti-Semitism as an unrelated pathological aberration.
Another escape hatch that Olson slams shut upon us is the device of distinguishing between Pound-the-man and Pound-the-poet.
The trouble with this manoeuvre is that it cannot help but demote poetry.
And Olson will have none of that:
Can any man, equipped to judge, find Pound other than a serious man?
Can any writer honestly argue with those who shall, do, call him a crank?
It's no good, that business.
Around his trial you will hear it again and again.
Just one of those goddamned writers.
They're crazy.
A Bohemian.
There are writers who are such, but not Pound, despite all the vomit of his conclusions.
Pound was a serious man, and never more serious than when he was writing poetry; and his poetry drives towards just those unpalatable conclusions that Olson forces us to look in the face.
If, on the other hand, from some consciousness of immaculate rectitude, we follow Allen Ginsberg in giving Pound a kiss of forgiveness — and it is in effect what David Heymann does towards the end of The Last Rower — it is poetry that we are presuming to forgive, not the man but ‘the-man-as-poet’.
How deep one has to go, to distinguish not ‘the man’ from ‘the poet’but ‘the-man-who-is-the-poet’, appears from Olson's splendid essay of 1949, ‘Granpa, Goodbye’.
It is impressionistic?
You bet it is impressionistic, and would that we had more such ‘impressions’:
His power is a funny thing.
There is no question he's got the jump — his wit, the speed of his language, the grab of it, the intimidation of his skillfully-wrought career.
But he has little power to compel, that is, by his person.
He strikes you as brittle — and terribly American, insecure.
I miss weight, and an abundance.
He does not seem — and this is a crazy thing to say in the face of his beautiful verse, to appear ungrateful for it — but I say it, he does not seem to have inhabited his own experience.
It is almost as though he converted too fast.
The impression persists, that the only life he had lived is, in fact, the literary, and, admitting its necessity to our fathers, especially  to him who had such a job of clearing to do, I take it a fault.
For the verbal brilliance, delightful as it is, leaves the roots dry.
One has a strong reeling, coming away from him, of a lack of the amorous, down there somewhere.
Wait.
I think I've got it.
Yes, Ezra is a tennis ball, does bounce on, off, along, over everything.
But that's the outside of him.
Inside it's the same, but different, he bounces, but like light bounces.
Inside he is like light is, the way light behaves.
In this sense he is light, light is the way of E.P. 's knowing, light is the numen of him, light is his way.
Maybe now I can get at this business of amor as of Ezra, and get at it right.
It isn't a lack of the amorous, perhaps, so much as it is a completely different sense of the amorous to that which post-Christian man contains, to that which…the likes of Duncan, say, or myself may feel.
Of the likes of Bill W.?
I am struck by the image of ‘fire’ in ‘Paterson.’
Maybe fire is the opposite principle to light, and comes to the use of those who do not go the way of light.
Fire has to consume to give off its light.
But light gets its knowledge — and has its intelligence and its being — by going over things without the necessity of eating the substance of things in the process of purchasing its truth.
Maybe this is the difference, the different base of not just these two poets, Bill and E.P., but something more, two contrary conceptions of love.
Anyway, in the present context, it serves to characterize two different personal via : one achieves its clarities by way of charitas , the other goes about its business blind, achieves its clarities by way of what you might call confusio .
And this would be the point from which to look back at Olson, as Catherine Seelye wants us to, and to regard The Maximus Poems as embodying ‘the way of confusio ’.
Which would raise the further question whether this way, as practised by Olson, and by Williams in Paterson , isn't so unlike the ways of poetry as we have known it that to call their works ‘poems’ doesn't merely confuse the whole issue.
But that would be a strictly literary question; and it's for raising quite other questions that this book is momentous and irreplaceable.
New York Review of Books , 1975.
Ezra Pound and the English
I have the impression that the novels of Phyllis Bottome are now little read, though I remember my mother borrowing them from the local library in Barnsley in the 1930s, and speaking of them with respect.
They are too good to be forgotten, or some of them are.
The one that in its day attracted most attention was The Mortal Storm , about the Nazis: though Phyllis Bottome herself seems to have preferred Old Wine , set in Vienna.
The book of hers that stayed with Pound was Private Worlds , which he reviewed in the New English Weekly in 1935, and referred to twice in Guide to Kulchur .
Pound had known Phyllis Bottome between 1905 and 1907, when they were fellow students at the University of Pennsylvania, and it's not clear whether it is that early association, or a period later when she had caught up with him in London, that Phyllis Bottome had in mind when she wrote of how Pound tried to transform her as a writer from a talented amateur into a professional:
I had successfully entered, at seventeen, precocious, and without a standard, the market of a profession which was, at the time I stormed it, financially profitable rather than intellectually exacting.
Ezra provided me with a standard; and gingered me into an attempt to train towards it.
Certainly it is the Pound of the London years, who had profited from Ford Madox Ford's pronouncements on diction, that Phyllis Bottome must have had in mind when she wrote:
The concrete image, unruffled by an adjective,was a thing Ezra would willingly have died for.
Rhetoric was a thing he would gladly have murdered; and he had already carried out his theory of honest thinking at the expense of considerable financial and perhaps emotional sacrifices.
His passionate and austere sincerity acted like a torch upon the young intellectuals of his day.
He cast off his home and his country because he  was disgusted by its slovenliness of intellectual outlook, although he was certain (with his gifts) of success and reputation had he remained in his own land; and he was wholly unknown and unsupported when he attempted to browbeat London.
‘His passionate and austere sincerity acted like a torch….’
This emphasis is significantly different from what it is nowadays common form to acknowledge — Pound's kindness and generosity to other writers, particularly in his London years.
Behind the geniality and the ebullient showmanship, something ‘passionate and austere’— I know of no other testimony which strikes that necessary note so firmly.
And yet this testimony is little known.
It's to be found in From the Life (1944): one hundred sheets of wartime austerity paper to which Phyllis Bottome commits ‘six studies of my friends’— that's to say, Alfred Adler, Max Beerbohm, Ivor Novello, Sara Delano Roosevelt, Ezra Pound, and Margaret MacDonald Bottome (this last the writer's American grandmother who in her forties became an influential evangelical orator).
The pages on Pound are not the only ones worth reading.
In particular the essay on Beerbohm is startlingly good: temperate, appreciative, sympathetic, yet in the end unsparing.
And it is worth dwelling on that, to the extent of calling into evidence another of Bottome's books,The Gaol (1962), p.240:
Ezra would have liked to see more of Max Beerbohm, whom he at least partially admired for his wit, although of course he could not have tolerated his philosophy of life.
But although they lived as the only intellectual representatives of their own language in so small a place as Rapallo, they were not destined to decrease each other 's mental loneliness.
I found that Max Beerbohm, having once met Ezra, declined to enlarge their acquaintance.
‘I do not really see Ezra Pound in Rapallo,’ Max Beerbohm told me.
‘He seems out of place here.
I should prefer to watch him in the primeval forests of his native land, wielding an axe against some giant tree.
Could you not persuade him to return to a country in which there is so much more room?’
The consummate silliness of Beerbohm's sneer, quite apart from showing just how brittle and thin was that famous ‘wit’ of his, has alas a representative significance also, as we see when we put beside it Maurice Bowra, another famous ‘wit’, saying of Pound that he was, not just a bore, but an American bore'.
Such frightened insolence  about Americans is still to be found in England, and among what the English regard as their intellectual and artistic elite.
Often enough it takes the same form as with Beerbohm: the affectation of an anachronistic ignorance about what life in North America is like.
And it shows, in Beerbohm and Bowra and as it survives today, how inevitable it was that Pound should have abandoned England and the English just when he did.
He had no alternative; had he remained in London after 1920, the antagonism to him could only have got more obdurate and more brutal.
This is something that the Anglo-American Phyllis Bottome, writing in England in wartime, finds hard to accept:
…
I like to think he will be forgotten as the belligerent sycophant of Fascism and remembered as what he was when I first knew him, in the years before our little war of 1914, when he was trying to take London by storm.
Foreigners always find that a difficult process — in fact only one of them made a real success of it — and Disraeli possessed what Ezra had been denied — the elasticity and toughness of a good Jew.
Ezra had neither toughness nor elasticity: he was as rigidly intelligent as a Plymouth brother; and as vulnerable as a sea-anemone.
His unquiet personality could not outface the somnolent arrogance of the greatest city in the world.
Yet Britain needed the youthful Ezra, almost as much as Ezra needed the thickly padded hide of this favoured country…
Or again:
…
Had Jonah been less indigestible how can we be sure that the whale would have expelled him?
Yet it was, I think, a tragedy for both parties that the whale of London could not keep down this nimble Jonah who distracted, but so well stimulated, her lethargic stomach.
From the moment Ezra left the Anglo-Saxon world he began to suffer more and more from the isolation of his intellectual exile.
This wild and wayward child of the Prophets —‘a Daniel come to Judgment’— needed the thick padded hide of the antediluvian monster, whose maw he had so precipitately fled from.
One thinks rather the better of Phyllis Bottome for wanting to believe that what had to happen could in fact have been averted.
But it should be clear to us now that the English hide which she thought so ‘thickly padded’ was in fact morbidly sensitive — certainly as long ago as Beerbohm's spitefulness in the 1930s, and perhaps as long ago as Robert Nichols's inexusable review of ‘Homage to Sextus Propertius’in 1920.
If Pound had been different…?
He would have had to be as different as T. S. Eliot; and there's an end of that speculation!
(For Bottome herself says: ‘No one could write better than Ezra when he was not trying to score off T.S.
Eliot by writing as badly as he knew how….’)
What Phyllis Bottome wants to do — what, in 1944, she needs to do — is to shift the blame for Pound's Fascism on to something other than the heedless impetuosity of Pound himself.
On the one hand she makes a speculative diagnosis of him, out of Adlerian psychology; on the other hand she half believes — but can't quite bring herself to say — that the blame lies with England, for virtually expelling him a quarter-century before.
Even as she offers her diagnosis, she very touchingly envelops it in a renewed insistence on how he was still, in 1935, ‘passionate and austere,:
Even as a young man, Ezra had always taken a determined stand on general decencies.
It was not licence he wanted; alas! not even freedom — his goal was the forcible enlightenment of mankind….
Even as a good Fascist Ezra found it hard to swallow the persecution of the Jews.
He got away from the subject when I pounced upon it.
The Teutonic mind, he said quickly, was no favourite of his: Mussolini, he implied, did not particularly dislike the Jews.
It is necessary to turn back to Ezra's childhood to find a key to that dire impatience which has led him into so strange a spiritual home as Fascist Italy.
It is, alas, the spoiled and wilful child who makes whips and bloodshed take the place of wisdom and social interest!
Nevertheless in Ezra we are dealing with a creative artist who never — however impatient he was — sold his birthright for a mess of pottage.
Ezra can be mistaken — more thoroughly mistaken than most people — but he has never been venal.
He is one of the few people I have ever met who has never been either inflated or deflated by personal possessions.
There is  practically no limit to his asceticism for any purpose — other than asceticism.
He lived in 1935 (when I last saw him) in the utmost simplicity, although if he had been a little more conciliatory he could always have earned enough for his comfort — and his wife's; but he never valued anything that money could buy as he valued the integrity of his sharp-shooting mind.
Elsewhere in this memoir there is more that is notable — both of documentation and diagnosis.
In 1944 it took courage to write so favourably about Pound; and it may even be that Phyllis Bottome foresaw, and was trying to guard against, the peril that Pound would be in as soon as hostilities should be over.
In any case, what she produced was something generous, anxious, and grateful.
It should be remembered, and she should be honoured for it.
I do not forget that my subject is Ezra Pound, not Max Beerbohm.
Yet the circumstance of the two writers being noncommunicating neighbours in Rapallo is too piquant not to be instructive.
And so I think it is worth recalling what W.H. Auden wrote of Beerbohm in 1965:
Greatly as I admire both the man and his work, I consider Max Beerbohm a dangerous influence — just how dangerous one must perhaps have been brought up in England to know.
His attitude both to life and art, charming enough in him, when taken up by others as a general cultural ideal becomes something deadly, especially for the English, an intelligent but very lazy people, far too easily bored, and persuaded beyond argument that they are the Herrenvolk .
One may be amused — though not very — that after living in Italy for forty-five years Max still could not speak Italian, but such insularity is not to be imitated.
‘Good sense about trivialities’, he once wrote, ‘is better than nonsense about things that matter.’
True enough, but how easily this can lead to the conclusion that anyone who attempts to deal with things that matter must be a bore, that rather than run the risk of talking nonsense one should play it safe and stick to charming trifles….
This, remember, is W. H. Auden, whom for many years some people in England have regarded as himself too anxious not to bore, too anxious always to amuse.
If this suggests that there are other sorts of English people than the sort Auden has in his sights, on the other hand it lends point and force to his censure of Beerbohm, and of what Beerbohm stands for in English life.
Auden goes on:
As it is, he slyly suggests that minor artists may look down their noses at major ones and that ‘important’ work may be left to persons of an inferior kennel, like the Russians, the Germans, the Americans, who, poor dears, know no better.
The great cultural danger for the English is, to my mind, their tendency to judge the arts by the values appropriate to the conduct of family life.
Among brothers and sisters it is becoming to entertain each other with witty remarks, hoaxes, family games and jokes, unbecoming to be solemn, to monopolize the conversation, to talk shop, to create emotional scenes.
But no art, major or minor, can be governed by the rules of social amenity.
The English have a greater talent than any other people for creating an agreeable family life; that is why it is such a threat to their artistic and intellectual life.
If the atmosphere were not so charming, it would be less of a temptation.
In postwar Britain, the clothes, accents, and diction of the siblings may have changed, but, so far as I can judge, the suffocating insular coziness is just the same.
Here, as often with the author of Thankyou, Fog , we may well suspect that Auden generalizes about English life too much on the basis of his own late-Edwardian childhood in a comfortable rentier household.
And yet I wouldn't dismiss out of hand Auden's claim that what he says of our family life holds as true of Coronation Street as of Lowndes Square.
In any case, enveloped though it is in ingratiating compliments to us on how charming we are in the bosoms of our families, the indictment is quite firm and it is unsparing: ‘Suffocating insular coziness’.
Most of all worth remembering is the trenchant declaration: ‘…no art, major or minor, can be governed by the rules of social amenity’.
It was because Pound behaved always in the spirit of this remark that he could not fail to offend Englishmen of the type of Beerbohm and Bowra, and that he continues to offend their likes and their successors (in all social classes) at the present day, as, for instance, his confrere T.S.
Eliot did not and does not.
On this issue indeed the comparison with Eliot is inescapable, Eliot very early learned and bowed to the English rule that social amenity must not be disturbed — alike in his life-style and, after Poems 1920 , in his poetic style also, he observed this rule punctiliously.
Pound saw him doing it, and chuckled indulgently; it was what he meant by dubbing Eliot ‘the Possum’(opossum, the creature that escapes danger by shamming dead).
And when we remember what Eliot did with the gibe, taking it over in the title of Old Possum's Book of Practical Cats , that collection of whimsical fireside charades in verse, we may well think again about Auden's  comment that in English family life ‘it is becoming to entertain each other with witty remarks, hoaxes, family games and jokes’.
Is it perhaps true that for many of the English, poetry has never been anything else but a superior parlour game?
We might begin to think so if we reflected that in parlour games the rules never change, and then noticed that this year the most accomplished of our poets in their forties published, sixty years after Pound's Lustra and Eliot's Prufrock , an ambitious poem in the shape of fifteen interlinked pentameter sonnets.
However, a safer and a wiser idea is to take up what I began with: Phyllis Bottome telling how Pound, when they were both young, tried to turn her as a writer from an amateur into a professional.
It was, of course, what he tried to do with everyone that he thought worth the trouble.
And once again it was this unrelenting professionalism in Pound that set, and continues to set, Englishmen's teeth on edge.
For in our national tradition, in the arts as until recently in sports, it is the amateur who is most admired; and Auden's charming joker by the Christmas hearth is only a particular version of the amateur.
He observes the prohibition against ‘talking shop’, whereas Pound through his London years seems never to have talked anything else.
(Once again Eliot knew, or soon learned, better.)
And the most Anglophobe of Pound's books is, appropriately, the one that is most full of shoptalk — though of shoptalk of a special kind, the talk of the master to his apprentices in the shop that is a workshop, the atelier where the talk that goes on is the vehicle by which an artistic tradition is transmitted, not in conceptualizing, and tendentious readings of history, but where it is concrete , in tricks of the trade and rules of thumb and words to the wise.
I have in mind How To Read , a disastrously misnamed little treatise, since its real subject is How to Write, and it is addressed to what Pound called (with the engagingly dated Edwardian elegance that he never wholly shed)‘the neophyte’— that is to say, to the young American writer who wants to know as soon as possible, though at the expense of considerable exertion which he is prepared for, how to assemble his kit of tools for the job in hand and others that he can dimly foresee.
When Pound revised and expanded this to make The ABC of Reading (the title is still a misnomer), he winkled out of it most of the anti-Englishness that had been present in the first version, when Pound was still smarting from what he took to be England's rejection of him eight years before, in 1920.
I have argued elsewhere that Pound was prepared to take instruction, as well as to give it; that when he first came to London in 1908, he was looking for masters to whom he might apprentice himself; that he found them in the Irishman W.B. Yeats and the maverick Englishman Ford Madox Ford (whose  professionalism about writing still denies him in England the recognition that he gets abroad); and (so I have speculated, though I know it cannot be proved) that Pound sought the same relationship with another Englishman, Laurence Binyon, who was too cagey to go along with the idea.
Before we leave this topic, with some doubtless well-received witticisms about the American ateliers that are called Schools of Creative Writing, let us ask ourselves how an artistic tradition is transmitted from generation to generation in England, if it is not transmitted in the way that Pound took for granted.
And let me assist such reflections by reporting that a gifted and earnest English poet of thirty-two, whom I met this very summer, not only confessed that he had never read through Basil Bunting's Briggflatts , but quite plainly saw no reason why he ever should.
We can stage a little comedy for ourselves if we pick out two expressions that I used in my last paragraph, and imagine ourselves presenting them to the startled and unwelcoming gaze of Max Beerbohm.
They are the expressions ‘kit of tools’ and ‘job in hand’.
We may doubt that Beerbohm had the acumen or the catholicity to respond to this provocation as conclusively as he should.
But in that case, let us do it for him.
The conclusive objection to ‘kit of tools’ or ‘job in hand’as appropriate expressions when we talk of poetry, is in some late lines by Eliot:
Because one has only learnt to get the better of words For the thing one no longer has to say, or the way in which One is no longer disposed to say it.
It is the occasion which determines what figurations of language are appropriate to it, and no one poetic occasion duplicates any other.
To this extent and in this way the English distrust of the professional writer can and must be vindicated.
It was what Pound found out the hard way, when the recurrent occasions of The Cantes compelled him time and again, not infrequently, to go against the precepts that he had promulgated himself when he was the fugleman for imagism and vorticism — for instance (and it is only the most obvious instance), the prohibition against archaic diction.
What's more, though it seems not to be generally realized, Pound recognized what had happened and acknowledged it; he did so in the public welcome he gave to Binyon's translations of Dante, which employ a very archaic and convoluted diction indeed.
And this was not the only occasion on which he protested, in the 1920s and 1930s, at having the precepts that were formulated to meet the special conditions of 1914 taken as absolute and binding for all poetic situations at all times.
He does not, however, retract his proposal that the precepts of the imagist  manifesto are still the best rules of thumb for ‘the neophyte’, the beginner in his ‘prentice-work; and for what it is worth my own experience in the workshop certainly bears that out.
The notion that we crucially need, I think, to do justice to the conflicting claims of the amateur and the professional in these matters, is the idea of thresholds .
In verse writing, as in virtually any other human activity we may think of, there are thresholds to be reached and crossed: below a certain threshold of practice and expertise, the attitude of the amateur produces only work that is ‘amateurish’(and heaven knows, we see plenty of that all around us); above a certain threshold of facility, the attitude of the professional produces work that is glib, facile, heartless, and academic — and we see plenty of that, too.
Though I think neither Eliot nor Pound explicitly used the idea of ‘the threshold’, the idea is surely implicit in the criticism of both men; and it is an implication that in our own criticism, and our own practice as verse writers, is almost universally ignored.
At any rate, in this way if in no other, the English ideal of the artist as amateur has a continuing validity — and one that it behoves us, as Poundians, to acknowledge more often than we do.
It is an idea — the idea that the practice of our art should ideally be an avocation rather than a vocation — which has a distinguished and ancient lineage, to be traced back through the English bourgeois idea of ‘the gentleman’ to the Italian aristocratic idea of ‘the courtier’.
Yeats's poem, ‘In Memory of Major Robert Gregory’, is centrally concerned with this, as when he associates Robert Gregory with that paradigm of the English courtier, Philip Sidney.
And during the years when Pound was most under Yeats's influence, Pound too embraced this ideal — as when in 1912 he went with Yeats and some others to pay an act of homage to one of the last English representatives of the type, the Sussex squire Wilfred Scawen Blunt:
But to have done instead of not doing
this is not vanity
To have, with decency, knocked
That a Blunt should open
To have gathered from the air a live tradition
or from a fine old eye the unconquered flame
This is not vanity.
Here error is all in the not done,
all in the diffidence that faltered.
However, we know from Yeats's letters even more than his poems that he thought the last possibility for aristocratic ease in the arts had disappeared when Robert Gregory was shot down over France in 1915.
And I think it could be maintained that when Pound left 
England in 1920, it testified to a similar recognition by him that the amateur ideal in the arts, however admirable in the abstract, and however rich its achievements under earlier structures of society, under the conditions of mass democracy could mean only amateurishness in technique, and thin-skinned insolence in debate.
Who is to say that Yeats and Pound were wrong?
Not I, certainly.
What is important to realize is that for Yeats certainly, and I think at times for Pound also, the only alternative open was a sorry second best.
Yeats in a letter specifically invoked the name of Wilfred Scawen Blunt on one of many occasions when he girded in rage against the ‘unnatural labour’ that verse writing had become for him, with the disappearance of the less egalitarian society that Gregory and Blunt stood for.
Professionalism in writing was what Yeats resentfully found himself condemned to; but he didn't like it, and he never pretended to.
Obviously, the same cannot be said of Pound.
On the contrary, as I have insisted, one indelibly American thing about Pound from the day when he first reached London was his, as it must seem to us, excessive faith in know-how, in a communicable ‘bag of tricks’.
And yet there is his tribute, as late as the Pisan years, to Blunt; there is the fact that his friendship with Yeats did not end except with Yeats's death; and there is above all the fact that his disenchantment with mass democracy kept pace with Yeats's, and culminated for him as for Yeats in the false alternative of Fascism.
I believe a close examination of his recorded opinions, and of the idiom in which those opinions were expressed (an idiom, even to the end, as much British as American), would show that Pound too was not insensible to the ideal of the aristocratic amateur in the arts, and was at least sometimes resentful, just as Yeats was, that political and socio-economic developments had made that attitude to the arts impracticable and sterile.
If so, we English Poundians, even as we castigate our countrymen for clinging to the norm of the amateur in an age when that norm is unserviceable, may well spare more than just wistful nostalgia for this ideal that survives among us only in a debased and anachronistic version.
One reason for insisting on this possibility is to prevent us from being too complacent and self-congratulating about what we are engaged in, here and now.
We should beware of supposing that, if Pound from the shades is looking at this present occasion, he is unreservedly gratified by what he sees.
Weekend conference and seminar and study group, doctoral dissertations, and communally compiled working papers toward another Annotated Index — we may agree, as I do, that in present historical conditions these are the best or the only ways of responding to the achievement of a very great, though of course imperfect, poet.
We may even feel, as certainly  I do, that some of the later cantos are of such a nature that it's hard to conceive in any age of a way of encountering them other than the way we're here embarked upon.
And yet we need to remember — Pound, I think, would have wanted us to remember — what a latecome development this is in the relations between a poet and his readers, how recent this is, and, in the perspective of history, how bizarre.
We may surely placate the shade of Max Beerbohm sufficiently to acknowledge that the danger we run in approaching poetry this way is indeed the danger of one sort of professionalism — specialized and therefore blinkered, inflexible, and humourless.
I suspect that Pound is rueful at best when he looks down and sees us industriously annotating out of Sir Edward Coke Canto 107, without noticing that the English language is in that canto handled with none of the sensitivity that would make those labours worthwhile.
What I am saying is that a lot of the common English objections to Ezra Pound have substance, and would be worth taking seriously, if only we could be sure that they were advanced in good faith, in humility, and with compassion.
Unfortunately the tone in which they are expressed, and the language they are couched in, prevent our taking them in that way, and recall for us rather the heads of Auden's indictment: ‘lazy…too easily bored…persuaded beyond argument…’
Accordingly, an assembly such as this in England — and let me remind you there have been earlier ones, at Sheffield and Keele — is an act of homage to a great and greatly maligned poet; but it is also, and cannot help but be, a patriotic demonstration against ‘suffocating insular coziness’.
Paideuma 7: 1–2 (1978).
This was originally a lecturer to a London conference of Pound studies in 1977.
Virgil's Presence in Ezra Pound and others
Most considerations of Virgilianism in our modern poetry have concentrated on, have been perhaps mesmerized by, the figure of T.S.
Eliot.
This is natural: the exceptionally influential eminence that Eliot achieved through the second half of his life, together with his almost explicit (though characteristically demure) donning of the Virgilian mantle himself, have made it inevitable.
And Eliot is still the massive figure that must be circumvented if we are to see Virgil as having exerted a powerful influence on our modern poetry in ways more partial, devious and oblique than Eliot allowed for.
For Eliot was intransigent.
Like the less diplomatically suave authority, Theodore Haecker, whom Eliot was at times glad to call on, the author of Four Quartets and editor of The Criterion required us to take Virgil as, above all, the author of the Fourth Eclogue, the pagan poet who prophesied Christianity, whose vision of human history must accordingly be seen as completed and vindicated by The Divine Comedy .
Eliot, it seemed, would have us take Virgil on his terms, or not at all.
And his terms were unyielding.
They were the same terms which Dante and the mediaeval jurists insisted on: Virgil was great, was perpetually relevant and in that sense ‘a classic’(if not, more exactingly, the one indisputable ‘classic’), because in him could be found what Dante teased out of him — the vision of Empire, of the divinely appointed imperium , which must be reconciled (this way and that, for the reconciling was not easy) with the no less divinely intended ecclesia .
The Holy Roman Empire, of Charlemagne, of the Ottonian emperors, through to the Hohenstaufens, was to be seen in all seriousness as the legitimate heir of ‘the Augustan peace’: a dispensation which, though seldom or never actualized through the last five centuries, must be held in mind as the one and only imaginable harmonizing of Church and State, of religion and politics, at least throughout Europe.
Nothing less than that potentiality  could, so Eliot seemed to suggest, give order and significance to the otherwise squalid and meaningless turbulence of the middle decades of the present century.
The vision was grand and, in its intransigence, breath-taking.
But how it could be brought to bear on specific political decisions that had to be taken in for instance the 1930s — this was far from clear even to Eliot himself, if we judge from the dryly disenchanted tone of many of his editorial pronouncements and observations in The Criterion .
Others before Frank Kermode, in his suave and erudite but ultimately acidulous The Classic (New York, 1975), had protested that as a framework inside which real political decisions and actions could be taken, Eliot's Virgilian-Dantesque perspective was not just useless but dangerous.
After all, had it not led Eliot into seeming to endorse the anti-semitic French royalism of Charles Maurras?
In recent years the one English voice that has seemed to reiterate the Eliotic thesis in anything like its entirety has been the voice of C.H. Sisson:
The case of Virgil is a crucial one…
For anyone for whom literary education — like any other — is an exploration of the meanings we have and live by, so far as we do live by meanings, Virgil and Dante are connecting rooms…
To talk of getting the full charge of the Divine Comedy — or more modestly and exactly, the fullest charge the particular reader is capable of getting — while treating Dante's master as an irrelevance, is nonsense;…
This is part of a polemic (reluctant, because in other contexts and on other grounds Sisson venerates Pound) against Ezra Pound's treatment of Virgil: ‘…there are such absurdities in Pound as the assertion that Gavin Douglas's excellent Aeneidos is ‘better than the original’, together with other devaluings of Virgil'.
For Eliot and Sisson it is unthinkable that one can venerate Dante without venerating Virgil, and vice-versa ; whereas Pound was firmly pro-Dante, and yet often raucously dismissive of Virgil.
The divergence is important, perhaps crucial, because Pound and Eliot, American expatriates of roughly the same generation, in the London of the second decade of this century made common cause and thereafter — despite ever wider ideological disagreements — remained friends, mutually respectful and mutually supporting, until Eliot's death in 1965.
Even today the two-headed chimera ‘Pound-Eliot’(not in  all ways chimerical) still stalks at large in literary discourse.
Some part of Sisson's censures must surely be conceded: whatever esteem we have and should have for Gavin Douglas's translation of the Aeneid , we can hardly believe that the Philadelphian Ezra Pound was any more at ease than most of us with Bishop Douglas's sixteenth-century Scots.
And some of Pound's many tributes to Douglas admit as much.
Pound's championing of Douglas had much to do with a polemic, in itself just and timely, against the presumed and unearned superiority of metropolitan English over the dialects of the British Isles, and of the English-speaking world.
At any rate it should not surprise us that when Virgil most startlingly irrupts into Pound's Cantos (rather late — it is in Canto 78), he should be heard speaking in the Caledonian accents of Gavin Douglas.
The question can still be raised whether Pound had any access to Virgil except through translation.
Pound, following a polemical strategy which served him well in the short run (but which later back-fired) deliberately provoked the academic classicists of his day; and his use of his sources, classical and other, was always both hasty and high-handed.
And so there are still to be found Latinists who think that the hilarious mistranslations in his Homage to Sextus Propertius (1919) were inadvertent rather than mischievously deliberate.
Accordingly the point must be made that the young Pound, as a doctoral student grounded quite rigorously in the Romance languages, certainly could and did read Virgil in the Latin.
Evidence of this is in the play he makes with the Virgilian aether and patet (Aeneid 6, 127, 130) in the puzzling but impressive Canto 16.
But even more telling is the negative evidence that, with the confessedly eccentric exception of Gavin Douglas, none of Virgil's translators have left their footprints on The Cantos .
Particularly conspicuous by his absence is that verse-translator of Virgil who is generally held (in my view, rightly) to have set a standard that no other can equal, except momentarily; that is, Dryden.
One commentator has indeed thought he found an echo of Dryden's translation of Aeneid 2, 417-20, in the opening lines of Canto 4; but I am persuaded by later scholars that the case is untenable.
This conspicuous absence of Dryden, though it helps to show that Pound needed no intermediary in his traffic with Virgil, also exposes a dispiriting limitation to Pound's taste, so catholic as he meant it to be: he never stretched his originally late-Victorian conditioning so far as to appreciate the masters of the English heroic couplet.
So in his late anthology,Confucius to Cummings (New York, 1964, with Marcella Spann), he explicitly preferred George Chapman's Homer to pope's, even though he had admitted that Chapman is unreadable, except for a few pages at a time.
And we cannot help but contrast the generous appreciation of Dryden by Eliot, who might have been expected to be temperamentally less in tune with him.
There is a more telling comparison.
Thomas Hardy, of an older generation, had implicitly claimed to be, and in the event had proved to be, a profoundly Virgilian poet.
Hardy was self-educated.
But his self-education had been very thorough, so that he turned himself into a good Latinist and a good Grecian also, as Pound in Confucius to Cummins acknowledged.
It is the more remarkable that Pound, no more than any one else for fifty years after Hardy died, pondered the Virgilian epigraph that Hardy put at the head of his ‘Poems of 1912–13’, originally in Satires of Circumstance ,(London, 1914).
The epigraph is Veteris vestigia flammae from Aeneid 4, 23, where Dido confesses to her confidante that the love she once felt for her now dead husband is about to renew itself for Aeneas.
The same phrase had been translated and mordantly placed by Dante in Canto XXX of the Purgatorio ; and so, when Hardy in these poems confronts the shade of his recently deceased and estranged wife Emma, not only does Aeneas in Aeneid 6 confront the reproachfully haughty ghost of Dido, but Dante's pilgrim confronts for the first time the shade or apparition of his lost Beatrice.
In fact the original eighteen poems of the Hardy sequence,(in the Collected Poems of 1919, he damagingly extended it by three extra pieces) tell a story of the poet's pilgrimage to his and Emma's early haunts, matching the stages of the journey there and back to specific stages of Aeneas's journey, in Aeneid 6, to the abode of the blest.
It thus represents, on the part of the supposedly non-modernist Hardy, a stratagem often taken to be definitively modernist: the use of an ancient fable to structure and resonate with a twentieth-century narrative, as the Odyssey structures and resonates with James Joyce's Ulysses .
Yet so firmly established is the image of Hardy as a rustic provincial that Virgil rates not a single entry in the index to J.O.
Bailey's 700-page Poetry of Thomas Hardy, A Handbook and Commentary ,(University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 1970).
Hardy undoubtedly read Virgil in the original; yet we know that long before he taught himself Latin his remarkable mother gave him (on his eighth birthday) a copy of Dryden's translation of the Aeneid .
And so there is reason to look  in Hardy's poetry not just for allusions to Virgil's Latin but for echoes of Dryden's English.
The only scholar as yet to have followed this scent is Tom Paulin in his Thomas Hardy; The Poetry of Perception (Totowa, New Jersey, 1975).
Paulin for instance considers some lines from Aeneid 11, in which Dryden makes Diomede say, of the war dead:
Transform'd to Birds, my lost Companions fly:
Hov'ring about the Coasts they make their Moan;
And cuff the Cliffs with Pinions not their own.
The masterly masculinity of ‘cuff’ may be thought to belong with Dryden's conception of the grand style more than with Virgil's.
There is nothing exactly comparable in the poem by Hardy which Paulin brings into comparison, ‘The Souls of the Slain’(1899, about the dead of the Boer War), but whether or not Dryden was the intermediary, the conceit and fable of the poem undoubtedly derive from this moment in Virgil:
Soon from out of the Southward seemed nearing
A whirr, as of wings
Waved by mighty-vanned flies,
Or by night-moths of measureless size,
And in softness and smoothness well-nigh beyond hearing
Of corporeal things.
And they bore to the bluff, and alighted —
A dim-discerned train
Of sprites without mould,
Frameless souls none might touch or might hold —
On the ledge by the turreted lantern, far-sighted
By men of the main.
Hardy's diction here is certainly pre-modernist, though in matters other than diction Hardy was more of a modernist than we commonly suppose.
At any rate such verses prevent us from supposing that only with modernism could fruitful contact with Virgil be resumed, or that late-Victorian Virgilianism was the perquisite of Alfred Lord Tennyson.
The Virgilianism of Hardy cries out for further investigation.
Pound greatly admired Hardy the poet — as Eliot did not, nor Yeats either.
But if Hardy's Virgilianism had been pointed out to Pound, this would not have counted in Hardy's favour.
For Pound's animus against Virgil was deep-seated and virulent from the first, and it persisted.
Already in 1914 he was exhorting the readers of Poetry (Chicago):
Let us choose: Homer, Sappho, Ibycus, Theocritus’ idyl of the woman spinning with charmed wheel; Catullus, especially the Collis O Heliconii .
Not Virgil, especially not the Aeneid, where he has no story worth telling, no sense of personality.
His hero is a stick who would have contributed to The New Statesman .
He has a nice verbalism.
Dante was right to respect him, for Dante had no Greek, and the Aeneid would have stood out nobly against such literature as was available in the year 1300.
And three or four years later, in an essay that is still valuable inasmuch as it is a catena diligently culled from curious reading, Pound urges readers of The Egoist to pay attention to Ovid rather than‘the more Tennysonian Virgil’.
In 1916 Pound recommends to the neophyte, Iris Barry, readings in Catullus, Propertius, Horace and Ovid, but warns her against trafficking with Virgil (or Pindar).
Most tellingly, in his Homage to Sextus Propertius (1919) he coerces Propertius into avowing anti-Virgilian sentiments that in fact Propertius did not profess.
From a different position, independently arrived at and much less troubling, the animus was to be shared lifelong by Robert Graves.
The grounds of Pound's hostility show up much more respectably than in any of his slashing prose in a passage of verse that has seldom been remarked.
It is in Canto 7 (originally 1921):
Dido choked up with sobs, for her Sicheus
Lies heavy in my arms, dead weight
Drowning, with tears, new Eros,
And the life goes on, mooning upon bare hills;
Flame leaps from the hand, the rain is listless,
Yet drinks the thirst from our lips,
solid as echo,
Passion to breed a form in shimmer of rain-blur;
But Eros drowned, drowned, heavy, half dead with tears
For dead Sicheus.
Life to make mock of motion:
For the husks, before me, move,
The words rattle: shells given out by shells.
The passage, even when returned to context, will obviously abide more interpretations than one.
(For good or ill, it is the poet's strategy that it should.)
Having lived with the passage for years, I am persuaded that it represents — based, as it plainly is, on Aeneid 1, 341ff., and 4 — a response to veteris vestigia flammae drastically at odds with Hardy's response (which, as we have seen, Pound had apparently not noticed in any case).
‘New Eros’— carried as it is on an elaborately established sobbing and languorous rhythm, the word ‘new’ denies itself.
How can the erotic stirring for Aeneas be ‘new’, when it is explicitly saturated with sentiment for the old, the dead, for ‘Sicheus’?
Dido's sobbing for her old lover even as she lies in the arms of her new one — this melancholy, which Virgil, and following him Hardy, responded to with such sympathy, is for Pound deathly, it precludes the genuinely ‘new’, which he urgently wants to find and to celebrate.
The Canto as a whole, whatever its incidental obscurities, is plainly concerned with the phenomenon of ‘the living dead’, focussed in part, as Ronald Bush has invaluably pointed out, on the old men, Clemenceau, Lloyd George and Woodrow Wilson, legislating at Versailles for a future they had no part in.
(They were thus represented in Maynard Keynes' Economic Consequences of the Peace , which Pound had read by 1920.)
The lines quoted, for instance, lead directly into a portrait of Alessandro de Medici as a personification of abuleia , with more than one indication that it will serve also as a portrait of Henry James:
And the tall indifference moves,
a more living shell,
Drift in the air of fate, dry phantom, but intact.
O Alessandro, chief and thrice warned, watcher,
Eternal watcher of things,
Of things, of men, of passions.
Eyes floating in dry, dark air,…
There are gradations among the living dead.
Some shells are more living than others; some — Alessandro, Henry James — carry off their condition of living death with a dignity that compels admiration.
Nevertheless, shells is what they are, husks, as earlier in this Canto:
Thin husks I had known as men,
Dry casques of departed locusts
speaking a shell of speech…
Propped between chairs and table…
Words like the locust-shells, moved by no inner being;
A dryness calling for death;…
What has failed in them is Eros; wherever erotic stirring in them seems to be new, it is nothing of the sort but a reminiscence of a stir that once was.
If Pound had attended to Thomas Hardy's marriage to Florence Emily Dugdale within two years of the death of his first wife, Emma, there can be little doubt that this is the verdict he would have passed on the transaction.
The break that Pound thus makes, not just with Hardy and James (his two acknowledged mentors — one English, one American), but with a succession of revered masters reaching back to Virgil, is momentous.
What he denies is not just veteris vestigia flammae but what Racine makes his Phèdre say, in appalled awareness of her own condition:C'est Vénus tout entière à sa proie attachée .
In that incomparable verse Racine surely articulates the classical and terrible conception that underlies also Virgil's treatment of Dido: sexual passion, the erotic, understood as one undifferentiated energy running wild, fastening itself seemingly at random on this person or that one, and switching from one to another in a way that discredits all human vows of constancy.
This was Hardy's conception also, as we see from poem after poem and story after story.
But of course the erotic can be conceived quite differently, as it was by Pound.
For him it was a matter of great moment, for he was one of those artists who hold that the energy of artistic creation is itself erotic, indeed (in his most extreme formulations) positively genital .
As the child that comes or may come from a sexual encounter between a man and a woman differs from the child born from that man and some other woman (or from the same man and the same woman on another occasion), so every genuine poem is the unique product of one unrepeatable encounter between the artist and an unearthly partner who may be called ‘Muse’ or ‘goddess’.
‘Make it new!’ was notoriously Pound's cry.
Though every responsible artist must know the annals of his art (no one more than Pound insisted on that), still every artwork that is worth anything not only can be but has to be new , unprecedented.
For Pound, alike in his sexual and artistic life, ‘Make it new’ was incompatible with ‘Here we go again' (if that vulgarity be permitted).
Those who know the life of P.B. Shelley, or of many another, will undoubtedly reflect that a man with this exalted view of the erotic life commonly makes a less  reliable consort than one with more modest expectations.
And it is true that whereas on the whole Pound managed his amorous career with more decorum than Shelley, still the pattern was, so far as we can discern, not very different.
It seems that on the basis of Canto 7 we can explain Pound's hostility to Virgil very simply indeed: it was precisely Virgil's melancholy, the lacrimae rerum which endears him to so many, that Pound could not stomach, so sanguine as he was and so determined to remain so.
In this stubborn bent towards the hopefully open-ended (which he lost before the end), Pound may legitimately seem to us more indelibly American than his fellow expatriate, Eliot.
But anyone who is tempted to affect an Old World condescension to the New (‘a young nation’, and similar self-servings) should consider again the date at which Canto 7 was written.
Because Pound was not a combatant, and because he resolutely resisted making easily patriotic and self-righteous gestures (this is what Homage to Sextus Propertius is about, very largely), the impact upon him of the First World War is under-estimated.
Yet he was to say that the entire enterprise of The Cantos was undertaken so as to uncover the reasons why war happens, so as to preclude its happening again.
In 1919, as the old men negotiated at Versailles, hope did not come easy, yet imposed itself as an unavoidable necessity.
After the four years of murderous deadlock on the Western Front — most of Canto 16 is concerned with that —‘Here we go again’ or ‘plus ça change’expressed a sentiment that was intolerable.
The new, the really new, had to be possible, since all the old wisdoms had proved themselves ineffective.
The hopefulness of Canto 7 is desperate.
Moreover, even if we allow ‘America’ to mean only the United States, the Old World needs to remember that there are more Americas than one.
Pound speaks for one, Eliot for another.
In many ways they differ, these two Americas, but they are alike in never having known defeat.
There is another America which neither of them knew, except tangentially: the America of the Old Confederacy which had known defeat, and was committed to living with that knowledge.
To the citizens of that America, Virgil's story in the Aeneid could have a painful immediacy.
Hence, Allen Tate's ‘Aeneas at Washington’(1933):
I myself saw furious with blood
Neoptolemus, at his side the black Atridae,
Hecuba and the hundred daughters, Priam
Cut down, his filth drenching the holy fires.
In that extremity I bore me well,
A true gentleman, valorous in arms,
Disinterested and honourable.
Then fled:
That was a time when civilization
Run by the few fell to the many, and
Crashed to the shout of men, the clang of arms:
Cold victualing I seized, I hoisted up
The old man my father upon my back,
In the smoke made by sea for a new world
Saving little — a mind imperishable
If time is, a love of past things tenous
As the hesitation of receding love.
Here the first four lines are a translation, and surely a fine one, of Aeneid 2, 499–502.
But the city that goes down, the civilization ‘run by the few’ which ‘fell to the many’, is not Ilium but Richmond or Montgomery or Atlanta, any one of the cities of the Confederacy finally sacked by Grant or Sheridan or the specially hated Sherman, generals of the victorious Yankee North.
The association is pressed home when the action resumes.
The destroyed South is named in ‘Blue Grass’, byword for Tate's native Southern state of Kentucky, rammed hard against ‘Troy’ in controlled synaesthesia that identifies conflagration with fruition:
I saw the thirsty dove
In the glowing fields of Troy, hemp ripening
And tawny corn, the thickening Blue Grass
All lying rich forever in the green sun.
I see all things apart, the towers that men
Contrive I too contrived long, long ago.
Now I demand little.
The singular passion
Abides its object and consumes desire
In the circling shadow of its appetite.
There was a time when the young eyes were slow,
Their flame steady beyond the firstling fire,
I stood in the rain, far from home at nightfall
By the Potomac, the great Dome lit the water,
The city my blood had built 1 knew no more
While the screech-owl whistled his new delight
Consecutively dark.
Stuck in the wet mire
Four thousand leagues from the ninth buried city
I thought of Troy, what we had built her for.
There is plenty of lacrimae rerum here, and one may legitimately wish for a touch of Dryden's bluffness or of Pound's impatient suspicion  of the elegiac note.
This is a comment not just on poetic style, but on the substance of the political alternative that Tate and some fellow Southerners were in these years trying to put together, to challenge the industrial capitalism of the restored Union.
Certainly Tate is not prepared to see the Federal capital, Washington, as a restored Richmond, as Virgil's Aeneas sees Rome as a second Troy.
Accordingly the phrase ‘a new world’ is mordantly, if a little cheaply, ironical.
The same irony is enriched and plangently deepened in another fine poem by Tate of the same year, in which once again the many Virgilian echoes point to a deeper affinity — with the fable of the Aeneid as making more sense than he can find anywhere else, for the historical predicament that the American Southerner has inherited and must make sense of.
This poem, now entitled ‘The Mediterranean’, was originally called ‘picnic at Cassis’, and that first title invaluably brings out the occasion of the poem — that is to say, a holiday excursion by boat taken by expatriate Americans along the coast of Southern France.
The last three of its nine pentameter quatrains read thus:
Let us lie down once more by the breathing side
Of Ocean, where our live forefathers sleep
as if the Known Sea still were a month wide —
Atlantis howls but is no longer steep!
What country shall we conquer, what fair land
Unman our conquest and locate our blood?
We've cracked the hemispheres with careless hand!
Now, from the Gates of Hercules we flood
Westward, westward till the barbarous brine
Whelms us to the tired land where tasseling corn,
Fat beans, grapes sweeter than muscadine
Rot on the vine: in that land were we born.
It is not outlandish to see in these verses a modern American so estranged from modern American society — its wastefulness (‘Fat beans…
Rot on the vine’), its heedlessness (‘with careless hand’), and its enervation (its land is ‘tired’, its conquest of that terrain ‘unmanned’)— that he would like if he could to unravel the threads of history, and become again a citizen of that Old World which his ancestors should never have left.
ln that case the last clause —‘in that land were we born’— is no patriotic bugle-note, but rather a flat acknowledgement of what cannot be helped.
Even if this is only one of possible readings, these stanzas and the poem as a whole  surely represent an extraordinarily searching and painful exploration of what may be involved, for people of today, in the Virgilian pietas.
Despite his metrical conservatism (his strenuous handling of the pentameter is surely surprising and admirable) and his unfashionable addiction to the grand manner and the high style, Allen Tate was certainly a modernist; that is what he was thought to be, and it is how he conceived of himself.
However, his allegiance to the cause and principles of international modernism never comprehended an allegiance to Ezra Pound as a modernist master.
Given Tate's deepseated and as it were forefated Virgilianism, it hardly could.
Eliot was his master, and in some measure Yeats.
Yeats divagated into Virgil's territory only when, in 1915, he wrote Per Amica Silentia Lunae , going for that title to Aeneid , 2, 255:A Tenedo tacitaeper amica silentia lunae .
But no one has ever thought that Yeats's temperament was Virgilian, and characteristically, in this momentous book of verse and prose mixed, he glimpsed Virgil momentarily only through the spectacles of — of all unlikely people — Paul Verlaine.
However, the poem that opens the volume, ‘Ego Dominus Tuus ’, is in the form of an inconclusive dialogue between two persons ‘Hic’ and ‘Ille’, who it is generally agreed might as well be named at certain points as ‘Ez’and ‘Willie’.
These identifications will not hold good throughout the poem, precisely because the two poets were so intimate, and would remain so: each could and did ‘internalize, the other, in the sense that within Yeats there was a voice that spoke the sentiments of Pound, and within Pound a voice that spoke like Yeats.
One of the things they seem to have agreed about, among innumerable disagreements, was the irrelevance of Virgil to their concerns.
Not all the commentators on The Cantos have remarked how conspicuous is the absence of Virgil's name and presence, among the numberless names and presences which jostle on Pound's pages.
peter Makin for instance, in general one of the very best such commentators, misleads when he glosses a passage from Canto 23 by remarking: ‘Troy was the citadel of a culture, and when it fell…the priest-king Aeneas (guided by the chthonic deities) took the heritage to Italy, where his descendants planted Rome…
‘. All quite true of course, but it has little or nothing to do with the passage in question,whoch focuses very markedly not on Aeneas but on his father Anchises:
And that was when Troy was down, all right,
superbo Ilion…
And they were sailing along
Sitting in the stern-sheets,
Under the lee of an island
And the wind drifting off from the island.
‘Tet, tet…
what is it?’ said Anchises.
‘Tethnéké.’. said the helmsman, ‘I think they
‘Are howling because Adonis died virgin.’
‘Huh! tet…’ said Anchises,
‘well, they've made a bloody mess of that city.’
‘King Otreus, of Phrygia,
‘That king is my father.’
and saw then, as of waves taking form,
As the sea, hard, a glitter of crystal,
And the waves rising but formed, holding their form.
No light reaching through them.
In a passage like this (and there are several very like it, as we shall see), Pound's interest in Aeneas is limited to the matter of his semidivine birth, how he was conceived by Aphrodite after she had assumed human form so as to lie with Anchises.
The source is not Virgilian, but the fifth of the so-called Homeric Hymns, ‘To Aphrodite’.
Aphrodite's lie about a non-existent human father, ‘King Otreus, of Phrygia’, is designed to conceal her divinity from her human mate, who is applauded for seeing through the fiction because of something uncanny in his bed-mate's bearing — sometimes specified as her gait, her way of walking.
Anchises is the hero, not Aeneas.
And he is the-hero-as-artist, who is called upon to make just such recognitions, of the divinely eternal through the veil of the quotidian.
The last lines quoted, which are also the last lines of the Canto, reveal this clearly for those who know The Cantos : the paradoxical coupling of the fluid (the waves) with the fixed (the crystal) is what Pound regularly sees as the essence of the authentic artifact.
Pound here is very close to Yeats who is, for instance in his great sonnet ‘Leda and the Swan’, fascinated similarly by the moments when the inhuman — it may be bestial, it may be divine, subhuman or superhuman hardly matters — invades the human.
To neither Pound nor Yeats did it seem that Virgil had much or anything to say about this matter which so preoccupied them.
More than twenty years later, at the end of World War Two, Pound, in a prison-stockade awaiting trial for treason, was still celebrating Anchises in the same strain, and for the same reason:
each one in his god's name
as by Terracina rose from the sea Zephyr behind her
and from her manner of walking
as had Anchises
till the shrine be again white with marble
till the stone eyes look again seaward
(Canto 74)
Or again, in Canto 76:
or Anchises that laid hold of her flanks of air
drawing her to him
Cythera potens,
no cloud, but the crystal body
the tangent formed in the hand's cup
as live wind in the beech grove
as strong air amid cypress
The ‘tangent…in the hand's cup’ has to do with the legend that the shapes of the finest Greek vases were replicated from the contour of the divinely beautiful woman's breast, as cupped in her lover's hand and thereafter imprinted on his mind — obviously a powerful emblem of how the impulse to artistic manufacture is erotic.
For present purposes the point is that such passages, which because of the name ‘Anchises’ may seem Virgilian, are nothing of the kind.
Accordingly, when the Virgilian voice does irrupt into these relatively late Cantos, it does so with all the more force for being unheralded.
It speaks Scots, as we have intimated:
‘Who says he is an American’
a still form on the branda, Bologna
‘Gruss Gott’, ‘Der Herr!’
‘Tatile ist gekommen!',
Slow lift of long banners
Roma profugens Sabinorum in terras
and belt the sitye quahr of noble fame
the lateyn peopil taken has their name
bringing his gods into Latium
saving the bricabrac
‘Ere he his goddis brocht in Latio’
‘each one in the name’
in whom are the voices, keeping hand on the reins
Gaudier's word not blacked out
nor old Hulme's, nor Wyndham's…
This is Canto 78, another of those composed in the Pisan prison-stockade while their author awaited transportation and trial for treason.
The opening lines of Gavin Douglas's Eneados (printed 1553) read:
The batellis and the man I will describe,
Fra Troys boundis first that fugitive,
By fait to Itale coyme and coist Lavyne;
Our land and see cachit with mekle pyne,
By force of goddis abuif, fro every steid.
Of cruell Juno throw ald ramembrit feid.
Greit pane in batell sufferit he also,
Or he his goddis brocht in Latio,
And belt the ciete, fra quhame, of noble fame,
The Latyne peple takin hes thair name…
The commentator who has done most justice to this appeal to Virgil by way of Gavin Douglas is the South African, Anthony Woodward.
But even Woodward fails to bring out how surprising it is (as well as how the line Roma Profugens Sabinorum in terras , has been enigmatically inserted in the preceding Canto 77).
Pound in this passage recollects how, late in the war, he set out with borrowed boots and haversack from Rome, already doomed to fall to the advancing Allied armies, for the Italo-Austrian domicile of his natural daughter, Mary, and how, hiking and hitch-hiking, he encountered much kindness from Germans and Italians alike.
What strikes him of a sudden, as he remembers this experience, is how it had been foreseen and marmoreally recorded by Virgil: as Virgil's Aeneas left doomed Troy, carrying his household and ancestral gods, so Pound leaves the doomed Rome of fascist Italy, carrying in his haversack his gods — books by Henri Gaudier-Brzeska and T. E. Hulme and Percy Wyndham Lewis.
For a poet so hostile to Virgil to discover that in extremis only Virgil had foreseen and foresuffered his predicament, and thereby eased it — this surely constitutes a very poignant moment in literary history, and in a history rather larger than ‘literary’ may suggest.
Virgin in a Cultural Tradition , eds R.A. Cardwell &J. Hamilton.
University of Nottingham, 1986.
Eliot, Williams and Pound in the Twenties
Harold Monro, writing in the London Chapbook in February 1923, observed of T.S.
Eliot's Waste Land that ‘in England it was treated chiefly with indignation or contempt’, whereas in America The Dial had awarded the author its annual prize of $2,000.
But the implied contrast is misleading.
Allowing for the conventions of sedate amenity that governed American reviewing (as for the most part they still do), one can detect in the American reviewers of Eliot's Poems (1920) and of The Waste Land (1922) the same recalcitrance that the British reviewers expressed more cheekily.
Louis Untermeyer, Robert Frost's correspondent who was to be an influential anthologist, wrote of Poems (The Freeman , 30 June 1920) that ‘Eliot cares more for his art than he does for his attitudes’; and that ‘the exaltation which is the very breath of poetry — that combination of tenderness and toughness — is scarcely ever present in Eliot's lines’.
When The Waste Land appeared, Untermeyer had become more irate: ‘The Dial's award to Mr T. S. Eliot and the subsequent bookpublication of his The Waste Land have occasioned a display of some of the most enthusiastically naive superlatives that have ever issued from publicly sophisticated iconoclasts’.
The poem itself he found ‘a pompous parade of erudition’, and he decided that ‘were it not for the Laforgue mechanism, Mr Eliot s poetic variations on the theme of a super-refined futility would be increasingly thin and incredibly second rate’(The Freeman , 17 January 1923).
Obviously a writer who is happy with ‘super-refined’(elsewhere he says that Eliot's ‘Portrait of a Lady’ is ‘extraordinarily sensitized’) is not a critic worth pausing on for long; and yet when Untermeyer cites all too patent imitations of Eliot's ‘Sweeney Among the Nightingales’in quatrains by Osbert Sitwell and Herbert Read and Robert Nichols, one can see good reason for him to think that Eliot s reputation, achieved so fast on such a slender body of work, was no more than modish.
And indeed it asks no great exertion of the historical imagination to recognize that, at a time when ‘the Sitwells’ were taken to be ‘modernists’equal with Eliot and Pound, modish  was just what Eliot's reputation was.
The achievement was quite otherwise; but it would be several years before that could be perceived, and the perception validated.
For this no one in American deserves more credit than Edmund Wilson.
He wrote, in The Dial for December 1922, the most emphatically welcoming and apparently influential review of The Waste Land , and although this reads a little quaintly now because Wilson took very seriously Eliot's supposed debt to Jessie L. Weston's From Ritual to Romance (which later criticism has taken lightly), his piece had the great virtue of conceding valid points to the opposition:
It is true his poems seem the products of a constricted emotional experience and that he appears to have drawn rather heavily on books for the heat he could not derive from life.
There is a certain grudging margin, to be sure, about all that Mr Eliot writes — as if he were compensating himself for his limitations by a peevish assumption of superiority.
But it is the very acuteness of his suffering from this starvation which gives such poignancy to his art.
However, it was more than three years later (The New Republic , March 1926) that Wilson brought Eliot's poetry home to the bosoms of his countrymen.
He did so, having ‘The Hollow Men’ before him, by insisting on the extent to which Eliot was indelibly American:
Mr Eliot has lived abroad so long that we rarely think of him as an American and he is never written about from the point of view of his relation to other American authors.
Yet one suspects that his real significance is less that of a prophet of European disintegration than of a poet of the American Puritan temperament.
Compare him with Hawthorne, Henry James, E.A. Robinson and Edith Wharton: all these writers have their Waste Land, which is the aesthetic and emotional waste land of the Puritan character and their chief force lies in the intensity with which they communicate emotions of deprivation and chagrin.
It is not at all incongruous that Wilson, who thus insisted on Eliot's Americanness, should a few years later, in his pioneering classic Axel's Castle (1931), insist on Eliot's Frenchness, thus giving substance and weight to Untermeyer's too glib acknowledgement of ‘the Laforgue mechanism’.
By taking seriously Eliot's debt to the French symbolistes (as before him only Allen Tate had done, in The New Republic , 30 June 1926), Wilson was still stressing Eliot's Americanness by showing at any rate how un-British he was.
Not surprisingly, though deplorably, British and also many American readers continued to ignore Eliot's French affinities, following instead the hints that Eliot had dropped for their benefit in his criticism, implying his kinship with such solidly English writers as Donne and Webster.
As Tate remarked austerely, ‘His Eliabethanism has indubitably been too ingenuously appraised by some critics’.
If we chronicle not how Eliot's reputation was advanced, but how Eliot's poetry (and all modern poetry) came to be understood, the part played by Allen Tate bulks very large and honourably.
He was among the first to champion Eliot.
Already as a young man of twenty-four he had pressed Eliot's claims upon his seniors, John Crowe Ransom and Donald Davidson, in the circle of the Nashville ‘fugitives’; and this initially provincial dispute was played out on a national stage as early as 1923 when, in the New York Evening Post Literary Review , Ransom, with the courtly composure that was to be his hallmark, tried to promote Robert Graves before Eliot, only to be taken to task in the same columns by his younger associate.
The exchange shows neither Ransom nor Tate at his best.
But both were themselves poets, and by that token were concerned more urgently than other commentators, even Edmund Wilson.
From 1927 onwards, as the consequences of Eliot's baptism into the Anglican church showed up in the imagery of ‘Journey of the Magi’, ‘A Song for Simeon’, ‘Animula’, and most conspicuously ‘Ash-Wednesday’(1930), Tate, open to the solicitations of Christian belief, took up the running on Eliot's behalf from the non-believer Wilson.
It was not easy.
Tate, an ambitious poet whose few irreplaceable poems were yet to come, was by 1927 in animated correspondence with two poets, Yvor Winters (1900–1968) and Hart Crane (1899-1932), who were at one, if in little else, in their certainty that Eliot's fame and Eliot's precedent were bad news for American poetry.
Already in 1926 (The New Republic , 30 June) Tate was obliged — faced with the aridity in diction and imagery of ‘The Hollow Men’— to concede that ‘It is possible that he has nothing more to say in poetry’.
Yet this admission was not so grievous for Tate as it would have been for others.
For Tate's very distinguished criticism, then and afterwards, was always more concerned with the socio-cultural conditions for poetry than with poetry itself.
And so it was not with any special disappointment that Tate envisaged how Eliot's message, his distinctively American apprehension of Europe, might thereafter be conveyed less in poems than in his conduct of The Criterion , the magazine he had begun to edit in 1923:
Going home to Europe, Mr Eliot has had to understand Europe; he could not quite sufficiently be the European simply  to feel that he was there; he has been forced to envisage it with a reminiscent philosophy.
And it is not insignificant that the quarterly of which he is the editor is the first British journal which has attempted to relate the British mind to the total European mind; that has attempted a rational synthesis of the traditions of Roman culture; that has, in a word, contemplated order.
And Tate proceeded to cite, with equanimity and approval, some of the non-English writers whom Eliot had solicited for The Criter- ion , or else had approved there: Charles Maurras, Paul Valéry, Henri Massis, Oswald Spengler — several of whom would not unjustly, though with the benefit of hindsight, be condemned later as Fascist or proto-Fascist.
But in any case there was a grave difficulty.
For if Eliot's debt to the French poets went beyond an easy charting of ‘influences’, or the neat and better than neat adaptation of French lines (for instance, from Laforgue) into English, it could only have meant an elimination from poetry of any notion of ‘message’.
‘Message’ was precisely whit French poetry, at least since Mallarmé if not before, had set its face against.
But alike in the British and the American traditions the expectation that the poet would have a message was so ingrained that even by those readers most alert to and informed about Eliot's French connections The Waste Land was still thought to deliver an urgent signal — usually about the bankruptcy of the European, or the Western, cultural and civic traditions.
In this dilemma, Eliot was less than helpful to his apologists.
The editor of The Criterion , from 1923 and more insistently from 1926, revealed himself as a writer with indeed a message, of a very bleak and uncompromising sort, affronting at almost every point the suppositions of secular liberalism.
And it was asking too much of readers that they should insulate Eliot the editor and editorialist from Eliot the poet; so that they should read ‘Ash-Wednesday’ without feeling that they were being nudged into the Roman Catholic or the Anglo-Catholic church —
At the first turning of the second stair
I turned and saw below
The same shape twisted on the banister
Under the vapour in the fetid air
Struggling with the devil of the stairs who wears
The deceitful face of hope and of despair.
At the second turning of the second stair
I left them twisting, turning below;
There were no more faces and the stair was dark,
Damp, jaggèd, like an old man's mouth drivelling, beyond repair.
Or the toothed gullet of an agèd shark.
At the first turning of the third stair
Was a slotted window bellied like the fig's fruit
And beyond the hawthorn blossom and a pasture scene
The broadbacked figure drest in blue and green
Enchanted the maytime with an antique flute.
Blown hair is sweet, brown hair over the mouth blown,
Lilac and brown hair;
Distraction, music of the flute, stops and steps of the mind
over the third stair,
Fading, fading; strength beyond hope and despair
Climbing the third stair.
Lord, I am not worthy
Lord, I am not worthy
but speak the word only.
It is perfectly true that there is nothing conclusively in the poem to make us identify the first stair with Dante's Inferno , the second with his Purgatorio , the third with Paradiso ; as there is not (a more piercing uncertainty) anything to determine for us whether ‘the broadbacked figure drest in blue and green’, with his ‘music of the flute’, is an image of what must be renounced in order to achieve Paradise, or else an image of how terrestrial life can most nearly attain the paradisal.
But no one will seriously maintain that the verses do not have a design upon us; that they do not promulgate a message — the message that all secular explanations of human life are vain and inadequate.
That the alternative religious explanation should still not know what value to put on ‘music of the flute’— this will be experienced by some as a cruel disappointment, by others as a welcome acknowledgement that dogmatic certainty on the large scale can comprehend uncertainties on the small.
But in either or any case their verses must surely confound the French theorists: the poem as a construction of words must be — at least when the words come from such a charged area of human experience as these do — a construction also of sentiments and ideas.
The poem does convey a message, though the message cannot be at every point decoded.
Allen Tate rose to this challenge.
His essay on ‘Ash-Wednesday’(The Hound and Horn , January-March 1931) has been anthologized many times, and rightly.
It is a masterpiece of literary criticism, precisely by being much more than that; under its surface is the furious rejection by Tate, now consciously an alienated Southerner and impenitent Confederate, of the scientific humanism of Yankee America.
Tate saw clearly the point at issue: ‘Mr Eliot's critics are a little less able each year to see the poetry for Westminster Abbey; the wood is all trees’.
And his retort, masterfully bold though disingenuous, is that ‘in a discussion of Mr Eliot's poetry, his doctrine has little to command interest in itself’.
Of ‘Ash-Wednesday’ Tate said, among much else that was penetrating:
These six poems are a brief moment of religious experience in an age that believes religion to be a kind of defeatism and puts its hope for man in finding the right secular order.
The mixed realism and symbolism of ‘The Waste Land’ issued in irony.
The direct and lyrical method of the new poems creates the simpler aesthetic quality of humility.
The latter quality comes directly out of the former, and there is a nice continuity in Mr Eliot's work.
Before he is through, Tate is claiming that ‘Ash-Wednesday’ represents ‘probably…the only valid religious poetry we have’, and he isolates two features of the writing which lead him to think this.
One, which need not concern us, has to do with imagery.
The other emerges when he remarks in the opening lines ‘the regular yet halting rhythm, the smooth uncertainty of movement which may either proceed to greater regularity or fall away into improvisation’.
This perception is picked up later, more than once, as Tate moves through the poem: ‘subtly and imperceptibly the rhythm has changed…’, ‘there is constant and sudden change of rhythm…’, ‘a broken and distracted rhythm’.
If we read ‘Ash-Wednesday’ through with Tate's commentary at our elbow, we see at any given point what he means: he has a good ear, as we might expect from his own poems (which are however metrical, as ‘Ash-Wednesday’isn't).
And we may agree that what binds together the six parts of ‘Ash-Wednesday’ is in large part something rhythmical.
It remains true that in Tate's criticism and since (for no advance has been made in this quarter)‘rhythm’ and ‘movement’are wholly impressionistic — you hear what the critic is talking about, or else you don't.
This is one area where modern criticism has notably failed.
To be sure, the vocabulary for defining such rhythmical effects is yet to seek; but should not critics apply themselves to seeking and finding that vocabulary, instead of pursuing semantic and allusive niceties?
In all the many thousands  of words that have been expended on Eliot's achievements, this crucial matter — his alertness to, and exploiting of, the rhythms of the English verse-line — remains a vacuum, occupied only by unsupported and insupportable appeals to ‘the ear’.
In 1927 Tate's correspondents Winters and Crane had been discussing between themselves not Eliot but William Carlos Williams (1883–1963).
On 19 March that year Crane told Winters that ‘Williams probably means less to me than to you’, and then proceeded to a hesitant account of how he felt about this one of their older contemporaries:
— There is no doubt of the charm of almost all of W's work.
I except the Paterson and Struggle of Wings lately published in the Dial.
I think them both highly disorganized.
But in most of Williams' work I feel the kind of observations being ‘made’…seem to me too casual, however delightfully phrased, to be especially interesting…
Later in the letter, considering apparently a different sort of poem written by Williams, Hart Crane confesses:
Personally I often delight in some of these excursions of W's — but I won't ‘approve’ of them.
They are too precious, insulate to all but — at least I fancy — a few ‘choice spirits’, and even then rather toylike.
I don't mean that I'm a democrat.
But I don't believe in encouraging the fancy — as long as there is imagination.
It is impossible to recognize in the poet thus characterized —‘precious’, ‘insulate’, ‘toylike’— the William Carlos Williams whom American opinon over the last thirty years has promoted as a respectable, and better than respectable, counterweight to Eliot.
For one thing, the poet thus extolled has been presented as above all poetically ‘a democrat’.
Yet Crane's assessment of Williams still has its validity, as is apparent if we consider (wearily, for it is the instance always cited) Williams's ‘The Red Wheelbarrow’.
The British poet Charles Tomlinson has cited this piece to enforce his contention that ‘There is no occasion too small for the poet's celebration’.
But is this, in any case, true?
Commonsense, not without distinguished endorsement from past centuries, thinks as Hart Crane did that it is not true  at all; that on the contrary there are occasions too trivial, too lacking in dignity or resonance, to deserve the ceremoniousness that, as Tomlinson perceived, verse-writing always brings with it.
The unfortunate effect in such cases is portentousness; and ‘The Red Wheelbarow’ is surely in this way portentous :
so much depends
upon
a red wheel
barrow
glazed with rain
water
beside the white
chickens.
‘So much depends’, says the little squib (for it is nothing more), on the wheelbarrow, the glaze of rain, the chickens.
But just how much does depend?
The momentousness of the sparsely furnished scene is blankly asserted, not proved.
Or rather it is proved — by sleight of hand; for if the little scene is not momentous, how did it come to be framed, in all its sparsity, by so much white paper?
The reverential hush is thus not only demanded, but enforced.
The poet cannot lose; whatever claims he makes for the momentousness of his subjectmatter are vindicated simply by the way those claims are made.
Such poetry is invulnerable, existing in a self-sealed and selfjustifying realm called ‘aesthetic’, from which no appeal is allowed, or can be made, to other realms like the ethical or the civic.
The literary histories invite us to associate such a belief in the unbreachable autonomy of art with haughty and disdainful decadents of the 1880s and 1890s.
The achievement of Williams, of his followers and admirers, has been to show that the most secure haven for such doctrines is on the contrary in an ideology that is aggressively egalitarian, and also secular.
For the belief that ‘there is no occasion too small’ is naturally at home in a society that resists any ranking of certain human and civic occasions below or above certain others.
And thus it seems that liberal social democracy cossets and protects the aesthete as no other form of society does.
Williams's ‘It all depends’ asserts and takes for granted the absence of any agreed hierarchies, hence the freedom of any individual to establish and assert his own hierarchy, without fear of challenge.
‘Spring and All’, a more substantial and widely praised poem, follows the same procedure as ‘The Red Wheelbarrow’ with the added spice of faux-naïf cuteness (announced in the very title, and taken up in epithets like ‘twiggy’).
One hopes that is not what Crane had in mind when he credited Williams's poems with ‘charm’.
Williams had certainly written better poems than these, and doubtless Yvor Winters had those others in mind when, in Poetry for May 1928, he wrote of ‘the most magnificent master of English and of human emotions since Thomas Hardy, William Carlos Williams’.
Significantly, this was in a review mostly concerned to deplore Eliot's influence on poetic style.
At that time hardly anyone but Winters would have named Williams in the same breath as Eliot, and it is characteristic of Winters's perversity (or his independence) that thirty years later, when it had become usual to set Williams up against Eliot, Winters's opinion of Williams had long been much less favourable.
However, he never ceased to admire a poem like ‘The Widow's Lament in Springtime’:
Sorrow is my own yard
where the new grass
flames as it has flamed
often before but not
with the cold fire
that closes round me this year.
Thirtyfive years
I lived with my husband.
The plumtree is white today
with masses of flowers.
Masses of flowers
load the cherry branches
and color some bushes
yellow and some red
but the grief in my heart
is stronger than they
for though they were my joy
formerly, today I noticed them
and turned away forgetting.
Today my son told me
that in the meadows
at the edge of the heavy woods
in the distance, he saw
trees of white flowers.
I feel that I would like
to go there
and fall into those flowers
and sink into the marsh near them.
This must be the sort of writing that Crane had in mind when he applauded Williams (still rather grudgingly, however) for sometimes attaining ‘the classic manner of the old Chinese poets’.
Certainly the deliberate naïveté here is not in the least false, but has the limpid directness of some of the Chinese poems that Pound had marvellously transfigured in Cathay (1915).
And so it was reasonable for Crane and Winters, who in the twenties was reaching for this style in his own poems, to call such writing ‘imagist’.
(Williams however in such a poem beautifully weaves the syntax of the sentence into and over his verse-lines — which is not a resource that most imagists were aware of.)
Certainly this limpidity is not within Eliot's reach even when he is trying to be limpid, as in ‘Ash-Wednesday’;, and of course the experience of a simple person enduring a commonplace and unavoidable sorrow — is such as Eliot could never manage, early or late.
It has to be pointed out, to those who are sure that Eliot is a great poet, what vast tracts of human experience are never touched on in his poetry.
Williams himself had entered the lists against Eliot, saying of Eliot's early poetry (and Pound's also):
It is the latest touch from the literary cuisine, it adds to the pleasant outlook from the club window.
If to do this, if to be a Whistler at best, in the art of poetry, is to reach the height of poetic expression, then Ezra and Eliot have approached it and tant pis for the rest of us.
And Williams jeered:
I do not overlook De Gourmont's plea for a meeting of the nations but I do believe that when they meet Paris will be more than slightly abashed to find parodies of the middle ages, Dante and Langue D'Oc foisted upon it as the best in United States poetry.
This was in The Little Review for May 1919, where Williams was taking issue with praise of Eliot by one of Pound's British friends, Edgar Jepson; but Williams's hostility to British culture ran deeper than that, and was to be a permanent feature of his outlook.
His malevolence towards Pound, his friend since their college days in Philadelphia, is extraordinary; and when in 1920 he amplified this piece in the prologue to his Kora in Hell , Williams compounded the offence by quoting selectively from a private letter that Pound had written him.
Astonishingly, Pound did not break off relations.
Instead he was provoked, in a letter, into one of the most illuminating  and betraying comments that he ever made, on Eliot, Williams and himself:
There is a blood poison in America; you can idealize the place (easier now that Europe is so damd shaky) all you like, but you haven't a drop off the cursed blood in you, and you don't need to fight the disease day and night; you never had to.
Eliot has it perhaps worse than I have — poor devil.
You have the advantage of arriving in the milieu with a fresh flood of Europe in your veins, Spanish, French, English, Danish.
You had not the thin milk of New York and New England from the pap; and you can therefore keep the environment outside you, and decently objective.
(Selected Letters , ed.
D.D.
Paige, p.158)
Pound here anticipates, and paints in a blacker hue, Edmund Wilson's recognition that Eliot is ‘a poet of the American Puritan temperament’, and Pound claims to be tarred with the same brush himself.
One must mind one's manners (and one's metaphors — tarring with brushes, for instance!) when venturing on to the territory that Pound opens up with his reflections on the ethnic mix of the American population, and the distinction that he makes between the older stock (Eliots and Pounds) and the relative late-come immigrants (Williams's stock on both sides).
Moreover Pound's anti-Semitism, later so notorious, certainly casts a sinister light on his readiness to broach these issues.
Yet these matters, it has been suggested, lie deep — indeed,unutterably deep — in every American psyche; and it is good that from time to time the unutterable be uttered — it is, one might say, one of the things that we look to poets for.
There can be little doubt for instance that the doubtfulness or downright hostility felt towards Eliot by some Americans, particularly in recent decades, derives from the sort of American Eliot was — and remained, long after he had taken British citizenship.
Eliot hailed from St Louis, but the Eliots there seem to have regarded themselves as Bostonian and Unitarian missionaries to that mid-western Philistia.
The poet did not share this sense, he actively disliked it, but he could not escape — not even in Europe — from what he saw as the balefulness of that inheritance.
He was what we have learned to call a WASP, and his lifetime coincided with the process, not yet quite completed, by which that caste — white Anglo-Saxon protestants of the northeast — was supplanted from the position of privilege that they had enjoyed from the first days of the Republic.
That privilege, and the airs and presumption that went with it, are still resented; and some of the resentment has rubbed off on the poet.
Pound's case is by no means so clear-cut.
At least one of his grandparents had made a career on the frontier; and in The Cantos this forebear, Thaddeus Coleman Pound, makes several entries, always with an encouraging flourish on the drums.
It is the more remarkable that Pound in his letter to Williams should diagnose himself as suffering from a milder form of Eliot's disease; most of the time, alike in his life and his poetry, he seems to be denying it by strenuously over-compensating.
Only once, late in life when he made as much of an excuse as he would ever make for his anti-Semitism, did Pound ever again enter the plea for himself that he suffered from the cultural anaemia of growing up in a suburb of an Eastern seaboard city.
As for Williams, who had an English father, it would be easy to explain away his hostility to England; but the sorrier likelihood is that he saw quite justly the baleful mixture of timidity and arrogance which characterized literary London in his lifetime.
However, Pound's diagnosis of Williams's condition was surely perceptive: Williams could abide American reality (where Pound and Eliot had to flee from it) because, as in the admirable ‘To Elsie’(’ The pure products of America /go crazy'), he remained the immigrant, the outsider looking in on the behaviour of the nation that he had been, by the sheerest accident, born to.
Yvor Winters, eschewing lurid and unstable metaphors of bloodpoisoning and leukaemia, applied the discipline of intellectual history to isolate the virus that for him too disabled American literature of the north-east.
It was, he decided, Emersonianism — a disease (if that is what it is) which is certainly no less rife now than it was when Winters made his diagnosis fifty years ago.
This investigation was part of the wholesale scrutiny and revaluation that Winters was shocked into by the suicide of Hart Crane in 1932.
In that revaluation, whereas Pound held his modest but respectable place, Williams was drastically denoted with Eliot rising in the scale against him.
Winters in California perhaps thought himself securely distant from the seat of the infection; he never visited Europe, still less was he tempted to expatriate himself.
Pound's forbearance towards Williams remains astonishing, the more when we realize that Williams's challenge to him came when he was remarkably uncertain and at sea about his own talents and the direction in which he should go.
Bowled over by the originality and assurance of Joyce's Ulysses , which was being sent to him by the author in typescript section by section, Pound was between 1920 and 1922 dismantling the several hundred lines of The Cantos that he had written and published, and recasting them radically, using some of the same material but trying for a less personalized presentation.
Moreover Pound had reached Williams's conclusion about  literary London, and in 1920 left for Paris, whence in 1924 he moved to Rapallo.
His acrid and accusing farewell to London was Hugh Selwyn Mauberley (1920).
But the poem of his that he most needed reassurance about was Homage to Sextus Propertius (1919), and for that he had to wait a long time.
When Eliot in 1928, loyally reciprocating services rendered, edited Pound's Selected Poems , he insisted on excluding the propertius poem, and it was not until 1932 that Basil Bunting wrote, already retrospectively, ‘In my considered opinion, ‘Propertius’ was the most important poem of our times, surpassing alike ‘Mauberley’and ‘The Waste Land’.’
This was in The New English Weekly , a London journal of very limited circulation; there appears to have been no comparable acknowledgement in the poet's native land.
Bunting, who respected Eliot, applied himself first to rebutting the reasons which Eliot gave, in his Introduction to Selected Poems ; for omitting this long and elaborate poem:
It is impossible to understand why Eliot should have excluded the ‘Propertius’ from his selection of Pound's work.
The plea of its difficulty will not hold, for as a consummation is always simpler than a beginning, the ‘Propertius’ is certainly much simpler than some of Pound's shorter earlier works whose content is sometimes elusive, tenuous, evanescent…
…
The question of the relation of Pound's poem with the book of Propertius's elegies does not arise, except for the literary historian.
There is no claim that this is a translation.
The correspondence, the interpenetration of ancient and modern, is Pound's, not Propertius's…
Half a century later, such commentary as there is on Pound's poem is still for the most part concerned with this question that for Bunting ‘does not arise’.
When he goes on to justify his high estimate of the poem, Bunting specifies:
The beautiful step of the verse, the cogent movement of thought and feeling throughout, the sensitive perception of the little balanced in the great and their mutual dependence, the extraordinary directness, here and there quite naked, achieved in spite of the complexity of the whole conception;…
Some of these claims can be considered, and either allowed or disallowed, only by looking at the work as a whole; others can be at least understood after reading only a few lines:
My cellar does not date from Numa pompilius,
Nor bristle with wine jars,
Nor is it equipped with a frigidaire patent;
Yet the companions of the Muses
will keep their collective nose in my books,
And weary with historical data, they will turn to my dance tune.
Happy who are mentioned in my pamphlets,
the songs shall be a fine tomb-stone over their beauty.
But against this?
Neither expensive pyramids scraping the stars in their route,
Nor houses modelled upon that of Jove in East Elis,
Nor the monumental effigies of Mausolus,
are a complete elucidation of death.
Flame burns, rain sinks into the cracks
And they all go to rack ruin beneath the thud of the years.
Stands genius a deathless adornment,
a name not to be worn out with the years.
Noting in passing how conclusively the ‘frigifaire paten’ rules out any notion of a translation of propertius (unless it were a translation in the sense of a raucous travesty or ‘put-down’— and indeed some academic latinists did misconceive Pound's poem in that way), some early readers were understandably disconcerted by the inversions of conversational or prosaic word-order —‘Happy who’, ‘Stands genius’— especially from a poet who some years before had seemed to polemicize for just that rule about word-order which he here flouted.
But these inversions were quite different in purpose and effect from those that Pound had practised indiscriminately in his earliest collections, and thereafter castigated; these were not poeticisms, but indications that he was addressing a sophisticated urban intelligentsia, that of Great War London, just as propertius had addressed the sophisticates of Augustan Rome.
The clue is in the diction, which gives ‘are a complete elucidation of’, for ‘clears up’ or ‘makes clear’.
The poet writes for, and gives a voice to, people whose privileged education has closed off for them the possibility of speaking as limpidly and directly as the speaker of ‘The Widow's Lament in Springtime’.
A special pathos is achieved when the poetry acts out the predicament of people whose all too expert command of language debars them (paradoxically) from expressing a common human sorrow — mortality, the fear of it, and its conclusiveness — as limpidly as could Williams's ‘widow’.
In the end the speaker of Homage to Sextus Propertius wins through to articulating that common  plight as memorably as Williams's speaker does — with, as Bunting says, ‘extraordinary directness…quite naked’.
But Pound's speaker, so far from naïve, has had to struggle through to that desired but unfamiliar nakedness; and Pound's verse enacts the struggle.
It may seem that when Bunting speaks of ‘the beautiful step of the verse, he is gesturing into a void not much less than Allen Tate when he wrote of the ‘rhythm’ and the ‘movement’of Eliot's ‘Ash-Wednesday’.
But in fact the metaphor ‘step’, implying tread, implies also volition and direction.
More important, since Pound's use of indentations conveys visually the effect of the verse-lines being ‘stepped’ down the page, to speak of ‘step’shifts attention from what rhythmically happens between the start and end of a line to how the poet manages to turn from one line to another.
(And ‘verse’ from versus , means precisely ‘turn’.)
To be sure, this is still rudimentary and indefinite.
But certain writings by Pound, Bunting and a couple of others can take us a little further.
What all of them contend is that the auditory effect of all English-language verse can only in a schematic and starveling fashion be pin-pointed by applying the only two measurements that traditional scansion recognizes: on the one hand the number of syllables, on the other the number of occurrences of ictus or ‘stress’.
One feature of English verse that is scanted by this method, or can be acknowledged only incidentally, is one that every careful reader knows from his or her experience:tempo , the speeding up or slowing down of enunciation, and therefore of apprehension, as we read through a line or through several lines in sequence.
This seems to be intimately connected with another principle, which is more radical and therefore more important: that of quantity , of syllables as being, in relation to their contiguous syllables, either long or short.
The variation between English-language speakers about what syllables, in effect what vowels, they treat as long or short, is so great that there can be no question of imposing on English verse a quantitative metre such as was used for ancient Latin (doubtless with some strain for those who spoke classical Latin with dialectal variations as to quantity).
This granted, it remains true, as anyone's experience of his own and others' speech-habits will confirm, that some English vowels are experienced and expressed as relatively long, others as relatively short.
Not just unmetrical poets like Pound (for the most part) and Bunting, but also a strictly metrical poet like the later Yvor Winters, came to think that the finest auditory effects in English-language verse were attained by those poets who attended to the quantitative elements in British or American speech as an incalculable dimension super-added to the recognized and calculable dimensions of syllable-count and stresscount.
Quantity in this sense,duration , is what musicians and musical  composers are continually concerned with; and so it is not surprising that poets of this way of thinking, like Pound and Bunting, show themselves avidly interested in poetry which has been, not at a level of theory but as a fact of performance, intimately associated with music: poetry that has been set, or has been written in the hope of being set, to music.
It is notable that it was Bunting, in his generation the only British emulator of Pound, who was most confident and insistent that in these matters Pound's immediate master was American, the Walt Whitman of ‘Out of the Ocean Endlessly Rocking’.
It is in any case certain that for years before Homage to Sextus Propertius Pound had been studying, not for their content chiefly but as models of musical form, the poems in quantitative metre of ancient Greece.
(His British predecessor in such technical study had been Thomas Hardy; but that is another, and difficult, topic.)
These matters are important because they explain how Pound and Eliot, who had campaigned as a team and would help each other for many years to come, radically differed not just in themes and attitudes (of which something will be said hereafter) but at this deep level, in the not altogether conscious interstices of their craft.
Fortunately Eliot declared himself unequivocally, in an essay, ‘Reflections on Vers Libre :’…the ghost of some simple metre should lurk behind the arras in even the ‘freest’ verse; to advance menacingly as we doze, and withdraw as we arouse'.
This is what Pound could never have said.
When, infrequently, he wanted to write in ‘some simple metre’, he did so; but when more often he wanted to get away from standard metres, he left them behind altogether, no ghost of them lurking behind his arras.
The difference between the two poets corresponds (not quite exactly, because the nature and history of French verse differs so greatly from English) to the distinction that the French make between vers libre and vers libéré ; between, we may say, free verse and freed verse.
Eliot's practice, as his remarks just quoted make clear, was always ‘freed’ verse: verse freed indeed from the constraints of traditional prosody, yet rather constantly recalling to the reader's ear one of the traditional patterns it was departing from.
(Hence, notably in ‘Gerontion’, Eliot's ability to approximate and even conform to Jacobean blank verse, yet to depart from it smoothly when he pleased.) Pound's verse on the contrary was, at least after Homage to Sextus Propertius , free, not ‘freed’: the rhythms that he sought and attained either had never appeared before in the language, or else had not appeared there for many centuries.
His departure was much more radical.
And yet he was not doctrinaire about it, having declared on the contrary (as early as 1917, significantly in a review of Eliot's Prufrock and Other Observations):
Unless a man can put some thematic invention into vers libre , he would perhaps do well to stick to ‘regular’ metres, which have certain chances of being musical from their form, and certain other chances of being musical through his failure in fitting the form.
The one who was doctrinaire was Williams, who regarded the iambic measure as a chief curse of the English legacy from which American poetry must free itself if it was ever to stand on its own.
However, Winters was to decide that Williams was ‘wholly incapable of coherent thought’, and when Williams tried to explain his own rhythmical procedures he invented ‘the variable foot’— which is, as has been remarked, the equivalent of a rubber inch.
Williams had a good ear, and since his death some of his admirers have made more sense of his procedures than he could ever make for himself, but the lamentable effect of his example has been to lead poets to trust their ear implicitly, thus discrediting the very notion of measure .
The closeness of Pound's and Eliot's collaboration when they were young did not become clear Until 1972.
In that year comparisons of Eliot with Pound were stimulated, and exacerbated, by the publication of what were called the ‘drafts and transcripts’ of The Waste Land ; that is to say, the heterogeneous packet of typescripts and manuscripts which Eliot had dumped on Pound in Paris, out of which Pound had helped Eliot to extricate the poem that for forty years had been known under that title.
In most ways this book reflected great credit on both poets, and was affecting evidence of their mutual trust, of how their common dedication to the poetic calling had precluded any taint of rivalry or wounded amour-propre .
On the other hand the material which Eliot had put into Pound's hands turned out to be so inchoate that many readers were led to wonder how far the poem as they had it all these years was in any authentic sense Eliot's at all.
To be fair to him, he had repeatedly hinted that, when the evidence was in, it would show that Pound's contribution went far beyond the mere passing of judgement on particular passages; and indeed it turned out that the very structure of the poem had been extricated by Pound, rather than conceived and composed by the poet whose name appeared on the title-page.
This was disconcerting, to say the least.
It was not easy to think of a precedent, and one could be forgiven for concluding that the notorious obscurity of the poem came about not by the author's design but accidentally, because the work was the product not of one mind but of two.
The poem, we might say, is in two minds about itself and its own meaning.
But that is not the whole story.
For Pound undoubtedly made the poem more obscure by asking for the excision of some transitional and bridging passages where the language was not at full pressure, but on the other hand he caused to be removed some extended sections which, being plainly extraneous, could only have added to readers' bafflement.
Moreover in some important respects Pound was more old-fashioned than Eliot.
As his later disastrous interventions in politics would make clear, he was a realist in quite a simple-minded sense, one who was concerned for public life, and believed (like activists of the Left) that a poet had the right and the duty to act in and upon that life quite directly; whereas the oddly distant weariness of Eliot's political pronouncements, even when he was most engagé as editor of True Criterion , revealed a man for whom the psychological reality of private torments took priority over any reality which announced itself as social and public.
Thus Pound was quite ready, and became eager, to deliver a message, though with more obliquities and delays than the impatiently moralistic reader could see reason for; whereas Eliot, true to his inheritance from French symbolisme , was sceptical and chary of conveying in poetry any message at all.
(Pound had studied some of the same French poets, notably Laforgue and Rimbaud, but he had profited by them in a quite different way from Eliot, and he was averse to the central thrust of the symboliste endeavour, to which indeed the imagist or imagiste movement which he had sponsored had been intended as a challenging alternative.)
The difference between the two of them showed up in The Waste ,Land drafts.
For among the rather few objections by Pound that Eliot paid no attention to were one or two which would have required him to make consistent, in terms of locality and historical period, some of his references to London life.
Eliot seems to have ignored these suggestions because for him the physical and social landscape of London was no more than a screen on which to project a phantasmagoria that expressed his own personal disorders and desperations (partly sexual, as one might expect, and as the drafts make clear); whereas Pound seems to have supposed that the subject of the poem was London in all its historical and geographical actuality, much as the city of Dublin was from one point of view the subject of Joyce's Ulysses .
Quite independent of Pound, most admiring commentators have read the poem more nearly as Pound read it than as Eliot intended.
They could always have maintained of course that, whatever the poet's intentions, the poem as an achieved entity answered to their interpretations.
But critics of the twenties, knowing nothing of Pound's part in the poem, and ignorant also of Eliot's private sufferings through his wretched first marriage, saw no need to go so far around, to support their conviction or assumption that The Waste Land was a poem with a message.
What was known about Pound's association with Eliot did Pound's reputation no good at all.
The insufferable Untermeyer in 1923 castigated the texture of The Waste Land as ‘that formless plasma which Mr Ezra Pound likes to call a Sordelloform’; and in the same year in London, Clive Bell, the voice of ‘Bloomsbury’, said of Eliot that ‘no aesthetic theory can explain his indiscreet boosting of…the lamentable Ezra Pound’.
But the most vicious discriminiation had come in the previous year, from Edmund Wilson, who applauded the structure of The Waste Land by contrasting it to ‘the extremely ill-focused Eight Cantos of his imitator Mr Ezra Pound, who presents only a bewildering mosaic with no central emotion to provide a key’.
Eliot, distressed, wrote to Wilson and to another of his champions, Gilbert Seldes, protesting that he did not want to be praised at Pound's expense since be was indebted to Pound (as indeed his dedication to Pound as il miglior fabbro had elegantly acknowledged).
Eliot told Wilson and Seldes that ‘I sincerely consider Ezra Pound the most important living poet in the English language’.
But the damage had been done, and Wilson's elevation of Eliot at Pound's expense was to be Echoed time and again for at least thirty years, and indeed is still to be heard even today.
Pound suffered immediately, in his pocket-book.
Always short of money, Pound in the twenties found one outlet after another closed to him and had great difficulty making ends meet.
He seems not to have whined, and his only complaint, posthumously recorded by Bunting in his obituary of Pound, is drily judicious: he ‘said in the Thirties that Eliot had got stuck because he could not understand Propertius [i.e. Pound's Homage ]and ill the rest had not stuck a few books earlier still’.
How early Pound came by this perception is not clear, but certainly he had no illusions from the first that his Cantos , building as they did on the rhythmical and thematic procedures of Homage to Sextus Propertius , would be found readily acceptable.
In 1922 he explained in a letter:
Perhaps, as the poem goes on I shall be able to make various things clearer.
Having the crust to attempt a poem in 100 or 120 cantos long after all mankind has been commanded never again to attempt a poem of any length, I have to stagger as I can.
The first 11 cantos are preparation of the palette.
I have to get  down all the colours or elements I want for the poem.
Some perhaps too enigmatically and abbreviatedly.
I hope, heaven help me, to bring them into some sort of design and architecture later.
(Selected Letters , p. 180)
Excusably perhaps, neither Edmund Wilson nor any one else could understand, or could credit, the scale on which Pound was working: 120 cantos, and by the time Pound died in 1972, the poem had fallen only just short of that.
In a poem designed on such a scale (and this evidence of ‘design’ on such a scale from the first is astonishing) it was obviously illegitimate to look, as Edmund Wilson did, for emotional or affective unity in each or any Canto in isolation.
As Pound confessed in another letter in 1933: ‘Most Cantos have in them ‘binding matter’, i.e. lines holding them into the whole poem and these passages don't much help the reader of an isolated fragment…
More likely to confuse than help'.
Pound was in all seriousness embarked on an epic poem (which he defined, following of all unlikely authorities Rudyard Kipling, as ‘the tile of the tribe’); he could not and did not expect understanding from readers who supposed that the epic poem had died in the seventeenth century if not before, whose expectations therefore were conditioned by their experience of the brief or else extended lyric.
There are lyrical passages or interludes in The Cantos , as in any epic poem, but to excerpt these for applause while deploring their context is to fudge the issue, and evade the challenge of the poem as a whole.
The scale on which Pound was working was not clear even to the poet himself; so that the eleven cantos which he originally designated as ‘preparation of the palette’ are now by responsible commentators considerably extended — to the extent that the first thirty cantos, which are all that the twenties knew of the poem (A Draft of XVI Cantos (Paris, June 1925);A Draft often Cantos 17–27 (100 copies, September 1928); and A Draft of XXX Cantos (210 copies, August 1930)), are now often regarded as laying out no the painter's palette the hues that only in subsequent cantos would be combined to polemical and imaginative purpose.
Certainly only in the next batch of cantos (post-1930), which began with extended excerpts from the founding fathers of the Republic, would the scale of magnitude of the poem become apparent, also its topicality and its Americanness.
Of the first thirty cantos by themselves, no account is more plausible than that of a writer in the New York Herald Tribune Books for 9 January 1927, who decided: ‘Mr Pound is avowedly writing a history of the Mediterranean basin'.
The writer  was Ford Madox Ford, who was among the most loyal as he had been among the first of Pound's friends; in the twenties he was as penurious and as out of fashion as Pound.
It is easy to cheat when quoting from these early cantos: either by imposing a seeming self-closure on passages that are in fact open at both ends, or (and as well) by presenting a lyrically appealing passage as typical of the whole.
Any quotation must in any case be extensive:
So that the Xarites bent over tovarisch.
And these are the labours of tovarisch,
That tovarisch lay in the earth,
And rose, and wrecked the house of the tyrants,
And that tovarisch lay then in the earth
And the Xarites bent over tovarisch.
These are the labours of tovarisch,
That tovarisch wrecked the house of the tyrants,
And rose, and talked folly on folly,
And walked forth and lay in the earth
And the Xarites bent over tovarisch.
And that tovarisch cursed and blessed without aim,
These are the labours of tovarisch,
Saying:
‘Me Cadmus sowed in the earth
And with the thirtieth autumn
I return to the earth that made me.
Let the five last build the wall;
I neither build nor reap.
That he came with the gold ships, Cadmus,
That he fought with the wisdom,
Cadmus, of the gilded prows.
Nothing I build
And I reap
Nothing; with the thirtieth autumn
I sleep, I sleep not, I rot
And I build no wall.
Where was the wall of Eblis
At Ventadour, there now are the bees,
And in that court, wild grass for their pleasure
That they carry back to the crevice
Where loose stone hangs upon stone.
I sailed never with Cadmus,
lifted never stone above stone.’
‘Baked and eaten tovarisch!
‘Baked and eaten, tovarisch, my boy,
‘That is your story.
And up again,
‘Up and at ‘em.
Laid never stone upon stone.’
‘The air burst into leaf.’
‘Hung there flowered acanthus,
‘Can you tell the down from the up?’
As ‘tovarisch’ quite raucously announces, Pound here in Canto 27 reflects on the October Revolution in Russia in 1917.
And not only the Xaritès (or Charitès, the Greek Graces) bend some solicitude over the unnamed revolutionary comrade, so does the poet — for indeed in 1930 Pound's desire for an authoritarian leader in politics was as ready to fix on Lenin as on Mussolini.
Rather plainly the poem decides, as others have decided before and since, that the revolution's humble heroes, revolution once accomplished, did not know what to do with the liberation they had achieved.
One needs Ford Madox Ford's emphasis on ‘the Mediterranean basin, to understand that ‘tovarisch’ is being dignified by having his exploits measured against the myths of ancient Greece — for instance, that of Cadmus, founder of Thebes, who sowed dragon's teeth from which sprang warriors which fought among themselves until only five remained.
Pound has no recourse to that staple of anti-Russian propaganda in every generation (some of it was being aired in these years in Eliot's Criterion ) according to which the Russian is ‘asiatic’, outside the confines of Europe.
What will disconcert readers who come to Pound after Eliot, what they will find either refreshing or exasperating, is the literalness of Pound's imagination.
When he has tovarisch say, ‘Nothing I build’, this is to be understood not allegorically but literally: working of stone, either architecturally or sculpturally, was for Pound the register of culture — a conviction which he shared in his lifetime with few except the British art-critic whom he knew and esteemed, Adrian Stokes.
Thus the reference to the ruined walls of Eblis, in Aquitaine, is not gratuitous; and we know from other passages that Pound's refusal in the last resort to take seriously Russia's contribution to European culture was grounded in his notion that Russia had never produced an indigenous tradition of stone architecture.
On the other hand, when in the ruined court of Eblis the bees find ‘wild grass for their pleasure’, that is good too.
For human building (art) and the processes of germination (nature) are not in this vision opposed, as alternatives we must choose between.
The one mirrors the other, and is nourished by the other.
To build is as  natural as to procreate.
Accordingly tovarisch condemns himself not only because ‘nothing I build’, but also because ‘I reap/Nothing’; the failure in the one capacity implies a failure in the other.
The identity of the two activities is asserted, with a succinctness that only the build-up has made possible, in ‘flowered acanthus’(acanthus , a classical motif of architectural sculpture, is also the stylized representation of specific foliage), and also in ‘Can you tell the down from the up?’(for there is no way of deciding whether ‘nature’ is the ‘up’and ‘art’the ‘down’, or vice-versa).
This sanguine trust in the unity and coherence of the universe is as far as possible from ‘the American Puritan temperament’, as Eliot suffered it and articulated it.
And nearly half a century later, when The Cantos would tail off (not discreditably) in ‘Drafts and Fragments’, Pound would still be purveying the same message, in terms of‘the gardens of Proserpine’, the mineral and metallic gardens that Proserpine according to the myth created in the underworld, to duplicate as ‘art’ the springing herbage that she inspired in spring and summer through her six months in the overworld.
No one in the twenties could have divined this over-arching design, nor did Pound suppose that anyone would.
How any of this was relevant to twentieth-century America was precisely the question that Williams had raised when he jeered at ‘parodies of the middle ages, Dante and Langue D'Oc’ being presented as ‘the best in United States poetry’.
And it is true that Williams was aware of creative work in American photography and painting, as Pound in his self-exile could not be.
But Pound with his invaluable naïveté really believed that the United States was ‘a land of opportunity’; that his nation's glory was all in the future, and would be achieved if only Americans would sort out those achievements of European culture (and of non-European cultures also) which were worth their emulating and trying to surpass.
Pound as Critic
Pound belongs in that sub-class of the species ‘critic’, which we call ‘poet-critic’.
So does Eliot of course, so does William Empson; not to speak of Dryden, Johnson, Coleridge, Arnold.
Yes, but unlike Eliot and Empson, Pound — by the abrupt, brusque and aphoristic way in which he delivers his critical judgements — insists that we understand them as immediately spun off from the imaginative work, thrown over his shoulder, as it were, as he hurries from one part of the workshop to another.
In this, of the great poet-critics of the past the one he most nearly resembles is Dryden, whose criticism virtually always comes before us as the preface to a volume of original imaginative writing — including translations which, in this too like Pound, Dryden considers no less ‘original’ than poems he has made up for himself.
Eliot and Empson take off their poet's hat, and wear a critic's hat — that at least is the decorous illusion which, by their style and procedures, they try to maintain; Pound and Dryden on the contrary wear the poet's hat all the time, even when they criticize.
To some this seems presumptuous.
Perhaps some of Dryden's early readers objected to this presumption in him; there is no doubt that many of Pound's readers have felt affronted, and feel affronted still, by the authority he claims, the impatiently magisterial tone of much of his criticism.
For the abrupt, hasty manner of Pound's criticism seems to some readers to carry the implication (to which Pound in fact did not subscribe) that no critic is worth listening to unless he has laboured at the maker's workbench; that all worthwhile criticism of stories comes from story-tellers, that only poets are worth listening to about poems.
In the 1930s critics so variously and widely influential as Allen Tate, Yvor Winters and F. R. Leavis each in his own way considered Pound's criticism, or some of it, and then instructed their readers that that criticism could safely be ignored.
An instance, and a momentous one, is Tate's review in Poetry for November 1932, of Pound's How To Read :
The real criticism of Mr Pound is not to be directed against his theory as such, but rather at the hasty headlong fashion  in which he presents it, at the logical confusion of his intellect when it is not performing the task which is specifically his own, that task being poetry.
The justification of Mr Pound's thesis in How To Read is not his arguments, but his poetry.
Leavis, who countered How To Read with a booklet,How to Teach Reading , and Winters, who declared in 1937, ‘Mr Pound resembles a village loafer who sees much and understands little’, told the same story as Tate: Pound was a naïf , an imagination and sensory apparatus that consistently performed better than it knew, in ways that the maker's own discursive intelligence failed to comprehend or measure up to; in Winters's memorable and mordant judgement of 1943, ‘a sensibility without a mind, or with as little mind as is well possible’.
Take Pound the poet (though in strictly limited dosages, if you listened to Leavis or Winters), and ignore Pound the critic — the message was loud and clear, and it was attended to.
The damage this did to our criticism was as nothing compared with the harm it did to our poetry.
Tate, so devoted to Eliot's precedent, appears to have dismissed as amiably perfunctory the respect that Eliot, not quite consistently but repeatedly, accorded to Pound's prose-writings and Pound's literary opinions; and — so it might be argued, though this is not the place for it — Tate's own verse, and the verse of those he influenced, were the worse for having taken note of Eliot's precedent without attending equally to Pound's.
(For the two sensibilities were radically different.)
As late as the 1960s the translations and imitations of Robert Lowell, who had sat at Tate's feet, were widely supposed to have been validated by Pound's precedent in this kind of writing, whereas in truth Lowell's Imitations allowed themselves liberties such as Pound would never have condoned.
Moreover, the advice that in 1932 Tate implicitly offered —‘Read Pound's poetry, and ignore his criticism’— was disingenuous.
For it turned out that Pound's poetry —The Cantos certainly but much of the earlier work also — could be understood and enjoyed only by those who had attended to Pound s criticism enough to grasp what it was that Pound was trying to do, or conceived himself to be doing, in his poetry.
And it was 1952 before that road was taken — by Hugh Kenner; it was only then that responsible criticism of Pound became possible — everything before that belongs, as it were, in pre-history.
Because Pound the critic seems to be always in his shirt-sleeves sparing a few distraught hours or minutes from the more serious business of writing poems or translating them, his criticism is dispersed, though there is much more of it than we are likely to remember.
Much of it indeed — art criticism and music criticism as well as criticism of literature — still languishes in the files of defunct magazines, from which no one seems anxious to rescue it.
For the rest, his exceptionally loyal publisher, James Laughlin of New Direc -tions , exerts himself to keep in print as much as possible.
But there is no one book, not even any two or three books, that can be pointed to as constituting the corpus or the canon of Pound's criticism.
The chronologically first and formally most decorous of his critical books,The Spirit of Romance (originally 1910), can very profitably be used — I speak from experience — as a manual for able undergraduates; especially if taken along with Confucius to Cummings , the anthology that many decades later Pound compiled along with Marcella Spann.
The Spirit of Romance is undertaken on the principle that Pound never ceased to hammer home, notably in How To Read and The ABC of Reading : the principle that no one can understand the history of poetry in English unless he or she takes note of poetry in, or responsibly translated out of, other languages than English.
Perhaps no one would deny this; but as each generation of students arrives more defiantly or hopelessly monoglot, as a whole new discipline (called ‘Comparative Literature’) has come into being to cater for those exceptional persons who can read more languages than one, the need for a classroom manual to redress this state of affairs becomes ever more urgent.
And yet, to the best of my knowledge,The Spirit of Romance and Confucius to Cummings have no competitors.
It is entirely typical of Pound that he should want his criticism to be immediately useful — to, as he says, ‘the neophyte’.
And not just students but their teachers would do well to acknowledge themselves neophytes.
It is true that Pound does not readily conceive of a reader who is not also an aspiring writer — something that led Leavis astray when he tried to retort to How To Read ; but there is no harm, and much profit, in letting the student of the history of poetry suppose that he or she is in due course going to write poems.
A very different book, much more idiosyncratic in its structure and its procedures, is the one of 1938 called in the American printing Culture , and iii the London edition Guide to Kulchur .
This is not a work of criticism though it contains much criticism along the way, and of the first order — for instance, Pound's respectful demurrer from the high valuation that Eliot had put on Johnson's Vanity of Human Wishes.
Guide to Kulchur gives us Pound at his most personal, at his most deliberately vulnerable; it is here that we find him wondering aloud, for instance, if the body of his work to that date could be mentioned in the same breath with Thomas Hardy's.
Three years before this, Yale University Press had brought out in a very handsome volume called Make It New seven essays representing Pound's criticism at its most scholarly, on such recondite  topics as Cavalcanti, and Elizabethan Classicists, and early translations of Homer.
Pound's point, of course, in these essays reprinted from magazines and from earlier collections like Pavannes &Divisions (1918) or Instigations (1920), is that these matters that we think of as recondite should not be so regarded.
Perhaps no one has been persuaded of this except those — a growing number, after all — who find that knowledge in these areas is indispensable for the understanding of The Cantos and of Pound's later translations, for instance from Sophocles.
But the thrust of these essays is not so special, nor so self-serving; those who nowadays gird at ‘the canon’, as an array of allegedly classic masterpieces in literature, their classic status imposed as an instrument of cultural oppression, need to take account of how in these essays Pound challenged the canon, requiring that it be revised.
Arthur Golding's translation of Ovid's Metamorphoses may not yet be ‘canonical’; but it is a lot nearer to being so because Pound campaigned for it.
The canon may or may not be oppressive: it is not inert, as Pound's revisions of it prove.
Fortunately, most of the essays in Make It New were brought back into print in 1954, when Eliot edited Literary Essays of Ezra Pound .
Of the many loyal services that Eliot did for his old comrade-inarms, this may be the most notable.
Given the dispersed profusion of Pound's criticism, neither the choice of what to reprint, nor the arrangement of it when chosen, can have been easy.
And Eliot lets us know that he had to argue with Pound, who wanted in some items that Eliot excluded, and wanted out some items on which Eliot insisted.
In the event, Eliot's selection and his arrangement are admirable; and undoubtedly a sure sense of what is great and irreplaceable about Pound as critic can be gained from this one volume.
ln his Introduction Eliot declares roundly: ‘Pound's critical writings, scattered and occasional as they have been, form the least dispensible body of critical writing in our time’.
The italics are Eliot's.
Those who have read him know how seldom he declares himself thus roundly and emphatically.
And in 1954 Eliot's influence and authority were unparalleled.
Yet this criticism which he declared indispensable has by and large been dispensed with, since 1954 as earlier.
It is not easy to understand why.
But it is charitable to assume that it has something to do with the kind of critic that Pound is.
And about this Eliot is again uncharacteristically emphatic, as well as eloquent.
Pound, Eliot says,
would cajole, and almost coerce, other men into writing well: so that he often presents the appearance of a man trying to convey to a very deaf person the fact that the house is on fire.
Every change he has advocated has always struck him as being  of instant urgency.
This is not only the temperament of the teacher: it represents also, with Pound, a passionate desire, not merely to write well himself, but to live in a period in which he could be surrounded by equally intelligent and creative minds.
Hence his impatience.
For him, to discover a new writer of genius is as satisfying an experience, as it is for a lesser man to believe that he has written a great work of genius himself.
He has cared deeply that his contemporaries and juniors should write well; he has cared less for his personal achievement than for the life of letters and art.
One of the lessons to be learnt from his critical prose and from his correspondence is the lesson to care unselfishly for the art one serves.
This is a noble tribute.
And yet it ends by striking a note that is not altogether happy, nor altogether adequate to what Eliot had said earlier.
‘To care unselfishly for the art one serves…’— that is right, of course, and no more than just.
But in Eliot's earlier sentences we have been told of Pound's serving not ‘art’, but artists; of his being concerned that they should each realize his or her full potential, so that the level of accomplishment (in ‘letters’ as well as‘art’) should be raised all round.
In that way, so Eliot has suggested, Pound made himself responsible for a whole ‘period’, the period of his lifetime, anxiously impatient that it too lift itself to a higher level.
If this is so, then it seems that for ‘the art one serves’ one might as well read: the culture one serves, the historical period one serves, even the society one serves (perhaps an international society).
In short, Eliot has delineated a critic who recognizes public or civic responsibilities; and unless we are very careful, to say of this critic that he ‘serves his art’ may seem a rather sudden cramping and diminution of the claims made for him.
The same thing happens when, later in the essay, Eliot defines the limitation of Pound's kind of criticism (for ‘any kind of criticism has its limitations’): ‘The limitation of Pound's kind is in its concentration upon the craft of letters, and of poetry especially’.
To move from ‘art’ to ‘craft’is rather plainly a further contraction, or diminution: and it will be radically misunderstood unless we remember that for Pound the level of craftsmanship (not just in letters, but in supposedly humbler trades also) is a register, a thermometer-reading, of the good or ill health of a period or of a society.
(His most categorical assertions of this are in Guide to Kul- chur .)
It is just here, I suspect, that we — many of us — are ‘turned off’.
In the first place, this is Pound at his most old-fashioned.
John Ruskin, it might be said, was the last considerable figure before Pound to hold in all seriousness, as Pound did, that the level of craftsmanship  and artistry in a society was the one infallible measure of that society's moral and civic health.
And many of us, I dare say, have tacitly (perhaps wistfully) consigned Ruskin's views to the ash-can of history, along with other Utopian systems put together in the nineteenth century which the desolate history of our own century has made no longer tenable.
Moreover, when we consider the courses that Pound was led into by his conviction of the civic responsibility of the man of letters — his money pamphlets of the 1930s, his desperate visit home in 1938 to keep the USA out of war with Italy, particularly his wartime broadcasts over Rome radio — we have some right to conclude either that the artist has no civic responsibility at all, or else that that responsibility can safely be discharged only in his art and nowhere else.
Understandable as it is, this reaction is plainly not altogether reasonable.
For Pound may have been wrong in selecting Fascist Italy as the modern society than came nearest to satisfying his Ruskinian demands, and yet right in thinking that societies should be judged according as they met, or failed to meet, that standard.
That he went grossly wrong in applying the standard does not mean that the standard as such was inapplicable.
However, most of us either no longer want to believe in the Ruskinian and Poundian relation between craftsmanlike performance and civic health, or else we tell ourselves (perhaps with Pound's fate before us as a cautionary tale) that we can no longer afford to believe it.
We are only just beginning to recognize that if we take this attitude, we are denying to arts and letters, and to the criticism of them, any bearing at all on public life — including, for instance, public education.
At any rate, though we would most of us like to maintain that Pound's Fascism is a quite distinct issue from Pound's poetry and his criticism, it is plain that we cannot do this.
His anti-Semitism may be a separate issue (though many of course will deny even that); but his Fascism cannot be, since it represents a disastrously false judgement made in the course of following through a conviction not self-evidently false — about there being a connection between the health of letters and the health of the commonweal.
It so happens that this troublesome question, or complex of questions, is not raised by the piece in Eliot's selection that I shall take to represent Pound's criticism at its irreplaceable best.
This is the brief article (less than five printed pages) which originally appeared in Poetry for February 1918, under the title, ‘The Hard and Soft in French Poetry’.
The title alone is enough to show that this piece, if it avoids giving offence in the ways just glanced at, will offend none the less.
For hardness and softness in relation to poetry — where have these qualities been defined?
Does Pound define them?
No, he does not, except circuitously and by implication.
However, he begins, after a fashion that is less rare with him than is commonly supposed, by apologizing for the impressionism that supplies him with the terms he needs:
I apologize for using the semimetaphorical terms ‘hard’ and ‘soft’in this essay, but after puzzling over the matter for some time I can see no other way of setting about it.
By ‘hardness’ I mean a quality which is in poetry nearly always a virtue — I can think of no case where it is not.
By ‘softness’ I mean an opposite quality which is not always a fault.
Annoyed as we may be at having the cardinal terms left thus undefined (for Pound proceeds no further towards defining them), we are compelled to see that this criticism is not of the chalk-or-cheese, sheep-and-goats variety; the discrimination proposed is more subtle — between a quality in poetry that is ‘nearly always’ a virtue (’I can think of no case where it is not'), and an opposite quality that is ‘not always’a fault.
This is a critic who uses sliding scales, not one fixed Procrustean rule.
The bluffly categorical manner is misleading; Pound is always ready to concede that ‘circumstances alter cases,.
One reason why Pound's scales must ‘slide’ is that nowhere in his criticism does Pound forget chronology — literary history and literary criticism are for him two aspects of one unified act of attention.
But there is more to it than that.
For Pound all dates are important but none more so than the date on the calendar above the critic's desk.
This is what Eliot means by insisting: ‘It is necessary to consider Pound's literary pronouncements in the light of the circumstances in which they were written…’
This sounds defensive, even apologetic.
But Eliot doesn't mean it so, as we see from the notorious case that he cites in illustration:
A great writer can have, at a particular time, a pernicious or merely deadening influence; and this influence can be most effectively attacked by pointing out those faults which ought not to be copied, and those virtues any emulation of which is anachronistic.
Pound's disparagement of Milton, for instance, was, I am convinced, most salutary twenty and thirty years ago; I still agree with him against the academic admirers of Milton; though to me it seems that the situation has changed.
In Eliot's view, the circumstances have changed so greatly over thirty years since 1924 that what was rightly said of Milton in that year cannot rightly be said of him in 1954.
This is relativity with a vengeance, and many of us have felt than in a case like this the scales that  Eliot measures by are not so much sliding as slithering.
In this instance Pound, we notice, stood firm.
But he was nearly as ready as Eliot to insist that all critical judgements and pronouncements are relative — relative, above all, to the date at which they are made.
Already in 1928 he was protesting that his own pronouncements at the time of the Imagist manifesto were tailored to the specific needs of 1914, and should not be taken as binding fourteen years later.
To minds of absolutist temper like Leavis and Winters, this was contemptible; and undoubtedly it is next to impossible to establish criticism as an academic discipline on grounds so sandy and shifting.
But perhaps the moral we should draw is that criticism is not, and cannot be, such a discipline (though literary history is, or may be).
A great mystery is why Eliot, who was more of a relativist than Pound, should have been accepted by the academic establishment whereas Pound was not.
Instead of defining ‘hardness’ in poetry, Pound rapidly cites three poets where he finds the quality in question: Gautier, Hérédia, Albert Samain.
He distinguishes among them, cursorily, as he cites them in order.
Turning to English (where, he assures us, the quality is much harder to come by), he reviews the claims of a Ben Jonson lyric, of George Herbert, Christina Rossetti and LionelJohnson.
He by no means dismisses the claims of these poets, but gently and respectfully sets them aside —‘I do not feel that they have much part in this essay.
I do not feel that their quality is really the quality I am seeking here to define’.
Why, then, are they named?
For a very good reason.
Pound says, in effect: ‘If your French isn't good enough to go where the quality is both defined (metaphorically) and exemplified, i.e. in Gautier's ‘L'art’ specifically and in his Emaux et Camées as a whole, or in the work of followers like Hérédia and Samain, then remind yourself, or re-experience, what it is like to read George Herbert and Christina Rossetti and Lionel Johnson.
Ask yourself what these three poets in your experience of them have in common, and in answering that you will get near to the quality I am trying to isolate.’
Nothing, after all, could be more scrupulous; this is how a truly empirical criticism proceeds and must proceed.
An array of instances, almost of specimens, is set before us; and we are invited to make our own observations, inferring from them as much as they will bear.
This was, Pound believed (and with good reason), the method of a great biologist, Louis Agassiz; and when pressed Pound was ready to call the procedure not just ‘empirical’ but ‘scientific’.
What is likely to strike us, however, is the compliment that Pound pays us; his courteous confidence in our disinterestedness, our patience and eagerness, and our capacity to experience what is on the page before us, whether in French or English, without  needing to have him constantly at our elbows, nudging us and crying, ‘Can't you see ?’
No aspect of Pound is more widely misunderstood.
It is rightly said of him that he was always a pedagogue, but he is a pedagogue in the courtly nineteenth-century mode of Professor Agassiz, who sets up the controlled experiment and invites us to participate in it, not in the hectoring and charismatic mode of the star of the lecture-hall.
Meanwhile Pound has proposed an English poet who is more nearly an analogue to Gautier than any so far mentioned, a nearer analogue and yet still not wholly trustworthy because he is ‘from poem to poem, extremely uneven’.
This is Walter Savage Landor; and this short article explains why Landor figures repeatedly, and always with respect, not just in The Cantos and in Pound's later criticism, but in Yeats's poetry and prose also.
Probably not in this essay as such, but in that area of Pound's conversation of which this essay is a distillation, we find the reason — so I believe — why Yeats said admiringly of Landor in 1917: ‘He had in his Imaginary Conver -sations reminded us, as it were, that the Venus de Milo is a stone.’
And I submit that out of this same background — conversations with Pound — comes that surprising coupling of names with which Yeats ends ‘To a Young Beauty’(1918):
There is not a fool can call me friend,
And I may dine at journey's end
With Landor and with Donne.
What we are groping for, what Pound (we now see) is inciting us to grope for, what Yeats is laying claim to, is that effect in writing which an earlier criticism knew as ‘lapidary’: that is to say, the effect or the illusion of words as not written or printed on a page, but as incised on a stone block.
The aspiration after this effect is very ancient, as we know from the Greek derivation common to both ‘epigram’ and ‘epitaph’.
Certainly the aspiration is not limited in modern times to those who have read Emaux et Camées , the French book that Pound respectfully pillaged for Hugh Selwyn Mauberley ; it is to be found in all modern poetries known to me, Russian and Polish as well as French, and (more faintly) in British and American.
In short, what this has to do with modern poetry is very clear; what it has to do with modern criticism is not clear at all , since that criticism has, as we have seen, no vocabulary for dealing with it, and moves further and further from finding such a vocabulary, the more it takes its lead from linguisticians like Saussure and Jakobson.
After he has made his first claim for Landor, Pound writes two paragraphs of the sort that have provoked near-apoplexy, because they have not been taken in the spirit that Pound intended:
We have in English a certain gamut of styles: we have the good Chaucerian; almost the only style in English where ‘softness’ is tolerable; we have the good Elizabethan;…and the bad, or muzzy, Elizabethan; and the Miltonic, which is a bombastic and rhetorical Elizabethan coming from an attempt to write English with Latin syntax.
Its other mark is that the rich words have gone:i .
e .,
words like preluciand , which have a folk tradition and are, in feeling, germane to all Europe:Leuchand, luisant ,lucente : these words are absent in Miltonism, and purely pedantic words, like irriguous , have succeeded them.
We have Pope, who is really the Elizabethan satiric style, more or less born out of Horace, and a little improved or at least regularized.
And we have Landor — that is, Landor at his best.
And after that we have ‘isms’ and ‘eses’: the pseudoElizabethanism —i.e. , bad Keats; the romantics, Swinburnese, Browningese, neo-celticism.
And how the devil a poet writing English manages to make or find a language for poems is a mystery.
No, Professor X, Pound does not say that Landor, or Landor at his best, is better than Keats; and no, sir, he does not say that Chaucer is better than Milton.
He is concerned with ‘the Miltonic’, with ‘Miltonism’, not with Keats but with ‘bad Keats’, not with Browning but with ‘Browningese’.
He is not talking about any one of these great writers (his devotion to Browning was well advertised) but about, in Eliot's words, the ‘pernicious or merely deadening influence’ that ‘a great writer can have, at a particular time’.
A great writer's idiom is, by himself when he nods and more certainly by his epigones who emulate and copy him, rigidified and adulterated.
And the more idiosyncratic his genius (this is the case of Milton, surely), the more likely it is that what will be copied is his mannerisms.
If it be objected that no beginning writer shops around in this way among the idioms handed down to him from the past, the evidence is that certain beginning writers do shop around in just this way; Ezra Pound was one of them, and he is by no means so exceptional as is supposed.
For such a beginning writer in such a situation, it may well turn out that a minor master like Landor is more fruitfully instructive than a major master like Milton or Keats: and if it does turn out so, one has a certain debt of honour that must be paid to the past master by whom one was liberated.
Two-thirds of the way through his essay, Pound apologizes again: ‘If this seem an over-long prologue…’
And we are astonished.
It had not occurred to us that this ranging survey of the idioms of English and incidentally French verse had been no more than a  ‘prologue’— and to what, for heaven's sake?
But Pound has not forgotten what his assignment is.
He believes, or he chooses to believe, that in Chicago or somewhere else there were readers of Poetry magazine in 1918 who zealously and in all seriousness wanted to know what French poets of that time they might profitably read, and what in the broadest terms they should look for in each of them.
And so the last page or so is given over to French names: Corbière and Jammes and De Regnier; Tailhade and Romains; Vildrac, Spire and Arcos — poets who at the present day have few readers even among the French.
Pound has been conned by French reputationmaking?
Not at all; good writing is so infernally difficult that even the most modest achievement (and Pound's claims for some of these poets are modest indeed) should not go unacknowledged.
Pound was to acknowledge some of them, all over again, years later in the Cantos .
And meanwhile, what courtesy to the readers of Poetry!
How confident he is, or affects to be, about their disinterestedness, their alertness, the range of their sympathies, the use that they will make of the gentlest hint or nudge!
That deference towards the well-disposed reader is hard to find in later criticism — for good reason, no doubt.
Well, but — so some readers may be saying or thinking — what about the content of these so numerous poems?
What are they saying, these poets, French and English?
Pound seems to have no interest in that.
Is it not the case that George Herbert and Christina Rossetti and even Lionel Johnson are devoutly Christian poets, whereas Pound is militantly non-Christian?
And if Pound so blithely overlooks that difference, doesn't that mean that we have in him a critic who attends to form, to style, at the expense of what that form and that style are used so as to convey?
Don't we have in him a formalist, in fact an aesthete?
This is the brickbat that has been thrown at Pound from the first, and is thrown at him still, because of his unswerving attention to what makes poetry poetry, and not some other sort of discourse versified.
It was the accusation, or the selfaccusation, that Pound wrestled with in Hugh Selwyn Mauberley , and settled not wholly to his own or any one else's satisfaction.
In ‘The Hard and Soft in French Poetry’ Pound confronts the issue very early, and deals with it to my mind conclusively.
This is when he discriminates Hérédia from Gautier:
Heredia is ‘hard’, but there or thereabouts he ends.
It is perhaps that Gautier is intent on being ‘hard’; is intent on conveying a certain verity of feeling, and he ends by being truly poetic.
Heredia wants to be poetic and hard; the hardness appears to him as a virtue in the poetic.
And one tends to conclude that  all attempts to be poetic in some manner or other defeat their own end; whereas an intentness on the quality of the emotion to be conveyed makes for poetry.
To go for the lapidary effect as such is sterile; one tries for the lapidary because, if achieved, it is a guarantee of the verity of one's feeling — Christian or non-Christian, as the case may be.
Aestheticism,l'art pour l'art , is identified, and impaled, in Hérédia (though with a beguiling hesitancy —‘perhaps’, ‘one tends to conclude’); to aim for the poetic ends up in something other than poetry, or else in inferior poetry.
In conclusion, and to end near to our starting-point, we should look at Pound's second apology.
In context, the effect of it is hardly apologetic at all:
If this seem an over-long prologue, think how little discussion there is of these things.
Only a few professors and their favourite students seem to have read enough to be able to consider a matter of style with any data at their disposal — these and a few poets of the better sort…
‘With any data at their disposal’— the terminology puts us back into Louis Agassiz' laboratory.
And is it not a true bill, now as in 1918?
Who would assert with confidence that there now are more professors with ‘data at their disposal’ than there were in 1918?
And of such professors, how many would rest content with the conclusion that Pound reached in 1918: ‘A critic must spend some of his time asking questions — which perhaps no one can answer.
It is much more his business to stir up curiosity than to insist on acceptances., Pound as critic cuts the critic down to size; which is, one may think, a pressing need, now, in 1984.
Adapted from The Sewanee Review , 92: 3 (1984).
Pound and the Perfect Lady
Pound 's Artists: Ezra Pound and the Visual Arts in London, Paris and Italy , introduced by Richard Humphreys.
London: Tate Gallery Publications, 1985.
Ezra Pound and Dorothy Shakespear: Their Letters 1909–1914 , edited by Omar Pound and A. Walton Litz.
Faber, 1985.
Thanks to Clive Wilmer among others, an exhibition of paintings, sculptures, photographs and printed material bearing on Pound's interests in ‘the visual arts’ was mounted for the Cambridge Poetry Festival on 14 June, and could be seen in Cambridge's not sufficiently renowned Kettle's Yard Gallery until 4 August; it will now be at the Tate from 11 September to 10 November.
Humphrey Carpenter's report on the exhibition for the TLS of 28 June will hardly choke the turnstiles.
The show has, he said, ‘something of the air of a school reunion about it’, and with a few exceptions ‘it is the Pound business much as usual’.
No one, he thinks, who is unfamiliar with ‘Pound's P.T. Barnumising for the visual arts’ will know what to make of it.
This tone is intolerable, and augurs very ill for Carpenter's biography of Pound, said to be in the works.
No one who reads the three solid essays in what is described as the catalogue of the exhibition (though it isn't quite that) can think that ‘Barnumising’ in any way describes Pound's ardent response to painting and sculpture, photography and architecture, first in London 1908–1920, then in Paris 1920–1925, and thereafter in Italy.
Carpenter, predictably, finds the three essayists — Richard Humphreys, John Alexander and Peter Robinson —‘taking a rather solemn approach to the whole thing’; whereas, he assures us, Pound's exertions on behalf of these arts partook ‘more than a little of the amiable joke’.
Before it is through, Pound's centenary year will bring on indigestion in even the most devoted Poundians.
But whether his artistic life was, as a few think, exemplary, or, as rather more think, a fearsomely cautionary fable, it is at all events a matter of some solemnity, and the amused weariness of we-have-heard-it-all-before will not serve in 1985 as it did in 1920 or 1940 or even, scandalously, as late as fifteen  years ago.
We have not heard it all before, unless we have read, as few of us have, Harriet Zinnes's compendium Ezra Pound and the Visual Arts , which all these essayists draw on very heavily.
Amiable joking was never what Pound intended, and only a total insensitivity to his tone of voice could lead one to think otherwise.
Solemn?
‘Sedate’ is a better word for these essays.
And two of them might be called even pedestrian.
No harm in that: pedestrian documentation is what there is a call for — Pound himself, and his admirers emulating him, have been so sprightly for so long that they have persuaded people they, and he, cannot be in earnest.
All the same, John Alexander's piece on the Paris period would have made livelier and easier reading if he had not, like Richard Humphreys on the London years, limited himself so self-effacingly to the documentation, necessary though that is.
The problem, for instance, of Pound's admiration for Brancusi, and of how that fits or does not fit with his other proclivities and principles, cannot for much longer be left where Alexander leaves it.
On the other hand, his account of Pound's attitude to Fernand Léger is new to me, and fascinating.
Peter Robinson's essay on Pound and Italian art is quite another matter: altogether more ambitious and probing.
Out of D.S. Chambers and Michael Baxandall and some Italian scholars Robinson measures up Pound's ideas about the right relation between artist and patron against what we know of how patronage in fact worked in the ducal fiefs of Renaissance Italy; and when he deals with the closeness of Pound's views on this and related matters to Ruskin's ideas (a theme common to all these essayists), Robinson dares to broach the too long forbidden topic of the poet's antagonism — inertly received, so some would say, rather than considered — to Christian faith and Christian ethics.
Ruskin's espousal of a craftsmanly aesthetics, Robinson points out, is grounded in Christian convictions about the humility proper to a fallen creature: lacking such grounds, Pound's holding to the craftsmanly not only seems arbitrary and unargued, it is as often presumptuous as humble.
It's Peter Robinson, too, who won't stay content with ritually shocked head-shaking at Pound's Fascism.
When Pound in an early Canto includes among a hero's conversational topics
And men of unusual genius, Both of ancient times and our own,
Robinson detects ‘a severe confusion of categories and contexts’, and he asks: ‘Might we not distinguish in kind between literary promotion, such as Pound's for Joyce, in war or peace, and advocacy such as Pound's for Mussolini in war rather than peace?’
Well, so we  might, but we might also think that ‘literary promotion’ is an inadequate description of Pound's sustained and inventive activities on behalf of his notably non-reciprocating Irish colleague.
In any case, Pound has the centuries on his side when he equates a genius in statecraft — Jefferson if not Mussolini — with a genius in an art or in speculative thought.
In fact, the equation is more challenging the other way round: Pound thinks Joyce a Phenomenon deserving equal attention with Mussolini — a temperate judgement that the years may be thought to have vindicated.
Art is at least as important as Politics, whether in Peace or war, and it is Pound's intransigent conviction of this that brings out the philistine in others beside Peter Robinson.
The statesman as artist — God knows it is a dubious and dangerous idea, but to get rid of it Probably involves demoting statesmen and aspiring statesmen from the privileged position that they still enjoy in public estimation.
Omar Pound, with Walton Litz of Princeton, has edited the letters that his Parents exchanged through their protracted courtship, and their Publishers have made of this a very pretty book.
This is appropriate, for the story that the letters not so much tell as adumbrate comes through with a wistful fragrance that is very affecting if one reads slowly.
Omar Pound must know the full story, but rightly I think, though surely austerely, he has left it for us to piece together.
And some of the nuances are lost on us, or left hanging as possibilities.
Was Frederic Manning, for instance, the Australian who would later write Her Privates We , in love with Dorothy, and wounded when she preferred Pound?
We are not told.
This is not to say that the letters can be left to speak for themselves.
On the contrary, the two young persons communicate in a jokily affectionate private language, often about people in a not undistinguished but certainly restricted circle of acquaintances and Shakespear connections, who lived according to social codes now utterly unremembered.
Accordingly, even those who have learned some of the relevant names from Pound's biographers would be quite at sea if the editors had not marshalled, deftly and compactly and sometimes wittily, some very out-of-the-way information.
Even so, the world that we have to enter — the world of the solidly professional bourgeoisie and minor gentry of pre-1914 England — is so remote from us, so exotic, that we can't always keep our bearings.
One is astonished, for instance, at how the daughter of Olivia Shakespear, no ordinary mother, was restricted, even in the arty society that she and Olivia frequented, by the still rigid conventions that wheeled her, uncomplaining but always chaperoned and often bored to tears, through a round of pointless visitings.
Dorothy Shakespear, one sometimes feels, was not much less imprisoned than Elizabeth  Barrett had been, and in not much less need of a poet-errant to liberate her.
Neither the captive nor her would-be liberator wasted much time complaining: these were the rules of the game, and the two of them could only be patient.
Patience is not what we associate with Pound, and from time to time he seems to have kicked over the traces (at least once to be ticked off for it by Dorothy): yet we see all over again that the young Pound was well content with Edwardian England, was hopeful of it and ready to abide by its rules in everything that mattered.
Of course, where Dorothy was concerned, that was his only strategy if he wanted to secure her in the end.
And in fact that is one of the affecting things: the story that we read is undoubtedly a love-story.
One had doubted this.
Our information about the later phases of the Pound marriage is certainly imperfect.
(And why should it not be?
So Omar Pound might legitimately ask.)
But such information as we have undoubtedly reflects more credit on Dorothy than on Ezra.
One was forced to envisage the possibility that Ezra courted Dorothy, not cynically indeed, but abstractedly, impulsively, without due consideration.
This correspondence, though Dorothy figures in it more prominently than Ezra, I believe puts paid to such suspicions.
By 1913 Pound is confiding in his fiancée as, we must believe, he did to no one else.
In their private code Yeats, who was to marry Dorothy's cousin and best friend Georgie Hyde-Lees, figures as ‘the Eagle’.
And in 1913 we have Pound writing of Yeats, who had just published ‘The Grey Rock’, that the latter is ‘very fine, but his syntax is getting obscurer than Browning's’, then confessing: ‘I wonder which is worse, to die in the aromatic subtlety of a disappearing cadence (à la ME) or to stodge one's nobility into an incomprehensible narrative,à la The Eagle’.
(The allusion to Pope's ‘Essay on Man’ is one of the few that the editors pass over.)
This is very astute criticism of Yeats: but more to the point is that Pound here confesses self-doubts such as he would have concealed from anyone he did not trust absolutely.
As we read the correspondence we seem to see Dorothy growing out of the gushing flibbertigibbet that she was in 1909 into a person altogether more substantial.
But this is almost certainly an illusion: as she becomes surer of her hold on the affections of her poet, so she becomes surer of herself, can dispense with affectations, and dares to speak with a certain authority about compositions that her lover sends to her — animadversions that the poet in turn receives quite humbly.
Although students of Pound will fasten with delighted alacrity on such passages as the one just quoted about Yeats, and on one or two similar passages (for instance, one of January 1914, where he speaks with hostility about symbols and symbolism), still this book  doesn't really belong with other Poundiana.
Its place is at least equally with The Diary of an Edwardian Lady , or even, since through long months the lovers are at opposite ends of Italy, with E.M.
Forster's Room with a View .
Its fragrance is real, and penetrating: but it does not release itself at the first casual opening of the pages.
And yet the fact must be faced: however much patient sympathy we bring to our reading, we close the book feeling frustrated.
For Dorothy is still not in focus, and one begins to think that she never will be, even if the correspondence of the Pounds' later years is some day published.
Dorothy, one suspects, was always too much ‘the perfect lady’, and schooled too thoroughly in the pre-1914 code of proud reticence (a code which incidentally her husband also adhered to), for her to escape the role of ‘poor Dorothy’ that some recent writers have cast her in.
Certainly she could not compete on anything like equal terms with Hilda Doolittle, the poet H.D. who, having mythologised her relations with Pound in a roman à clef many years ago, did it all over again just before her death in End to Torment , a supposed ‘memoir’ which people seem disposed to take literally, though in its scattiness it may well be as fictionalised as the novel had been.
It does not help, I'm afraid, now when American cultural chauvinism wants to reclaim Pound, that Dorothy was an Englishwoman whereas Hilda, the childhood sweetheart from Bethlehem, Pa., was echt -American.
H.D., nicknamed ‘the Hama-dryad’, is the subject of much high-spirited comedy in the letters that Ezra and Dorothy exchanged, and this ought to provoke second thoughts in those who want to take Hilda's account at face-value: H.D. may have honestly persuaded herself that she was the great (though virginal) love of Pound's life, but it's unlikely that Pound thought so, nor need we.
Dorothy however remains, not nebulous exactly, but enigmatic.
The odd anecdote — for instance, James Laughlin's of 1965 about how she advanced his education in Rapallo by reading to him the stories of Henry James — brings her momentarily into focus, but then she disappears again behind a smokescreen of gracious good breeding.
The loss is grievous.
For when the Pisan detention-camp in 1946 compelled the poet to breach, though guardedly, the barrier of his reticence, he certainly wrote about the women he had loved; and if Dorothy is of that company (as she must be, surely), we need to know just where she figures, and on what terms.
It is the reader of moving and extraordinary but cryptic poetry who needs to know this, not the perhaps nosey biographer.
London Review of Books , 19 September 1985.
