TELEVISION /Broken English: Mark Lawson on Home Run, and BBC2's Red Dynasty
By MARK LAWSON
THERE were several scary moments in Home Run (BBC 1), a thriller by Andy Armitage, but few as terrifying as the early revelation that the central character was called Billy English.
It was a christening that seemed to hunger for significance.
Certain newspapers and television programmes have long enjoyed surname humour — the mid-wife called Miss Stork, the taxi-driver Mr Hanger — but few such features have unearthed a Mr England, Miss English or Mrs Albion whose character is, in some obscure way, an embodiment of the national one.
This is one significant difference between fiction and existence.
In real life, men called England end up as football manager of Wales.
In a story, such a guy is the Isles.
Billy English stood for an English clan wider than his immediate family.
Born to salty, honest East End folk — this was hinted at, the script sensibly avoiding the risk of fleshing them out — he had risen in the City to a financial position which permitted him to park his BMW beside the flash docklands flat, close to his rough but pure roots, in which he kept his nice French bird.
Billy's only problem was that someone or something was pursuing him.
The phantom was initially nameless but the viewer knew that, if he had shouted Class or Guilt after it, it would probably have answered.
Television was so quick to join the Yuppie Backlash that there is now a real danger of a Yuppie Backlash Drama Backlash, in which the viewer starts muttering about not being able to switch on the bloody set without seeing a broker being broken.
That said, Home Run was a strong competitor in the market, with a quirky eye.
At the end, the traitor of the English clan hurled his credit cards at his parents’ grave in what seemed to be a symbol for throwing bad money after good.
Michael Kitchen played Billy with some finely judged deliberate accent slippage.
At least, I hope it was deliberate.
It probably was, as the producer David Snodin and the director Nicholas Renton are one of the hottest teams in television drama.
Last week, they were responsible for A Wanted Man (BBC 2), a powerful trilogy of plays by Malcom McKay about the police interrogation, trial and attempted rehabiliation of a murderer.
A few months ago, Snodin also produced Tony Marchant's acute and bruising Take Me Home, the best drama serial of the year, in which another Yuppie (he doesn't like them, does he?), this time in a new town, lost his wife and lifestyle to a mini-cab driver.
If you achieved such a quantity of quality work in the theatre, they would be tipping you to lead the RSC.
In television, it just slips quietly by, but we should hope that there will always be people to run the kind of BBC in which such drama — literate, socially sensitive and lovingly crafted — can be done.
‘Should television be the voice of the party or the voice of the people?’, asked a witness in Red Dynasty (BBC 2).
The speaker was a Chinese television news producer, acknowledging a debate within her industry.
A new kind of documentary was on offer for viewers in Beijing: populist, slightly Wilcocksy people shows.
Her remarks were recorded before events in Tianamen Square and it was clear by the end of the programme that the proper function of current affairs television was less of a live debate inside the country than it had been.
However, Peter Firstbrook's series, lucidly scripted and fronted by Edward Behr, makes no secret of having set out to make one kind of series (Wither China?) and then being armlocked by events in to another (Withered China?)
Turning its wrecked agenda in to a benefit, this film presented four brief lives, with Tianamen as merely one event.
The most startling yarn was that of Zhang Quo Zhi, who enjoyed a lifestyle which, if you did know better, you would describe as that of a successful capitalist.
Worth £20 million, he had a limousine and 11 bodyguards.
The one serious omission of Behr's script was to discuss from whom they were shielding him: is kidnapping an inevitable corollary of even relative economic freedom?
Just before Tianamen, Zhang got the Entrepreneur Of The Year Award, presented by a party chief who has since been redeployed.
Alfred Yu, a university lecturer who had openly criticised that government, has remained in Australia, where he was teaching, too nervous to return.
Despite the crushing of the students, he still hoped that ‘a phoenix will rise up from the ashes.’
This is one of those English expressions so weathered that their emotional batteries are irretrievably flat but, from the lips of someone who spoke English with the cool precision of a fluent foreigner, the phrase was terribly affecting.
He probably intended it as an exact classical allusion.
In a solid South Bank Show (LWT) on Jimi Hendrix, Eric Clapton swore while describing his feelings when the guitarist died.
Such are the times in which we live that the decision to leave his expletives unbleeped prompted tabloid news stories but, really, the programme was quite intensely moral.
Any child watching will have learned that even geniuses need to practice (Jimi riffed even while cooking breakfast) but that talent can be undone by sex and drugs.
The programme might have said more about technique — what, at plectrum level, made him tangibly different from the folk-group strummer -but was a thorough biography and survived the expressive limitations of rock anecdotage: ‘His attack to a guitar was, oh, something else…‘
DANCE /Taking a rain check: Judith Mackrell on Burrows and Smith at The Place, and The Royal Ballet's La Bayadere
By JUDITH MACKRELL
WITH at most one new work a year to his name, Jonathan Burrows is hardly a prolific choreographer.
Yet it is not just his commitments with the Royal Ballet that hold him up, it is also his unusually intense way of making a work.
Each piece feels like the product of long slow hatching, like a closely-guarded experiment.
And in each piece this is matched by a peculiarly private quality of movement and motivation.
This personal stamp is partly created by the unique range of Burrows’ influences — British folk dance from his training at the Royal Ballet School, ballet itself, and at the opposite extreme the minimal, unburnished style of Rosemary Butcher, with whom he has performed several times.
But it is also that the worlds which Burrows evokes are very intimate and very enclosed.
Hymns was an alternately brutal, comic and touching study of pubescent schoolboys while his new work, dull morning cloudy mild, stems from the diary of an old man whose memories are bound up with his obsessive recording of the weather.
Matteo Fargion's specially composed music for piano, strings and brass does much to set the tone of the piece, with its clouded dissonances and flurries of bright jazzy melody.
The choreography likewise evokes changes of weather and mood but without displaying any overt narrative development.
The two central, baggy-suited dancers, Lynne Bristow and William Trevitt, either mirror each others' movements (the old man perhaps communing with his diary) or else dance as a couple (the man reliving past relationships).
Thus some slow, desiccated waltzing and gentle leans have the quietude of an old couple on a dull mild day; sequences of deft, steppy footwork and sharp edged leaps have the high spirits of blustery sunshine, while a duet of rhythmic fidgety gestures has the feel of a lifelong argument continued during a rainy afternoon.
The other four dancers regularly interrupt or echo these sequences with images from the past — a robust trio, whose folk steps and causally thrown jumps have the coltish energy of adolescence and two couples who look like lovers courting in the 1920s.
By the end this quartet depart the stage in a halting dance of death and Trevitt is rolled up in a carpet, leaving Bristow alone without partner or diary.
This presumed death is the only unequivocal event in the whole work, however, and there are moments where its meditative air threatens to become bafflingly introspective.
Burrows seems to have lived with his material for so long that he has forgotten to throw out enough clues for the rest of us, and there are few hints as to why certain sequences are so important that they should be repeated over and over again But what constantly saves the piece from disappearing into itself is the obliquely moving nature of the central relationship and some patchy but startlingly lovely dance images.
The performances too are excellent, with all six dancers (from the Royal) sensitively adapting to the small scale of The Place (no stagy projection or glazed expressions).
Bristow and Trevitt never waver in the closeness of their mutual dialogue and move easily between forceful classical dynamics and quiet self-containment.
At 40 minutes this is an odd but oddly engrossing private journey.
Equally personal is Janet Smith's The World Outside My Window, the first piece she has made since disbanding her company and the first in a long time that she has made to please herself.
It is based on poems by a woman (apparently her sister) who became disabled by a viral disease.
But while Burrows' concerns are revealed only tangentially, Smith's are delivered with her usual immediacy.
The frustrations of the cripple are rawly evoked as Smith is bundled, like so much insensible flesh, through the hands of the other dancers.
Her hankering for the outside world is shown through a solo where she is cruelly tangled in the legs of a chair.
And her flights of memory are carried through lyric dance sequences that nicely exploit the five dancers' fluent technique.
The World Outside My Window encompasses an unusually broad range of movement for Smith and shows encouraging signs of fresh invigoration.
But for all its individual strengths it doesn't evolve a satisfying shape.
The choreography remains a moment by moment response to the poems and, awkwardly, these themselves are not especially good.
Their images rarely arrest and their rhythms sound clumsy both in sung and spoken delivery.
Naked emotion grants the work an uneasy power — but at times it feels like special pleading.
After all this, the plot of La Bayadere comes as outrageously irresponsible nonsense.
Yet during his Saturday night guest appearance Julio Bocca danced the ballet with a heroic degree of conviction.
As the warrior Solor he possessed neither the exotic glamour of Ruzimatov nor the romantic height of Cope — and a dispassionate viewer would admit that his turban gave him an unfortunately gnome-like appearance.
But he is not only a fine actor and an even finer dancer he is also uncommonly and unabashedly sexy.
In the long opening mime section Bocca's graceful arrogance was eloquently coupled to the desperate impatience to meet Nikiya (Viviana Durante), and once dancing with her the two qualities sparked into a heady ardour.
When he brushed his cheek against hers or supported her waist in multiple pirouettes the sensual heat was unmissable.
Even Durante, who has a tendency to forget her character when she is dancing, responded at times with an uncharacteristically voluptuous abandon.
For those of us less fortunate in the audience Bocca's technical prowess was devastating enough.
In the austere Shades act he perhaps overdid the stunts -but otherwise the height of his jumps coupled with the careless speed of his preparation was breathtaking.
So too was his exceptional ability to accelerate or delay his pirouettes at will — a dancer for whom gravity is only a trivial inconvenience.
THEATRE /Making more of the Moor: Paul Taylor on Trevor Nunn's Othello at the Young Vic
By PAUL TAYLOR
TREVOR NUNN'S ‘chamber’ production of Othello, now transferred to the Young Vic, is both intricately sketched-in and lengthily drawn-out.
Lasting well over four hours, it is patently in no hurry to come to conclusions or to an end.
But in return for its rich density of lovingly dwelt-on, almost novelistic detail, what you lose is any sense of a strong forward pulse or of the play's irresistible sweep towards doom.
The pace is often dilatory and this, reinforced perhaps by the nineteenth-century costumes and setting, can give the proceedings an at times bizarrely Checkhovian cast.
Arriving in Cyprus ahead of Othello, an understandably nervous Desdemona is forced to hang around on the quay and, in an effortful charade of lightheartedness, swap bawdy banter with Iago and company.
In Nunn's way of orchestrating the scene, however, the forced merriment comes across like the willed time-killing in Three Sisters, less the whiling away of a few specific minutes than the attempt to shake off a pervasive ennui.
Never less than thoroughly fascinating, the production is dominated by Ian McKellen's extraordinary Iago, a performance which feels like a shifting palimpsest of impersonations.
Partly, with his flat Northern vowels, tight blue uniform and fusspot bracings and flexings, he is the officious British bobby of the Derek Guyler school.
But in the discreet, epicene efficiency with which he clears away Casio's bowl of vomit or dusts down Othello after his fit, he is the finicky gentleman's gentleman, his body language strongly reminiscent of Dirk Bogarde in The Servant.
It is an eye-catching portrait of twisted repression, but to my mind it fails to conveys the essentially diabolic nature of Iago's negativity.
The nearest you get to this is the thrilling moment at the end of Act One when, as though he had engendered them, the thunder and lightning which usher in the next act and a complete change of country, melodramatically erupt during Iago's concluding lines.
Elsewhere, the close-up, detailed approach which works brilliantly, say, for Imogen Stubbs's affecting Desdemona (the pathos of her disoriented, jittery jauntiness intensified by beautiful touches such as the sepia photograph of her estranged father she keeps on the bedside table in Cyprus or the chocolates from Casio that she has secreted in a locked draw, not because she fears sexual misconstruction but because she would like to be thought too grown-up for frivolous sweet-guzzling by Othello) paradoxically diminishes Iago because it encourages the belief that he can be realistically ‘explained’ like a figure in a novel.
With Willard White's massive, resonantly spoken (if rhythmically uncertain) Moor, the slight mismatch of scale between the size of performance and the chamber-dimension of the production is all to the good.
Othello is larger-than-life and never more so than when determined to die, as White demonstrates in a nobly paced resumption of dignity in the difficult final scene.
But, with Iago, Nunn has opted for a congruence of scales.
He has decided that the reason Iago proffers for his villainy (especially the absurd idea that both Casio and Othello have slept with his wife) are genuine, if deranged convictions, rather than the dispassionately improvised rationalisations of a mind that cannot even account to itself for its limitless evil.
Accordingly, bitter, accusing looks flash between McKellen and Zoe Wanamaker's excellent, bleakly disillusioned Emilia.
When Othello and Desdemona lovingly embrace, Iago grabs his wife in a rough, lewdly competitive clinch.
The production's passion for substantiating things also has the effect of downgrading Iago's freewheelingly malign genius.
The inspired stroke of telling Othello that he has been witness to one of Casio's incriminatingly erotic dreams is here popped into Iago's head because Casio does, at one point, actually hug him in his sleep.
The perverted originality of Iago's ruse, now linked to a cause, thereby loses its lurid gleam.
All that said, this is a production which any serious lover of Shakespeare should try to see.
If it stimulates you to dissent, it is precisely because it is so closely pondered in its own terms and it never, throughout its four hours, loosens its grip on you.
MUSIC /Gone up in smoke: Tosca — Grand Theatre, Leeds
By JULIAN RUSHTON
OPERA NORTH's Tosca, first produced last year, is revived with a new conductor and two new principals, once again headed by the flame-haired Tosca of Mary Jane Johnson.
If its dramatic focus seems different, it is because Carlo Rizzi's tempi are rather faster than those adopted by Clive Timms; the action progresses less with inexorability than by abrupt shifts of mood.
Perhaps not every chord was quite in place, but this remains orchestrally an exciting performance; occasional poor balance between voice and stage emanates, I think, from the acoustic properties of the set.
Johnson remains nearly ideal as the jealous, mercurial prima donna.
Her powerful and eloquent singing really does not need to be supplemented by low-register Sprechstimme; one can see the point, but Puccini is near enough to raw melodrama without such mannerism.
Only the otiose ‘Vissi d'arte’ actually misfired; should she really be expected to sing it lying down?
And given the inevitable draining of tension at this point, it was remarkable indeed how she and the Scarpia, Keith Latham, revived the scene for its murderous climax.
Latham stood in without notice for the indisposed Donald Maxwell, anticipating his own planned debut in the role by three months.
There was no sign of being unprepared in his typically confident singing, audible even at the end of Act One.
He already has a conception of Scarpia, a cunning brute who veers from calculated anger to cool appraisal of Tosca's bottom while her lover is being tortured.
One must hope that Maxwell will be well enough to assume the role next week, but meanwhile the company is to be congratulated on replacing him with so sterling a performance by this seasoned professional.
Edmund Barham makes Cavaradossi almost as formidable, a convincing aristocrat, tender with Tosca, arrogant with Scarpia, and sung with true tone and great power.
Among minor roles I enjoyed Roger Bryson's fussy Sacristan, setting the scene of pious hypocrisy by lighting up during the Angelus.
If memory serves, Ian Judge's excellent production, Ann Curtis's fine costumes, and Gerard Howland's half-baked set remain as they were.
The problem with the latter is that, despite superficial alterations, principal architectural features remain constant within the distinct localities of the three acts, nicely illustrated in the programme.
Judge's ability to achieve a forceful interaction of character would be better served by something more abstract, like the current Peter Grimes set.
As it is, grandly pedimented doorways and fluted columns are miraculously transposed from the church to the fortress.
Perhaps the final act, with its slow playing out of Scarpia's macabre joke, is beyond redemption dramatically; but how, pray, does Tosca, who exited through vast double doors into a corridor in Act Two, know that the same doors provide, in Act Three, a convenient jumping off point to eternity?
THEATRE /Spandau ballad: HID (Hess is Dead)— RSC Almeida season
By MICHAEL CHURCH
IN a pre-production interview with this paper Howard Brenton and his director Danny Boyle offered helpful hints as to how we might best grasp the meaning of HID (Hess Is Dead).
The play would turn on two questions: did the man officially claimed to be Rudolf Hess really hang himself, and was he Hess at all?
In essence, though, it was to be ‘a play about modern Europe and the peace we're living in’.
The pivotal notion of Spandau prison being pulled down and replaced by a supermarket was one which greatly excited Brenton, signifying at a stroke both Western Europe's descent into cynical consumerism and the wiping out of history.
The production would be high-tech, with key scenes performed simultaneously on stage and on videotape.
Watching the characters being bugged on TV monitors, the audience would themselves be made to feel under surveillance.
Not a madly promising menu, and fraught with predictable dangers.
Compared with the mysteries surrounding the deaths of President Kennedy or Marilyn Monroe, the controversy surrounding Spandau's 93-year-old inmate is about as interesting as the fall of a dead leaf.
And dispersing the audience's attention among nine separate TV sets is a sure way of dispersing any atmosphere you may have been lucky enough to set up.
In the event — 90 minutes without an interval — it quickly became clear that all the surveillance in the house would be cruelly trained on those unfortunates doomed to flesh out Brenton's thoughts.
The plot, insofar as one could discern it, was both labyrinthine and self-cancellingly ambiguous, built round an interview in a psychiatric hospital between a journalist and the grief-obsessed widow of a German professor who had bequeathed a videotape casting doubt on the official version of Hess's death.
The other characters were a sold-out leftie academic (who drew much knowing laughter from the first-night audience), a right-wing academic, a military automaton, and an Amstrad word-processor which enigmatically took the floor in a central scene.
The script cut from psychiatry to politics to history to Euro-moralising with dizzy speed; film-clip collages of Hitler saluting, Hess (or not-Hess) in the mortuary, hamburger ads, crumbling buildings, a screaming man in seventeenth-century dress, and the widow miming Hess's improbable suicide all chimed in an unholy jangle with the events on stage.
The questions raised may have been interesting, but the answers given were tritely familiar; the authorial tone was relentlessly baleful.
David Calder and Polly Walker performed heroically in the leading roles: in their hands Brenton's crudely stereotyped hack and his tediously distracted wench almost became convincing.
But one was left wondering at the decision to commit time, money and talent to this dingy piece of hokum.
In December HID will be produced in a seventeenth-century dissecting theatre in Amsterdam, thus assuming yet another layer of pseudo-significance.
THEATRE /Frozen attitudes: Nearly Siberia — Soho Poly
By ALEX RENTON
OME props ought to carry a warning.
A good example is the Russian matrioshka doll — the fat mother with smaller clones within — that the heroine of poet Carol Rumens's first play Almost Siberia twists apart in a central crisis scene.
She is, admittedly, pregnant at the time, but the problem with this familiar literary symbol is that it has rather more inside it than the play does.
Almost Siberia is a glasnost spin-off piece: a genre that was bound to have a vogue.
When writers go abroad they bring back ideas, understandably enough, and the Russian souvenir shop is no less full of wonders for having had its door opened further.
And writers are going to Russia: at the Barbican Pit at the moment is Robert Holman's enchanting play for the RSC, Across Oka, which uses the relationship between an English and a Russian adolescent to say some pithy things about divides both cultural and geographic.
Rumens's play has similar concerns, though they are rather less delicately expressed.
She pictures the relationship between Katherine, the brash and rather unlikely features editor of Woman Now magazine (do these people really stand around in camisoles dictating gory details about gynaecological examination over radio-phones?) and a Russian exile, Slava.
Concealed within Rumens's story is one other — a fairly familiar account of how jealousy can enfeeble the strongest of us, and how when that jealousy is of the past and of cultural differences it is probably unbeatable.
Some of those differences are nicely illustrated.
That their duvet cover is made of the Russian flag and the Union Jack can be passed by; better are such details as the fact that Russians call spam ‘Roosevelt smile’; the question of whether Down's syndrome chidren are known as Mongols in the USSR, and a dispute over private medicine: ‘You think I've fled 1,000 miles from scientific communism just to live with Mrs Engels?’ asks Slava.
Urbane Slava, nicely played by Peter Silverleaf even though he is much too young for the part, has a fairly dangerous past.
The two wives and two children he left behind in Russia call strongly to him, and when, under glasnost relaxations, he gets the chance to visit them, the relationship with Katherine cannot take the strain.
The play's chief problem lies in the fact that its Russian aspects, and particularly Slava's mysterious second wife, refuse to become real.
This is enhanced by director Julia Pascal's insistence on bathing in red and blue light the scenes where, perhaps in Katherine's imagination, the ex-wife meets Slava.
Fairly soon one realises that red means melodrama, and blue means romance, and you wonder if you have stumbled across the first romantic novel of the post-communist era.
A genuine, old-fashioned, bedroom surprise scene contributes to the impression.
If, perhaps, Katherine was a little more credible (and Gerardine Hinds's rather uncertain playing doesn't help), there might be more to grapple with.
But despite Rumens's wit and some good supporting acting, this gets to be little more than one of those stories that might grace Woman Now's problems page.
