Latest corporate unbundler reveals laid-back approach: Roland Franklin, who is leading a 697m pound break-up bid for DRG, talks to Frank Kane
By FRANK KANE
IT SEEMS that Roland Franklin, the latest unbundler to appear in the UK, has made a fatal error in the preparation of his £697m break-up bid for stationery and packaging group DRG.
He has not properly investigated the target's dining facilities.
The 63-year-old head of Pembridge Investments, through which the bid is being mounted says, ‘rule number one in this business is: the more luxurious the luncheon rooms at headquarters, the more inefficient the business’.
If he had taken his own rule seriously, he would have found out that DRG has a very modest self-service canteen at its Bristol head office.
There are other things he has, on his own admission, not fully investigated, like the value of the DRG properties, or which part of the DRG business he would keep after the break up.
When the bid was launched last week, Mr Franklin faced some criticism from City commentators on both those counts.
He regards the charges as unfounded.
On property, he is blunt.
‘I do not regard property profits as earnings.
We have made a bid of nearly £700m for a company with a book value of £200m — we've acknowledged there is some extra worth there, but I cannot see the sort of value they are talking about in property.
If they can prove it is there, we might pay for it,’
On the other criticism he is equally dismissive.
‘That point about the core business is very unfair,’ he says.
It is difficult to decide when you are an outsider what the business is like.
We would eventually like to do it along with the management, within the philosophy we will impose.’
The Franklin philosophy was learnt in the US leveraged buyout business at the side of Sir James Goldsmith.
Mr Franklin went there at the end of the 1970s, after the collapse of Keyser Ullman, the merchant bank where he was a director that was rescued by the Bank of England.
He feels that Keyser's problems were hastened by an unwise acquisition.
He went to the US because ‘Goldsmith decided that if you wanted to be a capitalist the UK and France were not the places to be’.
Along with Sir James he found the US much more attractive, taking over and breaking up some fairly hefty US corporations.
He rejects charges that he was partly responsible for the ‘casino atmosphere’ that gripped US corporate life in the early 1980s.
‘We stirred it up, yes, but we never lost any money for anybody and we never added to the unemployment figures.’
What he has learned from Goldsmith (‘the only genius I have ever come across’) is that the holding company is not the most important unit of corporate organisation.
‘The concept of the company does not interest me -it's the businesses that are important.
It does not matter whether or not DRG makes sellotape or Basildon Bond — it's of no consequence to anybody if somebody else makes them.’
And there is always the ultimate unbundler's defence — that he will make money for his backers.
In a takeover campaign that has already seen vitriolic language, he responds to the charge that he is mounting the bid to enrich himself and his friends by saying: ‘Nobody could take that as a criticism — this is an investor group.
It would be a criticism if I was doing it to impoverish myself’.
Square Mile: Stock Exchange takes the bull by the horns
By JOHN MOORE
SLOW developer; confusing thinker who is liable to cause controversy and conflict.
These are the characteristics of the International Stock Exchange's own Taurus programme rather than one of the signs of the zodiac.
For years the International Stock Exchange has been attempting to reduce the flow of paper on share transactions through the evolution of a computerised system known as Taurus.
With its enthusiasm for acronyms, the exchange has taken the ‘Taurus’ title for its computerised settlement masterplan from the full title of the scheme, the ponderously named Transfer and Automated Registration of Uncertificated Stock system.
Such a scheme will allow firms operating on the exchange to hold and transfer shares without the need for share certificates.
Proposals for the development of a Taurus system have been under consideration for much of this decade.
But, even at this stage, there are many hurdles to overcome, as a conference of City experts highlighted last week.
At the core of the problems in the development of the Taurus system is the rapidly changing character of financial markets and their structure.
When original objectives were set out in the early 1980s for improving services and reducing costs at the exchange through cutting down on the amount of paperwork, more detailed efforts were made to put the objectives into action.
These were overtaken by the Government's plans to deregulate the British securities market, announced in 1983, which were to lead to Big Bang.
There were then more pressing priorities.
But since 1987 there has been added impetus to the development of the Taurus programme, triggered largely by the post-Big Bang boom in share dealing and the subsequent crash in 1987.
Huge backlogs of work built up in the securities dealers' back offices as deals could not be completed within the exchange's usual accounts periods.
According to Anthony Preece, director of operations at investment group Citicorp Scrimgeour Vickers, speaking at last week's conference, there were at least 13 different design concepts for the future Taurus system under discussion in the City as of March this year.
Aside from the technological requirements of the new system, other important issues have to be resolved.
The participants in Taurus, the requirements needed for the participants, and the international consequences of the new system, are receiving detailed consideration.
Potential members of Taurus include the listed companies affected by the scheme, registrars, private client brokers, retail brokers, custodian banks, institutional investors, and money brokers.
Yet as Andrew Palmer, deputy finance director at Legal &General Investments warned at the same conference, ‘like all chains, Taurus is only going to be as strong as its weakest link.
And technology could easily become the weak link with some participants’.
He said that in the last two years he had met very few institutions which had not cut back their system budgets following the 1987 crash in share prices in the stock market.
‘It would be a serious mistake for them to believe that they could put the whole Taurus market place at jeopardy by cutting back on their Taurus budget.’
On the international front Bill Widdis, director of systems development at the stock exchange, is wary of arguments calling for full transnational integration of share clearing systems.
‘We must note that the nations of Europe have evolved their national clearing and depository systems over many years and, for many reasons, they are all different from one another,’ he says.
‘Some systems serve markets in only one member state, while others, specialising in cerain types of instruments, are of European importance,’ he stresses.
‘Any developments towards integration should take this diversity into account and not seek to prescribe a uniform model when national differences do not compromise the objective of efficient and secure international settlement.’
BIIBA-Fimbra battle worsens
THE gentlemanly war between the British Insurance and Investment Brokers Association (BIIBA) and the Financial Intermediaries, Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association (Fimbra) appears to be escalating.
BIIBA has now made a strong complaint to Fimbra about the latter's decision to withdraw from an agreement made on 18 September which would have allowed BIIBA members, who held existing professional indemnity cover, to renew their existing policies.
Fimbra, as the regulatory body of middlemen who sell investment and insurance products, is attempting to require that these intermediaries hold professional indemnity insurance cover through a centralised scheme provided by Fimbra.
The insurance cover is designed to protect intermediaries against suits for damages brought by irate customers.
BIIBA, as the trade association attempting to represent most middlemen, is equally unhappy that Fimbra is attempting to bring in a centralised insurance scheme, as most of BIIBA's members have their own professional indemnity insurance cover.
A centralised scheme would disrupt existing relationships between BIIBA members and their insurers, and lose them valuable financial advantages such as a no claims bonus.
BIIBA wanted a stay of execution on Fimbra's plans and thought that it had gained such a deal when its chairman, David Palmer, met Fimbra chairman Lord Elton.
In those discussions BIIBA claims that it was agreed that its members would be allowed to renew their existing policies up to 31 October 1990.
A misunderstanding then seems to have occurred with Fimbra writing to its members last week saying that its scheme had not been altered in any way and that members could not renew existing policies if the renewal date was after 1990.
BIIBA's director of public affairs commented: ‘Fimbra have clearly reneged on their agreement.
In view of the rumours of meetings between it and the underwriters of the Fimbra scheme it appears that the insurers are calling the shots.
For a scheme which was claimed to take independent financial advisers out of the power of insurers, this is an ironic situation for Fimbra to have got itself into.’
The campaign continues.
A new aroma THE International Stock Exchange started out life as a London coffee shop.
Last week it admitted its 400th member, the Swedish-owned United Securities Fondkommission, the first time that level has been reached in its 300-year history.
Perhaps the ISE ought to bring out a commemorative and suitably international blend.
View from Manhattan: Airlines fly into regulatory storm
By LARRY BLACK
RE-REGULATION is the buzzword on the lips of the US airline industry, as the worst excesses of the oligopoly bred by its predecessor, deregulation, once again became evident.
While the stock of yet another carrier soared on buyout speculation, a fatal crash at New York's La Guardia Airport, again brought lax airline safety to public attention.
And another bankruptcy, involving Braniff Airlines, reminded everyone of the stranglehold the Big Eight carriers have over the domestic market.
But it was neither safety, monopoly nor dangerous debt loads that precipitated the first major intervention in the industry by Transportation Secretary Samuel Skinner last week.
It was ‘national security concerns’.
On Friday, citing worries about foreign influence over civil aviation, Mr Skinner issued a ‘consent order’ on NorthWest Airlines, forcing it to reduce the involvement of KLM, the Dutch carrier, in its recent buyout.
Earlier his office issued a request for information to United Airlines, whose $6.8bn staff buyout is to be part-financed by $750m from British Airways.
Foreign involvement in US carriers, Mr Skinner argued recently, could compromise response to a national emergency.
‘Civil aviation must have a clear commitment to America,’ he said.
KLM's part in the NorthWest deal falls short of the 25 per cent limit placed on foreign ownership by the Federal Aviation Act of 1958.
But the Dutch airline has had to agree to reduce its $400m investment in NorthWest to about $175m, or about a quarter of the equity involved in the takeover being led by Los Angeles businessman Al Checchi.
The $3.65bn buyout will increase the airline's debt-equity ratio from less than 50 per cent to 585 per cent and NorthWest operates one of the oldest fleets in the industry, but Mr Skinner's chief concern was the citizenship of KLM's representative on the NorthWest board.
‘I can't figure out why foreign investment is the battlefield he decided to pick,’ one official said on Friday.
Washington's stance seems sure to complicate the United Airlines buyout, which was to close a few days after the 10 October deadline set by Mr Skinner for information on BA's involvement.
Though BA would have only 15 per cent of the voting shares in United, the second-largest US airline, its investment represents almost 80 per cent of the equity in the deal.
Under the apparent terms of the Transportation Secretary's new regulations, BA would have to slash its contribution by $500m — probably killing the staff buyout — and would effectively lose its representation on the UA board.
Changing the ground rules has angered investors on both sides of the Atlantic, and Mr Skinner's mandate for this is being widely questioned -particularly as foreign carriers are already represented on US airline boards.
British Department of Transport officials have expressed concern about the probable restrictions and urged ‘an open and free investment climate’.
The irony of Mr Skinner's re-regulation of the airline industry, say Wall Street analysts, is that it comes after the shake-out among domestic carriers has taken place and serves only to reinforce the advantages enjoyed by the surviving majors.
Mr Skinner's real concern is not United's loyalties in the event of an Anglo-American war but the bargaining strength of the US industry in international negotiations.
Bilateral treaties now regulate trans-Atlantic air traffic, and 1992 has US carriers worried about their strength in future talks.
US airlines not involved in partnerships complain Europe does not allow reciprocal investments in flag carriers, and argue that protectionism will worsen with continental integration.
US airlines already find themselves at a disadvantage because of‘open sky’ policies during Reagan-era deregulation, they say.
Mr Skinner in speeches decrying ‘unparalleled levels of foreign investment’, has made references to ‘the covenants that spell out the opportunities’ for the airlines of each nation.
Foreign influence over major US airlines would mean ‘this framework would be radically altered,’ he said.
What could rescue the United Airlines deal is the nature of the buyout; United employees will control 75 per cent of the airline's voting stock, making it by far the largest employee-owned corporation in the US.
A strong political lobby has already been mounted in Washington, arguing United ‘will remain a truly American asset’ because of the staff participation.
Democrat Robert Byrd, the former Senate leader, has criticised Mr Skinner's actions in the NorthWest deal, and warned against interfering in United.
United is also arguing that employee concessions in the deal should be considered ‘sweat equity’, reducing BA's contribution to 35 per cent.
If BA can resell $300m of its United investment — ideally to US citizens -then its remaining equity share could be said to be only 21 per cent, airline officials in New York argue.
Mr Skinner's action also raises the possibility of retaliation by other governments, and of slower international liberalisation if not an outright global re-regulatory war.
‘The US may find it fairly unfriendly when some of its carriers want to make deals in Europe,’ said Jon Ash of Global Aviation, an airline consulting firm.
‘It has major implications for all future transactions.’
USM: Remedial action at Lincat has results
By JOHN SHEPHERD
THE SHARE price of Lincat Group, maker of commercial catering equipment, is getting a boost after being toppled from its perch of 175p this summer when news of continuing problems at three subsidiaries filtered through to the City.
Analysts downgraded four-year profit projections and exposed Lincat to the harsher side of stock market life, culminating in a fall in the share price to 127p.
Apart from its loss-makers Lan-Elec and Abbey Clocks, the cost-cutting programme at a large profit generator, Corsair, was running behind schedule.
Group profits before tax for the first six months of the year soared by 46 per cent but the final result to 30 June, announced last week, showed a less than sparkling advance of 26 per cent to £1.28m compared to earlier City predictions of £1.4m-plus.
The poor second half performance, however, masks the changes that have been made at Lincat, which is now placed to deliver more acceptable returns.
The ill-fitting Abbey Clocks and most of the assets of Lan-Elec have been sold, and Corsair's problems have been rectified by a new face behind its managing director's desk.
Attention has also been focused on expanding through acquisition, removing doubts about the board's ability to mix lateral movements with logical progression.
July saw the purchase of Colbrook Equipment, a designer of food display units, for a maximum profits-related payment of £2.16m — less than seven times Colbrook's pre-tax earnings of £329,000 in 1988.
Lincat also announced last week its first overseas acquisition.
Douglas, the leading US maker of pan washers for the bakery trade, provides a profitable US base and the chance to undercut the market by setting up more cost effective production facilities based on Lincat's UK operations.
The purchases, together with the remedial action, should ensure that Martin Craddock, chairman and chief executive, can at least match analysts' forecasts of £1.8m pre-tax when he reports on the 1989-90 year.
Taking last Friday's price of 160p, Lincat is on an undemanding p/e of 9.5 and less than eight the following year.
Guy Bell of Beeson Gregory, a new name dealing in USM shares, says the company is under rated and is set for medium-term expansion.
MB and Caradon stay quiet on bid rumours
By JERRY CONNOLLY
MB GROUP, the old Metal Box company, refused to confirm yesterday that it was on the verge of a £300m-plus bid for Caradon, the building products group.
Caradon also refused to comment, but has already announced that it was involved in talks which could lead to a bid.
Its share price closed on Friday at 474p, valuing the group at £282.2m.
A rise of 14p amid speculative interest added almost £10m to the value of the bathroom fittings and showers business on Friday.
Analysts expect the company to make £36m pre-tax profits for the year to March.
The price has risen by 119p since Caradon announced a possible bid on 31 August.
While MB is refusing to comment on what it called ‘market rumours’, senior executives, including chief executive Murray Stuart were involved in meetings at MB's head offices yesterday.
City sources believe MB is the most likely suitor for Caradon as it reshapes into an international trading company.
Last week it announced first-quarter contributions of £11.1m from CMB — the result of the £900m merger between Metal Box and the French Carnaud company.
MB has two core businesses along with its CMB shareholding — security printing and heating and bathroom products.
Last month it agreed to spend £194.2m on the US-based ABS cheque-printing business.
A pro-forma statement of the combined companies' net assets was £294m.
MB's building products division has a large overlap with Caradon's operations.
Caradon was floated in July 1987 with a market value of £134m following a £61m management buyout from Reed in 1985.
A slow down in the bathroom business — identified by MB when it announced its results last week — affected City confidence in Caradon.
But it has a range of highly-regarded brand names including Mira showers, Twyford bathroom fittings and Celuform plastic timber systems.
Last year Caradon bought the Everest double-glazing business from RTZ for £32m and was thought to be stalking further acquisitions.
MB last week admitted its Stelrad central heating and bathroom products business was operating in a reduced UK market for central heating and stagnating bathrooom products market.
European markets are more buoyant, and some analysts believe Caradon's products could be sold more strongly in Europe.
B &Q team buys Kent Garden Centres
By JERRY CONNOLLY
THE MANAGEMENT team which helped develop the B &Q DIY business is on the acquisition trail again — this time in the gardening business with a ‘multi-million pound’ deal to buy Kent Garden Centres, writes Jerry Connolly.
The acquisition, announced yesterday, brings five centres and two development sites into the Retail Corporation, which plans a nationwide chain of 50 garden centres under its Gardenstore operation within two years.
Retail, which refuses to disclose the terms of the deal, was set up last year with £10m of City capital and is headed by Malcolm Parkinson, the former B &Q managing director.
Mr Parkinson says Gardenstore, with 11 outlets on more than 66 acres, ‘is one of the top four garden centre chains in turnover and number of sites, and largest in square footage terms’.
John Kennedy, former B &Q financial and systems director, is also on the Retail board along with Alan Greensides, former buying and merchandising director at the DIY concern.
They believe the garden centre business is at the same stage of development as DIY was a decade ago.
A spokesman said: ‘The industry is highly fragmented and business will be growing through acquisitions for some time.
Retail is unwilling to help the opposition by saying what it paid for Kent.’
Europe's mobile phones top the 2 million mark
By MARY FAGAN
EUROPE'S cellular radio market broke the two million subscriber barrier in September, a rise of 26 per cent since the beginning of the year.
According to the Fintech Mobile Communications newsletter, the UK is still by far the largest market with almost 700,000 subscribers split between Racal Telecom's Vodafone and British Telecom's Cellnet.
But although the UK now has 12.28 cellular telephones per 1,000 inhabitants, Norway leads the penetration stakes with almost 40 handsets per 1,000 inhabitants.
Apart from the UK and Scandinavian countries, penetration is still low in Europe, but this is expected to change over the next few years as telecommunications markets are opened up.
West Germany, for example, is to introduce a digital cellular radio service in competition with that offered by the Deutsche Bundespost, and France has already licensed a private operator.
The real boost for cellular radio will come in two to three years' time with the introduction of the Europe-wide service, GSM.
33m pounds buyout of FIG goes ahead
By MARY FAGAN
THE £33m management buyout by Fenchurch Insurance Group from GPG has been completed despite pressure for a better price from GPG shareholders including Robert Maxwell.
Mr Maxwell, with 15 per cent of GPG, the old Guiness Peat Group, and Lord Kissin, with a five per cent stake, strongly opposed plans to sell off three of GPG's operating companies.
But shareholders voted by three to one last week to back the sell-offs which will reduce borrowings to a consortium of banks, who acquired 61 per cent of GPG after the collapse of the New Zealand Equiticorp business.
The mbo of Fenchurch was engineered by JO Hambro Magan, whose managing director Alton Irby said: ‘It shows that leveraged buyouts can be done, even if this one was difficult.
‘The problem was that an insurance broker is not asset-backed.
It has cash flow but its assets are its people.
The insurance business cycle is also at a low ebb.
Around a hundred of the staff have taken part in the buyout, which we are very pleased with.
It shows they have confidence in the management.’
The mbo is being led by six senior executives.
The buyout involves an initial payment of £30m, with a further £3.2m of deferred payments including £2.7m for contingencies.
Equity in the mbo vehicle is being provided by FIG staff, with mezzanine finance arranged and under-written by Intermediate Capital Group.
Senior debt is underwritten by National Westminster Bank.
Economic Outlook: A deficit between consenting adults
By SARAH HOGG
The Chancellor is trying to convince his political audience that Britain's deficit (now running at close on 4 per cent of national income) is not a problem; and to convince the markets not to sell sterling.
In both arguments, the next two weeks — which include a probable German interest-rate rise and an unavoidable Conservative Party conference — will be critical.
If Mr Lawson can hold off a base rate rise at least until he can blame the Germans, that will make his political task a fraction easier; but not much.
The balance of payments is a circular identity of inflows and outflows, which must necessarily match each other.
You can start the argument at any point on the circle.
Viewed from one angle, a current account deficit is merely the necessary counterpart of a capital account surplus, and it is from this point that Nigel Lawson's defensive intellectual outworks run.
Britain's kind of deficit arises not because the Government needs to borrow; the public sector itself is in heavy surplus.
The deficit is created by the actions of the private sector.
If — so his argument goes — consenting adults in the private sectors of different countries lend money to each other, all that shows is that capital markets are usefully redirecting the surplus savings of one economy to the investment opportunities in another.
That detached observer, the International Monetary Fund, calls this kind of deficit ‘efficient and self-correcting’.
History shows it can go on for a long time, as deficits and surpluses did during the golden age before the First World War.
Very recent history suggests the world has become much more like that again, with investment in each country breaking free from the constraint of domestic savings.
Evidence of excessive demand There is some observable good sense in this argument, and it helps to explain why sterling has not hit the fan a lot earlier, during a truly spectacular swing from surplus to deficit over the past two years.
But its limits are exposed by asking a simple question: why, then, should Mr Lawson not be quite happy to see the deficit get even larger?
Why should a ‘good’ deficit not get even ‘better’?
The first reason the Chancellor gives is that there is some ‘bad’ froth on the ‘good’deficit: that is to say, evidence of excessive domestic demand.
This argument starts from a different point on the balance of payments circle, with the excess of imports over exports.
Even here, something can be found to say for the deficit, as a safety valve for inflationary pressures.
But it still has, willy-nilly, to be financed by attracting capital inflows.
Now, this surge in demand was equally clearly created by the grown-up private sector, not by a government binge.
But here Mr Lawson does not seem to be quite so indifferent to the behaviour of consenting adults: he has been endeavouring to control their behaviour by altering the price at which they can borrow.
Answer number two turns on another price that bothers him.
International borrowing nowadays takes place in a world of moving exchange rates.
In pre-1914 days, there was a gold standard, and a single world capital market centred on London.
Today there is again a global capital market, but no gold standard, no fixed exchange rates, for Britain not even a European Monetary System.
That is not Mr Lawson's fault, of course, but he has to live with the danger that while the world's capital markets will duly bridge the gap between Britain's domestic savings and investment, they will only do so at a lower price for sterling.
If you take the argument about consenting adults to its logical conclusion, that price — Britain's exchange rate — should be left to them, too.
But however suspicious Mrs Thatcher may be of managed exchange rate systems, she dislikes a falling pound as much as anyone.
So we come back around the circle to the capital side of the balance of payments, and the operationally interesting question: for how long can we expect the world's savers to make up our domestic shortage?
Mr Lawson is right to say that deficits are more sustainable than they were in the 1970s.
There is indeed a world market for savings, although that is not a wholly comforting fact: the Chancellor himself foresees a world shortage of savings, which means everyone is going to have to compete harder (ie, pay more) for them.
Meanwhile, market operators take due account of exchange rate risk; and what alarms them is not so much the size, but the direction of a deficit.
Over-optimism at the Treasury Through the summer, the signs of a slowdown in domestic demand had come reasonably on cue: the inflation figures duly peaked, retail sales tailed off, even labour costs did not accelerate as fast as feared.
Car sales were uncomfortably large, and with them the July trade deficit; but the Treasury thought it detected more comforting underlying trends.
Last week it was obliged to admit, yet again, to over-optimism.
The Chancellor is now prepared to claim no more than that the deficit is ‘more or less flattening out’.
Not much of a claim, more than a year after he started trying to turn the tide; and one yet to be proven, anyway.
There are such awkward critics as Fred Bergsten, of the Institute of International Economics in Washington, who argue that a private-sector induced deficit might actually be more tiresome than the US-style ‘twin deficits’— in public finances and the current account — because however much he deprecates the latter, at least it is clear what ought to be done.
It is, he argues, not at all clear how you raise private savings to close the other kind of gap.
This point should not be pushed to perversity: the IMF is still clear that a US-style deficit is worse, and it certainly is not being quickly corrected.
But Mr Lawson has to show he knows how to do the trick, before he can win his argument, in theory or in the markets.
Corporate Profile: French flair and Le Mortgage push Compagnie Bancaire ahead: Michael Prest takes a look at one of Europe's most unusual and successful financial groups
By MICHAEL PREST
BRITISH yuppies yearning for that charming little place they saw in the Dordogne last summer have probably never heard of Compagnie Bancaire.
But since 1988 they may well have taken out ‘Le Mortgage’ offered by the French company's British offshoot, UCB Group, to finance their terrain gastronomique.
In so doing, they will have added their mite to the expansion of one of Europe's most unusual and successful financial groups.
Le Mortgage offers fixed-rate sterling finance to Britons wanting to buy second homes in France.
CB takes care of the notaire who is the dread of British buyers of French property.
It is a tiny part of CB's business.
But in several ways it illustrates the group's strengths: size combined with flair, a strong French base from which to develop business abroad, and a flexible structure.
CB is certainly successful.
Consolidated net operating income has risen from FFr880m (£86.3m) in 1984 to FFr1.34bn last year.
Over the same period new business almost doubled to FFr68.4bn, total loans and other financings grew from FFr94.3bn to FFr146bn, and savings managed jumped from FFr6.3bn to FFr29.9bn.
In 1988 the group had 8,000 employees, of whom 500 were outside France.
More important, perhaps, CB is an unusual organisation.
As a massive lender which takes no deposits, a marketer of industrial and consumer finance, and increasingly a purveyor of insurance-related products to an under-insured French public, CB probably embodies a unique combination of strategy and interests.
There is definitely no parallel in Britain.
CB originated in the ruins of France one year after the end of the Second World War as Union Financiere d'Enterprises Francaises et Etrangeres.
Its founder, Jacques de Fouchier, is still closely associated with the group as Chairman Emeritus — itself an unsual idea — of the supervisory board.
In the early years, the company was involved mainly in financing imports of raw materials and factory equipment, and its chief shareholders were the leading French banks.
Since then two related developments have given the group its unusual character.
One development was a network of stakes in the principal companies in each type of business.
Four of these companies are quoted separately from CB on the Paris Bourse (CB received a London listing in 1973): UCB (33 per cent owned by CB, in housing and property finance), UFB Locabail (66.2 per cent, business equipment finance), Cetelem (67.7 per cent , consumer finance), and Cardif (56 per cent , life insurance and savings products).
The man who runs the group is 51-year-old Andre Levy-Lang.
He is the engaging chairman of CB's management board, whose education at the Ecole Polytechnique and doctorate from Stanford University create an aura of international competence one meets too rarely in British companies.
He explained that the structure evolved because the group needed equity to finance growth.
Several of the quoted subsidiaries and associates also control other businesses, for example Solveg, a property portfolio management company, in which several CB group companies have stakes.
This structure is typical of the continental, as distinct from the British, firm: the holding group, particularly the bank holding group, stems from equity involvement in industry, an involvement shunned by British banks.
At the same time, CB, as it became in 1959, has seen the source of its earnings diversify as consumer finance became more and more important to the group.
Loans made in 1979 totalled FFr59.1m, of which property accounted for FFr40m and consumer finance accounted for FFr9.29m, or 15.7 per cent of the total.
By 1988, however, the picture had changed dramatically.
Consumer finance contributed FFr40m, or a quarter, to all loans that year of FFr147m, while property made up FFr75.1m of the total.
The tell-tale sign was that at FFr29.5m, consumer finance was easily the biggest component in new lending last year.
In the early 1980s, new lending was roughly the same in consumer finance as in housing and property finance.
Another simultaneous change of long-term importance to CB is the growth of overseas business.
The total of loans and other financings to customers outside France has gone up from FFr28m in 1981 to FFr10.7m last year.
Mr Levy-Lang said that this year a quarter of new lending will have been outside France, and 90 per cent of that will have been in the United Kingdom.
CB already claims 2 per cent of the British fixed-rate mortgage market.
Mr Levy-Lang is casual about CB's expansion.
The move into consumer finance, he said, was chiefly caused by restrictions on lending, the corset, to other areas.
‘Regulation made us do that,’ he said.
CB, he claimed, had in mind no particular balance between its components.
‘We have no ratio in the mix of business.
We want to grow as fast as we can.’
But there are disciplines.
The key objective is a 15 per cent return on equity, and all business within the group is conducted at arm's length on guidelines laid down by CB at the centre.
Mr Levy-Lang said: ‘It is a financial discipline in a way.
We can't do anything we want within the group.’
There is also a shrewd understanding of what consumers want.
With a wry smile, Mr Levy-Lang observed: ‘I have a great belief in the rationality of consumers.
They are very intelligent economists, all of them.’
He acknowledges that as a result, the consumer finance and investment markets are very competitive, not least in France where savers now have more faith in money, as distinct from assets, and the big banks are muscling in.
One solution for CB, according to Mr Levy-Lang, is attention to detail.
‘We approach every problem as a specific problem.
It is what makes us different from the commercial banks.
You have to offer specific services to specific people.’
Despite its rate of return target, the average between 1984 and 1988 was 12.7 per cent, slipping to 12.4 per cent last year.
Several factors are inhibiting growth of earnings: a weaker domestic loan market, tighter interest rate margins, and slow growth by some subsidiaries.
The latter is within CB's competence to remedy.
Cardif, the insurance company, and Cortal, the asset management division of CB, have both grown too slowly recently for the group's taste.
CB is also trying to substitute floating rate for fixed rate mortgages in France.
These problems will take a while to sort out.
CB is also most unlikely to reach its ambitious goal of generating half its earnings outside France by 1992, despite having started 20 new businesses in Europe over the last few years.
Mr Levy-Lang is characteristically disingenuous about the talismanic date of 1992.
‘It led us to speed it up,’ he said, while denying that the alleged single market would of itself promote business.
Blessed with tight and impressive management, however, and its firm French base, CB's long-term growth seems assured, whatever the specific problems.
And there will be no difficulty in following events.
The group's financial yearbook, beautifully produced in English, is as comprehensive as the most demanding analyst could wish.
Perhaps after Le Mortgage the British will see ‘Le Life Policy’ and ‘Le Loan’.
Business and City Summary
By MICHAEL PREST
TODAY: Revised UK retail figures for August.
Change in UK credit business.
US August construction spending.
Japanese foreign exchange reserves (September).
West Germany current account (August).
WEDNESDAY: UK housing starts and completions (August).
UK overseas travel and tourism contribution to invisible earnings (July).
THURSDAY: UK second quarter personal income and expenditure figures.
UK second quarter industry finance statistics.
Bundesbank council meeting (West Germany) FRIDAY: UK second quarter steel consumption and stock changes (final).
US unemployment (September).
US non-farm payrolls (September).
Commodities: Reading higher prices in the tea leaves
By MICHAEL PREST
SINCE we are in the middle of the International Coffee Organisation meeting -how do they pass a week without a visible result?— I thought it appropriate to think about tea.
It is not such a perverse idea, because a lot of people have recently become interested in that noble beverage.
As always, the interest is not unconnected with a little matter of price.
At last Monday's weekly London tea auction, prices reached their highest for three years.
Many in the trade expect prices to go up further today, and possibly for quite a few auctions to come.
Richard Howell of Sheppards, the London stockbrokers, has been following tea and plantation shares for 20 years.
‘My anticipation is that we will certainly see a rise on Monday — not of the same proportion, but there's clearly going to be a rise.
What's developed in 1989 is a genuine shortage of teas of all grades.’
Over the past 12 months the price of lower medium quality tea, which is the main ingredient in the British cuppa and imparts that unique lorry-driver flavour, has almost doubled from 78p a kilogramme to 135p.
Medium qualities have also risen noticeably, from 98p to 145p, over the same period.
But quality teas, the best grade, have hardly changed at around 200p a kilogramme.
The rise is particularly interesting because it confounded expectations.
The Economist Intelligence Unit concluded in its World Commodity Outlook 1989: ‘Short of climatic intervention — to which tea is less vulnerable than most other major crops — a continuation of the downtrend seems unavoidable: we expect London auction prices to average £1/kg, or even less, in 1989.’
At the beginning of the year, however, the trend argument was much more plausible than it is today.
World production of tea (black and green) grew from 2.27m tonnes in 1985 to 2.34m tonnes in 1987, and rose again in 1988.
Whereas, according to the United States Department of Agriculture, world production rose by 4.5 per cent, consumption, on estimates by the International Monetary Fund, went up by only 2.6 per cent .
At the same time, the main import markets continued to decline.
In 1987 imports into Britain fell by 12 per cent, although with around a fifth of the market we remained easily the world's biggest tea importers.
The Irish, however, drink an average of 3 cups a day, fractionally more than the British.
But beware of extrapolations, my daughter.
Expectations were upset for three basic reasons: First, the long Tamil insurgency in Sri Lanka has finally taken its toll of the tea estates.
Exports from that lovely island could be 40 per cent lower in 1989 than in 1988.
Since Sri Lanka previously exported about 200,000 tonnes of tea annually, only a little less than India, the biggest exporter, the loss is crucial.
Second, there was a climatic disaster.
Malawi, which exports normally about 40,000 tonnes a year, has suffered from a serious drought.
Only a good crop in Kenya has saved Africa from another disaster.
Third, Indian exports have been depressed by a combination of politics and nature.
The political factor is the imminent general election.
Fearful of the consequences of higher tea prices, the government has sought to stabilise them by fiddling the weekly Calcutta auctions.
In alternate weeks the auction is wholly devoted to domestic buyers or to foreign buyers.
Since the bulk of the tea at the Calcutta auctions is low medium quality, the dual auction has a disproportionate impact on tea prices generally, and on London prices especially.
This effect has been compounded by the natural factor, a disappointing crop in southern India.
There are other elements in the price rise as well.
At the end of last year, again largely for political reasons, the Pakistan government granted licences to importers to bring in tea.
Pakistan is now a net tea importer.
In a different and much more alarming category is the fate of the Soviet industry.
The Soviet Union used to produce about 150,000 tonnes of tea a year, making it one of the biggest growers.
But nuclear power changed that.
According to Mr Howell, all the bushes in Georgia were polluted by radiation, and have been destroyed.
For the first time that anyone can remember, the Soviet Union has been buying at the London auction.
Mr Howell is convinced that the tea market under-supplied for several years.
‘This genuine shortage is occurring for the first time ever.
This is the great genuine move in the tea price.’
There is evidence to support the case that prices will remain high for a while.
Despite the withdrawal of the Indian army from Sri Lanka, peace may not be established.
Even if it is, some estates could take years to rehabilitate.
A tea bush requires constant attention: if not plucked for a year it can take two years to return to normal; if bushes have to be uprooted, new ones take seven years to come into production.
Despite the relative growth of consumption and demand in the mid-1980s, the market for black tea alone was finely balanced at around 1.67m tonnes.
Moreover, the four biggest growers and exporters — India, Sri Lanka, China and Kenya — also have large populations and /or high birth rates.
As the Indian example shows, domestic consumption is a vital factor.
Yet one must be cautious.
Historically tea has been a fairly dull market, dominated by trade interests — two arguments against the London Fox's efforts to excite interest in a tea futures contract.
A balanced market, by definition, can swing surprisingly fast in the opposite direction: the chances are, for example, that Malawi will not have a drought next year.
But for all I know, the ICO could still be meeting then.
International Capital Markets: Accountants face hard task in search for global harmony
By DAVID FRANK
YESTERDAY was the last day for comments from the public on a paper issued in January entitled: ‘Comparability of Financial Statements’ published by the International Accounting Standards Committee.
This is hardly the sort of catchy title guaranteed to get most of us rushing to our desks in search of pen and paper, nor is it easy to imagine squeezing into packed village halls to listen to speeches demanding a rewrite of the rules on deferred taxation.
In acknowledgement of this, IASC, which comprises the leading world accounting bodies, sent out a separate invitation to interested parties asking for their views on the subject.
It called this: ‘Towards the International Harmonisation of Financial Statements’.
Harmonising international accounting standards is more important than one might think.
In today's markets, where increasingly companies are looking to raise funds beyond their own national borders, agreement on an objective standard for measuring the financial health of a business is vital.
The world's top securities market regulators, who met recently in Venice, cited the need to reconcile financial statements to local accounting standards as a significant factor in any company's decision on which markets to target or not for an international offering of new shares.
The lack of accounting harmonisation, particularly between the US and the UK, is seen by many bankers as the key issue in the development of the Euro-equity market, where new issues of shares are offered in more than one country simultaneously.
Two examples highlight the problems.
When British Telecom was privatised, shares were issued both in the US and the UK (and other jurisdictions).
BT's registration statement for the US showed that ‘net income’ and ‘shareholders’equity' under UK generally accepted accounting principles (Gaap) were each double the US Gaap figures and retained earnings were three times the US Gaap equivalent.
When BP made its disastrous privatisation offering at the time of the crash, its profit forecast for the year ending 31 December, 1987, computed in accordance with UK Gaap, was £1.45bn whereas its forecast based on US Gaap was 25 per cent lower at £1.1bn.
Both forecasts were included in the US and Canadian prospectuses.
The UK prospectus, however, contained only the UK Gaap computed forecast.
The problem IASC, and the market regulators' body Iosco, faces though is determining how harmonisation can be brought about.
Everyone might agree that financial statements should be based on the same standard but the inevitable follow up comment is: ‘Yes, ours’.
According to bankers active in the Euro-equity market this cry is heard most frequently from US accountancy firms which believe their standards, being the most conservative, provide the safest blueprint.
Without the support of the Americans, harmonisation seems a distant ideal.
And yet applying US standards in this country for example, could require a massive downward restatement of corporate profits and net worth, which would be resisted fiercely.
What some experts would like to see is a system of reciprocity whereby companies could make international equity offerings using their home market accounting standards without the need to reconcile their financial statements to the standards of each jurisdiction in which shares are offered.
This probably provides the best way forward, not least because of the major markets only the US, Italy and Canada explicitly require foreign companies to restate their figures according to local standards.
The UK by contrast requires only that figures are prepared and audited to internationally acceptable standards but not necessarily UK Gaap.
If the US could be persuaded to take a similar line, many of the problems for companies contemplating an international issue would disappear.
The Eurobond market is on course for a record year after registering a volume of $165bn for the first nine months according to Euromoney Bondware.
At this rate 1989 volume should comfortably surpass 1986's record figure of $179bn, and may yet reach the magic $200bn.
40% of shareholders approve Ferranti demerger plan
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
MERCHANT bankers proposing a demerger of Ferranti International into two separate businesses have received the initial approval of 40 per cent of the company's shareholders.
Hill Samuel said yesterday that the plan to put Ferranti's naval and avionics businesses into a separate company and to merge it with another UK defence company, thought to be Thorn EMI, is to be investigated further.
Christopher Baker of Hill Samuel said the plan was presented in writing to the Ferranti board on Friday.
Sir Derek Alun-Jones, Ferranti's chairman, announced on Friday that the beleaguered company would have to write off £185m.
Ferranti is now convinced that it was the victim of fraud perpetrated by International Signal and Control which it took over two years ago.
A report by Coopers &Lybrand into suspect ISC contracts and the nature and extent of any fraud is expected to be delivered to Ferranti today or tomorrow.
Ferranti then hopes to decide on a course of action and in particular on how to restructure its capital base.
It has already undertaken to sell off £100m worth of businesses and to raise £150m through a rights issue or by attracting a suitor.
Sir Derek said last night that he had ‘glanced’ at the Hill Samuel plan and was interested to see how it works out.
But he stressed: ‘It's only an idea, not a proposal, and it needs a lot more work.’
The Hill Samuel plan envisages splitting off the UK naval and avionics businesses and giving shareholders one share in the new company for every share they hold in the existing organisation.
Talks are believed to have been held with Thorn EMI, whose defence interests are up for sale.
A successful merger could create a defence company with estimated sales of £800m.
Ferranti's naval and avionics businesses are thought to have a turnover of about £500m.
According to Mr Baker, Thorn's ground-based radar activities would dovetail with Ferranti's airborne radar and result in a formidable force in European defence electronics.
Ferranti's annual meeting, adjourned until 10 October, will now almost inevitably be put back for a further four to six weeks in the light of recent events.
Meanwhile, the company hopes to go ahead later this month with the launch of its Creditphone mobile telephone service.
Ferranti is one of four licencees starting these low-cost services, intended to bring mobile communications to the masses.
The company also said that it will continue with its application to the Department of Trade and Industry to operate a ‘personal communications network’, which is expected to present the same opportunities in the next decade as cellular mobile radio is doing in this.
Lawson's battle for base rates
By PATRICK HOSKING, Banking Correspondent
NERVOUS investors and hard-pressed mortgage borrowers face another anxious week as Chancellor Nigel Lawson battles against continuing pressure to lift base lending rates.
Analysts expect the pound to come under renewed pressure in the run-up to Thursday's Bundesbank meeting, which will decide whether and by how much to raise West Germany's key Lombard interest rate.
The markets have already fully-discounted a half-point rise in the German rate to 7.5 per cent.
However, a full one-point rise would probably trigger another run on sterling and force a one-point base rate rise in the UK.
The Government has signalled its determination to resist raising the 14 per cent base rate during the politically-sensitive fortnight of the Labour and Conservative party conferences.
According to Bill Martin, economist at UBS-Phillips &Drew: ‘The only thing the Chancellor fears more than the currency speculators are the rows of blue rinses at Blackpool next week’.
Building societies would respond to a base rate increase with a hike in their mortgage rates.
A one-point rise in the mortgage rate to 14.5 per cent would increase the monthly payment of a £30,000 endowment mortgage-holder by £17.75 to £271.88.
There are fears that share prices could tumble again, even after last week's 70.8 point drop in the FTSE-100 index to 2,299.4.
‘The cosy notion of a soft landing has now evaporated in investors’ minds,’Mr Martin said.
However, on Friday the Confederation of British Industry accused the financial markets of ‘hysterical over-reaction’ and said there was ‘plenty of good news’on the real economy.
Final retail sales data for August, published today, will test the accuracy of the provisional 0.4 per cent growth rate.
Results this week from Next and Sears will also give a measure of the retail downturn following the 1,850 job cuts announced by Littlewoods last week.
Results from four TV companies this week may give clues as to any slowdown in corporate expenditure.
Pearl chief to meet Australian Mutual amid bid rumours
By JOHN MOORE, Assistant City Editor
DAVID ANDERSON, chairman of Australian Mutual Provident, Australia's biggest life insurer, and Einion Holland, chairman of Pearl Group, the British life insurance company, are meeting over the next few days amid speculation that the Australian group is poised to mount a takeover bid for Pearl worth at least £1bn.
Australian Mutual Provident executives were yesterday believed to be mounting plans for a takeover which could be one of the largest acquisitions made in the British life insurer sector.
‘Any bid which has not been discussed with us will have to be considered,’ said Mr Holland, yesterday.
‘I have a long standing arrangement to meet Mr Anderson this week.
But so far we have received no direct approach.
The last time I met AMP was over two years ago.’
The news of the meeting of the two executives follows a steep rise in Pearl's share price last Friday.
It rose 44p to 552p.
There has been intense interest in the British life insurance sector by Australian, New Zealand and Continental interests for some time.
Australian Mutual Provident has been building up its stake in Pearl for the last two years.
In June this year AMP's shareholding jumped to 18 per cent when it acquired a block of over 23 million shares, representing 13 per cent of Pearl's equity, from FAI Insurances, a leading Australian insurance and investment group.
Australian Mutual received approval from the Department of Trade and Industry which it needed if it was to hold more than 15 per cent of Pearl's shares, the level at which a shareholder is regarded as ‘controlling’ an insurance company.
At the time of the acquisition insurance analysts said that AMP had aspirations to expand, and since it controls one third of the Australian life insurance market its opportunities were limited in that country.
Earlier this year AMP acquired London Life, the mutual British life insurer, for just £15m which, with its own operations in the UK, gives it about a 1 per cent market share.
AMP would like 5 per cent of the life insurance market in Britain, which experts feel can only be achieved through acquisition.
Buying Pearl would give AMP a further market share of over 2 per cent.
Pearl was founded in 1864 and is the UK's second largest life office after the Prudential which specialises in door-to-door collection of insurance premiums from customers.
Following legislative reforms, it has recently been making a big drive for personal pensions business which has proved successful.
In its last financial year ending December 1988, Pearl reported pre-tax profits of £66.2m compared with £48.34m a year earlier.
Last month Pearl announced pre-tax profits for the six months ending 30 June of £31.1m, an increase of 8 per cent on the previous year.
The directors recommended that the dividend payout to shareholders should be increased by 25 per cent to 7.5p a share which was widely regarded as a move designed to ward off a takeover bid.
If Pearl decided to resist the overtures of AMP it will be the second major takeover battle in the British life assurance sector in barely two years.
In 1987 the Compagnie du Midi, the French financial and insurance group, moved to acquire British life insurer Equity &Law, which was also under siege from the New Zealand entrepreneur Sir Ron Brierley, whose interests owned 29.6 per cent of Equity &Law.
Equity &Law finally recommended acceptance of the £448m takeover by the French group.
Japanese to buy 25% of Virgin
By MARY FAGAN
A JAPANESE company is to buy 25 per cent of the record business of the Virgin Group, which Richard Branson took private in October of last year.
Virgin, which owns the sixth largest record company worldwide, will make the formal announcement today in London, writes Mary Fagan.
The buyer is said not to be one of the large five record companies — Thorn EMI of the UK, Sony, Warner, Polygram and Bertelsman — which between them dominate 70 per cent of world sales.
Virgin last night refused to comment, but estimates are that the deal could be worth well in excess of £50m, making it one of the largest investments by a Japanese organisation in a UK company.
With a turnover of about £250m, Virgin Records is one of the few independents left in the music business.
In August the Virgin Group sold its film and video distribution arm, Virgin Vision, to Management Company Entertainment in the US.
But in spite of clear signals from Virgin Records that it wants to remain independent, speculation was rife that the purchaser might be Sony.
Industry observers fear that this would be another nail in the coffin of the independent record industry.
In 1988 the Japanese giant bought CBS records for $2bn and last week it announced that it would take control of Columbia pictures.
Virgin sources said yesterday, however: ‘We want a minority partner.
The last thing we want is to lose our independence to one of the big five.’
The deal is the latest in a spate of mergers and takeovers in the music publishing business.
Earlier this year, Thorn EMI paid £187m to US-based SBK for a large catalogue of songs, and subsequently also bought a half share in Chrysalis Records in the UK.
Since then, Polygram has bought Island Records and has anounced the takeover of Arecords.
Both Virgin and Thorn EMI are thought to be vying for the lucrative Jobete in Detroit, which controls the publishing rights to a catalogue of 15,000 Motown titles.
The decision to look for a significant equity partner appears to be Virgin's attempt to keep out of the clutches of the five majors while remaining a credible force in the worldwide music business.
