Tigrayans advance on a helpless Addis Ababa
From RICHARD DOWDEN in Addis Ababa
THE ETHIOPIAN army is failing to halt northern rebels advancing rapidly southwards to the capital and its vital lifeline road.
Some observers are predicting the imminent collapse of the military regime which has ruled Ethiopia for 15 years.
The rebels, the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front (TPLF), are threatening to cut off Dese, a key garrison town protecting part of the road linking Addis Ababa with the port of Assab.
They have advanced down the Asmara road in the past four weeks and are now reported to be operating south of Dese.
They have surrounded a garrison at Bati, to the east, and on 19 September they attacked Mile on the Assab road, closing it for 36 hours.
Helicopter gunships ply constant missions from their base at Kombolcha: yesterday I watched MiG-21 fighter-bombers, loaded with bombs and rockets, take off from Dire Dawa and head west.
The estimated 40,000 troops in Dese are being joined by the remnants of the defeated Third Army, which is struggling down the road or surrendering to the rebels.
One estimate puts government losses in the past four weeks at 20,000 killed, captured or deserted.
The government in Addis Ababa will say nothing about the situation, and the war is not reported by the state-run media.
However, recent visitors to Dese describe the areas as chaotic, with whole units leaderless and unwilling to fight.
Soviet advisers have been withdrawn from Dese and Kombolcha.
A Soviet Deputy Defence Minister, General Varrenikov, has been in Addis Ababa for the past week.
He is reported to be negotiating the complete withdrawal of the 1,500 Soviet military advisers.
The Russians have said they believe in a negotiated settlement to the civil war, but they are continuing to supply arms to President Mengistu, apparently to allow him to negotiate from a position of strength.
A large consignment of weapons was unloaded from a Soviet ship at Assab on 21 September.
Weapons will not, however, save President Mengistu if no one is willing to use them.
The Ethiopian army, the biggest in sub-Saharan Africa, consists largely of press-ganged young peasants or unemployed urban teenagers who have been drafted to the front after a few weeks' training.
At the end of a spectacularly successful year, the TPLF drove the Ethiopian army out of Tigray province in February.
Few people thought the Tigrayans could continue their success outside their own province, but on 26 August the TPLF began an advance which drove the government forces out of Korem and Kobo.
Three weeks ago, the 102nd Airborne Division, Russian-trained and regarded as a crack unit, was rushed from its base at Asmara to the front line, but it too has been mauled by the rebels, who swept through the mountains flanking the main road, capturing all the towns as far as Woldiya.
Meanwhile, in Eritrea, to the north, a de facto ceasefire is holding between the government and the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF), which is seeking independence for Eritrea.
Peace talks began in Atlanta, Georgia, last month and are due to resume in Nairobi on 18 November.
The only government-controlled areas in highland Eritrea are the road between Asmara and Massawa and the garrisons of Keren, Senafe and Adi Kwala.
Government troops are digging deep defences at Asmara and there is no doubt that, should the peace talks fail, the EPLF will resume fighting and attack it, or try to cut it off.
One option for the TPLF is to strike east, to the Assab-Addis Ababa road.
If they succeed in cutting it, they will have achieved checkmate.
They could strike west and try to cut off Gonder, another heavily-fortified garrison, or they could try to continue rolling south towards the capital.
Addis Ababa is guarded by about 20,000 troops, including President Mengistu's Praetorian guard, which saved him during the coup attempt in May.
No one believes the TPLF can take the capital, but their continuing success could persuade senior army officers that President Mengistu should be replaced by someone who can stop the war and negotiate.
‘The situation is very, very fluid and there is a possibility that the regime will disintegrate,’ said one Western diplomat.
The TPLF has recently transformed itself into the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Movement to give itself more national credibility, but its core remains the Marxist-Leninist League of Tigray, whose political model seems closest to the late Enver Hoxha's Albania.
Much as many Ethiopians fear and loathe the government, they are calling for more political and economic freedom, and would not feel liberated by the TPLF.
Nor would they welcome a takeover by the Tigrayans.
Most of the people between Dese and the capital are Maharan and Oromo.
Nevertheless, there have been several incidents in the capital recently.
Bombs were placed in the fuel depot at the airport last month, and a small power station nearby was blown up.
Tribalism and liberation meet at Transkei burial
From JOHN CARLIN in Bumbane, Transkei
WHEN is an independent state not an independent state?
When it's a homeland.
Bumbane, otherwise known as ‘the Great Place’, is the royal burial site of the Tembu tribe here in what South Africa insists on calling the Republic of Transkei, a so-called ‘homeland’ for black people upon which Pretoria imposed political independence in 1976.
This helps explain the extraordinary spectacle here yesterday of 5,000 loudly ‘anti-colonial’ black people clamouring against independence and for political re-integration with South Africa.
The occasion was that black South African speciality, the political funeral.
Behind it all was the hand of Nelson Mandela, which may lend the event much significance should it turn out that President FW de Klerk is serious about negotiating with black leaders.
Mr Mandela belongs to the royal family of the Tembu tribe.
The man buried yesterday was the king of the Tembus, the most powerful of the half dozen tribes who speak the Xhosa language.
Since there are six million Xhosas -one million more than the entire white population of South Africa — they are potentially a serious force for Mr de Klerk to reckon with.
They count among their number more than 70 per cent of the leaders in the executive of the African National Congress.
The ANC does not like this fact to be mentioned, because it purports to eschew tribalism in favour of an all-embracing black nationalism.
All the more odd, then, that yesterday's funeral should have been both a celebration of time-honoured Tembu ritual and the most vocal demonstration in years on what the rest of the world calls South African soil of the strength of the ANC and its far from tribalistic affiliate, the South African Communist Party.
The imprisoned Mr Mandela has met in recent months more than a dozen of the chieftains and assorted dignitaries — his Xhosa wife, Winnie, among them -who were on the podium.
Yesterday not only were the Xhosas out in force, it seemed that a convention of the entire Mass Democratic Movement -essentially the exiled ANC's internal representatives — had been called.
King Sabata Dalindyebo would have been pleased.
He died three years ago.
But his body was exhumed last Monday for the ceremonial reburial yesterday.
The problem had been that there was no ceremony the first time around.
He was buried, under orders from the corrupt and usurping Matanzima brothers who used to run Transkei, in a commoner's grave.
The Matanzimas were forced out after a military coup nearly two years ago.
The benign ruler who took over, Major-General Bantu Holomisa, spoke at the graveside.
In so doing he also gave his blessing to — what in effect proved to be the case — declaring the Transkei, or at least Bumbane, the first ANC liberated zone, however fleetingly, yesterday afternoon.
Draped over the king's coffin was an ANC flag.
He had vehemently opposed Transkei's bogus independence and, hounded by the Matanzimas, had fled to Zambia, where he joined the ANC.
Much plotting went into the organisation of the event.
Major-General Holomisa met the president of the ANC in London recently.
His brother, who lives in the same house, spoke with Mr Mandela for five hours on 4 August.
Mrs Mandela has been shuttling back and forth with messages from her husband's prison home near Cape Town.
The tribal leaders who visited Mr Mandela have also met the top ANC leaders in Zambia.
The upshot of it all is that Major-General Holomisa has made Transkei a haven of sorts, a thorn in Pretoria's side, for the ANC.
He will no doubt tread very carefully, but the consequences of his stand could be far-reaching.
He said yesterday that he meant to conduct a referendum to test whether Transkei's three million people wished to retain ‘independence’ or not.
If the answer is ‘no’, South Africa may have to confront the beginning of the end of the ‘homelands’ system.
Swapo remains favourite to win the United Nations-supervised elections next month
From JOHN CARLIN in Bumbane, Transkei
A woman shows her support for the South West Africa People's Organisation (Swapo) at an election rally in Windhoek.
Swapo remains the overwhelming favourite to win the United Nations-supervised elections next month, but claims that the organisation has detained and tortured many of its members in Angola and Zambia may deprive it of the two-thirds majority needed to form a government in an independent Namibia without holding another election.
The UN is investigating the allegations.
Swapo and its main rival, the Democratic Turnhalle Alliance, have accused each other of violent intimidation during the campaign.
Out of India: The snow-wreaths melt away in the heat of battle
By TONY ALLEN-MILLS
BHARATPUR — The monsoon rains are lifting across the Gangetic floodplains, and there is a hint of magic in the air.
The winter migrations are beginning, and the skies over northern India are alive with transiting birds.
In the next few weeks, as the seasons change in eastern Europe and central Asia, spectacular colonies of painted storks will descend on the lakes and marshes of Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan.
They will be followed by flocks of pintail ducks and greylag geese.
Tens of thousands of birds, navigating with miraculous precision, arrive each year at their Indian winter homes.
But for one tiny group of exquisitely beautiful long-distance travellers, the coming journey may prove their last.
Somewhere along the Ob river in central Siberia, slowly building strength for a 3,500-mile flight, wait perhaps 50 Siberian cranes.
They are, as far as naturalists are aware, the only surviving members of a rapidly dwindling population of a bird the Siberians call the ‘snow-wreath’.
Every autumn, the birds rise from the Ob river swamps to begin a perilous journey south.
One small group heads for Iran; the rest fly through the Soviet Union, across the battlefields of Afghanistan and past the guns of Pakistani poachers to the monsoon-soaked plains of India, where they pass a lazy winter feeding on plants.
But each year fewer arrive.
A century ago, more than 200 Siberian cranes were recorded in the jheels and marshes of Uttar Pradesh.
In 1984, there were 41; two years ago, 31.
Last year 23 arrived.
Only 13 reached Iran.
The Siberian crane stands four and a half feet tall, its brilliant white plumage offset by a blood-red beak, face and legs.
Jet-black wing quills are visible in flight.
Like most birdwatchers, I have only seen them in pictures -invariably in supremely elegant poses, their long, thin beaks delicately probing the water for weeds.
Unlike most birdwatchers, I am lucky enough to live less than four hours' drive from their regular winter home — a wildfowl marsh constructed by one of the Maharajahs of Bharatpur.
I was there recently, talking to Dr Lalitha Vijayam about her research on the Siberian crane's problems and about my chances of seeing one before the Ob river race becomes extinct.
The Maharajahs of Bharatpur were dedicated hunters, famous for their prodigious shoots.
A plaque in the Bharatpur marshes records the November day in 1938 that the then Viceroy of India, Lord Linlithgow, bagged 4,373 wildfowl, 3,044 of them before lunch.
The royal guns did not fall silent at Bharatpur until 1964.
Soon after, thanks largely to the endeavours of India's finest ornithologist, Salim Ali, the ex-Maharajah's swamp was turned into a sanctuary unequalled in Asia.
It is now formally known as the Keoladeo Ghana National Park, and its own guide book charmingly and accurately boasts: ‘Birds!
Birds!!
Everywhere Birds!!!’
Of all the species visible in Bharatpur, none is more romantic or mysterious than the Siberian crane.
There are many suitably marshy habitats in the Ganges basin, yet the bird has invariably stopped at Bharatpur.
There are other beautiful cranes in the park — my favourite is the demoiselle, a slender grey bird with delightful black plumes and ear-tufts.
But no other bird exerts quite the appeal of the annual visitor from the river Ob.
Every year the Indian newspapers chart Siberian crane sightings with the devotion and enthusiasm the British press usually only musters at times of royal births.
Dr Vijayan, a research scientist with the Bombay Natural History Society, is leading a study of the Siberian crane that began in 1980.
She confesses her team can only guess at the causes of the bird's decline.
‘We think they are being shot for meat when they land in Afghanistan,’ she said.
‘And we know that some have been poached in Pakistan.’
The cranes may also have suffered from Bharatpur's environmental problems.
Scientists are trying to calculate the long-term impact of the catastrophic drought of 1987.
There have been rows over cattle-grazing and other encroachment.
Fortunately, this year's monsoon was short but sharp, and improved water management has produced good floods.
Dr Vijayan also reports that after a long struggle to arouse their interest, Pakistani environmentalists are aware of the threat to the bird.
But the war rages on in Afghanistan, and crane protection is understandably a low priority in Kabul.
The war, and the region's complex geopolitical concerns, are also preventing naturalists from undertaking the most effective means of monitoring the Siberian crane -ringing the flock with miniature transmitters that could be tracked from space.
The prospect of Moscow, Kabul, Islamabad and New Delhi all agreeing on a joint satellite monitoring venture is not great.
The scientists can only wait and hope.
Which is what I shall be doing for the next three months.
Given the awesome sum of human misery in this part of the world, I suppose I shouldn't get too worked up about the fate of a flock of birds — particularly as the much larger eastern race of the Siberian crane, which migrates from north-eastern Yakutia to the lower reaches of the Yangtse river in China, is apparently surviving well.
But if the snow-wreaths of the Ob river don't reach Bharatpur this year, I shall feel inescapably sad.
Russians send Kabul 2,000 supply trucks
From AHMED RASHID in Kabul
THE SOVIET UNION is supplying the Afghan government with another 2,000 trucks to step up the supply of food, fuel and ammunition to Kabul's 1.5 million people before the winter snows affect the roads.
The unconditional Soviet support to the Kabul regime is on such a scale that the US and Pakistan cannot hope to match it.
Every few minutes a truck thunders down the strategic Salang Highway on its way from Hiratan on the Soviet border to Kabul.
Convoys half a mile long are watched over by scattered Afghan army outposts on the hills by the road.
Drivers report no guerrilla attacks, even though security north of the Salang Tunnel has been largely handed over to local militia units and the army withdrawn.
After setting up a bitumen plant and providing earth-moving machinery, the Soviets helped cut a new road east of the old Salang Tunnel.
The highway, which links up with the old road south of Charikar, avoids mujahedin territory and and passes through a region where the Kabul regime has concluded deals with local guerrilla commanders.
‘We are receiving 300 trucks of supplies a day from the Soviet Union,’ said the deputy prime minister, General Mohammed Hakim.
A US-trained officer, 48-year-old General Hakim is the most experienced convoy trouble-shooter in the regime, having organised the relief convoy to the besieged city of Khost two years ago and saved Kabul from near starvation last year.
‘The government's main preoccupation is getting supplies to the cities before winter,’ he said.
This year, government-held countryside produced only 150,000 tonnes of wheat, or 10 per cent of Afghanistan's total consumption, due to a bad harvest and the war.
Of the 90,000 tonnes of wheat needed in Kabul to survive the winter, 37,000 tonnes have already been stockpiled, General Hakim said.
Afghan and diplomatic sources said that the Soviets would provide 2,000 more trucks and fuel tankers, but General Hakim admitted that the real problem will be fuel, which is already in short supply in Kabul.
Diesel prices on the black markeat are ten times higher than the official price.
Even for some government cars, diesel is only available on the black market.
For the past few weeks President Najibullah has been meeting militia commanders from around the country offering them more weapons and money to maintain their loyalty and keep the roads open.
Since all private truck owners are now allowed to bring food from Hiratan and sell it in Kabul, some militia commanders, most of them former mujahedin, are buying trucks and becoming traders.
The Soviet relief effort is also employing aircraft.
Up to 40 flights a day bring in weapons and ammunition, including Frog 7s, a short range surface-to-surface missile that is less expensive than the Scud missiles already provided.
The flights that circle Kabul every quarter of an hour are a morale booster for the hard-pressed population.
‘The Soviet Union is giving us oxygen — bread and weapons to defend ourselves,’ said Suleman Laeq, the minister for tribes and nationalities.
Soviet aid to Kabul is estimated at between $250m (£154) and $300m a month.
The US and Saudi Arabia will have funnelled some $700m to the Pakistan-based mujahedin by the end of this year.
Soviet aid has helped in maintaining the population's morale and the regime's credibility and unity, while US aid to the to the mujahedin has done little to increase their unity, morale or fighting ability.
WASHINGTON — The US should explore the possibility of an agreement with the Soviet Union to cut off military supplies to Afghanistan, a leading senator said in a report published yesterday, Reuter reports.
Claiborne Pell, chairman of the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee, also called for a neutral government in Kabul to hold elections or seek a traditional Afghan consultative assembly.
Mr Pell issued the report after a trip to Pakistan in August and talks with Pakistani leaders and leaders of the US-Pakistan-backed provisional government.
Army on guard as China fetes its Revolution
From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
CHINA'S leaders celebrated the 40th anniversary of Communist rule yesterday, protected from their people by the biggest security operation undertaken in the capital since the People's Liberation Army stormed into Peking four months ago.
Standing exactly where Mao Tse-tung proclaimed the People's Republic of China on 1 October 1949, paramount leader Deng Xiaoping joined other party leaders atop the Gate of Heavenly Peace to preside over a night of fireworks and martial music in Tiananmen Square.
Fearful of protests or violence by citizens outraged by the army's brutal assault on Tiananmen on 4 June, armed troops cordoned off a large area of central Peking, admitting only hand-picked spectators into the square.
Among the guests were thousands of plain-clothes police and out-of-uniform soldiers, some of whom arrived in military trucks, dressed as clowns.
Authorities have themselves acknowledged fears that ‘counter-revolutionaries’, still at large despite a nationwide crackdown on dissent, might try to sabotage the anniversary.
Throughout the day, thousands of troops patrolled central Peking, while police set up road-blocks to check cars in the city's north-west university district of Haidian, the birthplace of China's seven-week-long pro-democracy movement.
Many students, still bitterly hostile to the government despite a barrage of propaganda and weeks of political study classes, refused to take part in the celebrations, spending the day inside their dormitories.
On instructions from authorities, Peking University, the focus of the student rebellion, sent a dance troupe, one of scores of similar groups dragooned into the celebrations.
Although sullen opposition and private anger still shadows the Communist Party, no disturbances were reported during yesterday's events.
Hundreds of thousands of people poured into the streets to watch the firework display -a fact which, Mr Deng boasted, proves that ‘China's social order has returned to normal’.
He made the comment in remarks to a visiting official from North Korea, one of only a handful of foreign countries to send special delegations for national day.
Others included East Germany, Cuba and the Soviet Union — a list that reflects China's sudden dependence on the Communist bloc for its friends.
Most Western ambassadors boycotted the firework display but did attend a reception on Saturday hosted by the Prime Minister, Li Peng.
Many Western businessmen attended both.
Strident editorials in the official press condemned foreign interference and predicted the worldwide triumph of socialism.
The Peking Daily accused the West of trying to subjugate China for 40 years and of now waging ‘psychological warfare and dreaming of victory without war’.
The unusually confrontational rhetoric suggests that Mao was perhaps less than correct when, 40 years ago yesterday, he announced to Tiananmen: ‘The Chinese people have stood up…we have friends all over the world.’
HONG KONG — More than 3,000 people marked the 40th anniversary of Communist rule in China yesterday by rallying to protest against the suppression of the pro-democracy movement in Peking, AP reports.
Szeto Wah, a Hong Kong legislator, told the crowd: ‘A republic ruled by the people has not yet been realised.’
The three-hour rally was organised by the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement of China.
Cambodia puts in more troops
From ANDREW HIGGINS in Peking
ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand (UPI, AP)— Heavy fighting continued in western Cambodia yesterday as the Vietnamese-backed government brought in reinforcements to face a drive by non-communist resistance forces, resistance officials and military sources said.
‘We might have to stop our advances if there are a lot of reinforcements,’ said a senior official of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF), Ieng Mouli.
Military reports showed the KPNLF offensive launched on Saturday had made quick initial progress, he said, and troops had captured at least 10 government positions and large quantities of weapons.
The acting commander-in-chief of the KPNLF, Dien Del, said the fighting had continued overnight and had been ‘more than 70 per cent successful’.
He expected his troops would take two more towns and said his fighters now controlled the whole of Highway 69, along the Thai frontier, north of Sisophon.
Western sources at the Thai-Cambodian border confirmed the KPNLF had scored some major gains, and military sources there said the fighting was continuing.
The low rumble of artillery fire could be heard from this nearby Thai border town.
One source attributed the quick victories of the initial push to agreement by the ill-trained Heng Samrin forces to accept payments to abandon their positions before the assaults.
Military sources said the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge guerrilla group had joined the KPNLF in a pincer attack on Sisophon.
Earlier, Abdul Gaffar Peang-meth, the assistant to the KPNLF commander-in-chief, Ak Sutsakorn, had denied any knowledge of co-ordination with the Khmer Rouge.
Prisoner of Conscience: Burmese prisoners face death: Moe Kyaw Thu, Zwa Gyi and Nyi Nyi U
By CAROLINE MOOREHEAD
A BOY of 17 and two men in their twenties face execution in Burma for planting a bomb, but others involved in the crime say they took no part in it.
Human rights organisations maintain that the men have been wrongly convicted and are being victimised for being members of the leading opposition political party.
were arrested on 17 July in connection with a parcel bomb which exploded in the Syriam state oil refinery 10 days earlier and killed two people.
Violent incidents of this kind have become commonplace in a country where all human rights are being eroded.
Nothing was known of the fate of the three men, all of them active on behalf of the National League for Democracy, until 27 July, when the official radio announced that they had been condemned to death.
Their trial had been completed in a single morning session before a military tribunal inside Insein Prison, an overcrowded place notorious for torture.
The trial was conducted under martial-law provisions proclaimed only on the day of their arrest, and was the first to be held under these procedures.
Lawyers said the prosecution was allowed to present evidence, but that there was no mention of any defence evidence.
Martial law orders empower military tribunals to ‘waive unnecessary witnesses’ and to impose death sentences ‘regardless of the provisions under existing laws’.
It emerged that not only was there no reliable evidence of guilt, but, on the contrary, there was considerable proof of innocence.
The Karen National Union, which admits to violent opposition to the military government, denies the three men were in any way involved.
A fourth man, said to have provided the bomb, has added that they had nothing to do with it.
No appeal is allowed under Burma's new martial law orders and Amnesty International fears that Moe Kyaw Thu, Zaw Gyi and Nyi Nyi U may be executed any day.
Aquino prepares for clash over Marcos body
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Manila
PRESIDENT Corazon Aquino of the Philippines is bracing herself for a legal battle over her decision not to allow the remains of the former president, Ferdinand Marcos, to be returned home from Hawaii for burial.
At the behest of Marcos' family, Vice-president Salvador Laurel, Mrs Aquino's estranged deputy and now head of an opposition party, and a group of ‘loyalists’ will today attempt to reverse an earlier Supreme Court ruling to uphold Mrs Aquino's decision to prohibit Marcos' return.
But at the weekend, although Mrs Aquino said she would respect any Supreme Court decision, she said she had received ‘highly sensitive’ information that strengthened her resolve.
She said yesterday that Marcos's remains may be brought to the Philippines when emotions have subsided.
Mrs Aquino cited the case of Napoleon, who died in exile in 1821 and remains made ‘a very triumphant return’ to France in 1840 when ‘things had settled down’.
Marcos ruled the Philippines for 20 years before Mrs Aquino was swept to office on a wave of ‘people power’ in 1986.
The Aquino government accuses him of having stolen up to US$10bn (£6.1bn) from the country during his reign.
He died in Honolulu on Thursday.
Calling Mrs Aquino's decision an infringement of universal human rights, Mr Laurel said: ‘The ban is contrary to the constitution and is therefore illegal.’
But citing ‘national welfare’, the Supreme Court earlier voted eight to seven to uphold the ban imposed by Mrs Aquino.
Mr Laurel said: ‘Now that he is dead, that makes a lot of difference.’
Details of the ‘highly sensitive’ information have not been made public, but it is understood to have originated from intelligence and diplomatic sources and probably relates to plans by Marcos loyalists to capitalise on his return to the country.
At meeting on Saturday Mrs Aquino gave aides details of this information.
The military is on alert, with half of its troops confined to barracks as a precaution against disturbances.
There has, however, so far been little popular reaction in the country to the death of Marcos.
Several hundred people have been attending a nightly candle-lit vigil, and there has been one other small protest.
Mubarak peace proposal exposes Israeli tensions
From CHARLES RICHARDS in Jerusalem
THE ISRAELI cabinet is being called this week to debate for the first time proposals made by Egypt for advancing the search for a settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The cabinet session — billed, like many before, as ‘crucial’— is to discuss the 10 points submitted by President Mubarak to clarify Israel's initiative for elections in the occupied territories.
They have directed a powerful light on the ambiguities of the initiative.
This has not only exposed the underlying differences between Likud and Labour which the initiative papered over.
They have also highlighted old rifts and stimulated new ones within the parties themselves.
Mr Mubarak's proposals were first formally presented to Israel on 16 September.
The Israeli Prime Minister, Yitzak Shamir, procrastinated and postponed discussion of the points at the cabinet, the inner cabinet, or the top decision-making body known as the ‘forum of four’ senior ministers, in the hope that the problem would go away.
In the meantime, ministers conducted individual diplomatic initiatives on the basis of Egyptian ideas not yet discussed by the government.
The Defence Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, met Mr Mubarak in Cairo, and in the US, Mr Arens and Mr Peres separately met President Mubarak and the US Secretary of State, James Baker.
The two issues at the heart of the disagreement are those which have killed at birth any attempt in the past dozen years to address the Palestinian question: Who speaks for the Palestinians and what are the limits of the Palestinian problem?
The first centres on the composition of a Palestinian delegation that would hold talks with Israel in Cairo.
Mr Rabin has suggested including Palestinians deported by the Israelis.
This would satisfy demands by the Palestine Liberation Organisation for delegates from outside to underline the principle that the Palestinian issue deals with a whole people.
At the same time, Israel could maintain they were still legally residents of the occupied territories.
But Mr Shamir has given no sign of softening his opposition to any contact with the PLO, or with Palestinians from outside, including those deported for activities hostile to Israel.
And the depth of his ideological commitment to maintaining Israel's hold over the West Bank rules out any acceptance of the principle that negotiations should eventually lead to an exchange of land for peace.
Israeli troops killed four Palestinians yesterday and a fifth was beaten to death by fellow Arabs for alleged collaboration with Israel, Reuter reports.
Lebanese MPs scrape rust off government machinery
From ROBERT FISK in Taif, Saudi Arabia
IT IS difficult to know who is the more isolated: the 62 members of the Lebanese Parliament or the 73 members of the Lebanese press corps.
Lebanon's MPs — 31 of them Muslims, 31 of them Christians — have left the militia leaders behind in Beirut to keep the peace.
The MPs are here to scrape the rust off the derelict machinery of government, to recreate the corroded institution that will have to elect a president and produce a government which can impose its rule on Lebanon — and on the militia leaders.
Hence the isolation.
Closeted in the conference palace at Taif — itself built by a Lebanese-born millionaire — the MPs found themselves unable to exercise their normal function of playing to the gallery.
Lebanese parliamentary sessions have to be open to the public.
They also, by law, have to be held in Beirut.
So this was therefore called ‘an informal meeting of Lebanese parliamentarians’— which effectively closed the doors of their marble debating chamber to the press.
In equal isolation at the Intercontinental Hotel, 16 miles away, Lebanese journalists found themselves restricted to the parliament's two opening statements and a diet of gentle assurances from Prince Saud al-Feisel, the Saudi Foreign Minister, that optimism was the order of the day, but while he had heard of some disputes in the parliamentary chamber, he had every reason to believe the Lebanese would accept the Arab League peace plan.
Christian MPs close to General Michel Aoun wanted to talk first about a Syrian withdrawal, in according with the general's instructions.
And it is perfectly clear that the old representatives of Lebanese democracy are under considerable pressure to talk about reform and not withdrawal.
Saeb Salam made this perfectly evident.
Mr Salam, 84, a Sunni Muslim, is the most impressive of Lebanon's dying breed of elder statesmen, but his words could have been those of a much younger man.
‘It is not appropriate to insist upon an immediate Syrian withdrawal,’ he said.
‘We must admit that a Syrian withdrawal could provoke many dangers for which no one would want to take responsibility.
This is true, regardless of the opinion that some people have of Syria, and of their unhappiness at Syria's presence in Lebanon.
Among the dangers that this could bring about would be the emergence of small concessional states governed by the militias.’
All this was shorthand for a simple warning: that if the Syrians pull out of west Beirut, the militias would go to war again in its streets, and there would be nothing the Christians could do about it.
Coach death
From ROBERT FISK in Taif, Saudi Arabia
(First Edition) LYONS (AFP)— A British girl, Yvonne Brigden, 16, was killed and two other Britons were injured when their coach collided with two lorries in southern France on Saturday.
Boris is back
From ROBERT FISK in Taif, Saudi Arabia
MOSCOW (Reuter)— Thousands of Soviet television viewers yesterday heard Boris Yeltsin, the Communist Party rebel, warn of a ‘revolution from below’ if radical economic changes did not happen within a year.
His remarks, during his recent US tour, were shown only days after Pravda reprinted — and then apologised for — an Italian newspaper article accusing him of drunkenness and high-living during the trip.
Afghan rockets
By AHMED RASHID
KABUL — Fifteen mujahedin rockets slammed into residential areas of Kabul over the weekend, killing 10 people and wounding 27, writes Ahmed Rashid.
Heavy fighting was also reported around the city of Khost.
The government said three soldiers were killed in a nearby village, and 41 guerrillas died in a retaliatory attack.
Party time
By AHMED RASHID
BULAWAYO, ZIMBABWE (Reuter)— Joshua Nkomo, 72, threw a huge birthday and 40th wedding anniversary party at the weekend and President Robert Mugabe was there to seal the unity between the former rivals.
During the two-day festivities at Barbourfields stadium, politicians and business leaders, city workers and Matabeleland villagers, ate and mingled.
Iran quake
By AHMED RASHID
TEHRAN (AFP)— At least 300 homes were destroyed in an earthquake which shook the south-western Iranian town of Sisakht on Mount Dena early yesterday, the news agency IRNA reported.
Most of the damage was caused by landslides.
Japan poll
By AHMED RASHID
TOKYO (Reuter, AFP, AP)— Japan's Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, scored an important victory in a parliamentary by-election in Ibaraki prefecture, north of Tokyo, yesterday.
Thus, Mr Kaifu is likely to be re-elected president of his Liberal Democratic Party next month, and retain the post of prime minister.
Turnaround
By AHMED RASHID
ISLAMABAD (Reuter, AP)— The Queen has sent a message to Pakistan, welcoming its formal return to the Commonwealth.
Nicholas Barrington has ceased to be Ambassador, and is now High Commissioner.
When the plaque on the home of the ‘British Ambassador’ was removed, the words ‘Residence of the British High Commissioner’were found on the back, a relic from 1972 when Pakistan left the Commonwealth in protest at its recognition of Bangladesh.
Libyan medal
By AHMED RASHID
NICOSIA (Reuter)— Libya has awarded Charles De Gaulle the medal of the Great al-Fateh Revolution for campaigning to free France from ‘American imperialist domination’.
Outback protests
By AHMED RASHID
SYDNEY (Reuter)— Police arrested more than 200 anti-nuclear protesters at a military base in the south Australian outback yesterday, bringing the total detained to nearly 500 in three days of protests.
Chemical Mace was used against the demonstrators at the US-Australian communications installation at Nurrungar, and the police were backed up by 50 unarmed soldiers.
Talks with ANC held in Britain
By JOHN BULLOCH
LONDON — A group of prominent white South Africans, including Wimpie de Klerk, brother of President FW de Klerk, began a series of meetings with the banned African National Congress in Britain yesterday, writes John Bulloch.
The ANC team was led by Thabo Mbeki, the organisation's chief of information and the man regarded as a likely successor to Oliver Tambo.
Reports in South Africa said a number of members of the Broederbond, the secret Afrikaner pressure group, were included in the talks, as well as individuals known to be close to Gerrit Viljoen, the Constitutional Planning Minister.
It is his task to try to involve black leaders in negotiations on constitutional reform.
Kohl party expected to lose again
By JOHN BULLOCH
BONN (Reuter)— Chancellor Helmut Kohl's Christian Democrats suffered their fourth successive election setback this year in voting yesterday in North Rhine-Westphalia, West Germany's most populous state.
Computerised projections showed the party's share of the vote for regional and city councils had fallen to 37.9 per cent from 42.2 per cent in 1984.
The Social Democrats increased their share slightly to 43.1 per cent from 42.5.
The World This Week
By FIONA LENEY
THERE WILL be little cause for celebration when East Germany marks the 40th anniversary of its founding on Saturday.
The government is planning lavish festivities to entertain all the friends that it claims to have.
But the jamboree could well turn into one of those parties where half the guests fail to turn up, and everyone else tries terribly hard to pretend that they are having a marvellous time.
Unsurprisingly, among the ‘friends’ attending will be the Romanian President, Nicolae Ceausescu, and the Czechoslovak leader, Milos Jakes.
The Chinese will also be represented, by their Vice-Prime Minister, Yao Yilin.
More interesting will be the presence of Mikhail Gorbachev, whose reforms are viewed with disapproval and alarm in East Berlin.
Also attending will be Poland's President, Wojciech Jaruzelski, considered by East Germany as one of Communism's sounder sons who has gone lamentably astray in handing power over to non-Communists.
A different sort of jamboree, arguably of greater use to mankind, kicks off in Oslo on Thursday, when the Nobel Peace Prize is announced.
One of the candidates this year is the entire population of Peking, apparently in keeping with the tradition of off-beat nominees for the prize.
The 1989 awards are each worth £300,000, 20 per cent more than last year, due to particularly good returns on investments made by the Nobel Foundation.
Hungary's Communist Party is expected to formalise radical political and economic changes at its special congress on Friday.
The congress has been brought forward by a year, in what is being interpreted as a victory for the leader of the reformist wing of the party, Imre Pozsgay.
He is reportedly hoping to oust Karoly Grosz as General Secretary.
The party may well face further depletion with the expected defection of some members to set up yet another social democratic opposition party.
Mr Grosz, 59, has been overtaken, some would say swamped, by the wave of reforms he unleashed after displacing Janos Kadar as Hungarian leader in May 1987.
Now he finds himself in the same position as his predecessor — a relative conservative whose time is past.
The Pope, a conservative whose grip on the reins of power has never been firmer, is setting off on a tour of the Far East on Friday.
He will start in Seoul, where he is to officiate at the 44th International Eucharistic Congress.
He will also celebrate mass for about one million Korean faithful and 20,000 clergy members and laymen from 120 foreign countries in a ceremony on Sunday.
The Pope is expected to meet President Roh Tae Woo.
A more controversial moment may come when he visits East Timor, since the Vatican refuses to recognise the annexation of the island by Indonesia.
The Soviet Defence Minister, Dmitri Yazov, visits the Pentagon today for a meeting with the US Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney.
His visit is the first by a Soviet defence minister to the US.
He is due to get a comprehensive view of the country this week, from watching marines train in California and visiting the 82nd Airborne Division in North Carolina, to a touch of military tourism on the site of the Civil War battlefield at Gettysburg.
EC foreign ministers, meeting today, have already drawn up their battle-lines over the much-vexed topic of safeguarding European culture on television.
They will be debating a European Commission directive which only calls on EC television stations to screen a majority of European programmes, where possible.
The British, perhaps sensitive to intense American lobbying over the issue, want to adopt the directive as it stands.
The French want a mandatory minimum level imposed of 60 per cent of programmes made in Europe.
If no accord is reached by Friday, the directive will die anyway, under a time limit rule.
Botswana goes to the polls on Saturday, when seven parties will contest 34 seats in the country's single chamber.
President Quett Masire is expected to be nominated again as the presidential candidate of the Botswana Democratic Party, which has ruled since independence in 1966.
Finally, a special celebration takes place on Friday, when the famous Parisian cabaret, The Moulin Rouge, celebrates its 100th birthday.
Genscher cheered as 4,000 refugees leave for the West
From EDWARD LUCAS in Prague
EARLY yesterday morning, the increasingly squalid West German embassy in Prague finally disgorged its cargo of more than 4,000 dirty, dazed and exhausted East German emigrants.
Conditions and hopes at the embassy had been declining rapidly, given the apparent reluctance of Czechoslovakia to contemplate even a temporary humanitarian solution to ease the overcrowding.
Early on Saturday evening, however, while Prague seemed sunk in its customary weekend torpor, West Germany's veteran foreign minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, arrived unannounced, hotfoot from the United Nations.
From a balcony overlooking the embassy grounds, and to wild cheering from the thousands of would-be emigrants in the ‘tent village’ below, he announced all those staying in the embassy would be allowed to leave immediately for the West.
The deal Mr Genscher struck with his East German counterpart, Oskar Fischer, remains as unexplained as it was unexpected.
Many of the East Germans assumed West Germany had again dug into its pocket to ‘buy out’ East Germans seeking to come to the West.
Better informed sources suggested Soviet pressure on East Germany was responsible for the climbdown.
Others pointed to the inevitable and embarrassing shadow the embassy occupation would have cast over next weekend's celebrations of the 40th anniversary of the founding of East Germany.
But the questions were forgotten in a scramble to cram grubby possessions into muddy rucksacks and carrier bags, and then stream out of the embassy to queue for buses in the long, cobbled, dimly-lit street.
For some, it was the first step outside the embassy grounds for three months.
An end-of-term atmosphere, tempered by extreme exhaustion, prevailed.
People embraced and wept, promising to stay in touch, only to realise in some cases that they had no addresses to exchange.
Some sang ‘Auld Lang Syne’, and ‘Tannenbaum’.
West German tourists and Czechoslovaks gathered on street corners to cheer and wave as seven chartered Czechoslovak buses began many hours of ferrying the East Germans to the distant suburban rail terminus where trains arrived through the night to take them to West Germany.
Women with children were in the first buses.
Even when, after several hours, the majority of emigrants had set off, a group of young men wearing track suits remained in darkness at the back of the embassy, helping the most recent arrivals over the railings.
At Liben railway station in the northern outskirts of Prague, East Germans queued cheerfully in drizzle for more than an hour to enter the departure hall.
Most were content to contemplate their deliverance, but some were more boisterous.
Young men carrying home-made West German emblems chanted ‘Long Live Germany, Long Live Genscher’.
Few appeared perturbed at beginning a new life in such unusual circumstances.
Many of the emigrants are skilled workers confident of their job prospects.
By far the greatest worries were those of divided families.
A small group was reported to have stayed in the embassy in the hope of avoiding separation from friends or family en route from East Germany.
Yesterday morning the police, conspicuous but inactive in past weeks, blocked East German latecomers from access to the embassy garden.
The embassy grounds, emptied of their temporary visitors, were unrecognisably battered.
The once crowded white and khaki tents sagged emptily over mud.
A sour smell of overcrowded humanity hung in the air.
The embassy gardener is said to be planning ‘to start again'.
Prayers and protest over Chernobyl
From EDWARD LUCAS in Prague
MINSK (Reuter)— A thousand people packed the main Catholic church here yesterday to pay tribute to victims of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, a day after an unprecedented protest march through the city.
Kalvariskii Church overflowed with people, many wearing armbands with radioactivity symbols.
They sang hymns and said a prayer for the 31 people who died and those who suffered from radiation in the April 1986 accident.
‘We must not forget the sufferings that occurred,’ the priest, Yan Adamovich, told the congregation in Polish and Byelorussian.
Hundreds of people stood outside unable to get in.
Similar services were scheduled for later in the day in the Byelorussian capital's two Orthodox churches.
On Saturday, more than 15,000 demonstrators ignored an official ban and rain to march through Minsk demanding local authorities do more to clean up the Chernobyl accident.
For four hours they chanted ‘Down with (Yefrem) Sokolov’— the republic's party chief — and cheered calls for the prosecution of those running the republic's government at the time of the disaster.
Around 100,000 people were evacuated from the Ukraine and Byelorussia immediately after the disaster, but Byelorussian activists say this was not nearly enough.
Latecomers who continue to hope
From ANNE APPLEBAUM in Warsaw
DOZENS more East German refugees arrived outside the West German embassy yesterday seeking asylum and passage to the West, including some who missed by only a few minutes a train that took more than 800 of their compatriots to West Germany.
Many of the new arrivals, who waited in the street outside the embassy, said they were convinced there would be another train for them.
The one they missed pulled out from Warsaw's East Station at 2.50am yesterday carrying 809 cheering East Germans bound for the Rhine region of West Germany.
Once upon a time another German government let Lenin cross another Germany in a sealed train on his way to Russia.
More than 80 years later, Lenin's heirs are allowing refugees from their Communist regime escape in the opposite direction, in an East German-made train travelling across East German territory.
Among those leaving was Cornelia, 22, a young East Berliner destined, she said, for West Berlin via a very circuitous route.
‘I still don't know if my family know where I am or if they will suffer from my decision.
But I saw no other way out: I didn't know if I would ever have a chance again.’
Some of the refugees had been living in Polish exile for as long as seven weeks, while others arrived only a few hours before West German diplomats announced they could leave.
Only two failed to go: a new mother and her child, who was born in a Polish hospital four days ago.
The East German government's decision to let the refugees leave across their own country came as a surprise to many, including some West German diplomats.
Some of the refugees originally refused to touch East German territory again, but were reassured when two of the West German diplomats said they would accompany the train, to ensure that the rules were followed.
During the journey, East German officials will enter the train, and collect all East German passports.
West Germans will then issue new ones.
Legally, the refugees have been expelled from East Germany, meaning that under current rules they cannot return.
According to unofficial reports, the arrangement was designed by the West German Foreign Minister, Hans Dietrich Genscher, the new Polish foreign minister, Krzystof Skubiszewski, and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, who met recently at the United Nations in New York.
Communists allow burial of Montenegro's last king
From MARCUS TANNER in Cetinje, Yugoslavia
THE PEOPLE of Montenegro yesterday welcomed home the remains of Nicholas I, their first and last king, after 70 years' exile in Italy, in belated fulfilment of his last will and testament.
Thousands of Montenegrins, many in national costume, waited at the quayside in Bar for the Italian warship that would bring him home.
Then they formed a slow procession behind the coffin into the mountains to the old royal capital of Cetinje for his reburial in the monastery there.
What was surely the last ever Montenegrin ‘royal event’ was masterminded by the republic's new Communist leadership, which has abruptly stopped describing Nicholas as a class enemy, to ride the same wave of popular patriotism and royal fervour which swept Serbia in the recent celebrations of the 600th anniversary of the battle of Kosovo.
The latest biography now calls him ‘an outstanding statesman, warrior and man of letters’.
‘If I die abroad in exile, let my body rest in a temporary grave until my mortal remains be transferred to our dear homeland,’ said the Montenegrin President, Branko Kostic, reading the royal will and testament to the crowds in Cetinje Square, who carried flags and portraits of Nicholas and his queen, Milena.
‘Today the people of Montenegro fulfill the wish of their first and last king guided by innate love and respect for their history,’ he went on.
‘Our tourist organisations are counting on big profits,’ said Srdan Darmanovic, a member of the Montenegrin Central Committee.
‘This will be good for the Montenegrin economy too.’
Montenegro's young and go-ahead leadership, which came to power this year amid furious popular dissatisfaction with the ‘old men in grey suits’, sponsored the gathering of Nicholas's surviving relatives — the first ‘royal reunion’ organised by a Communist government.
‘A letter dropped through the post from the President of the Socialist Republic of Montenegro, inviting me to the funeral,’ said John Kennedy, a Conservative Party member who lives in Barking and is a distant relative of Nicholas.
Montenegro's sudden rehabilitation of Nicholas's memory is a popular move.
‘He liberated us from the Turks and fought for our independence,’ said a small boy who waited at the quayside amid a jostling crowd of former monarchs, visiting Serbian bishops and television crews.
Marko Radoman, 103, and a veteran of both Balkan wars, was given a place at the front as one of the few with personal memories of Nicholas's reign.
For a man whom Rebecca West, a contemporary Balkan observer, called ‘repulsive’ and ‘treacherous’for deserting his Serbian son-in-law, King Alexander, in the First World War, it is a sepia-tinted view of history.
Nicholas was known as ‘the uncle of Europe’ for his success in marrying his beautiful but penniless daughters into the grander royal houses of Russia, Serbia and Italy.
This furthered his long-term ambition to rule a large ‘south Slav’ kingdom when the Ottoman Empire finally collapsed.
One daughter, a grand duchess of Russia, even gained a footnote in history by introducing an unknown monk, Rasputin, to the Russian Tsarina Alexandra.
In his minute, inaccessible capital, which today has only 15,000 inhabitants, Nicholas erected a miniature European court and an exquisitely furnished Victorian palace.
He even persuaded 12 European powers to turn cottages into full embassies.
It was a fair achievement in a town which an earlier observer described as ‘44 hovels’.
But Nicholas's grand design collapsed in 1918 when his Serbian son-in-law, Alexander, deposed him and incorporated Montenegro into Yugoslavia.
For church and state it's divorce — Italian style
From MICHAEL SHERIDAN in Rome
EVEN THOSE students of Italian Catholic politics enchanted by Byzantine matters are nostalgic this autumn for the days when schism was a simple affair.
Important changes are afoot within the network of personal relationships which have cemented state and church power in Italy since the war.
The church hierarchy, which daily seems to see less that is Christian in the Christian Democrat party, is divorcing itself from its traditional allies.
Ironically, it is the proconsuls of that great exemplar of Vatican influence, Giulio Andreotti, Prime Minister for the sixth time, who are exciting church disapproval.
His faction has triumphed over the reformist elements of Christian Democracy, headed by the ousted leader and premier, Ciriaco De Mita.
In the sweetness of victory, Mr Andreotti's Roman cohorts have forgotten that they are mortal and, in the eyes of many churchmen, their greed and arrogance now risk bringing Catholic politics into disrepute.
The Pope's Vicar of Rome, Cardinal Ugo Poletti, has taken to scolding the Christian Democrats for their divisions which may bring victory for the secular parties and the Communists in city elections on 29 October.
A public rift in Catholic politics surfaced last week when the Communion and Liberation movement severed its ties with a powerful weekly magazine, Il Sabato, run by Andreotti supporters.
The magazine exploited popular Catholic themes, such as anti-abortion campaigning and family values to channel middle-class resentment into a political movement.
The movement promoted single-issue politics but invariably delivered its machine vote to the Christian Democrats.
The Pope's initial enthusiasm for its stridency has waned, as has his toleration for the way Rome is governed beyond the Vatican walls.
‘A place with corners that resemble the Third World’ was his verdict this year on the city's mixture of new private affluence and public squalor, its Mafia-like interest groups and its grotesque inefficiencies.
His newspaper, L'Osservatore Romano, spared no criticism of the Christian Democrats who divided the spoils in city hall.
The mayor, Pietro Giubilo, had to quit in the face of corruption allegations involving companies linked to Communion and Liberation.
He was never more than the creature of Mr Andreotti's key fixer, Vittorio ‘The Shark’ Sbardella.
Yet Mr Andreotti moved smoothly into the premiership.
One senses that people do not trifle with ‘The Shark’, whose background is in the seedier recesses of legal neo-fascism.
Between the embarrassment of frank sleaziness, the vicious campaigns of Il Sabato against Mr De Mita (then a serving prime minister) and the evidence of its own eyes, the Italian church began distancing itself from both Communion and Liberation and Mr Sbardella.
Frightened, Communion and Liberation has now disowned Il Sabato, removing its directors and leaving the weekly in the hands of Mr Sbardella.
The Bishops applauded.
Mr Andreotti's supporters may triumph in the elections.
But their patron, though ensconced in the Prime Minister's palace, is clearly more estranged from the mainstream of Catholic politics than at any time in his 40-year career.
It is a sin for which neither absolution nor salvation may readily be forthcoming.
Bush's tax cut tests Democratic mettle
From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
DEMOCRATIC leaders will make desperate attempts this week to prevent President Bush from claiming a Congressional majority for conservative economic policies, similar to the one enjoyed by President Reagan in his early years.
The Democratic leadership in the Senate is anxious to reverse the handsome victory by Mr Bush in the House of Representatives last week, when 64 Democrats voted with the Republicans to sweep through a two-year cut in capital gains taxes.
Senator George Mitchell of Maine, the Democratic majority leader in the Senate, said yesterday that he was confident that the senior house of Congress would dismantle the temporary tax cut.
Congressional officials predict, however, that a truncated version of the tax break will pass the Senate this week, allowing the White House to trumpet a one-two victory over the relatively untried Democratic leadership on Capitol Hill.
Such a victory would also permit Mr Bush to claim a Republican-conservative Democrat working majority in Congress for his ‘no new taxes, growth will solve everything’ economic policy.
It would, however, leave prospects for medium-term, or even short-term, progress in solving the federal budget deficit more confused than ever.
The dispute has left the bipartisan efforts to reduce the deficit in, at least temporary, tatters.
The Republicans claim that the capital gains cut (from 28 per cent to 19.6 per cent for two years) would stimulate investment and create jobs.
The Democratic leaders insist that the cut is an unwarranted giveaway to the wealthy which will have no significant effect on the economy and deepen the deficit.
In reality, the squabble is more over slogans and symbols left over from the Reagan years than anything substantial.
This begs the question why the Democrats and the White House are staging such a divisive quarrel, at a time when agreement on a deficit-cutting budget for 1990 is already overdue (the nominal deadline passed yesterday).
Some pundits suggest that the capital gains tax battle is a shrewd White House softening-up exercise for an even more aggressive assault on the Democratic leaders in the next two to three weeks, designed to force a 1990 deficit-cutting agreement on Republican terms.
This flies in the face of the cautious nature of the Bush administration.
Congressional sources believe the White House saw the chance for a quick, psychologically valuable victory over the Democratic leaders.
Ecuador holds drug lord
From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
BOGOTA (Reuter)— Colombia was reported yesterday to be seeking the extradition of a suspected cocaine baron held in neighbouring Ecuador as a wave of bombings, believed to have been carried out by drug traffickers, continued.
Police sent a five-man mission to Ecuador to bring back Evaristo Porras Ardila, the most important figure detained in the government's six-week crackdown, according to the daily El Tiempo.
Mr Porras, considered a chieftain of the Medellin cocaine cartel, was arrested on Thursday in the northern town of Tulcan, about 10 miles from the Colombian border, and was to be handed over to Colombian authorities ‘as a show of Ecuador's support’ for the drug crackdown, an Ecuadorean spokesman said.
News of Mr Porras's arrest followed the explosion of 13 bombs at the weekend, some of which damaged six schools in Bogota.
Two teenage girls and a woman were hurt.
In Medellin, a three-week lull in bombings was broken on Saturday night when a dynamite blast damaged two telephone control boxes.
Baby deaths ‘due to crack’
By JOHN LICHFIELD
WASHINGTON — The city's infant mortality rate has surged to the level of some Third World countries, largely as a result of cocaine-addiction among young women, writes John Lichfield.
Some 169 Washington babies died before their first birthday in the first six months of this year, bringing the capital's infant mortality rate to 32.3 deaths for every 1,000 live births, a 50 per cent increase on 1988.
This is more than triple the national average, itself one of the worst in the developed world.
Health officials blame the increasing use by women of crack, the smokable form of cocaine.
Smoking crack during pregnancy can cause low birth-weight, respiratory problems and premature labour.
In acute cases, the babies are born addicted to cocaine.
Officials also blame last year's Congress decision to ban the public funding of abortions in Washington.
They say drug-abusing mothers who would previously have had an abortion are bearing sickly babies with low chances of survival.
The city's baby death rate now compares with that of Argentina, Venezuela, Thailand and Paraguay.
