The Bar Conference: Donaldson sets the tone for battle over rights of audience
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
BARRISTERS could retain much of their monopoly over advocacy in the higher courts under a subtle agenda for discussion spelled out by Lord Donaldson, the Master of the Rolls, as he opened the Bar's annual conference in London at the weekend.
Signalling the beginning of a lower-key campaign against the plans of the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, to give increased rights of audience in the High and Crown court to solicitors, Lord Donaldson called on the Bar to put aside the ‘trauma, the acrimony and the recriminations’ which followed Lord Mackay's Green Papers and to abandon the hustings.
Lord Donaldson said objectives due to be included in this autumn's Bill were ‘total freedom of choice for the client, unless the interests of justice otherwise require’.
‘When those concerned turn their attention to this problem, they may find they have to make a distinction between litigation in which there is a direct public interest in the result and that in which the public interest is limited to ensuring that an adequate system of justice is available.
‘In the first category we have criminal cases, judicial review and cases which involve matrimonial status and the welfare of children or those under a disability.
In many of them, particularly criminal cases, the interests of the client may be quite different from those of the public.
‘In these cases the interests of justice may demand special requirements such as, for example , that the preparation and presentation of the case be in separate and independent hands’.
In the second category, general civil cases, parties should be able to choose their own lawyers because the interests of justice would be inherently less likely to fetter the client's right of choice.
Lord Donaldson implied, however, that solicitors who exercised their new rights of audience in these cases ought to be expected to concentrate on advocacy.
While emphasising that he had not reached any firm conclusions, Lord Donaldson's voice will be a powerful one in behind-the-scenes manoeuvres as rules governing the exercise of the new advocacy rights are hammered out away from the parliamentary battlefield.
The rules will be drawn up by the Law Society ‘having regard’ to suggestions made by a new lay-dominated independent advisory committee on legal education and conduct.
They will have to be approved by the Lord Chancellor and be subject to the ‘concurrence’ of four senior Supreme Court judges, of whom Lord Donaldson will be one.
In practice, initial drafts of rules will be the subject of ongoing discussions between all four parties.
The four will have to have regard to the ‘interest of justice’ objective.
But on the other hand, the statute will also include a clear intention that extended rights of audience are put into practical effect as soon as the necessary conditions have been met.
A majority of judges said in their response to the Green Papers that standards of conduct and competence might decline if lawyers who worked in partnerships and took instructions directly from clients (most solicitors) were allowed widespread access to the higher courts.
Lord Donaldson's formula for settling the rights of audience controversy was viewed as an adept political move by some delegates.
Alternative dividing lines which have been informally mooted, such as simply restricting solicitor-advocates in Crown Court jury trials to the less serious cases, had been viewed as difficult to support as a matter of principle.
Lord Donaldson's remarks were greeted with cautious enthusiasm by Bar leaders.
Desmond Fennell, QC, the Bar's chairman, said that he was ‘greatly encouraged’ by Lord Donaldson's indication that the interests of justice objective would prevail.
Roger Henderson, QC, the Bar's public affairs spokesman, warned that the words used in the White Paper were open to different interpretations, but said: ‘Lord Donaldson has plainly interpreted the White Paper on the basis that there has been a major change from the Green Paper.’
John Hayes, secretary general of the Law Society, said he regarded the entire matter as up for debate.
‘We look forward to the discussions.
The Master of the Rolls has always been keen to find a middle way.’
Lord Donaldson attacked the White Paper's suggestion that it might be in the public interest to allow other professions, such as accountants, to be given rights of audience in the courts.
The Bar Conference: Aid fund for injury claims ‘should be tested’
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A TRIAL SCHEME should be set up to assess the validity of a contingent legal aid fund to finance personal injury claims for those too well-off to qualify for legal aid but too poor to pay fees, the conference was told.
Under the scheme, successful claimants would pay about 10 per cent of their winnings to a central fund which would meet the costs of unsuccessful claims.
George Pulman, QC, a member of the Bar Council's working party on contingent fees, told a conference workshop on financing litigation that unlike other forms of contingency fee arrangement, lawyers would have no personal interest in the outcome of litigation and there would be no ‘legal aid blackmail’— where cases are legally aided the normal ‘costs follow the event’ rule does not apply and defendants have to meet their own costs even when they win.
In working out the percentage deduction from the damages of successful claimants, comparison should be made with trade union funded personal injury litigation where costs were paid to winning defendants.
‘My initial inquiries suggest that a figure of significantly less than 10 per cent is a real possibility,’ Mr Pulman said.
Initial government money would be needed to get the scheme off the ground.
But Mr Pulman estimated that could be repaid within two years.
A four-year trial scheme should be set up using firms outside London specialising in actions for trade union members.
Legal Aid Board proposals to grant ‘franchises’ to selected solicitors' firms doing legal aid advice work under the ‘green form’scheme will enable the board and lawyers to jointly improve the system, John Pitts, the board chairman, said.
In return for assurances of service to a defined quality, franchised firms would enjoy benefits such as easier administration, devolved responsibility for some aspects of case management, and faster payment.
John Hayes, secretary-general of the Law Society, said the advantages ought to apply to all solicitors and the board should not seek to produce artificial criteria for selection.
‘There should be a much higher threshold at which solicitors would need to consult the board.
The system I would like to see is solicitors being given the job of approving up to £500 of legal aid work, with spot checks on quality, taking off any who are found to have abused it.’
The means test for all legal aid work could also be simplified and handled directly by solicitors, again subject to careful spot check monitoring, Mr Hayes said.
The Bar Conference: Plea for new ‘lawyer-free’ hearings on small claims
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
A LAWYER-FREE small claims procedure, easily operated by the do-it-yourself litigant and staffed by a new body of volunteer ‘civil justices’, is needed to combat problems of cost and delay Lord Donaldson, the Master of the Rolls, said.
The new breed of civil justices would be similar to JPs in the criminal field but would act as arbitrators in county courts.
‘The only qualifications they would need would be common sense, a judicial temperament and an elementary knowledge of the limited aspects of the law which are applicable to such disputes,’ Lord Donaldson said.
‘At the risk of deeply shocking you, I have to say that in relation to small claims, we have to get rid of the lawyers.’
They were ‘overqualified and not cost-effective for small cases’.
He added: ‘The aim must be to produce small claims procedures which can be understood and followed by the do-it-yourself litigant.’
If assistance was needed it should be provided by the courts themselves, by Citizens Advice Bureaux or by similar agencies.
In the minority of cases where representation was really needed it should be provided by ‘para-legals’, able to charge less, in line with their lower qualifications and overheads.
Lord Donaldson said afterwards that his proposal would not lead to a downgrading of justice.
‘At the moment county court registrars are often just using their common sense, not their knowledge of law.
I can't see why the ordinary housewife shouldn't do it.’
He predicted there would be no shortage of volunteers, who could acquire the necessary skills on short courses.
‘There is nothing so fascinating as other people's disputes.’
The system outlined by Lord Donaldson, a man not known for his left tendencies, bears marked similarities to those operated in a number of eastern bloc countries.
The drift of his remarks is likely to find favour with the Lord Chancellor, Lord Mackay of Clashfern, who said last year that many litigants wanted fuller participation in the legal process rather than acting as bystanders in cases conducted by lawyers.
Lord Donaldson then attacked Lord Mackay's White Paper proposals for banks and building societies to undertake conveyancing.
Although the near-monopoly enjoyed by solicitors was indefensible because it related only to the preparation of documents, ‘there is a real need for consumer protection and I am far from sure that the White Paper proposals meet this need,’ he said.
Conveyancing documents should include a certificate by the purchaser saying either that he had been fully advised by a wholly independent practitioner or that he had declined such advice — and the certificate should contain a prominent ‘health warning’ against declining to take it.
The Bar Conference: Commercial judges ‘need highest pay’
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
JUDGES in the Commercial Court should get higher salaries than other High Court colleagues, the conference heard.
There was a pressing need for more judges to help to reduce increasing delays, Richard Williams, a solicitor, said.
‘The unedifying scramble for a free judge causes great embarrassment to solicitors vis-a-vis their clients.’
Extra appointments could be financed by the court's customers paying higher charges when cases were set down for trial.
A more difficult problem was ensuring the extra judges were of a sufficiently high calibre.
‘If more judges are required because of the greater degree of litigious activity it is logical to assume that those successful counsel of high calibre who would be candidates for judge's office would find it economically more gratifying to remain as advocates’, he said.
Bearing in mind the commercial raison d'etre of the court, there was a case for paying its judges more than those in other divisions.
There could also be a Commercial Court of Appeal with its own, higher paid, judges.
Mr Williams said delay was the main complaint solicitors faced from clients.
The Bar Conference: Children's recollection usually reliable says psychiatrist
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
RESEARCH shows that a child's recall is usually accurate, and errors are of omission rather than commission, Dr Danya Glaser, a consultant child psychiatrist, said.
But this does not ensure credibility, which is related to the way the child's account is obtained.
‘If details are requested which, from the child's point of view, are peripheral to the event and therefore not recalled, the child may feel obliged to fabricate one.’
Research had found that even very young children do not ‘go along’ with erroneous suggestions concerning the essence of their experiences.
It was vital to take account of children's cognitive and emotional responses when evaluating their evidence.
‘Denial is present in 85 per cent to 90 per cent of cases.
It is in this context that a reticent, hesitant and anxious account, sometimes followed by a retraction, is likely to be credible,’ she said.
The Bar Conference: Barristers in sex trials defended
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
REPEATED attacks on cross-examination by defence barristers of the victims of alleged sexual offences were misplaced and naive, David Cocks QC, chairman of the Criminal Bar Association, told the conference.
Cross-examination was ‘the greatest legal engine ever invented for the discovery of truth’, he said.
Mr Cocks predicted that advocates would have to adapt their techniques in cases involving children and other vulnerable witnesses, but warned: ‘It would be disastrous for an excessive preoccupation with welfare to erode the defendant's rights and to undermine the role of his advocate.’
The climate of opinion that children never lie about sexual abuse was ‘dangerous’, he added.
Mr Cocks also criticised judges for making uninformed pronouncements about whether child witnesses were old enough to give evidence.
Under the Children and Young Persons Act 1933, judges must be satisfied that the child is of sufficient intelligence to justify the reception of the evidence and understands the duty of telling the truth.
In practice, children under the age of eight are rarely called as witnesses and judges still follow a 1958 House of Lords ruling that a jury could not attach any importance to the evidence of a child of five.
‘This is a subject on which judges need, and should have, expert assistance from a clinical psychologist and not be left to flounder through what may be an ill-informed and perfunctory form of inquisition before the child gives evidence.’
Mr Cocks went on to criticise video interviewing techniques of police and social workers.
‘Might there not be a case for putting the initial interview in the hands of an educational psychologist skilled in eliciting a history without being committed to what the social workers revealingly call ‘disclosure’? ', he suggested.
Once initial interviews with children had been videotaped, the prosecution should have the right to apply for a pre-trial hearing before the judge, in informal surroundings, at which the child could be examined and cross-examined.
But there were serious objections to using the videotaped interview as a complete substitute for the child's evidence in chief at the trial, because of the unsatisfactory nature of the questioning and because it would cause difficulties for the prosecution.
First Birdwatching Fair in Rutland Water, Leicestershire
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
Some of the ‘twitchers’ at Britain's first Birdwatching Fair, held at Rutland Water in Leicestershire over the weekend.
Proceeds went to a campaign against the annual slaughter of 900 million migrating birds around the Mediterranean.
Contemporary Art Market: Paintings poised between Expressionism and Romanticism
By EDWARD LUCIE-SMITH
MUCH OF the painting in London commercial galleries hovers somewhere between Expressionism and a more traditional British Romanticism.
A good example is the William Tillyer show at Bernard Jacobson.
Tillyer sees nature as luscious and womb-like.
The way he interprets it owes a lot to the work of the late Ivon Hitchens, who used a similar technique, with broad swirls and patches of paint, and little attention to details.
The exhibition indicates that Tillyer's work has been moving away from Hitchens and closer to American landscape-abstractionists, notably Helen Frankenthaler.
Some of the pictures are American in scale — very much bigger than anything he has shown before — and this makes the resemblance more apparent.
(Prices from £7,000-£40,000).
Kark Weschke, at the Redfern Gallery, is Expressionist in a more orthodox fashion — not surprisingly, since he was born in Germany in 1925 and did not come to England until 1948.
His painting, now, is a slightly odd mixture of German and British influences.
One very ambitious painting, of Gordale Scar, challenges recollection of the huge romantic canvas showing the same spot, painted by the early nineteenth-century British Romantic artist James Ward and now in the Tate Gallery.
Other canvases, such as Weschke's awkward but powerful version of Europa and the Bull, are much closer to German Expressionism of the pre-First World War variety.
(Paintings from £7,000-£12,000.
Drawings from £500-£1,200).
Agnew's has an exhibition by the Yorkshire artist Len Tabner.
Most of the works are either pastels, often with the addition of charcoal and graphite, or watercolours.
There are seascapes, bleak, upland landscapes and industrial scenes.
All are themes Turner might have used and Tabner is clearly conscious of his example.
David Brown, in an introduction to the show, also suggests an affinity with the Scottish painter, William McTaggart (1835-1910).
This is appropriate in more ways than one, since, like McTaggart, Tabner has remained somewhat apart from the more experimental tendencies of his time.
But there are many good things here, nevertheless -these are skillful, powerful drawings, which impress by their sure sense of rhythm.
(From £1,000-£9,000).
The Scottish Gallery has an exhibition of paintings by Roderick Carmichael, an Edinburgh-born artist who has spent the last 10 years in Australia.
Few of the canvases are primarily concerned with landscape, but it tends to find its way into most of them.
The technique and colour are Expressionist, but the paintings also have a lingering hint of Pop Art because they are frequently concerned with symbolic objects.
A rather kitsch ceramic stool in the form of an elephant wearing a howdah is the chief image in a couple.
(From £4,500-£10,000).
Prisoners of war fund ‘is failing needy old soldiers’
By JAMES DALRYMPLE
A FUND standing at about £200,000 which was raised to give aid and comfort to homecoming British prisoners after the Second World War is alleged to be growing in direct proportion to the number of old soldiers dying without ever seeing a penny of it.
The fund, raised in 1944 in the Midlands, was invested by officials of the Royal Warwickshire Regiment and, apart from the stock market crash of two years ago, it has steadily increased.
In one 10-year period from the mid-1970s it rose from just over £30,000 to nearly £250,000, and analysts calculate that in 20 years -when all the men it was specifically designed to help will be long dead — it will be worth well over £1m and increasing in value at more than £100,000 a year.
Yet, the Labour MP Jeff Rooker claims, there have been examples of Royal Warwickshire prisoners of war seeking desperately needed help who have been given as little as £25, while many more have been means-tested and found ‘unqualified’ for even basic financial assistance.
There has also been malpractice in the past by officials administering the fund, he claims, in which thousands of pounds were used to foot the bill for regimental social functions.
This was privately admitted by senior officers who took over the running of the fund two years ago, and after an inquiry by the Charity Commission more than £3,000 was repaid from regimental funds.
Mr Rooker, MP for Perry Barr in Birmingham, discovered the existence of the POWs Fund in 1976 and publicised it in the Midlands.
He received about 20 letters from ex-regimental POWs who were in need; these were passed on to the regiment.
Mr Rooker said that the 20 letters resulted in only seven men receiving financial help.
The highest-paid got £40 and the lowest-paid, £25, in a payout of £220 — even though the fund then stood at £58,000.
Of the other 13 POWs, six were given nothing, five either died at that time or could not be traced, and two refused to submit to means testing.
‘Some of these men had been so badly damaged, both physically and mentally, by their experiences on the battlefield and in POW camps that their lives were ruined.’
Mr Rooker said money from the fund ‘simply never got to the people who needed it because it wasn't publicised enough and because the regimental administrators were inefficient.
Now it is standing at a huge sum, growing rapidly, and it is still not going where it is needed’.
He added: ‘The sane thing to do would be to take perhaps half of the total sum, make a determined effort to find every surviving POW, and share the money equally with them.’
The man in charge of the fund, Brigadier Jimmy Chater, admitted that there had been problems with finding and helping Royal Warwickshire POWs, and agreed that the income from the fund exceeded the benefits paid out.
He said that some time ago the POWs fund was merged with a general purposes benefit fund for all old comrades of the regiment, but that POWs were given priority in any benefit payouts.
‘I wish it were true that the fund will continue to grow, but we are at the mercy of the markets, and we must keep a healthy capital amount for all needy old soldiers down on their luck.
If we were to wind up the POWs fund and pay out the money once and for all to all POWs that we could find, we could run into severe problems in the next 10 to 15 years as these chaps get very old and need help even more.
‘There were problems in the past with the way the fund was run, but when I took over a couple of years ago we took a very long look at our accounting system and put matters right.
‘Now, we advertise repeatedly for any POWs who are in trouble, and we are only too pleased to help them.
I regret the allegation of means testing.
When we are asked for assistance we call in the Services’ social services people, the SSAFA (Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families Association), who decide what help is needed, and we provide it.’
Whitehall Watch: Poacher turns gamekeeper to scrutinise Civil Service: Peter Hennessy talks to Sir Angus Fraser, head of the efficiency unit
By PETER HENNESSY
A YEAR ago Sir Angus Fraser took over from Sir Robin Ibbs as the Prime Minister's efficiency adviser and part-time head of her efficiency unit.
It was a tough assignment for two reasons.
First, Sir Robin and his team had developed, and persuaded ministers to adopt, the most radical plan — the so-called Next Steps — for restructuring the Civil Service in nearly 150 years.
No successor could hope for such an earth-moving tenure as that.
Secondly, Sir Angus was barely a year out of the Civil Service after a career which had taken him to the chairmanship of the Customs and Excise.
Wouldn't today's permanent secretaries rather resent one of their own returning to tell them how to overturn the habits of a lifetime?
Twelve months on, Sir Angus is not really worried on either score.
Preparing the Next Steps — the conversion of the Civil Service's businesses into executive agencies standing free of policy-making departments — tended to monopolise the attention of the efficiency unit with its tiny staff.
The Next Steps is now a separate project run by Peter Kemp in the Cabinet Office.
Renewing the emphasis on the unit's original raison d'etre created by Lord Rayner, the Prime Minister's first efficiency adviser — the scrutiny programme of efficiency studies — was necessary, Sir Angus said, as ‘it had taken a bit of a setback’.
He is very pleased with the ‘good meaty topics’ departments have been suggesting for scrutiny this year.
He mentioned the Home Office-led investigation of state funding of the voluntary sector; the Department of Education's investigation of educational support grants, about £650m worth, given to local education authorities for tasks deemed especially important; and the Department of Social Security's review of the shortfall of contributions to contributory benefits, amounting to nearly £500m a year.
As for old colleagues resenting his intrusion on their territory: ‘Any external agent is going to be viewed with a certain amount of suspicion.
I haven't noticed it.
Having done the job myself, it helps me to understand that departments are being asked to review everything continuously.
It doesn't mean they get an easier ride, but it does mean I'm not going to be utterly unreasonable in the demands I make.’
One thing Margaret Thatcher asked him to concentrate on in his Whitehall travels is the quality of departments' planning machinery.
This has been a focus of his first year and will be of his second.
Occasionally, the efficiency unit scrutinises itself.
So I asked Sir Angus to answer the basic questions he tells scrutineers to apply.
Every scrutineer begins by asking ‘What's it for?’
Sir Angus replied: ‘We are for advising the Prime Minister, who is very interested in efficiency and effectiveness in the Civil Service.
We are for bringing outside analysis to departments along with the office of the Minister for the Civil Service and the Treasury.
The Treasury are the regulars.
We are the irregulars.’
How much do you and your staff of eight cost?‘£374,000 a year.’
Who are your customers?
‘I am a servant of the Prime Minister.
In another sense, it's the departments with whom we work.
In another sense, it's the consumer or the taxpayer.’
Is the efficiency unit necessary?
‘It's necessary because the PM wants it.
The question is whether the same remit could be fulfilled by different means?
We find that being cast in the role of external stimulator does serve a useful function.
‘If a department has an internal review it can get bogged down in internal considerations.
We guarantee high-level attention from the permanent secretary and the minister.
The results are less likely to seep into the sand.’
Like everyone else in late 1980s Whitehall, the words ‘changing the culture’ are constantly on Sir Angus' lips.
That, he says, is what the Next Steps is all about: ‘It will succeed only if it changes the way business is done and accounted for.’
Is it going to work?
‘Yes.
When I left the Civil Service in 1987 I was rather pessimistic.
But the way it's moved on has been quite good.
I reckon it's pretty well irreversible.’
Salary increases for managers average 11%
By BARRIE CLEMENT, Labour Editor
PAY RISES for managers are averaging 11 per cent, almost double the level of a year ago, and accelerating, according to research published today.
Those aged over 35 are receiving increases of 8.5 per cent, while younger colleagues are getting 12.9 per cent , the Reward Group reports in its biannual survey.
Younger, more mobile employees, on an average of £13,700 a year, are enjoying bigger increases because companies are ‘desperate’ to keep them.
Older managers, on £16,650, are regarded as more stable and having reached their ‘ceiling’.
Overall, salary rises have almost doubled in a year.
The average increase reported in the March survey was 8.5 per cent.
In September last year it was 6.4 per cent.
Four regions were found to be above the average: Scotland, 12.2 per cent; the West Midlands 12 per cent ; the South-west 11.6 per cent ; and London 11.5 per cent .
Rates in the West Midlands, however, are still 8.3 per cent below the national average.
The biggest rises — about 12.6 per cent— are being won in smaller companies with a turnover of less than £5m.
This suggests that such firms are reacting on a more ad hoc basis to pressure in the market, the report says.
The mechanical engineering sector has seen the largest increase, at 15.3 per cent, although pay is 7.3 per cent below the national average.
The ‘love affair’ with company cars is becoming more intense despite the Chancellor's best efforts.
Companies find it increasingly difficult to attract the right people in the £14,000 to £18,000 range unless they offer a car.
Two years ago, less than 25 per cent had a car, now almost 35 per cent.
The survey analysed nearly 21,000 salaries of senior managers to supervisors at more than 900 companies with a total workforce of 824,000.
Millions at risk in loan swap challenge
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
A High Court case starting today pits local authorities and the City's financial institutions against each other.
Millions of pounds are at stake and one side is certain to receive a bloody nose.
The legality of money market dealings by Hammersmith and Fulham Council in west London, which once amounted to exposure of £5bn is being challenged by its auditor, Anthony Hazell, a partner in Deloitte Haskins and Sells, with the support of the Audit Commission, the local authority financial watchdog.
The council embarked on a series of complex and sophisticated manoeuvres, including interest rate swaps, swap options, and cash options which initially proved profitable — earning £13m — but which would now result in massive losses.
Essentially, these manoeuvres are a way of managing debt to take advantage of interest rate changes, but the council went way beyond debt management into pure financial speculation.
There are 77 other local authorities playing the markets in a similar, though less extensive, way, and a similar number of financial institutions are involved.
All these transactions could be declared ultra vires, beyond the legal powers of local authorities and therefore invalid, if Hammersmith loses.
The judges could complicate matters by ordering that the outcome of the deals be reversed, necessitating a mind-numbing series of calculations by the City.
But, if Hammersmith wins and the deals are declared legal, the council will have to pay the losses on the transactions.
These have mounted because in February Nicholas Ridley, then Secretary of State for the Environment, stopped any new deals and Hammersmith's portfolio was largely weighted to the expectation that interest rates would be low, preventing the council from improving its position in the market.
The council had wound down its holdings from £5bn to £2bn but its advisers had backed the wrong horse by predicting low interest rates.
In an affidavit to be presented to the hearing, the auditor calculated that Hammersmith could lose £74m at current levels of interest rate and £186m if rates rose by 1 per cent.
Given that this sum represents more than half the council's average annual spending, the poll tax payers would be faced with a nightmare.
The council's fund established after Mr Ridley blocked the deals to pay back any losses is currently less than £20m.
Fortunately for Hammersmith and its citizens, legal advisers for all parties concerned have been unequivocal, all suggesting a defeat for the council, which would mean Hammersmith would not have to pay the losses on the transactions.
The deals stretch back to 1983 when the council was run by a Conservative-Liberal coalition.
For several years the market playing was limited but early in 1988, finance officers began taking options out on a massive scheme.
The council's Labour leadership, who have been in control since 1986, have argued that they had no control over the transactions as the day to day running of the finance department is in the hands of expert financial staff.
Publicly the banks have suggested that there could be dire consequences for the City should the deals be ruled illegal.
They feel that as innocent parties they are being cheated.
However, insiders reckon that the councils will get away with it if Hammersmith loses.
While the banks may then try to sue the council or even individual officers the risk is very widely spread and no financial institution will be put in danger.
City schools face cash cuts
By SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
HARD-PRESSED inner city comprehensive schools are likely to lose thousands of pounds a year under government plans to devolve financial management to heads, one of the largest teachers' unions warns today.
However, comprehensives in relatively affluent rural and suburban areas will become richer.
A survey by the National Association of Schoolmasters/Union of Women Teachers reveals that under the new financing formula nearly 60 per cent of secondary schools will be less well funded and about 40 per cent better resourced.
The study of 1,544 secondary schools in 43 local education authorities in England and Wales shows 882 schools will lose nearly £55m between them annually — an average of £62,663.
In particular, the survey suggests 71 per cent of secondary schools in metropolitan authorities will lose money and that the average cut in Liverpool, Manchester, Rochdale, Salford and Derbyshire will be more than £100,000 a school.
Fred Smithies, union general secretary, said that the redistribution of resources would result from budgets being calculated according to total pupil numbers instead of classes taught.
Budgets would also be calculated to meet average teaching costs — not reflecting actual staff salaries.
‘The school curriculum will be devastated,’ Mr Smithies added.
‘Pupils’ educational prospects will be blighted.’
Leaders of the Association of University Teachers, representing university lecturers, are recommending a claim which would mean a 27 per cent pay increase for its 30,100 members.
The claim, drawn up by the national executive, will be discussed by a union council meeting on 14 October.
A MORI poll commissioned by the Independent Schools Information Service, representing most private schools, suggests 57 per cent of Labour supporters do not want such schools abolished.
A similar poll last year showed 52 per cent favoured retention.
The poll, of nearly 2000 adults, showed 72 per cent favoured the retention of independent schools.
Among trade union members 70 per cent were in favour, while 75 per cent of Green Party members opposed abolition.
Teachers ready to walk out in ‘oversize’ classes protest
By SIMON MIDGLEY, Education Reporter
TEACHERS in east London are set to walk out of schools today if asked to take classes which they believe are too large.
Members of the National Union of Teachers in Hackney and Tower Hamlets have voted, by a 95 per cent majority, to refuse to teach classes of more than 30 pupils.
The limit for first-year infants classes will be 27 and for classes of children of mixed ages, 24.
The action will affect 107 schools but it is not clear how many have what the union regards as oversized classes.
Shortages mean supply teachers are acting as permanent class teachers, leaving schools with no reserves to cover for sickness.
When staff are absent, a class is split between other teachers.
Hackney and Tower Hamlets are among the boroughs worst affected by shortages.
Inner London as a whole has 653 primary teacher vacancies.
Mike Loosley, general secretary of the Inner London Teachers' Association -the area union branch — said yesterday: ‘There's no getting away from the fact that a child sent home on a particular day as a result of our action will be suffering.
But our belief is that, in the long-term, we shall improve education because even this Government will see the need to pump in more money to get teachers.’
It is estimated that about 75 per cent of the union's members in Hackney and Tower Hamlets voted in the ballot, supported officially by NUT national leaders.
Embryo Bill to be used in fight against abortion
By SARAH HELM, Home Affairs Correspondent
‘PRO-LIFE’ campaigners pledged at the weekend to launch a ‘make or break’drive to roll back the abortion laws.
Experts on both sides of the debate believe the parliamentary campaign has the best chance of success since abortion was legalised in 1967.
Phyllis Bowman, national director of the Society for the Protection of the Unborn Child, told its annual conference at Keele that a dual attack on abortion and embryo experimentation will be launched in the autumn when the Government announces its Bill on embryo research.
The society, which claims wide support in the Commons and the Lords, will campaign against embryo research and aim to introduce its own amendment to reduce the time limit for abortion to 18 weeks.
The Government has indicated it will make provision in the Bill for such an amendment.
That means it will be the first time abortion has been debated as part of government legislation, rather than on the basis of a private member's Bill.
As a result, the amendment cannot be ‘talked out’ as has happened on every previous occasion, but will have to be resolved through a free vote.
The society move was immediately condemned yesterday by the British Pregnancy Advisory Service as ‘an attempt to hijack government legislation’.
Diane Munday, for the service, said: ‘Embryo experimentation and abortion are two different issues.
This is another attempt to waste parliamentary time — already 280 hours has been wasted in this way in the past two decades.’
The society argues, however, that the announcement of the Bill itself is a success, showing how ‘pro-lifers’ have forced the Government to resolve the issue both on embryo research and abortion.
‘We have taken single issue campaigning beyond the text book by forcing the Government to take responsibility itself,’ Ann Winterton, Conservative MP for Congleton and secretary of the all-party parliamentary Pro-Life Group, said.
The society has started raising funds for the campaign.
It estimates it will need about £200,000 and has been pledged £65,000 by the millionaire property developer Godfrey Bradman, chairman of the society's Education Research Trust.
Mrs Winterton said the campaign would be the most complex fought by the sociey because it linked the two issues.
Some MPs and peers were in favour of one but not the other.
In addition, the Bill would be introduced in the Lords first — and while the society had ‘clout’ with MPs, peers were less assailable, she said.
Nevertheless, its members were all urged to target MPs and peers -particularly the ‘waverers’— with letters and personalised press releases, issued at the conference.
Mrs Winterton said letters should not be sent to the ‘converted’ who might find them an irritant, suggesting a change of tactics since the campaign over the Alton Bill.
The Government's Bill on embryo research comes after the report of the committee chaired by Baroness Warnock which recommended experiments on foetuses be allowed up to 14 days.
There will be two alternative clauses -one calling for a ban on research and one for research to be allowed up to 14 days.
The Bill will also set up a statutory licensing body to police experimentation.
As well as campaigning for the first of the two alternatives, and for balanced representation on the licensing body, the society will introduce the abortion amendment.
Phyllis Bowman said at the weekend that the best the society could hope for would be reducing the time limit to 18 weeks.
The society claims, however, that recent votes show it has 3-1 support in the House of Lords and more in the Commons.
Health authorities face cuts in beds and services
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
HEALTH authorities look to be at risk of another round of bed closures, service cuts and deferred developments this winter, despite the fact that the year's financial settlement for the NHS originally looked generous.
In London, St Bartholomew's Hospital has closed 75 beds to combat a threatened £2m overspend.
Tower Hamlets health authority is considering action which may involve service cuts to tackle a feared £1.4m deficit.
In King's Lynn, Norfolk, 12 orthopaedic beds plus a small ward have closed and operating sessions are being reduced after a £238,000 overspend in the first five months of the financial year.
In Kettering, Northamptonshire, new operating theatres which would have cost an extra £250,000 a year to open will stand unused until at least next April.
Oxfordshire health authority has decided that a threatened £500,000 overspend means it cannot open a new cardiology unit which would have freed beds for other uses.
North-West Thames regional health authority has several districts with significant overspends, while South-East Thames is facing a potential £5m shortfall with many of its 15 districts ‘walking a tightrope’.
Districts in the region are already looking at deferring planned developments, extending Christmas ward closures and freezing staff appointments.
Clive Minty, manager of Plymouth health authority and chairman of the NHS finance officers association, said the situation looked tight.
‘I wouldn't rule out the need for some extra cash for the service between now and the end of the financial year, although we haven't quite arrived at that stage yet.’
The scale of the financial problem is much smaller than in 1987 when nearly 4,000 beds were closed, triggering the NHS review and an emergency injection of £100m to keep the service going.
But several senior finance officers said last week that between two and three dozen health authorities could face bed closures and service cuts in the next couple of months, with others deferring developments.
Problems have arisen despite this year's cash for the NHS appearing, when it was announced last November, to allow for real growth for the first time in years, even after taking into account inevitable pressures such as the rising number of elderly people.
Since then, however, a whole range of staff from administrative and clerical, to senior managers, anciliaries and technicians have won pay rises above, and sometimes well above, the 5 per cent the NHS was given for inflation.
Non-pay items such as drugs and equipment have been running above 7 per cent as inflation generally has risen.
Cost-improvement programmes, which are meant to generate internal savings, are proving far harder to deliver, finance officers say.
Appeals over the nurses' regrading are coming through with no extra cash to pay for them, and, ironically, in the Thames regions the slump in house prices has slowed staff turnover; vacancy levels, which helped balance the books at the cost of quality and volume of service, are lower.
Water warning
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
(First Edition) Thousands of householders in the Pontnewydd area of Cmwbran in Gwent have been warned to boil their cooking and drinking water after vandals threw debris into a nearby reservoir during a break-in.
Dearer letters
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
The cost of first and second-class letters rises 1p today to 20p and 15p respectively.
Composer's visit
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
Walter Kent, the American composer of The White Cliffs of Dover, visited the town for the first time yesterday and presented an original of the song manuscript to the district council, which will display it in the £14m ‘White Cliffs Experience’ due to open in 1991.
Oil spilled
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
An emergency clean-up operation was launched last night after the MV Worthy spilled about 50 tonnes of oil during a delivery to the marine terminal of the Fawley oil refinery, Southampton.
Bridge fall
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
A man is recovering in Frenchay Hospital, Bristol, after falling from the Severn Bridge.
Dean White, 23, from Chepstow, Gwent, who suffered cracked ribs and bruising, was swept on to a mudbank in the dark and found by members of the Army Apprentice College at Chepstow, after coastguards with spotlights and a helicopter with heat-searching equipment had searched without success.
Murderer escapes
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
A convicted murderer was on the run last night.
Richard Dennick, 22, who was convicted at Chester Crown Court in 1983, is thought to have used a blanket rope to escape from Lewes prison, East Sussex.
He is described as 5ft 10ins, slimly built, with a fresh complexion and ginger hair, and should not be approached if sighted, police said.
Gambling aid
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
An organisation has been set up in Leicester to help the growing number of young people addicted to gambling.
The UK Forum on Young People and Gambling aims to act as a co-ordination and information centre, and to provide counselling and advice to youngsters with gambling problems — mainly with fruit machines.
Bus fracas
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
A double-decker bus overturned in Dublin when fighting broke out among passengers.
Twenty-four passengers were still being detained in two Dublin hospitals last night with fractures, and one with spinal injuries.
New security measures, including video surveillance cameras, come into force on the city's bus fleet this week.
Kidnap hunt
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
Police in the Irish Republic are searching for Damien Hulme, 40, who was abducted from his home in Dundalk, Co Louth, by a gang wearing masks and carrying sledgehammers.
The police suspect the IRA may be connected with the incident.
Sixteen in court after drugs raid
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
Sixteen people will appear before magistrates at Highgate, north London, today in connection with the police raid on the Broadwater Farm estate.
The majority would face drugs charges, a Scotland Yard spokeswoman said.
A further 22 arrested in the raid on Friday, and 51 detained on the Tottenham estate in the week leading up to it, had been charged and would appear in court at a later date.
Yesterday, the police denied that drug dealers were tipped off before the operation.
However, it emerged last night that a reporter from London Weekend Television unwittingly tipped off residents about the raid when he phoned contacts on the estate to ask if there had been a raid — before it had actually happened.
Speelman facing classical opponent in chess contest
By WILLIAM HARTSTON, Chess Correspondent
This afternoon, at Sadler's Wells theatre, he begins his attempt to progress to the final of the world chess championship candidates matches.
His opponent will be the Dutch grandmaster Jan Timman, 37, and their match may last three weeks.
They will share the stage in the Pilkington Glass World Championship semi-finals with two Soviet grandmasters, Anatoly Karpov and Artur Yusupov.
In a brief ceremony yesterday evening, Timman and Yusupov drew the white pieces for today's opening games.
While the officials, commentators and chess groupies then lingered over an enjoyable buffet, the players and their seconds rushed off to put the finishing touches to six months of preparations.
The visiting players have been in England for some days, and all four are becoming understandable twitchy as the time to make the first moves approaches.
Karpov is the best known of the contestants.
World champion for 10 years between 1975 and 1985, he has, since losing the title, been doggedly pursuing the man who took it from him, Garry Kasparov.
Karpov is the only semi-finalist who appears relaxed and confident.
While his delegation (two grandmaster seconds and a doctor) have stayed out of sight, performing their analytic labours, Karpov has attended receptions, even sometimes looking as though he is enjoying himself.
His opponent, Artur Yusupov, 29, looks worried.
A raggedness around the edge of his thick, ginger beard seems a symptom of the nerve-fraying tension that surrounds a match of this importance.
Tall and slightly stooped, Yusupov normally shows a shy good humour in his conversation, but he has looked increasingly serious these last few days.
He brings to his games an intensity of concentration few can match, but he has always found Karpov a very difficult opponent.
The match between Timman and Speelman has no clear favourite.
Speelman has the reputation of being a very solid player with occasional flashes of mercurial originality and brilliance.
Timman, 37, is a more classical player, but inconsistent.
While Speelman can be relied upon to finish just above half-way in any international event, Timman's name frequently features either at the top or near the bottom.
Over the next two weeks, each pair will contest eight games.
If the score is tied at 4-4, the match will go into overtime.
At this level, eight games are too few to allow any margin for error (in world championship matches, they play 24).
But with each loser taking home about £28,000 in prize money courtesy of Pilkington Glass, even the underdogs could afford to be a little more cheerful.
as if deliberately to disconcert the semi-finalists, the world champion, Garry Kasparov, has registered one of his most impressive performances.
With one round still to play in the Interpolis tournament in Tilburg, Holland, he is already sure of first place.
Nine wins and four draws from thirteen games give him a score of 11 points, three points ahead of Viktor Korchnoi in second place.
Such a huge margin of victory has rarely been seen in a tournament of this class.
Runcie attack on ‘Pharisees’ revives rift with Tories
By JAMES DALRYMPLE
IN A RASPING attack on the ‘Pharisees’ of British society who decry the unsuccessful, the jobless and the poor, the Archbishop of Canterbury has returned to his attack on a decade of Conservative government.
Dr Robert Runcie links drug and alcohol abuse, crime and vandalism, debt and family break-up with a section of the political and commercial leadership that says: ‘We have made the people wealthy, it's the Church's job to make them good.’
In an interview in the magazine Director to be published this week, Dr Runcie denies that there are ‘tensions and suspicions’ between Lambeth Palace and 10 Downing Street, but he points out that the Church of England is active in parts of the country where the Conservative Party has little support.
‘This makes the church sensitive to the needs of those areas and that section of the population which has not benefited from the last 10 years of Conservative government,’ he says, claiming that there is ‘no automatic connection between wealth creation and a happy society’.
He also says: ‘Jesus reserved his most astringent criticism for the Pharisees.
We tend to think that the Pharisees were unscrupulous, double-dealing, untrustworthy.
That was not the case.
Most of them led lives of exemplary moral rectitude.
That did not cause them to escape the sharp edge of Jesus's tongue.
He disliked their self-righteousness and their judgemental attitudes.
‘Those are the real dangers in our society today.
I sense they are both increasing.
The successful are always tempted to regard their success as a sort of blessing or reward for righteousness.
‘This can lead to judgements being made about the unsuccessful, the unemployed, the poor and the unintelligent which are both uncharitable and untrue.
‘I'm thinking of the sort of attitude that suggests the unemployed do too little to help themselves, that if only you have determination and drive you can get on in the world.’
He says there are positive factors in the new atmosphere between local authorities and private enterprise, but it ‘hardly touches on the problems of poor housing, lack of amenities and the continuing unemployment’.
‘These problems are what lead to that sense of being left out, of isolation and despair, which in turn can lead to the symptoms we are familiar with — drug and alcohol abuse, crime and vandalism, debt and family break-up.’
A Downing Street spokesman said yesterday that ‘there was absolutely no reaction at all’ to Dr Runcie's latest broadside.
Ivor Stanbrook, MP for Orpington, who chairs the Conservative backbench constitutional affairs committee and is an Anglican, said: ‘The ills of society are as much the responsibility of the Church as of political parties.
The Archbishop should be thoroughly ashamed of himself at the failure of the efforts of the Church to create a better society.
‘Despite their differences, the philosophies of the two main political parties in Britain can be supported quite sincerely by Christians.’
Frank Field, Labour MP for Birkenhead and also an Anglican, said Dr Runcie was right to attack government polices but he should also direct his attention to the Church, which was ‘self-righteousness on stilts’.
Support came from one unlikely quarter, Peter Bottomley, the Northern Ireland minister.
He said Dr Runcie was being attacked by people who had not read the article in its entirety.
‘What he actually says is a very proper reminder that you can do more good with wealth in the nation, in the community and in the family, but wealth for its own sake is not a good thing.’
Pharisee: ‘One of an ancient Jewish sect distinguished by their strict observance of the traditional and written law, and by their pretensions to superior sanctity.
A self-righteous person, a hypocrite’.
Police attacked at acid house parties
By JAMES DALRYMPLE
SIXTEEN police officers were hurt, including seven sprayed with CS gas, and 51 people were arrested at an acid house party, police said yesterday.
Drugs worth £2,000, including LSD, ecstasy and cannabis, were seized.
Thirty-three people were charged with drug offences, the other 18 with possessing offensive, weapons and offensive behaviour.
The police were attacked as they tried to break up a crowd of about 10,000 people gathered in a field at Sidlow Bridge, near Reigate, Surrey.
Roads were jammed with traffic.
Supt John Hoyle said he and his 25 officers feared for their lives as about 100 guards and party organisers smashed their vehicles, let off the gas, and menanced them rottweiler and dobermann dogs.
‘I was forced to make a tactical withdrawal for the safety of myself and my officers.
We had to allow the party to continue through the night.’.
Reinforcements were called in from the Surrey, Kent, and Sussex forces.
About 150 police moved in at daylight to make arrests.
In Harlow, Essex, police arrested at least 45 people when they closed down an acid house party attended by 3,000 to 4,000 people at a disused warehouse at 6am yesterday, a police spokesman said.
The arrests were for alleged public order, criminal damage or drugs offences.
Tests were being carried out on suspected drugs thought to include heroin, ecstasy, cocaine, LSD and cannabis.
Officers also found two hammers, two knives, a knuckleduster and three clubs.
No one was charged.
An acid house party attended by children as young as 12 was broken up by police yesterday.
Cigarettes thought to contain cannabis, and illegally-sold alcoholic drinks were seized.
About 500 people were at the party, in a barn at Elmstone Hardwicke near Cheltenham, Gloucestershire.
Forty people are to appear in court in Blackpool today after Birmingham City supporters went on the rampage before and after their team's Third Division match with Blackpool, wrecking a pub, smashing dozens of windows and bombarding police with bottles and glasses.
Two policemen and about a dozen supporters were injured.
Chance to damn Rushdie ‘missed’
By NICHOLAS SCHOON
BRITISH Muslims have missed a great opportunity to turn public opinion against Salman Rushdie, an Islamic scholar said yesterday.
Ahmed Deedat told thousands of Muslims who filled the Albert Hall in central London that if they had only shown the non-Muslim majority that Mr Rushdie had grievously insulted the Queen, Margaret Thatcher and all white women in The Satanic Verses, then the author would have been condemned by all of society and the book banned.
But Sheikh Deedat, who is based in South Africa, avoided a straight answer when asked if Mr Rushdie should be killed.
His talk was peppered with quotations from The Satanic Verses, none of them put in context and almost all involving obscenities.
The sheikh, a white-bearded man with the charisma of an American TV evangelist, is a specialist in the comparison of other faiths with Islam.
His lecture tour will continue in five cities, ending in Birmingham on Sunday.
‘I would have been one with you in marches, burning books and so on,’ he said.
But being in Durban, far from the turmoil over the book's publication, he had been able to read it and ponder.
His conclusion was to turn the tables on those in the West who defended Mr Rushdie.
The Satanic Verses referred to Mrs Thatcher as ‘Maggie the bitch’.
Worse still, the central character dreams of ‘making tender love to the Monarch…she was the body of Britain, the avatar of the State’.
If all British people did not feel deeply hurt by this ‘there's something wrong with you…’
Sheikh Deedat quoted one sentence which said white women were useful only for copulation.
He linked public readings of the book in New York with the rape of a young, white woman jogger in Central Park by six blacks.
Afterwards, Ali, 19, from Luton, Bedfordshire, said he approved of the sheikh's message.
‘I'm a Muslim fundamentalist, but if I had a knife and I saw Rushdie I wouldn't kill him, I'd talk to him.
A lot of this is political.
Plenty of those who talk about killing him would never do it themselves.’
Relaxation ‘better than some drugs’
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
MANY of the four million people prescribed drugs for mild high blood pressure could take smaller doses or live without them by learning to relax, Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin says today.
Breathing exercises, meditation, and deep muscle relaxation, or simply ‘imagining pleasant experiences’ can produce a significant fall in blood pressure.
The Bulletin, which gives impartial advice on medicines to doctors, says more GPs and nurses should learn these skills to pass on to patients.
People with mild high blood pressure are at a slightly increased risk of a stroke, heart attack, or heart failure.
But the drugs that can reduce it have to be taken for life, and many have unpleasant side-effects.
Patients have complained of impotence, skin rashes, dry eyes, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, fatigue or insomnia, and problems with circulation.
But relaxation therapy is not an easy alternative, the Bulletin says.
Patients must practise the techniques for up to 20 minutes a day.
Further, large-scale studies are needed to confirm the encouraging results obtained so far.
‘It is a sad reflection on the financing of drug research that so much more is spent on the development of new and ‘me too’ drug therapies,’it adds.
Clarke's strategy set at secret talks
By COLIN BROWN, Political Correspondent
HEALTH MINISTERS met secretly at Chevening last week to agree a strategy for winning the propaganda battle over the Government's NHS changes.
The first step will come next week when Kenneth Clarke, Secretary of State for Health, uses the Conservative Party conference at Blackpool to reaffirm his commitment to changing the NHS and set out a justification for the forthcoming legislation.
Mr Clarke is also keen to avoid further conflict with GPs.
Although he will take urgent steps to impose a new contract, which they have rejected, he has told the doctors' and dentists' pay review body that he is prepared to tackle any problems arising in the first year.
One source said: ‘He gave an undertaking to the DDRB in his submission last week that we will monitor very closely the effects of the contract in the first year.
If there are any problems in performance-related pay, we can iron these out.
We are not saying it is fixed in concrete.
We are saying it is the best we can do and we must judge how it is operating.’
Mr Clarke's undertaking will be seen as a promise to provide more money, if it becomes necessary, in an effort to assuage the doctors' concerns about the contract.
New pay recommendations are due in the new year and, although Mr Clarke has told the review body that there must be pay restraint, ministers appear likely to press for the award to be met.
The meeting at Chevening, the Kent home taken from Sir Geoffrey Howe and handed to his successor as Foreign Secretary, John Major, was also a stock-taking exercise.
It took place after the BMA leadership agreed to call off its damaging campaign against cash restraint on GPs' drug budgets, a move regarded by Mr Clarke as a ‘breakthrough’ in his efforts to win wider support.
The Government is hoping the BMA's acceptance of assurances that patients will not be denied drugs for cash reasons will also end allegations that doctors will not take the elderly and chronically sick on lists because they are too expensive to treat.
Ministers say they have deliberately avoided ‘sounding triumphal’ about the BMA's backdown to avoid rekindling the controversy.
They are keenly aware the BMA leadership could come under attack from its rank and file.
The BMA decision came with perfect timing for Mr Clarke, who was facing serious Conservative unrest at Blackpool about the presentation of health policies.
He will lay an order in the Commons in a fortnight, immediately after the summer recess, to impose a new contract on GPs.
He aims to have it debated and passed by next month.
Ministerial sources confirmed the contract will be the ‘same in every particular’ as the deal reached with the BMA leadership which was rejected in a ballot by doctors.
Ministers say Mr Clarke's decision not to drop the concessions on targets for performance-related pay, given in talks with the BMA, and return to the tougher limits for higher pay underlines his determination to seek peace.
However, it also reflects government recognition that health has become one of its most vulnerable policy areas.
The Labour Party Conference: Policy review throws a spanner in the Whitehall machinery
By COLIN HUGHES, Political Correspondent
AN INCOMING Labour government would turn large areas of Whitehall upside down— but the party's policy review barely considers the implications of its plans for restructuring government departments.
Scattered through the policy review are proposals to: Drastically alter the status and organisation of the Department of Trade and Industry; Create two departments — a Department of Consumer Affairs, and a Department for Legal Administration; Create a Department of Environmental Protection within the existing Department of the Environment; Set up a plethora of new commissions and executive agencies; Set up a Women's Ministry.
Those are only the most overt changes advocated in the review papers.
The only department which explicitly escapes unscathed is the one which Conservatives would most like to abolish: the Department of Energy.
In virtually every case the aim of causing upheaval is explicitly declared, because Labour's aim would be to upset the bureaucratic order it inherits.
New departments and quangos would, according to the review, be designed to act as irritants and antagonists within the Civil Service system.
But the policy review nowhere considers the overall effect of the individual changes proposed, or how they might be co-ordinated.
Nor does it contemplate the knock-on consequences for Labour ministers of attempting to implement their programme while rebuilding the governmental machine.
The ‘medium term industrial strategy’ which would form the centrepiece of Labour's economic policy would, according to the Productive and Competitive Economy review group, be ‘administered by a transformed Department of Trade and Industry’.
The review adds: ‘What we now seek is a DTI which will have an equal, if not superior status, to that of the Treasury.’
That approach would seek to knock out a keystone of Civil Service tradition.
Labour policy has long sought to challenge the Treasury's dominance in government.
But its last effort — the Department of Economic Affairs, set up by Harold Wilson and headed by George Brown — ended in futile departmental and ministerial infighting.
There would in addition be a minister for Science and Technology at the newly supreme DTI, with responsibility for determing investment in research.
There is no mention in the education policy of how that might affect the Department of Education and Science.
But while the DTI would override the Treasury, a new ‘powerful Department of Consumer Affairs’ would antagonise the DTI.
It would be headed by ‘a minister of Cabinet rank’ and act as ‘the consumers’voice with other government departments'.
Its remit for inter-departmental intrusion would be wide, with ‘a watching brief over government action’ and the ability to initiate consumer legislation.
Only the Women's Ministry would be given equal license.
It would be able to ‘require each government department to review its policies, practices, and existing and proposed legislation’.
While new departments are born and others extended, one of the oldest — the Home Office — would become a shadow of its present self.
Labour's proposed Department for Legal Administration would take over responsibility for courts and tribunals; court procedures; organisation, training and appointment of the legal profession, magistracy and judiciary; legal aid; legal services; and the Sentencing Council.
That would leave the Home Office with policing, penal policy and the criminal law.
Responsibility for the Sex Discrimination Act, the Equal Pay Act and the Equal Opportunities Commission would be given to the Women's Ministry.
The concept of a minister having Cabinet rank — and therefore implicitly not being a member of the Cabinet proper — crops up again on environment.
A ‘new Minister of Environmental Protection’ would operate inside the DoE.
That could work — though it is easy to imagine conflicts of interest with the housing and planning functions of the department.
More problematic will be Labour's plan for the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
‘The priority of MAFF must become food, not farming,’ the policy review says.
‘Its main concerns would become food and the people who consume it, not farming and those who produce it.’
But the regulatory functions over the food industry, now split between MAFF and the Department of Health, would transfer to a new Food Standards Agency.
That is the first of many agencies, executives, commissions, and other quango-like bodies recommended by the review.
In some cases Labour's quangos merge existing ones, or replace well-established bodies.
The funding of higher education would become the responsibility of one body, rather than two.
Labour's Quality Commission would replace the Audit Commission.
But there would be new regulatory commissions and consumer councils for every utility, along with ombudsmen, and public interest commissioners appointed by the Secretary of State.
There would be Skills UK — a locally structured training commission — a Fair Wages Commission, a Health Technology Commission, a Health Quality Commission, an Education Standards Council, an Independent Sentencing Council, a Children's Commissioner, an Environmental Protection Executive, and a Social Insurance Fund administered by…‘an independent commission’.
The Labour Party Conference: Cook appeals for Labour to accept electoral reform
By COLIN HUGHES and COLIN BROWN
AN IMPASSIONED appeal for Labour to back electoral reform was made by a leading Shadow Cabinet member yesterday after the national executive decided overwhelmingly to oppose a proportional representation motion.
Robin Cook, a member of the national executive and the health spokesman, said that a Labour government which sought to force its programme on an unwilling nation would be unsocialist.
He told a Labour Co-ordinating Committee rally that it was not enough for Labour to win the next election.
It would also be necessary ‘to smash the decrepit, effete constitution that allows a minority to capture power, and then use it ruthlessly in the interests of the privileged few’.
Mr Cook argued that 10 years of Thatcherism had been forced on most people, who had never voted Conservative, and that many of those who opposed PR in the Labour Party wanted to use the same undemocratic power ‘to ram socialism down the throats of a majority who didn't vote for it’.
Advocates of the first-past-the-post system argued that it was the only way of delivering strong government, Mr Cook said.
But after 10 years of Tory rule, he had had enough of that approach to politics.
Labour would be acquiescing in a ‘democratic outrage’ if it continued arguing that, because the Conservatives had got away with being undemocratic for so long, it was now Labour's turn.
Mr Cook also countered the argument that PR would build in a pull towards the centre ground, preventing Labour from implementing a radical programme.
It seemed strange to make that argument, Mr Cook said, when it was clear the whole policy review process was designed to placate the centre ground.
‘I cannot honestly see that a system which would require us to compromise the morning after the election is really so morally inferior to a system which has already obliged us to compromise our policies two years before polling day.’
His speech, however, came aftera 24-4 vote in the national executive to oppose a proportional representation motion which will be debated on Thursday.
The four were Mr Cook, Ken Livingstone, John Evans and Clare Short.
Mr Livingstone said he was against pacts, but 10 years of Thatcherism had demonstrated the dangers of giving power to elites.
However, Neil Kinnock, the Labour leader, and Roy Hattersley, his deputy, both opposed the motion.
Mr Hattersley said giving disproportionate power to small, minority centre parties would not improve democracy.
Mr Kinnock said it was wrong to propose a fundamental change in the voting system for a short-term tactical vote to get rid of the Thatcher Government.
The only way to remove the Government was for Labour to win the next general election.
Mr Kinnock intends to reinforce his conviction that Labour is in a position to win in his keynote speech tomorrow.
Party organisers want the conference to show that the party is united as never before, leaving Mr Kinnock free for the first time to sell the policy package to voters without worrying about splits.
There is expected to be a close vote on defence, but Mr Kinnock is confident the new policy will be affirmed today.
The executive is recommending rejection of a motion calling for unilateral disarmament.
It is also urging the conference to oppose a motion, supported by the National Union of Mineworkers, to commit a Labour government to abolishing all nuclear power within 15 years.
There could also be controversy over the executive's rejection of demands for the age of consent for homosexuals to be reduced to 16 years.
The Labour Party Conference: Scargill may stand for Barnsley seat
By COLIN HUGHES and COLIN BROWN
ARTHUR SCARGILL, the miners' president, refused yesterday to deny reports that he was to become a Labour MP.
Mr Scargill is said by sources in the National Union of Mineworkers to be putting his name forward for the Barnsley West and Penistone constituency.
The NUM leader — vice-chairman of the constituency party — said any such decision would have to be taken by the Yorkshire area of the NUM.
Mr Scargill would seek to become an NUM-sponsored MP.
The present Labour MP in Barnsley West, Allen McKay, is to retire before the next general election.
Mr McKay had a majority of 14,191 at the 1987 election.
Mr Scargill's election to Parliament would acutely embarrass Mr Kinnock, but would pave the way for the NUM's merger with the Transport and General Workers' Union.
TGWU members have said they would resist attempts to make Mr Scargill leader of a new energy section within their union.
It is also possible that party members in Barnsley would prefer a more moderate candidate.
The Labour Party Conference: Rough-edged voice of the grass roots
By COLIN HUGHES
JOHN PRESCOTT did not go to university, was never a television presenter, and finds it exceedingly difficult to complete a grammatically correct sentence.
Those are three reasons why he will today be elected to Labour's national executive, writes Colin Hughes.
The other main reason is that, having been sidelined by Neil Kinnock last year into the job of transport, Mr Prescott has found himself appearing on the early-evening television and radio bulletins more often than any other member of the Shadow Cabinet.
His brief has converted him into Labour's chaos and disaster spokesman.
From clogged skies to choked motorways, from Clapham Junction to the Marchioness, Mr Prescott has been Labour's voice of protest on an issue that has moved to the heart of the ‘quality of life’ agenda increasingly dominating the political agenda.
The former ferry steward, who rose through the National Union of Seaman before being elected MP for Hull, wears every thought and feeling on his sleeve.
He is therefore easily riled or mocked.
Nicholas Soames, the aristocratically toned and booming Tory MP for Crawley, can still make him stumble at the despatch box by muttering ‘Another G and T, Giovanni’.
Though he is neither intellectually sharp nor verbally articulate, Mr Prescott is intelligent in a self-schooled way, and speaks in a language that many Labour voters understand.
The smooth style of Bryan Gould and the calm air of managerial competence conveyed by John Smith are deemed essential to make southern voters feel confident about the new Labour Party.
Mr Prescott's rough-edged style conveys a sense of honest indignation, where soothing strokes of eloquence might seem insincere.
On top of that, he enjoys an unusually untainted popularity among activists and grass-roots trade unionists.
Having devoted most of his political life to touring constituencies and union branches, he has barely needed to campaign for the constituency section of the executive over the past two months.
When Mr Prescott first backed off standing against Roy Hattersley for the deputy leadership last year, and then changed his mind and decided to contest it after all, Neil Kinnock expressed unrestrained irritation.
But the pair, openly hostile by the end of last year, will patch up their mutual differences.
Mr Kinnock will want Mr Prescott's national executive support — and may sometimes even need his constructive criticism.
Mr Prescott is unquestionably closer to a large swathe of the rank and file than most other members of Labour's Shadow Cabinet.
Maybe it was for that reason that the party leader singled Mr Prescott's past year performance out for praise in an interview in The Sunday Correspondent yesterday, calling him, chummily, ‘Johnny’.
All the signs, it seems, of an overnight rehabilitation.
The Labour Party Conference: Conference condemned by activists as ‘farce’
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
AN ATTEMPT by party activists to empower the Labour conference to amend the leadership's policy review was defeated with the aid of union block votes.
Constituency party delegates declared the conference was being reduced to ‘a rubber stamp’, a ‘farce’ and ‘a mirror image’of the Conservative's conference.
But Larry Whitty, general secretary, said under party rules policy statements, such as the manifesto, were not amendable.
Out of 10 speakers from the floor on two composite motions reaffirming the conference's right to the final word on policy determination, only one backed the procedure adopted by the leadership for the review.
Trade union delegates remained silent during the short debate but voted solidly behind the leadership.
A composite requiring a separate vote where part of a policy document conflicted with a conference resolution was defeated by 4,921,000 votes to 1,057,000.
Les Huckfield, a former Labour minister, moving the composite on behalf of Co-operative Retail Services, said resolutions from the 1988 conference on social ownership, unilateralism and repealing anti-trade union legislation were ignored in the review.
‘We are talking about the right to behave as members of a democratic organisation and introduce amendments to our own fundamental policies.
It is hypocritical that we praise Gorbachev and perestroika, praise what is happening in Poland and Hungary, when we can't even amend basic policy.’
A second composite instructing the National Executive Committee to treat conference resolutions as amendments to review documents was defeated by 3,704,000 to 2,245,000.
Moving it, Ken Slater, of Hyndburn, pointed out there were some 60 resolutions on the conference agenda endorsing existing party policy for unilateral nuclear disarmament.
But if the review document, Britain in the World, was adopted those would be ignored.
Florrie North, of Eltham, said, after 53 years as a party member, that ‘it seems conference is being asked to rubber stamp policies made elsewhere’.
Martin Smith, of Brighton Kemptown, protested: ‘We want a Labour government, but that does not mean to say that we are going to meekly accept inadequate policies and an economic policy that is doomed to failure.’
Mr Whitty told delegates the NEC had given them ‘adequate time to look at the reviews’.
He said there would be a debate on reform of conference procedures and policy-making on Friday.
The Labour Party Conference: Compromise over black sections set for defeat
By BARRIE CLEMENT, Labour Editor
NEIL KINNOCK'S attempt to defuse the long-standing controversy over black sections looks set for a conference defeat.
The three largest unions are refusing to vote for his compromise which would let whites belong to a black socialist society.
The Transport and General Workers' Union, which has the largest block vote (1.3m), is abstaining.
The GMB general union and the Amalgamated Engineering Union, with 800,000 and 600,000 votes respectively, are casting theirs against.
The decisions of the union delegations will probably mean a continuing wrangle.
A hardline motion calling for black sections is almost certain to be thrown out on Friday and the party could be left without a policy as support for a proposition calling for societies with exclusively black members is also in doubt.
Mr Kinnock's compromise would have created one society, with a national executive seat if it attracted more then 3,000 members.
The NEC adopted the plan by 21 votes to five.
Bill Morris, deputy general secretary of the TGWU and the most influential black trade unionist, believes society membership should be restricted to representatives of ethnic minorities.
Mr Kinnock and his deputy, Roy Hattersley, have consistently opposed exclusively black sections.
The party's campaign to win mass membership has failed, the GMB leader, conceded yesterday.
John Edmonds, a confidant of Neil Kinnock, said the party needed to talk to potential members rather than rely on advertisements and mail shots.
His union will spend £1.5m over the next two years in an attempt to increase individual membership.
Membership dropped by 23,000 last year to 265,000, although officials say additional members attracted this year has almost offset that loss.
In 1952-53 membership peaked at a million.
The Labour Party Conference: Left rejects appeals for unity
By JOHN PIENAAR
PROMINENT left-wingers yesterday rebuffed appeals for unity behind Labour's policy review and accused the party leadership of a calculated effort to stifle grassroot dissent.
Tony Benn, Ken Livingstone and Dennis Skinner, Labour chairman, joined in an attempt to rally opposition to the review at a pre-conference fringe meeting.
As Labour leaders predicted a smooth ride for the policy overhaul this week, the three ‘hard left’ national executive committee members attacked the main elements of the package, from its abandonment of nuclear unilateralism to the shift away from all out renationalisation.
Mr Benn told the Campaign for Labour Party Democracy rally: ‘Now we have a leadership that claims the right to control the party entirely from the top.
They aim to win by detaching the Labour Party as a whole.’
He cited the decision to deny local activists the chance to amend the review, the leadership's refusal to restore all trade union immunities, the rejection of demands for all-black sections within the party and the strengthening of Shadow Cabinet power.
‘They are moving towards American politics.
We shall have four-yearly conventions…you can drop your resolutions and buy balloons; because that is all you will be able to release when you come to these conventions.’
He and Mr Skinner urged a future Labour government to give those not paying the poll tax an amnesty.
And the party chairman derided the differences between Neil Kinnock and Bryan Gould, the trade and industry spokesman, on the value of water industry shares.
‘Let's tell them we are going to take them back without compensation.’
He added: ‘The whole balance of the party is being moved away from the conference and the NEC to the Shadow Cabinet.’
Mr Livingstone urged Labour activists to strengthen the left wing faction in the NEC elections.
The Labour Party Conference: Skinner cheered over water shares
By JUDY JONES
DENNIS SKINNER, the Labour Party chairman, won loud cheers from conference delegates yesterday when he demanded the return of water to public ownership without compensation to shareholders by the next Labour government.
He also urged the party not to turn its back on traditional principles and values in its drive to agree an election-winning package of policies this week.
In a speech that blended music-hall style with soap-box rhetoric, the veteran left wing MP for Bolsover, said: ‘For too long the Labour Party has been trying to follow in the wake of Mrs Thatcher's agenda.
We have to escape from the time warp in which, unfortunately, some people are still caught after three election defeats in a row.’
Mr Skinner insisted: ‘There will always be a need for socialism, whether in Britain or anywhere else, so long as there are millionaires living in the lap of luxury and other people living in cardboard boxes, so long as we have a system which allows the poor countries of the world to hand over $50m to the rich.’
He maintained there was only one way to resolve differences within the party leadership over Labour's policy towards a privatised water industry: ‘Take water back without compensation.’
However, Mr Skinner firmly supported Neil Kinnock's rejection of electoral pacts with other parties to help to defeat the Tories.
He portrayed the Tories as the party of worn-out ideas, led by a Cabinet of incompetents.
More people had seen Sky television than John Major, the new Foreign Secretary.
John Wakeham, the new Secretary of State for Energy, had risen to public prominence in his previous Cabinet job by refusing to have nuclear waste dumped in his constituency.
Chris Patten, hailed the new ozone-friendly Secretary of State for Environment, had now been exposed as the ‘dirty water salesman of Europe’.
The Prime Minister had spent 10 years trying to destroy the human spirit in Britain, but ‘she has failed because we in this movement are not going to allow her’.
