Ripping yarns and moral minefields: Allan and Janet Ahlberg talk to Celia Dodd about their bestsellers for children
By CELIA DODD
THESE days, no one questions the importance of good books for the under-fives.
But books that appeal to adults too are just as important; we are, after all, the ones who have to do the reading.
There are few things worse than being bludgeoned into reading a book you hate.
Story-reading should be one of the great joys of parenthood, a real meeting of adult and child minds.
With the Ahlbergs' books, it very often is.
The husband-and-wife partnership behind such classics as The Jolly Postman, Burglar Bill and The Baby's Catalogue win children over with ripping yarns and a wicked sense of humour.
They win their parents over with a rose-tinted vision of the world which is decidedly reassuring.
Their books are usually set nostalgically in the past — the Thirties and Forties are favourite periods — and often feature the perennial characters of fairy tales and nursery rhymes.
Yet they are saved from sentimentality by the wry humour of both text and pictures.
The Ahlbergs have been accused of not facing up to the harsh realities of life, of being too cosy and sweet, but their latest picture book, Bye Bye Baby, published today, breaks the mould.
In it, a small child roams the streets, talking to strangers, until he finally goes off with a woman who has been wandering about pushing an empty pram.
Curious subject matter for a children's picture book, you might think, and hardly guaranteed to win the approval of the gimlet-eyed children's book world.
But the Ahlbergs have no time for literal interpretations of their work.
How, they argue, would Alice, or The Wind in the Willows, stand up against such scrutiny?
The way to look at Bye Bye Baby, they insist, is as a ‘light, surreal comedy’.
‘Certainly if you bring a literal interpretation to the story, it's a minefield,’ Allan Ahlberg says.
Bye Bye Baby gets away with its particular minefield thanks to the sleight of illustrator Janet Ahlberg's hand.
The visual inspiration for the book was the famous advert for Start-rite shoes, showing a small boy and girl walking off down a tree-lined avenue — an innocent image if ever there was one.
The Ahlberg version features a solitary figure.
The advert gave the story its vaguely Thirties setting.
The success of the Ahlbergs' working relationship must have a lot to do with their long and happy marriage.
In spite of apparently incompatible personalities — she is small and shy, he is large and does most of the talking — they have an empathy which is essential to the way they work, a persistent mutual pestering.
The strength of the partnership is highlighted for Allan, who also works with a number of other artists.
The time-consuming nature of Janet's part in the process, combined with a bad back which prevents her spending more than a couple of hours at the drawing board every day, means she cannot keep up with her husband's prolific output.
‘With other illustrators, I work at a distance — we visit and phone, but there is a point at which I can't pester them any more,’ Allan says.
They see themselves not as author and illustrator, with separate roles, but as a partnership of ‘book-makers’, contributing equally to the process.
Allan Ahlberg says: ‘In the past, a lot of children's books seemed to be the work of talented illustrators whose pictures looked brilliant framed in a gallery, but when you tried to read the book, there was nothing there, because the words started as a coat-hanger to hang pictures on.’
Given the importance they place on the interrelationship of words and pictures, the couple's working lives are surprisingly separate.
They claim to see each other less than couples who go out to work, meeting for the occasional cup of coffee in the kitchen.
Their 10-year-old daughter, Jessica, who is likely to be seen with her head buried in The Beano or a Roald Dahl novel, has provided the inspiration for many of her parents' books.
As a baby, she was fascinated by the Mothercare Catalogue, and so The Baby's Catalogue, which documents the paraphernalia of the infant's small world in minute detail, was born.
Allan's experience as a primary school teacher is another rich source of ideas.
The couple still maintain close links with local schools, where they spend hours researching, sketching and absorbing jokes.
After 10 years of teaching Allan had had enough.
‘I ran out of steam.
It's a killing job.
Little kids eat you alive, they want so much physically and emotionally.’
Every year he would have half a dozen nine- and 10-year-olds in his class who could barely read.
He treated reading as a team effort, getting them to read the Daily Mirror rather than the dull, babyish books on offer.
These days, he writes the books intended to help children learn to read.
‘A lot of books used in schools are technically readable but rather drab stories.
There's no reason why they shouldn't be funny or gripping even if they don't use many words.’
Writing books for children is becoming increasingly complex, as the arbiters of the modern child's mores — librarians, teachers and publishers — lay down ever more stringent criteria.
‘The problem with children's books increasingly is that there are armies of people who are properly concerned with, for example, the way girls were always discriminated against in the past,’ says Allan.
‘That is bad, and must be thought about.
But people seem to think that stories are written to a prescription, that you sit down and say, you don't want it to be sexist, you don't want it to be racist.
In reality you just invent a tale, as if you were sitting round a fire in a cave.’
In fact anti-racism and anti-sexism seem to come naturally to the Ahlbergs.
Their books are full of female breadwinners and New Men changing nappies and comforting bawling babies in the small hours.
Although they are a principled pair — they once turned down the Smarties Award on moral grounds — the Ahlbergs reject the notion of children's author as moralist.
‘I would say, just sit down and tell a good story, and to hell with the morality,’ Allan Ahlberg declares.
With that characteristically strong statement, he puts his finger on the secret of the Ahlbergs' phenomenal success with adults and children alike.
A manifesto for fashion from an idea by Lenin: Helen Womack on the stylish clothes being inspired by communism's icons
By HELEN WOMACK
RUSSIANS are numb to the red of the Communist Party and the face of Lenin which has stared at them in public places for decades.
Not surprisingly, they failed, with the first outbreak of Gorbymania, to see the fashion asset in the political imagery all around them.
It was left to Western businessmen to manufacture CCCP T-shirts which ended up on the Soviet black market, an acute case of carrying coals to Newcastle.
But one Moscow designer, at least, has been able to look at the familiar with a fresh eye and use the symbols of Soviet power with wit and imagination.
Yelena Khudiakova's exhibition of ‘high fashion using imagery from behind the Iron Curtain' opens at the Birch and Conran gallery in London's Soho today.
Ms Khudiakova herself may, from time to time during the week of the show, model some of the 20 outfits — a red silk skirt patterned with the heads of workers who look as if they are marching when you walk in it, a red evening dress decorated with a swath of flowers reminiscent of the relief on a pavilion in Moscow's Stalin-era Exhibition of Economic Achievements.
The latter dress shows something of the influence of her education at the Moscow Institute of Architecture in the early Eighties: ‘We studied sculpture, graphics and composition as well as architecture.
It was a good grounding for an artist.’
Opportunities to be creative as an architect are limited, so many look for other artistic challenges, she explained.
But her main inspiration is the post-revolutionary school of constructivist art.
Her idol is the 1920s artist Varvara Stepanova, whose clothes designs she has reconstructed for museums and whose portrait, along with that of the revolutionary poet Mayakovsky, she has stitched on to another of her own red dresses.
Developing the constructivist style, Ms Khudiakova, 31, has created straight cotton dresses with cog-wheel patterns in primary colours.
She has also designed black-and-white striped or chequered dresses, inspired by the shadows and dramatic diagonals in Eisenstein's films.
She modelled these under the chandeliers in the grand marble foyer of one of the seven Stalin-gothic skyscrapers in Moscow, which she describes as ‘a perfect example of Soviet pokazukha (window-dressing).
The outside of the building is splendid, but the flats inside are cramped.’
Why is she fascinated by a style perfected under a dictator whose crimes the Soviet people are just beginning to understand?
‘I know it is sometimes ugly and has bad political connotations.
But it is special.
You won't find it anywhere else in the world — the Moscow metro or the boards of honour (hoardings where photos of model workers are displayed).
I'm trying to make it more beautiful and transform it into the language of clothes.
‘Ideology is one thing, but it is possible to enjoy a visual impression without thinking of history.
Art is higher than politics.’
She is not a member of the Communist Party.
A sense of humour redeems her designs from some of their associations.
‘Fashion is extravagant.
You should enjoy yourself.
This is not satire, but there is an element of a joke.’
She indicates a necklace made up of military insignia to illustrate her point.
One can imagine a Soviet general fuming to see it around her neck.
Her clothes are extravagant but not beyond the means of, say, Russian stars of stage and screen.
The red silk skirt with workers' heads and a gold top that goes with it, both cut from silk bought in Soviet Central Asia, would cost about 1,000 roubles (the average Soviet wage is 200 roubles a month) or £700 in London.
Ms Khudiakova also provides sketches for Dom Modi, the state fashion house which mass produces clothes.
‘I design what pleases me and if customers like it that's fine’.
Asked what she thought of Slava Zaitsev, the man who has dressed rich Soviet women and diplomats' wives since the Brezhnev era and the only Soviet fashion designer well known in the West, she curled up her nose.
It seems Mr Zaitsev may be about to lose his monopoly on fame.
