Cricket First Test: Azharuddin's daring defiance
AS anti-climaxes go, they do not come better than this.
As history, nothing that happened here yesterday was ever likely to match the events of Friday, but as entertainers, the Indian batsmen generally hold their own.
They are still 277 behind England and only 43 ahead of Graham Gooch, but for exhilarating strokeplay, the honours are all with the Indian captain, Mohammed Azharuddin.
The unchallenged winner of the wooden spoon after putting England in on Thursday, he bounced back yesterday with an innings of magnificent irresponsibility.
He reached three figures, for the fourth time against England, in only 130 minutes and 87 balls.
It was the fastest hundred in a Test match in England since the heady days of 1981, and as a gambler's last throw, it was in the same class as Botham's 149.
In three innings against England this summer, he has yet to be out.
Not that Gooch was finished.
Four years ago, when Ian Botham returned from suspension and took a wicket with his first ball, Gooch trotted up from slip and asked him, ‘Who writes your scripts?’
Whoever it was, Gooch seems to have hired them.
Yesterday, not content with turning England into a winning team and making the highest Test score of the modern era, he threw himself the ball — and removed the dangerous Sanjay Manjrekar with his third delivery.
The next wicket to fall was that of Ravi Shastri: Gooch caught him.
At pounds 150, the fee paid to the man-of-the-match adjudicator, Ray Illingworth, will work out at about pounds 300 per second's thought.
Unless, that is, Azharuddin gets another 217 tomorrow.
India had resumed at 48 for no wicket, needing another 406 to avoid the follow-on.
Shastri and Navjot Sidhu continued to enjoy both good fortune and the spaces which Gooch's attacking field left open.
Devon Malcolm and Angus Fraser opened the bowling and both started as they were to go on.
Malcolm's first ball was cut for four by Sidhu.
Fraser's first ball beat Sidhu outside off-stump; his second, angled in, was worth a shout for lbw.
The disappointing slowness of the pitch allowed both openers to play Malcolm off the back foot, and therefore to drive his attempted yorkers.
He has two kinds of Test performance — five for very few, and none for a lot, and this was looking like the latter.
But Fraser, steady as ever after missing five Tests through injury, found enough lift to have Sidhu sharply caught off bat and pad by John Morris.
Morris's contribution to this match is unlikely to find much space in Wisden, but he already looks the part.
When Chris Lewis replaced Malcolm, ball dominated bat for the first time in the match, with nothing to show for it.
Lewis bowled a yard quicker than on his debut at Edgbaston, hit an impeccable length, and moved the ball away.
When he was not bowling, his cat-like fielding at midwicket kept an appreciative crowd happy.
Shastri had gone on, barely noticed, to 50, when Gooch's gentle swingers drew Manjrekar into a loose cut and Jack Russell took the catch.
Dilip Vengsarkar came in looking for his fourth hundred in as many Lord's appearances and immediately joined Shastri in exploiting the unpatrolled third-man boundary.
After lunch (123 for two off 45 overs), India stepped on the gas and Gooch turned, not before time, to the off-spin of Eddie Hemmings.
Shastri blocked his first three balls, and hit the next three for 4-4-6 with a straight drive and two elegant swings over mid-wicket.
Malcolm's return brought him a straight push for three and a ninth Test hundred, but he immediately drove half-heartedly at Hemmings and gave Gooch a simple catch at mid-on.
Vengsarkar, who had been ticking along nicely, was now upstaged by Azharuddin.
Whatever the opposite of a captain's innings is, he was intent on playing it.
He got off the mark with an uppish straight drive for four, which might have given a less myopic bowler than Malcolm a return catch, and in Malcolm's next over, he attempted a square slash which, if he had got an edge, might have prevented him ever setting foot in India again.
Happily he missed, tried the shot again a few minutes later, and middled it.
He was sufficiently troubled by Malcolm's bouncer to stand frozen at the crease and take it on the helmet, but sufficiently brave to try to hook the inevitable follow-up.
He took three audacious fours off an over from Hemmings, and the loss of Vengsarkar, flicking at one of Fraser's worst deliveries, did nothing to sober him up.
His fifty contained 11 fours, and he celebrated with three more.
Sachin Tendulkar came in to a reception whose volume and pitch tended to confirm what Bishen Bedi had been saying about his sex appeal, and there was the arresting sight of a 41-year-old bowler taking on two batsmen whose combined age was 42.
After an hour had been lost to rain straight after tea, Tendulkar drove loosely at Lewis and lost his middle stump.
The only man capable of stopping his flow of boundaries was Dickie Bird, who took the players off for bad light for quarter of an hour at 5.30.
The new ball was taken as soon as it was available, and entrusted to Lewis.
Azharuddin gave him the three-fours-in-an-over treatment, driving all three off the back foot.
He may have been missed on 96 by Morris, low at mid-wicket; Morris may have decided that sections of the crowd would riot if he held it.
Lewis gave way to Fraser, and Azharuddin brought up a great hundred, and 1,000 for the match, with an easy clip for three.
He lost Manoj Prabhakar, carried away by the exuberance of his own and everybody else's strokeplay, but Kapil Dev survives -and he is the only Indian who has made a faster Test hundred than Azharuddin's.
If the follow-on now loomed large, Azharuddin could not see it.
The batting triumphs of Graham Gooch and Graeme Hick...
Page 24 
Motor Racing: Fighting Senna refuses to succumb: Brazilian overcomes cramp and gremlins to keep Prost waiting
From MAURICE HAMILTON in Jerez de la Frontera
AYRTON SENNA did all he could to keep the championship open by yesterday winning the Spanish Grand Prix which, after a week of accusations and exclusions, was something of an anti-climax.
Senna led from the start and, apart from a brief skirmish in the opening laps, never came under serious pressure.
The Ferrari of Gerhard Berger finished second, 26 seconds ahead of Alain Prost's McLaren.
Prost's result does little to further his cause in the championship if he has to drop his lower scores but Senna now knows that he must win the final two races in Japan and Australia.
Prost, meanwhile, can do no more and the pressure is now with his team-mate to repeat yesterday's performance.
While Senna's steady but swift progress made his 20th Grand Prix victory look easy, the reigning world champion says this race has been one of the toughest.
‘This is a very difficult circuit,’ Senna said.
‘I expected it to be hard because, when we tested here last February, I did a full race distance and it was hard work, very painful.’
After almost two hours at the wheel yesterday, Senna limped away from his car, the only obvious sign that he had suffered from brake trouble during the last quarter of the 73-lap race.
‘I had cramp in my right leg,’ the Brazilian explained.
‘I was going as carefully as I could because I had a 25-second cushion over Berger so I was able to slow down a bit and the pain eased.
Also, I had trouble with the gearbox, the lever became spongy and I wasn't sure what was happening.
It was quite a fretful race for me in many ways.’
If Senna had not either won the race or finished second, he would have been out of the championship.
Senna said he realised that a good start was vital.
If Berger took the lead into the first corner, then Senna would have difficulty getting by on such a tight and twisting circuit.
Berger said: ‘He made it to the first corner ahead of me and I tried to hang on.
I pushed as hard as I could but it was obvious there was no chance of passing him.’
Berger then decided to wait until the scheduled pit stops in the hope that the Ferrari crew could steal an advantage over the McLaren mechanics.
Unfortunately for Berger, both stops were exceptionally slick and, judging by the controversial aftermath of Nigel Mansell's botched pit stop in Portugal last week, perhaps that is just as well.
It is fair to say that this race lacked the energetic input normally associated with Mansell, banned from yesterday's Grand Prix after breaking the regulations at Estoril last Sunday.
Once the pit stops, shortly before half distance, were over, the race became even more tedious as Berger heeded sagging oil pressure and reduced his pace.
There was not even the threat of an attack by Prost since he, too, was suffering from gearbox trouble.
‘This result is exactly what I was looking for,’ Prost said.
‘It is very difficult to overtake on this circuit, so it was really mission impossible to get ahead of Senna and Berger in the early stages.
Shortly after the start I had problems with Gerhard's oil all over my visor, so I just drove my taxi home to take third place.’
Clearly, the gearbox remained the Achilles' heel for the McLaren-Honda and it will doubtless cause Senna one or two anxious moments before this season ends in Adelaide on 5 November.
‘I know it's going to be very hard for me,’ said Senna.
‘But I don't intend to give up.
I will fight all the way.’
That is a sentiment which is quietly echoed by McLaren and Honda since, if Prost wins the title, he will take the coveted No. 1 to Ferrari next year.
While Prost and Senna continued their dispute for this year's title, Jean Alesi reinforced pit lane opinion that the young Frenchman is a future champion.
After a stirring drive, Alesi finished fourth for Tyrrell and, along the way, he had to deal forcefully with Britain's Martin Brundle, the Brabham driver eventually spinning off.
Brundle's trouble had been caused by a split exhaust pipe which overheated a shock absorber.
An eventful race for Derek Warwick brought the British driver ninth place but only after he had wiped off a nose cone on his Arrows when he tangled with Nelson Piquet's Lotus.
The penultimate round of the championship will be in Japan on 22 October.
Golf: Calcavecchia digs in for consolation prize
By TIM GLOVER at St Andrews
IT COULD be said that the Scottish appetite for golf is so healthy they would turn out to watch anybody play.
Even Americans against the Japanese.
An uncommonly large crowd walked the links here yesterday, a neutral army encouraged to watch the final of the Dunhill Cup by the prospect of topping up a tan in October sunshine.
Some of them, by no means all, paid £7 to witness Mark Calcavecchia, Curtis Strange and Tom Kite win $100,000 (£62,000) apiece.
This particular America's cup bears no comparison to the trophy they failed to capture at The Belfry.
Even so, the money helps.
Asked if this was consolation following the tie in the Ryder Cup, Kite replied: ‘Yep.
We had our minds made up that we were going to win this thing.
We were all disappointed with the Ryder Cup.
Everybody talked about the good of golf but I don't think any of the 24 players were satisfied with the outcome.’
Calcavecchia, who defends the Open Championship here next summer, had never seen St Andrews before and he improved with every round.
In the 36-hole final yesterday, he went round in a five-under-par 67 to defeat Hajime Meshiai by a stroke.
Kite and Naomichi Ozaki shot 68 and Strange defeated Koichi Suzuki with a 72 to a 75.
Thus the United States established a 2½–½ lead.
Calcavecchia was again first out in the afternoon and he gave poor Meshiai no respite, scoring 66 to a 73.
On the day Calcavecchia was 11 under par and had 12 birdies and an eagle.
However, he became a victim of Sod's Law and not everybody appreciated his play.
On the 12th green second time around he was so far from the hole he decided to use his wedge instead of his putter and took a six-inch divot out of the hallowed ground.
Some people booed.
He repeated the act (the greenkeeper would probably say it was vandalism) at the 14th green.
It mattered not that Kite was beaten by Suzuki and Strange by Ozaki for the Americans already had an unassailable 3 ½ points on the board.
‘I really enjoyed it,’ Calcavecchia said, yawning in mid-sentence.
‘I knew I was going to be tough to beat this week.
I think I'm a great putter, sometimes an incredible putter.
It seems that every time I come back from a big disappointment I win.’
For putter read wedge.
His big disappointment in the Ryder Cup was losing to Ronan Rafferty on the final day after twice putting the ball into water.
Earlier in the season, in the final round of the Bob Hope Classic, he putted like the comedian and lost the tournament by a stroke.
The following week he won in Phoenix by seven strokes.
Over the next two weeks West Germany will have the pleasure of his company.
‘I've had enough of this team stuff,’ he said.
In the play-off for third place — $36,666 (£22,773) per man -England beat Ireland 2-1.
The match hinged on the confrontation between Christy O'Connor Jnr and Mark James and it was effectively settled at the first hole.
It is a hole in the head as far as the Irishman is concerned.
Against the United States on Saturday, O'Connor Jnr, in a sudden-death play-off against Kite, hit a wedge into the Swilken Burn which runs across the front of the green.
Yesterday he hit an eight-iron into the same stream and took a triple-bogey seven to James's four.
At the second he had a bogey five to James's three and was five strokes adrift.
‘I'm done,’ O'Connor Jnr said.
‘I was like a zombie out there.’
Rugby Union: The dye is cast for injured Richards
By STEVE BALE
ENGLAND will almost certainly be without their inspirational Lions No. 8, Dean Richards, when they play Fiji in five weeks.
Richards, who did not attend yesterday's badly disrupted squad session at The Stoop, is to have dye injected into his injured shoulder to show up the extent of the damage.
‘You can't predict anything until he has seen the scan, but Dean is looking very doubtful,’ England's manager, Geoff Cooke, said.
Wade Dooley and Paul Rendall were also absent.
Seven players — Carling, Oti, Hill, Moore, Mullins, Linnett and Teague — attended the session but did not train with the squad.
Two, Bailey and Egerton, finished early.
Cooke accepts that Chris Oti will not be ready to face Fiji.
Mike Teague (who now has a knee, as well as a shoulder, injury) is doubtful but Will Carling, the captain, says he will be fit despite being concussed in Harlequins' win over London Irish.
Carling has already targeted Quins' First Division game with Orrell on 28 October for his return.
In Wales, battle lines are being drawn for Friday's meeting to debate the severing of links with South Africa.
Clive Rowlands, the Welsh RU president, has written to member clubs urging them to follow this course.
‘We have been brought to our present position by the policy and behaviour of the South African Rugby Board,’ he said.
‘They have been ready to give priority to their own interests regardless of the effects on other unions and particularly on the Welsh Rugby Union.’
Rowlands has been critical of Welsh officials who went to the SA Rugby Board celebrations.
But Terry Vaux, the WRU committeeman who resigned from the International Board because of the row, has written to clubs in his area, Gwent, informing them that Rowlands had encouraged him to attend.
Welsh rugby is also in trouble on the field — on Saturday, five weeks before Wales play New Zealand, they lost to Bridgend — and a thigh injury in that debacle has put David Young out of the Home Unions XV who play France on Wednesday.
Jeff Probyn, the England and Wasps prop overlooked for the Lions tour, has been called up as his replacement.
Donal Lenihan, who had been named as captain, has also withdrawn after injuring a shoulder.
His place in the second row is taken by Scotland's Damian Cronin, with England's Rob Andrew taking over the captaincy.
Football: FA investigates crowd trouble
By STEVE BALE
THE Football Association is to launch an inquiry into the crowd trouble involving Birmingham City supporters at Blackpool on Saturday, when police in riot gear had to move into the terraces to part fighting fans.
Adrian Titcombe, the FA's crowd management co-ordinator, said: ‘We want to be clear where the trouble occurred so we will study all the reports before coming to any conclusion.’
The FA made Birmingham's away matches all-ticket after trouble at Crystal Palace last season and Chief Supt Kenneth McKay, head of Blackpool police, said fans without tickets caused most of the trouble.
‘Two hundred fans arrived without tickets and there were 3,000 in the town causing all manner of problems, terrorising elderly women and children,’ he said.
The FA will also investigate Dunstable's bizarre exit from the FA Cup on Saturday when the entire team walked off in their second-round qualifying tie at Staines after having three players sent off in the first 38 minutes.
The Southern League team are expected to be expelled from the competition.
Kevin Drinkell, the Rangers striker, will join Coventry City today for £800,000 and make his debut against an old club, Grimsby, in the Littlewoods Cup on Wednesday.
Peter Davenport, who joined Middlesbrough from Manchester United for £700,000 less than a year ago, may seek a move after being left out of the squad for Saturday's game at Watford.
Cycling: Vanderaerden's Classic clout
By ROBIN NICHOLL with the Nissan Classic
AFTER four days of sparring, Eric Vanderaerden unleashed his Sunday punch to knock out the fading hopes of Sean Kelly, and the whole of Ireland, in the Nissan Classic, which finished in Dublin yesterday after five days and 925km.
The Belgian, who had popped out of the clinches to snatch narrow verdicts in three mass sprint finishes, settled the race with a remarkable show in the 40km time trial.
Not since 1985, when he won a Tour de France time trial, had Vanderaerden shown such form against the clock.
Not only did he catch a crestfallen Kelly, who had started a minute ahead of him, but he socked the hopes of Frenchman Charly Mottet and the Swiss powerhouse Thomas Wegmuller.
Vanderaerden averaged more than 46kph to beat Mottet by nine seconds, then, aided by his Panasonic teammates, carefully controlled the afternoon race through the Wicklow mountains.
‘I now feel that I am back to the form I had three years ago, and after my performances in Ireland, I feel I can win the Paris-Tours classic next Saturday,’ he said.
Kelly finished fourth overall, ousted from second place by Mottet and Wegmuller, and came close to losing the King of the Mountains honour.
Only on the final climb of Sally Gap did he clinch victory as his rival, Gary Baker, was struggling back from two punctures.
Kelly, who has won this race three times, said: ‘It has been a very long and hard season for me, and I feel very tired.
Still, the best man won.’
Rugby League: Kiwis humbled by Saints
By PAUL WILSON
St Helens.... 27 New Zealand.. 26 THE meagre attendance of 6,940 at Knowsley Road was hardly surprising, given Alex Murphy's under-selling of his own side, but the Saints supporters who stayed away missed a rare and unexpected rugby league treat.
Tony Gordon's Kiwis, who will now find it difficult to go through the remainder of their tour undefeated, are not as tight and efficient a force as Graham Lowe's team of four years ago, but with a virtual Test side out, should have been far too strong for Murphy's collection of reserves.
That Saints managed to cause an upset with nothing more than direct running and honest endeavour, bodes well for Great Britain, though the Kiwis cannot be expected to enter the Test arena in such a generous mood.
Gary Freeman, for instance, the scorer of the tries which knocked Britain out of the World Cup last year, was yesterday to be seen vainly flapping after Roy Haggerty, prior to Neil Holding's all-important drop goal.
The Kiwis wasted two excellent try opportunties with careless forward passes, and gifted St Helens the opening try when David Watson allowed Alan Hunte a 15th-minute interception.
Quick replies by Kelly Shelford and Mark Elia led to the suspicion that New Zealand could score at will and were easing themselves into their stride, but doubts arose early in the second half with a succession of missed chances.
It was Stuart Evans, bringing a touch of Cardiff Arms Park to the proceedings with a pushover try in the right corner, who brought Saints to within a point at 14-15.
New Zealand pushed out to 26-15 with a Kevin Iro try and a second from Elia, but after David Tanner had pegged two points back with a penalty, the winger claimed the try of the match by finishing a thrilling move between Phil Veivers and Mark Bailey.
Paul Forber scored from close range three minutes from the end to give Saints a one-point lead and the crowd, such as it was, went wild.
There was even closing drama when Shelford missed a penalty, and a chance to save the game, with the last kick of the match.
It was entertaining viewing for Mal Meninga, watching the game with his Canberra colleagues, but the Australian declined a £50,000 offer, made after the game, to rejoin St Helens.
Athletics: Elliott's win saves blushes
By NEIL WILSON
PETER ELLIOTT saved England's selectors from any embarrassment yesterday, finishing his track season unbeaten by domestic rivals.
Southwark Park, beside the Thames in London's former docklands, on a cool, grey October evening, is hardly Auckland, and Steve Cram was nowhere in sight.
But a victory by Elliott in the final event of General Portfolio's grandly mis-named Mile of Miles series was all that mattered to selectors three days after they chose him ahead of Cram for the Commonwealth Games.
It was never in doubt.
Only Said Aouita has beaten Elliott since the Yorkshireman returned to the track after an injury postponed the start of his season until mid-August.
Only a week ago, he was in New York beating the world champion, Abdi Bile, and the best of the rest at this distance.
Nobody remotely approaching that calibre threatened him yesterday.
Having won two of this series in the fastest times already, he would have had to finish four seconds behind the steeplechaser Mark Rowland to lose the first prize of £5,000.
Elliott was not entirely satisfied.
He hoped to surpass Cram's fastest mile time of the year to remove the last argument against his own selection, but after two laps of inadequate pacing, he was never in prospect.
‘This late in the year even pacemakers are tired,’ Elliott said after finishing in 3min 54.46sec.
He managed to complete the last lap with a flourish in a little under a minute, opening up a 10-metre lead down the back straight.
The £3,000 prize in the women's event went to Bev Nicholson, another athlete bound for Auckland.
Rugby Union: Welsh horizon all turns black
By STEVE BALE
EACH new indignity in the heap visited on Welsh rugby seems worse than the last.
The selectors knew they were playing with fire when they decided to arrange a couple of club fixtures and they have duly been consumed in a conflagration of their own making.
The New Zealanders, appropriately garbed in funereal black, arrive next week to scatter the ashes.
On and off the field the national game of the Land of Song is in a discordant mess.
Losing was one thing but to lose as spinelessly as the Welsh XV did to Bridgend on Saturday was to add insult to severely injured pride.
‘In all honesty we should have won by at least 15 points,’ Brian Nicholas, the Bridgend coach, said.
as if 24-17 and derisive chants of ‘Easy, easy’ were not bad enough, this humiliation was against a side who have made a wretched start to the season — a week earlier Pontypool had given them a 35-6 going-over — and were short of at least half-a-dozen first-choice players.
Four of the absentees suffered the squirming discomfort of being among the Welsh squad.
‘It's not that I don't want to say anything but I just don't know what to say,’ John Ryan, the Welsh coach, sighed.
His plans in ruins, he is now reduced, Micawber-like, to hoping something will turn up before his players face the All Blacks in five short weeks.
At Bridgend he looked in despair, and he almost admitted as much: ‘I hope we can pull it together but sometimes I have my doubts.’
Nicholas was sympathetic: ‘He is only as good as the players we give him.’
But another selector confided the truth that Wales should be giving club opposition a hammering — and at half-time, building on their win over Newbridge, it looked as if they would.
They had weathered Bridgend's early fury, conceding a try before coming back with some confidence to score three of their own.
But Wales were having us on.
From the comparative opulence of 17-6 they then slipped into penury by conceding 18 unanswered points.
Bridgend raised their game against Wales; now Wales must do precisely the same against New Zealand.
No one who was at the Brewery Field (perhaps not even the selectors) would give twopence for their ability to do so.
The backs were mainly pedestrian but the fundamental problem lay elsewhere.
Apart from Kevin Moseley's steady supply from the line-out, there was nothing much to commend in a Welsh forward effort which reverted to the very worst Eighties stereotype of static, cumbersome donkeys only too willing to slow the game to walking pace.
‘When the pressure comes on, players revert to bad habits,’ Ryan said.
The All Blacks would treat such an outmoded approach with the scorn it deserves, although on the other hand they might have been impressed with Bridgend's contrasting mobility and aggression.
The back row were swifter to the loose ball, had a clearer idea of what to do with it when they got there, and their impressive half-backs were given every opportunity — which they eagerly took — to control the game.
This was conveniently encapsulated in the first try.
Wales, characteristically, delayed the heel at a scrum, putting Robert Jones in trouble when the ball finally emerged.
He was scragged by Mike Budd, Jeremy Cooper came away with the ball, Owain Williams acted as the link, and Kevin Ellis scored: three back-row forwards and their scrum-half in perfect harmony.
Wales's instant reaction, a try by Arthur Emyr, and subsequent steady improvement, bringing well-crafted tries for Emyr and Robert Jones, promised more than was later fulfilled.
In the third quarter Bridgend had little difficulty in wiping out an 11-point deficit, Huw Bevan supporting Aled Williams's break for their second try.
It was a magnificent fightback and such was Welsh distress that they never looked like preventing it.
‘We have taken a step backward,’ Ryan said — and on this sorry evidence it looks as if it will be backwards all the way when the Test takes place at Cardiff Arms Park on 4 November.
As the Welsh squad do not meet again until 30 October, time has all but run out.
Rugby Union: Summit a total success for Bath
By ROBERT COLE
Neath..... 13 Bath...... 17 WHEN the undisputed club champions of Wales and England collide, sparks can be expected to fly, and Saturday's game provided the perfect blend of drama, skill and excitement.
Since Neath were without five of their Welsh squad members, including their inspirational leader Kevin Phillips, when something had to give it was the home side.
Defeat for the Welsh All Blacks, particularly at the fortress that is The Gnoll, is a rare occurrence, hated by the players, frowned upon by the coaches and detested by the increasing army of fans who continue to pack the ground.
But whatever their collective response to coming second, no one could complain of losing to a Bath side so replete with experienced English caps and burgeoning talent.
The English Cup and league champions brought to an end a 33-match unbeaten home run by Neath, dating back to Pontypool's visit on 8 March, 1988, and recorded their first win over Neath since 1983.
Yet what pleased the Bath coach Jack Rowell more than the cold facts and figures was that his team had come to terms with Neath's ‘unique style of total rugby’.
That was the greatest triumph.
‘The only way forward for British rugby is to play that standard of game every week,’ he added.
‘Playing regularly in south Wales has helped us to go places and 10 years on it's nice to crown it with a win like this.
Now we must look to the next stage of development.
‘As a side you have to learn to cope with new styles, temperaments and pressures.
That's one of the reasons why we want to play the best sides in Europe.’
Having dispatched the pride of Romania, Steaua Bucharest, and the cream of Wales, Neath, Toulon are next on the Bath hit-list.
To succeed again they will have to improve their fitness and concentration, the only flaws in an otherwise faultless game-plan.
Having raced into a 14-point interval lead, thanks to two tries from Tony Swift, another from Richard Lee and a Jonathan Callard conversion, they nearly allowed themselves to be knocked out of their stride by Neath's bludgeoning approach.
Tries by Allan Bateman and Colin Laity brought the home team back into the hunt and set up a stirring finale to the heavyweight contest.
Rugby Union: Snook's struggle for survival
By BARRIE FAIRALL
Bedford..... 6 Wasps...... 57 BEDFORD have now conceded 117 points in their last two matches and this latest reversal served only to illustrate the plight of a club who a few months ago were celebrating their arrival in the Courage First Division.
In theory, things can only get better; in practice, they may well become a lot worse before Wasps return in the league next March.
While Wasps could relax and enjoy their Goldington Road romp, Bedford learned nothing that they did not know already.
Frailties throughout the team had been ruthlessly exploited at Leicester, where they were taken for 60 points.
Here, within three minutes, Mark Bailey had rounded their defence for the first of his side's dozen tries.
It will require a miracle for Bedford to retain their status, even allowing for their few plus points — a top New Zealand coach, the arrival of a useful looking New Zealand scrum-half, and the fact that if the three national divisions are expanded, as proposed, next season, only one team will be going down from the First Division.
So Bedford must make the most of limited resources — and pray.
The Taranaki coach, Ian Snook, accepts that it is a hard task trying to keep Bedford afloat but, sink or swim, he will be grateful for any signs of improvement.
As for Grant Patterson, Snook's countryman may prove a crucial figure in Bedford's cause.
A sniping and competitive scrum-half straight out of the All Black mould, he has to serve out his time but qualifies to play in the league in the new year.
By then, Bedford will be left fighting for survival in four crunching closing fixtures and when Patterson makes his likely league debut it will be in Bath, of all places.
Then come Wasps, Rosslyn Park and finally Bristol.
Luck they need because on Saturday Wasps, one of the main contenders for the heavyweight Bath title, inflicted much mental and physical damage.
From Bailey's first thrust to Simon Smith's closing dig there was only one side in it as Bedford stumbled to their fourth defeat in five matches.
Rugby Union: Bowling swings it for Llanelli
By JIM HILL
Llanelli....... 27 Leicester....... 8 GOING for the gap took on a painful new meaning for Steve Bowling when he helped Llanelli claw their way back to win this entertaining game.
In scoring the try which restored Llanelli's lead and waning confidence deep in the second half, the left wing Bowling got an accidental boot in the mouth.
It left him dazed, bleeding profusely and minus a front tooth.
Bowling took no further part in the proceedings, but he may think it a small price to pay for providing one of the turning points in a memorable match.
It was a contest to restore one's faith in a game which is allegedly losing its way.
Llanelli, who had six of their best with Wales and several others injured, replaced experience with unbridled exuberance.
Leicester, who arrived without four regulars, were no less adventurous.
Orchestrated by their stand-off and acting skipper Les Cusworth, they were even prepared to run the ball from behind their own line and the kick to touch was an absolute last resort.
Rarely can two sets of forwards have covered so much ground and sustained so furious a pace in their efforts to set up scoring chances.
And outstanding among them were the visiting prop Wayne Richardson and Llanelli's hooker Andrew Lamerton.
To illustrate the excellence, the brothers Underwood combined to produce the best of the seven tries.
Tony, on the Leicester right, started it five yards from his own line with a brilliant burst which took him over the half-way line.
Richardson then made more ground and, when Cusworth spun out the scoring pass, England's Rory Underwood obliged with a typical one-handed touchdown.
John Liley converted to give Leicester a 12-10 lead which they stretched to 18-10 before Bowling and Llanelli hit back.
Rugby Union: Students deliver a lesson
By STUART ALEXANDER
Cambridge University.... 28 Northampton.............. 4 THE Light Blues looked anything but lightweight in their first run-out of the season against supposedly senior opposition.
First they had to lend some maroon LX Club shirts to a Northampton side who had forgotten to bring theirs along, and then the students gave a lesson in speed about the field, quick thinking and teamwork.
No wonder their coach Tony Rodgers could scarcely restrain a grin at the end as a cluster of Northampton committee men tried to work out why they had also travelled with little sense of direction, wit, wisdom or work rate.
Rodgers knows there is a long way to go before the big one in December, but he has the makings of a strong, hard pack and the chance of additional talent behind them providing injury does not intervene.
Although the No. 8 Rob Wainright broke his leg in midweek, he could be back in training in November, and in John Wilby he had a deputy who shone in the back row.
Northampton, too, were missing key players, going down by five tries to a consolation one.
Two tries, the first in under two minutes by Simon Holmes and the fourth by the hooker John Ashworth, were from alert attention to the ball at their own throw-in near their own line.
Andrew Davies, Paul Reed and captain Alan Buzza coped with the slippery drizzle to score the others, and Saints were spared another 14 points in missed kicks.
Rugby Union: Kelso in need of their imports
By BILL LEITH
Kelso........ 18 Heriot's FP.. 29 KELSO, the champions, languish bottom of the Scottish First Division — in the illustrious company of Hawick, among others — ironically after preparing more thoroughly than usual.
The harvest was early and they had a pre-season tour.
Hopes of a title hat-trick hang by a thread, but all is not quite lost.
Gary Callander, the former Scotland hooker, is in cracking form again and, with John Jeffrey staying down and grafting at second row, they took particular encouragement from their scrummaging in an 18-29 defeat by the powerhouse Heriot's.
Any real revival hopes, however, hinge on the New Zealanders Brian Bellingham, a wing, and Steve Autogavea, a lock, who are due to arrive from Auckland in midweek.
Since Sean Lineen changed nationality to win four caps last season, every Kiwi migrant is now the subject of intense scrutiny and great expectations.
In Bellingham's case, there is the added pressure of impressive advance billing from his ex-clubmate Lineen.
Had they seen Saturday's encounter, the Kiwis might have been tempted to catch a plane home.
Heriot's, stronger in the set-piece and sharper on the rare occasions play flowed, scored tries through Cameron Glasgow, Gary Kenhard and Peter Steven and kept their own line intact.
Some 35 penalties were awarded, the teams occasionally shaking their heads in bafflement.
Fortunately, frustration surfaced only in sporadic back-chat, but when teams such as Kelso and Heriot's, each with a tradition of expansive back play, fail to put on a show in glorious conditions something, surely, is wrong.
Rugby Union: Yorkshire's home works
By PAUL STEPHENS
Yorkshire.... 29 Durham....... 16 FORCED to abandon the selection policy that in recent seasons embraced many of the top players qualified for the county but living well out of it in favour of those representing clubs within the broad acres, Yorkshire made an emphatic and ebullient start at Otley in an effort to regain the title they last won in 1987.
The immediate benefit of discarding established regulars was an accumulated perception and zest for attack that Durham were unable to match.
Notwithstanding a marked inferiority at centre and back row, the champions, with only nine of their title-winning side and four newcomers to county rugby, made an unstinting contribution to a fluid game in which they were outscored in tries only three to four.
It was as well for Yorkshire that John Howe and John Dixon were unable to assert any aerial authority for, early in the first half, John Orwin collided with the newcomer Steve Harris, suffered a neck injury and, though he stayed on, was a virtual passenger.
He will miss tomorrow's encounter with Cheshire.
It meant that Yorkshire, if not previously committed to open plan, had no choice than to adopt one.
This suited Peter Buckton and Simon Tipping admirably; they made the best possible use of the loose ball, punching holes through the Durham defence so that, as the final quarter was reached, Yorkshire led 25-6.
Powerless to halt the irresistible Simon Irving and Paul Johnson, Howe led a spirited fightback with a try, to which Dave Cooke — the best of the title holders' backs — added another, but Johnson later confirmed Yorkshire's legitimate hopes of being northern group winners with a third score from the backs.
Basketball: Roberts walks tall to fell Giants
By DUNCAN HOOPER
BRACKNELL Tigers maintained their run as England's most successful pot hunters when they defeated Manchester Giants 97-91 in the final of the Tournament of Champions at the Granby Halls, Leicester.
For the Tigers, who won the Coca-Cola National Cup and NatWest Trophy last season, Dale Roberts collected 34 points and the game's Most Valuable Player award.
Kingston, whose coach Kevin Cadle watched Friday night's semi-final, did not qualify for the tournament because they did not compete in the League last season although their form over the past three weeks suggests they will be front runners over the next seven months.
Just five minutes into Saturday's final Giants lost the 6ft 9in England forward Dave Gardner with a sprained ankle.
His departure, combined with those of Chris Kearney and Jason Fogerty who both fouled out in the last five minutes, proved crucial to the outcome.
In the first half Bracknell, inspired by another England player, Tony Balogun, had opened a 36-24 lead.
But they trailed 58-53 early in the second period after Giants' Kevin St Kitts and Jerry Johnson spearheaded a 14-0 spurt.
From then until the final three minutes rarely more than one basket separated the teams, as Tigers came back again, until Roberts scored and free-throws from Tom Seaman and Paul James gave Bracknell breathing space at 95-92.
Roberts, fittingly, scored the game's final point from the foul line.
Australian Rules: Hawks swoop to be team of the decade
By DUNCAN HOOPER
(First Edition) HAWTHORN won their second consecutive Victorian Football League premiership on Saturday, defeating Geelong by six points before more than 100,000 spectators in Melbourne.
The victory, 21-18 (144) to 21-12 (138), established the Hawks as the club of the decade, it being the team's fourth title in seven years, and their ninth consecutive grand final.
Hawthorn took the lead early in the first quarter and the Cats then had to play catch-up.
Geelong forward Gary Ablett led his team with a record-breaking nine goals and became only the second person to win the most valuable player award while playing on a losing side.
Geelong, who finished ninth last year, were the underdogs for the match but came within one straight kick of achieving the impossible dream, in coach Malcolm Blight's first year.
Football: Hazard hints at the missing gifts
By PATRICK BARCLAY
HOW TO describe Saturday's match between Chelsea and Arsenal?
Well, I seem to recall a London gallery exhibiting a pile of rubbish, which was considered valid art by the proprietors and drew a large attendance.
The only redeeming feature of a goalless, worthless event at Stamford Bridge was that it did not require a grant.
Yet the Chelsea manager, Bobby Campbell, and Arsenal assistant, Theo Foley, agreed it had been a good match, and the spectators' complaints were muted.
Some even applauded the players at the end.
It takes all sorts.
Bobby Robson was there to assess World Cup candidates, but nothing positive emerged from 90 minutes of scuffling that made one almost yearn for the more measured boredom of Rangers' European Cup exit in Munich three days earlier.
At least the outcome was appropriate.
Had either of the teams won, they would have taken the League leadership.
Instead Liverpool stayed top without kicking a ball.
Television had postponed Manchester United's scheduled visit to Anfield so it could be shown live on 22 December, the longest night.
London's leading pair, as if piqued by this, turned 30 September into the longest afternoon.
On and on it dragged.
Lacking a goal that might have altered its chemistry, it remained a matter of dull physics.
Yet many of the crowd were kept interested by the possibility of victory, which is, I suppose, what derbies are about.
They are so frequent these days in London, which has eight of 20 First Division clubs, that we must expect aesthetic considerations to be overridden.
Why, though, could these supposed championship contenders not have tried to emulate the fine passing that had sprinkled the previous weekend's Merseyside joust?
The simple answer is that Chelsea are in a false position and Arsenal, on this evidence, slightly jaded champions.
They ought to have pocketed three points in the first half-hour but Tony Adams, a more threatening centre-forward on his forays than the current Alan Smith, missed the target with two headers and David Rocastle let Dave Beasant save a penalty, much as the stretch-version keeper had done for Wimbledon in the 1988 FA Cup final.
Now an Arsenal team in peak health would have kept a grip on the match.
This one could not.
As George Graham indicated upon his side's accession to the title, they would need more composure and sophistication to match Liverpool in the longer term.
He chose not to hasten the process by buying.
After all, he had just the man on his staff.
But Paul Davis remains unfit.
His absence is increasingly conspicuous and Liverpool, for the moment, in a super league of one.
Davis, of course, would have walked into England's team in Poland a week on Wednesday; until last season's prolonged suspension, followed by injury, Bobby Robson had him firmly pencilled in as Bryan Robson's replacement.
Michael Thomas, several years younger, is not quite in the same class yet but may have to play in Chorzow.
If so, it will be a gamble, because he flopped on his only previous international appearance in Saudi Arabia.
The odds are favourable enough according to Chelsea's Mike Hazard, who said of his adversary: ‘He could cope in Poland, not just because of his ability to close people down and use the ball well, but temperament — you saw that when he scored the goal that won Arsenal the League.’
Very kind, but international players are supposed to be habitually influential, and it was Hazard who in the second half, with a few incisive passes, gifts from the heavens on a day like this, left a greater mark.
Chelsea might have won had the ball not kept turning into a Mexican bean at Kerry Dixon's feet.
Campbell's hard-working side are still trying to sort out their system, which involves a spare defender and, as far as one can see, a good deal of improvisation.
It should suit Tony Dorigo, the unblooded England left-back, though oddly his rival, Nigel Winterburn, did more rampaging on Saturday; neither, in truth, made the heart pound.
Dorigo at least had the satisfaction of seeing his direct opponent and England colleague David Rocastle withdrawn.
All in all, Bobby Robson must have found it about as fruitful as a day trying to get in touch with Brian Clough.
There was, however, one aspect that deserves commendation.
After 16 minutes Graham Roberts was injured by a tackle for which Perry Groves was booked (Steve Clarke took over as sweeper, and is likely to have several weeks in which to build on a promising display).
Roberts's ankle appeared broken, but the Chelsea players were not interested in retribution and the club, as soon as they knew the injury was less serious, put a message on the electronic scoreboard: an example of public relations from which others could learn.
Football: Lineker crackers paper the cracks
By JOE LOVEJOY
Tottenham Hotspur..... 3 Queen's Park Rangers.. 2 THE GROUND is beginning to look like the finished article, but work on the team is still behind schedule.
The East Stand at White Hart Lane, open for business for the first time, provided a gleaming backdrop for Gary Lineker's first hat-trick for two years, but Gary's glory game served only to paper over Tottenham's cracks.
QPR are not good enough to finish in the top six, according to Trevor Francis, their player-manager, but they should have won and would surely have done so but for a mind-boggling miss by Andy Sinton when it was 2-2.
For the second week in succession, Spurs' dodgy defence had thrown away a 2-0 lead.
Lineker spared their blushes this time, but not even the striker acclaimed by Francis as Europe's best (Gullit may sue) can oblige every week if the requirement is two goals for a draw, three for a win.
‘Of course, some things are still not right,’ Terry Venables, approaching the second anniversary of his appointment, said.
Two new players were needed to take Spurs where they wanted to go.
Murmurs of discontent off-stage.
‘He has signed 12 already.
Where are they going — Twickenham?’
The most pressing need is for a centre-half to prevent the sort of soft header with which David Bardsley brought QPR back into contention, and a more productive partner for Lineker.
Venables continues to pursue Mark Wright, Derby County's England defender, and is giving serious consideration to the swap proposed by Everton which would take Paul Stewart, Tottenham's blunt instrument of a centre-forward, to Goodison Park in exchange for Tony Cottee.
The deal would have been done by now but for Venables's reservations about playing two penalty-area sniffers together without an orthodox No. 9 to provide an aerial target.
It worked at West Ham, where Cottee enjoyed a profitable partnership with Frank McAvennie, who is scarcely from the Mick Harford mould.
And anyway, the bottom line should be Cottee is unquestionably a better footballer than Stewart.
In contrast to his partner's thud and blunder, Lineker's finishing was of the highest order.
His second goal was the highlight of the afternoon — the single-minded determination to score almost as impressive as the execution which saw him hold off Paul Parker and Alan McDonald and allow the ball to run past him before spinning and shooting across David Seaman, from right to left.
Two-nil up at home against moderate opposition — it would have been downhill all the way for most teams.
But then most teams are not lumbered with Spurs' defence.
Bardsley and Francis profited from their collective inadequacy, and at 2-2 it was anybody's game.
It should have been QPR's, when Sinton, set up by Bardsley, somehow contrived to shoot wide.
Instead, Nayim's cutback from the byline on the left enabled Lineker to win it for Tottenham.
Four goals in two games.
Was he over his illness and restored to peak efficiency?
A thin smile.
‘Not that one again.
Every time I go through a lean spell I've lost a yard; every time I score a goal it means I'm over the hepatitis.
I always knew the goals would come.’
Football: UEFA Women's Championship Group Three game at Brentford
By JOE LOVEJOY
Jan Murray, the England left wing, avoids becoming the filling in a Finnish defenders' sandwich during the UEFA Women's Championship Group Three game at Brentford yesterday.
England failed to take their chances, many of which were created by Gillian Coultard in midfield, and the game finished goalless Photograph: Peter Jay 
Football: Platt ploughs a lone furrow of excellence
By PHIL SHAW
Aston Villa....... 1 Derby County...... 0 WHEN the tough get going, to paraphrase that wonderful bit of locker-room nonsense, the Villa usually get left behind.
In defeating Derby they simply got lucky.
Villa began the afternoon where they finished in May, one rung above the relegation places, although this time last year they stood fifth in the First Division.
That they are already struggling clearly troubles Graham Taylor.
The Villa manager spent £1.2m in February on Ian Ormondroyd and Nigel Callaghan — neither of whom made Saturday's starting line-up — and a further £1m during the summer.
Taylor wanted the Rangers striker Kevin Drinkell — now Coventry-bound — but chairman Doug Ellis was apparently reluctant to back his judgement.
A separation may now be imminent.
David Platt is making a brave fist of replacing Alan McInally — his goal, brilliantly struck from an angle after he had gone round Peter Shilton, was his fifth this season — but he cut a solitary, composed figure in a side bereft of confidence and quality.
Derek Mountfield and Kevin Gage were horribly out of touch; the scalpel tongues went for Chris Price in that peculiarly cutting way reserved for baldies playing badly; and the introduction of Ormondroyd, the forward built like a Handsworth tower block, brought cruelly sarcastic cheers.
Where does that leave Derby?
Aggrieved after looking the more cohesive, balanced unit; incredulous that after so many chances they still have just five goals.
Dean Saunders should at least have emulated Trevor Francis's hat-trick at Villa Park a week earlier, and Paul Goddard's anger at being substituted suggested all is not well with last season's fifth-placed team.
Arthur Cox's admiration for John Fashanu is well known, and perhaps it is time for the Maxwell millions to be used to purchase just such a battering Ram.
The need for an element of surprise is also glaring, and it would be worth Cox's monitoring the John Sheridan situation at Forest.
Both sides are in Littlewoods Cup action this week.
Derby start 2-1 down to Cambridge and Villa defend the same score at Wolves, where Taylor may have to trust in another piece of sports sagacity.
Fast guys tire, a basketball coach once said of his own high-rise team, but big guys don't shrink.
Football: Bowen belittles the Millwall machismo
By NICK DUXBURY
Millwall........ 0 Norwich City.... 1 GRAFFITI displaying the legend ‘lesbians ignite’; T-shirts bearing the sinister slogan ‘These colours do not run’; and simulated sex over the Tannoy gave every indication that Millwall was still a Den of iniquity.
Innocuous would be nearer the mark.
The activists' message scrawled on a wall near the ground is some way removed from the burning passions normally aroused by football, while the T-shirts are more machismo than menace, and pop songs peppered with heavy breathing are apparently in vogue if not in keeping with pre-match entertainment.
Cold Blow Lane no longer chills the blood for all the wrong reasons, but that is not to say the Lions have gone soft.
Norwich will testify to a victory hard won.
Millwall were unbeaten at home and only the Canaries' ability to metamorphose into a giant yellow sponge kept Teddy Sheringham and Tony Cascarino soaked in sweat and starved of success.
The squeeze was on from the start, Mark Bowen clearing off the line in the fourth minute and again in the 84th from Terry Hurlock's drive as Norwich maintained a startling statistic of having yet to concede an away goal.
They have also yet to lose in the League, Millwall's threat being thwarted by a dogged defence and a dollop of luck.
The Lions like the high way but are not rigid disciples of one code, and passes to feet compared favourably with passes measured in feet from the ground.
The pass master was Gary Waddock, playing only his second First Division game after a two-and-a-half year absence caused by a knee injury.
Waddock even overshadowed Hurlock until the sting of falling behind injected the long-haired harrier with more drive.
Millwall's chagrin was heightened by the knowledge that their redoubt had been stormed by a full-back, Bowen's 60th minute winner being a cold blooded execution from Robert Fleck's spear of a short through-ball.
As Bowen admitted, it had been ‘like the Alamo’ for Norwich and bastions was on the lips of every Millwall supporter as they headed home complaining of an iniquitous defeat, their moans contrasting the broadcasted cries of consummation.
Football: Nicholas needs live bullets
By DON LINDSAY
Aberdeen.... 1 Celtic...... 1 AS A CHEEKY teenager who was capable of scoring more than 30 goals a season, Charlie Nicholas earned the nickname the Cannonball Kid.
Sadly, Charlie's arsenal has been dampened and diminished in his post-Parkhead years, and finding the back of the net now has become rather less of a habit.
So far this season, Nicholas has fired only blanks, 13 matches having passed by without him hitting the target.
‘He's not the first striker to go a few games without scoring,’ Alex Smith, the Aberdeen manager, said.
‘It will eventually happen and when it does it will be like a release valve.
But as long as he is setting up things for other people, that's fine by me.’
Nicholas's lack of success in front of goal, though, underlines Aberdeen's Achilles' heel — the inability to make pressure tell.
In Jim Bett, Paul Mason, Brian Grant and Craig Robertson, they have an effective and, at times, elegant midfield, which can impose its will on opponents, but too often the opportunities created come to nought.
Saturday's goal was the product of some poor defending by Celtic and the alertness of Mason in picking out the ginger nut of Alex McLeish, but, again, they relied on a defender to score.
Although two points clear of the pack, the writing is on the wall for Aberdeen unless someone starts banging goals away.
Joe Miller was the subject of praise from Billy McNeill, the Celtic manager.
The winger, who last Friday withdrew a transfer request, scored the equaliser and generally did his bit to rally the troops.
European Football: Maradona's restoration period
By PHIL SHAW
THE FORM book proved a poor guide yesterday when Napoli, who stumbled into the UEFA Cup's second round in midweek on penalties, won 3-0 against Milan, who had breezed through their first defence of the European Cup, writes Phil Shaw.
Internazionale shrugged off defeat by Malmo to beat the leaders, Roma, also by 3-0.
as if to underline the point, Malmo completed their regular season by losing 2-0 to relegated Vastra Frolunda, although they now play off for the Swedish title with Norrkoping.
Diego Maradona did most to restore Napoli to the top, creating headed goals (18 and 45 min) for Andrea Carnevale and scoring a virtuoso third (84).
Inter's treble came from Lothar Matthaus (26, 39) and Andreas Brehme (51).
In Spain Real Madrid now lead on goal difference from Atletico Madrid and Sevilla after a 4-1 win over Cadiz, Hugo Sanchez scoring two and Bernd Schuster one.
Basque nationalism surfaced during Athletic Bilbao's match against Atletico.
Demonstrators invaded the pitch, but they were repelled and play continued.
At half-time a giant Spanish flag was burned, and Atletico sent on Paolo Futre.
He made a goal (65) for Baltazar, but Howard Kendall's side equalised (70).
Football: Palace rise above Everton's kneading
By JONATHAN FOSTER
Crystal Palace.... 2 Everton........... 1 LIKE other Merseyside institutions before them, Everton can find scapegoats on their own left wing.
Passes played into space there created a two-goal, first-half deficit, which the patient patterns Everton built down their right flank ultimately merited to cancel: a team, in fact, of two halves.
The sinister side included Norman Whiteside, still short of full fitness and substituted after his irritability got him booked, and the right-footed Neil McDonald, an obviously uncomfortable deputy at left-back for Neil ‘Disser’ Pointon.
So the thrust of Everton movement was provided down the other side by Ian Snodin and Stuart McCall, to such effect during the second half that Steve Coppell, the Crystal Palace manager, likened the impression on his defence to kneading dough.
Maybe, but Palace were nothing if not doughty.
Geoff Thomas, a makeshift centre-back, put head, toes and abdomen to the ball in exemplary manner, and Andy Gray's defending was even more impressive than the passes he timed to perfection for both Palace goals.
The first was simple, after Gray had intercepted some sloppy play and sent Mark Bright through: goalkeeper Neville Southall parried the shot, but Ian Wright converted his fourth League goal of the season.
The second was altogether more clever: McDonald isolated and an offside trap jammed by a pass that Alan Pardew collected before shooting diagonally past Southall.
By then, the game was set in an exciting crescendo, Palace interrupting the openings contrived down the right by Mike Newell and Pat Nevin with breaks aimed at Wright's speed and control.
Wright looked acclimatised to the First Division, more so than his partner Bright, who has yet to score this season.
Newell has also arrived impressively from the Second and took his goal with poise.
Football: Bassett hounded by comparisons
By JOHN DOUGRAY
Sunderland.......... 1 Sheffield United.... 1 WHAT gets up Dave Bassett's nostrils, as he so vividly put it after his side's draw at Roker Park, are the people who make comparisons between Sheffield United and his former club, Wimbledon.
‘It's not the Wimbledon style of play with us, it's the Sheffield style.
You have to play according to the players you've got,’ he said.
All the same it is hard to resist the temptation to describe United's style as Wimbledon Mk II.
For a start, you have goalkeeper Simon Tracey, signed from Wimbledon last year.
He regularly plays the ball outside the 18-yard area before kicking it upfield.
Where did he learn that move?
At the heart of the defence is Mark Morris, a first-team regular with the Dons for seven years.
Then there is John Gannon in midfield.
He was six years with Wimbledon.
It does not really matter how you describe the style — Wimbledon, long ball, direct.
The fact is, it works and it has taken United to the top of the Second Division, unbeaten in nine League games.
Sunderland were handed an early goal by Brian Deane who headed Gordon Armstrong's inswinging corner high into his own net.
United completed the scoreline after 19 minutes through an Ian Bryson header.
Sport in Short: Volleyball
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Tennis
By JOHN DOUGRAY
THE unseeded Anders Jarryd of Sweden overcame a shaky start to beat fifth-seeded Kevin Curren in the semi-finals of the San Francisco Grand Prix tournament.
Jarryd won 3-6 7-6 7-5 in 2hr 37min and now plays Brad Gilbert.
THE All England Club chairman, R E H ‘Buzzer’ Hadingham, 73, is to step down in December after six years in charge of Wimbledon.
JOHN McENROE and Michael Chang head the entries for the grand prix tournament at Wembley on 7-12 November.
Revised first-round draw: Italy v New Zealand; Soviet Union v Switzerland; Canada v Brazil; Spain v France; United States v Greece; Czechoslovakia v Belgium; Sweden v Japan; West Germany v Finland; Australia v China; Argentina v Philippines; Bulgaria v South Korea; Netherlands v Yugoslavia; Denmark v Poland; Britain v Indonesia; Austria v Mexico; Hungary v Thailand.
Sport in Short: Swimming
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Squash
By JOHN DOUGRAY
STAFFORD MURRAY, 19 days short of his 14th birthday, became the youngest winner of a senior county closed championship at the Leominster Leisure Centre, Herefordshire, yesterday when he defeated his coach, Peter Ratcliffe, 9-5, 9-7, 9-2 in the final.
Sport in Short: Speedway
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Snooker
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Sailing
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Rowing
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Rhythmic Gymnastics
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Rallying
By JOHN DOUGRAY
JIMMY McCRAE, of Scotland, won the 2,200-mile round-Britain Autoglass Tour by 22 minutes at Brands Hatch yesterday when he finished second to Wales's David Llewellin in the final stage.
Sport in Short: Olympics
By JOHN DOUGRAY
THE SPORTS COUNCIL is to support Manchester's bid to host the 1996 summer Games by giving the city £50,000 towards staging 15 major sports events.
They will include the English Open table tennis tournament, the women's world and European weightlifting championships and the British and European 10m airgun championships.
Sport in Short: Motor Racing
By JOHN DOUGRAY
DICK JOHNSON and John Bowe of Australia, in a Ford Sierra, led from the start yesterday to win the Bathurst 1,000-km touring car race from the West German pair of Klaus Niedzwiedz and Frank Biela, in another Ford Sierra.
Sport in Short: Golf
By JOHN DOUGRAY
BILL BRITTON won his first PGA Tournament without hitting a ball yesterday when the final round of the $750,000 Tallahassee Classic was rained out.
Sport in Short: Cycling
By JOHN DOUGRAY
JEANNIE LONGO, of France, beat her own world 10km and 20km records and her one-hour high-altitude record yesterday.
Longo, a triple gold medallist at this year's world championships, clocked 12hr 59min 50sec in the 10km, 25:59.96 in the 20km and covered 46.35268km in one hour.
Sport in Short: Cricket
Sport Page 28
Sport in Short: Boxing
By JOHN DOUGRAY
JESUS ROJAS, of Venezuela, won the World Boxing Association flyweight title from Fidel Bassa, of Colombia, after 12 rugged rounds in front of the champion's home crowd, in Barranquilla, on Saturday night.
Sport in Short: Bowls
By JOHN DOUGRAY
SCOTLAND scored a crushing 20-5 victory over England in the Players' Association international at Carlisle.
The Scots, who led 12-3 overnight, needed only one more point to secure overall victory and clinched it in the first match to finish yesterday when Jim Muir beat Mike Marsden in straight sets.
Two Scots, Willie Wood and Hugh Duff, finished with 100 per cent records from their five matches.
Sport in Short: Baseball
By JOHN DOUGRAY
GEORGE BELL drove in the last of three runs in the eighth inning as the Toronto Blue Jays came from behind for a 4-3 victory over the Baltimore Orioles in the SkyDome on Saturday and reached the American League championship series against the Oakland Athletics.
The first game of the best-of-seven series between the winners of the West and East divisions will be in California tomorrow.
Sport in Short: Badminton
By JOHN DOUGRAY
ALLAN BUDI KUSUMA, thriving on the confidence gleaned from his victory over Denmark's world No. 1, Morten Frost, in the semi-finals, beat fellow Indonesian Eddy Kurniawan 15-7 15-12 to win the Dutch men's open title and move to the top of the world rankings.
Sport in Short: Athletics
By JOHN DOUGRAY
DOUGLAS WAKIIHURI, Kenya's premier marathon runner, took the lead after 10km of the 30km Lidingoloppet in Sweden and won the world's largest cross-country festival by two minutes.
Britain's Angela Tooby broke 4km from the finish to win the women's 15km race.
ROSA MOTA, Portugal's Olympic women's marathon champion, won a 10-kilometre race in a suburban Tokyo park, in 32min 31sec.
Sport in Short: American Football
Sport Page 28
Rugby League Round-Up: Eagles making a soar point
By PHIL SHAW
THE FORTUNES of two clubs who joined the League together during the summer of 1984 could hardly be more contrasting.
Sheffield Eagles' fortunes are soaring in the top flight; the 28-16 win at Wakefield was their third in four matches.
They came from 14-2 down at the break, and Trinity's failure was compounded by the sending off of Mark Conway.
Nottingham City, originally named Mansfield Marksman after a lager, remain marooned in the depths of the Second Division.
They led Halifax 8-4 at half-time only to collapse, punch-drunk, to a 72-20 defeat.
The only consolation was a crowd at the Harvey Hadden Stadium of 2,581, boosted by visiting fans.
In a bad-tempered match, Jason Ramshaw, the Halifax hooker, had his jaw broken, while his team-mate Richard Fairbank and Nottingham's Craig Whitehead were sent off.
Remarkably, Halifax's performance meant that the First Division leaders Wigan, 66-0 winners in a 12-try romp at Barrow, were not the day's top scorers.
Steve Clayton's eighth-minute dismissal for tripping hardly enhanced the home team's prospects.
Hull ended their four-game losing streak by beating Leeds 8-7 at The Boulevard.
Richard Gay, their teenage stand-off, set up the decisive try as Hull came from 7-4 behind in the closing minutes.
There were calls for the resignation of coach Kevin Ashcroft as Salford went down to another heavy defeat, 36-12 at home to a Bradford side inspired by their Canberra Raider, Ivan Henjak.
Three players were banished at Workington — Dave Lowden and Paul Penrice of the home side and Basil Akey from runaway winners Ryedale York.
Resurgent Fulham, home from Hendon, overran Carlisle 50-6 at Chiswick.
Hockey: Holwell quickly sets ball rolling
By BILL COLWILL
SUE HOLWELL, the England sweeper, had the honour of scoring the first goal in the Women's Typhoo National League when it got underway on Saturday.
In an early-start game her goal after seven minutes from a penalty corner set Leicester on their way to a 2-1 win against Exmouth.
Holwell got a second after the interval with the Exmouth captain, Rosie Goodridge, pulling one back in the last minute.
Chris Lysons, Great Harwood's goalkeeper, will remember her first National League game for different reasons.
Against Slough, she saved a penalty stroke from Karen Brown but was beaten six times — twice by Brown and twice by another GB striker, Kate Parker, the Slough captain, with further goals coming from Lesley Hobley and Sue Chandler, Slough's latest recruit.
Ealing were quickly into action in their game against Orpington, with Jane Jagger opening the scoring in the second minute following a brilliant move involving Joan Lewis and Mandy Langridge.
Lewis and Langridge added further goals before the interval with Anne Green and Andrea Gallyer completing the scoring in the second half for a convincing 5-0 win.
To complete an opening day which was lacking in surprises, Sutton Coldfield won 2-0 away at Chelmsford with goals from Jane Swinnerton and Sian Jones.
Meanwhile, Hightown were 3-0 winners against Clifton on the Bristol University ground.
Their goals were scored by Jackie Crook, Sue Jones and Maggie Souyave, England's former indoor captain.
A game with a difference took place at Wimbledon, the oldest women's club in the world, as part of their centenary celebrations — a costume game between a side representing the pioneers of the club and one representing the swinging Thirties.
Hockey: Hacker to the four
By BILL COLWILL
Wales.... 4 Italy.... 0 WALES'S men extended their unbeaten run to seven matches yesterday when they defeated Italy at the National Sports Centre, Cardiff, writes Bill Colwill.
This followed their 2-0 win over the Italians on Saturday.
Hounslow's David Hacker, who got both goals in the first match, opened the scoring yesterday after 10 minutes as Wales established quick control.
Hacker and his Hounslow club-mate, Jon Rees, were in dominant form in the Wales midfield, putting the Italian defence under constant pressure and it came as no surprise when Owen Mackney put Wales further ahead on the half hour.
Hacker put the match beyond doubt two minutes after the interval with his second strike, although Jeremy Fry in the Welsh goal was called upon to make two smart saves before, in the last minute, Mark Lewis, one of only two home-based Welsh players in the side, sent Antony Colclough away for the final goal.
As Welsh hockey moves up a step and they prepare for their European Cup qualifier next year, their next games are against Belgium at Newtown at the end of the month.
They will be more than grateful to the English Poundstretcher League for the experience being gained by 13 of their 16-man squad.
Tennis: Jones fears second lightning bolt
From Our Correspondent in Tokyo
WHEN Sara Gomer, Clare Wood and Julie Salmon collapsed to a 2-1 defeat to Indonesia in the first round of the Federation Cup in Melbourne last December, they were the laughing stock of the tennis world, writes our correspondent from Tokyo.
Tomorrow at the sprawling Ariake Tennis Centre here a changed, but not new, British team will face the same opponents, desperate to restore some of their lost pride.
Wood remains, but Jo Durie replaces Gomer while Anne Hobbs will take over from Salmon.
Although last year's result shocked most people in the sport the British team captain, Ann Jones, claims she was not among them and therefore she had a firm eve-of-play warning for her players.
‘I have told them not to think that lightning can't strike twice,’ the former Wimbledon champion said.
‘I have been in tennis long enough to know that it can.
It is nice that we can play them again so soon, but since last year I think they have improved.’
Jones based her judgement on the fact that yesterday Indonesia crushed Malaysia in the qualifying round, losing just two games in their 3-0 win.
In many eyes, Britain could leave Tokyo as winners anyway.
In yesterday's opening ceremony they wore one of the most striking two-piece outfits which put them in the running for the ‘elegance’ award for the best dressed team.
The award will be presented tomorrow night.
The Soviet team had a go, too.
They marched into the stadium in matching denim jackets, mini-skirts (which were brought into the country by the US team captain, Marty Reissen) and dark glasses.
The most notable absentees were Martina Navratilova and Chris Evert, who will arrive today after playing an exhibition in Philadelphia, and Gabriela Sabatini and Monica Seles, who withdrew because they were too tired.
Bodybuilding: Charlie rules on pure flex appeal: Joe Lovejoy enters the oily domain of the muscled where Surrey's incredible hulk uncovers a universal truth
By JOE LOVEJOY
MR UNIVERSE will gird up his loins in briefs which bring a new meaning to the term bikini line, clip his diamond ear-stud into place and take the rattler from his Guildford home to Luton this week to begin his reign by promoting a new range of office furniture.
‘Strong and reliable stuff, see.
A good tie-up and a nice little earner.’
‘Earners’ like these keep Charles Clairmonte's body and soul together — no small task when the body in question is 17 stones of unadulterated muscle.
The 31-year-old ex-paratrooper's prize for retaining his title at Wembley on Saturday night was £10,000, which does not go far for a full-time body builder who downs half a dozen eggs after his breakfast cereal and eight to 10 chicken breasts a day when ‘bulking up’.
Charlie's weekly food bill comes to rather more than £100.
In his amateur days he was an ‘eviction technician’(a fashionable euphemism for bouncer) but such work is regarded as unseemly for the standard bearer of a sport which prides itself in its healthy clean-living image, and he now supplements his income from the few competitions which pay more than a pittance by personal appearances.
Clairmonte was a popular choice for the title first won by John Carl Grimek, America's ‘Monarch of Muscledom’ back in 1948, but his victory had been a close run thing.
Edward Kawak, who won in four successive years (1982-1985), mysteriously representing France, Lebanon and West Germany, was too close for comfort in second place (he was French this time).
Out in the audience it was bedlam, each Rodin pose greeted with wolf whistles, cat calls and enough indecent suggestions and doubles entendres to script a new ‘Carry On’ series.
Pecs mad, this body building lot.
Out on the stairs a piece of paper as worthless as Chamberlain's prohibited the use of body oils.
Back stage was like the Costa Brava: everyone oiling themselves and each other.
If they had all gone for a midnight swim, we would have had the worst slick since the Torrey Canyon.
What were they using if not the stuff Johnson intended for babies' bums?
‘You don't expect me to give away the tricks of the trade, do you?’ snapped Casey Kucharyk, who was to win Amateur Class II (up to 5ft 9in).
Sorry, Casey — the secret's out.
The colour and smell were a giveaway.
The magic potion was nothing more sinister than Hawaiian Tropic sun tan oil.
Upstairs in the Hampton Room Kawak was preening and strutting his stuff with a worried frown, pondering perhaps in which language to prepare a winner's speech.
Tatyana Scholl, the West German who was to win the Miss Bikini (physique) class, took time out from her press-ups to waddle around nervously like a weight-lifter eyeing the bar.
Someone suggested she touch up her lipstick, but make-up only made her look more than ever like the Spitting Image puppet of Bette Midler.
There were two classes for the ladies: Miss Bikini (figure), which was like Miss World without the breasts (pumping iron, paradoxically, serves only to deflate them) and Miss Bikini (physique) in which the girls resemble scaled-down versions of the men, without the knobbly bits.
Tatyana the Terrible won the Amazons' title, our own Tracey Citrone the more aesthetic section.
Charlie Clairmonte was the real winner, though — the one the highlighted products of London's solariums wanted to be photographed with.
How had he first got into body building?
‘By reading super hero comics,’ Flash Charlie said.
Surrey's own incredible hulk is available for personal appearances.
The odd chicken or a carrot cake would be much appreciated.
Sailing: Soviets slide to seventh place
By STUART ALEXANDER
BY a margin of two minutes 40 seconds the Soviet yacht Fazisi, with co-skippers Alexei Gryshenko and the American Skip Novak, finished sixth in the first leg of the Whitbread Round the World Race to Punta del Este, Uruguay.
But, by the even narrower margin of 38 seconds after handicap correction, they had to concede the place to Italy's Gatorade.
Both had finished just over six hours behind the Swedish ketch The Card with Pelle Petterson in the crew.
All agreed that the tactical decision on whether to go east or west at Cape Finisterre had been the key to success.
Half the fleet had arrived by last night, including the joint services yacht Satquote British Defender, which was beaten for eighth place by only 37 minutes by the first of the three Finnish challengers, Martela OF.
Defender also had the distinction of having the first woman finisher, Mandy Gallow.
Then, in the space of 31 minutes, came Spain's Fortuna Extra Lights, France's Charles Jourdan and the second Finnish maxi, Belmont.
Ireland's NCB and the third Finnish challenger, UBF, were due in last night.
Snooker: Top spot for Davis
By JANICE HALE
STEVE DAVIS might have begun his season behind the other players but he started it in style by capturing the first British ranking event, the BCE International, when beating Stephen Hendry, his most obvious rival, 9-4 at Trentham Gardens, Stoke, writes Janice Hale.
Davis, who won the world title for the sixth time in May, decided not to compete in the first two ranking events in Hong Hong and Bangkok.
He also did not compete in the European Open and will be absent from the Dubai Classic, which are also ranking events.
Consequently, after the Asian Open — which Hendry won — his No. 1 position in the world was taken over briefly by the 20-year-old Scot.
But his victory at Stoke on Saturday has him back at the top of the list.
He had only won one match prior to the international, in the Regal Scottish Masters, but is well aware of his own capabilities.
‘I raised my game just enough to get through the early rounds,’ he said of his performance.
‘It was a hell of a standard and an enormous challenge.
It stretched you to the limit.
I love playing great players and he's (Hendry) a great player.’
Equestrianism: Whitaker in search of rich picking
By GENEVIEVE MURPHY
IF John Whitaker can repeat last year's form at The Horse of the Year Show, which begins today at Wembley Arena, he will be the taker of rather more than a whit.
He won five of the 1988 contests and a total of £42,399, writes Genevieve Murphy.
Whitaker, the European champion, rides the same three horses as last year — Next Milton, Gammon and Hopscotch.
Milton's three 1988 victories included the winner-takes-all prize of £25,000 in the first running of the Next International Masters, which will be staged again on Friday evening.
This evening's opening performance begins with the final of the first Olympic Star Spotters Championship, which aims to give riders of young horses the chance to test their potential stars.
The idea has been warmly welcomed by David Broome, who has qualified Paul Schockemohle's seven-year-old Lotus for this evening's contest.
New Zealand's dual Olympic three-day event champion, Mark Todd, will also be in action on his latest Kiwi import, Double Take.
Squash: Parke's pay-off
From RICHARD EATON in Kuala Lumpur
SIMON PARKE, whose selection for England in the World Championships was dogged by controversy, began to repay the selectors' faith as he beat the Canadian No. 1, Sabir Butt, and the effects of influenza here yesterday, writes Richard Eaton from Kuala Lumpur.
Parke, 17, needed all his creativity and courage to hold on for a 15-10, 9-15, 15-12, 15-14 victory just when his resources were beginning to flag.
It was the Yorkshireman's second win in two days and his reward was to move within one win of a place in the last 32.
Another English selection for the team event, Jason Nicolle, the British Under-23 champion, also came through, winning 15-9, 15-11, 17-15 against Florian Possl, the West German who recently beat the England No. 1 Del Harris in New Zealand.
However, the Australian Geoff Hunt, joint holder of the record of eight British Open titles, just failed to make it.
He lost the toughest tussle of the day, against another former world champion, Maqsood Ahmed.
Hunt went down 15-9, 15-17, 15-13, 8-15, 15-5.
The Pakistani today plays the former British champion Geoff Williams for a place in the main draw.
Racing: The Trainers and Jockeys Making The Running on The Flat
Sport Page 29
Racing: Slippers comforts Sangster: Changing fortunes for a former leading owner and changing jockeys for Europe's richest race
By JOHN KARTER
OIL RICH beats filthy rich every time, but after several years of battling to remain buoyant in the remorseless wake of the Maktoums, Robert Sangster clambered back on to terra firma with his most significant win for a long time in Saturday's Hoover Fillies' Mile at Ascot.
Silk Slippers enabled Sangster — slowly-sinking in the super league of owners — to regain a foothold by wearing down the red-hot favourite, Moon Cactus, owned ironically by Sheikh Mohammed, in the dying strides of an event that has become a fertile proving ground for Classic fillies.
What a difference a few precious centimetres can make in this game of high stakes.
On both her outings Silk Slippers has thrust her attractive nose in front just where it matters and in so doing has established herself not merely as a valuable stud prospect, but an exciting candidate for next year's 1,000 Guineas and Oaks.
Sangster had been leading owner in this country five times in eight years up to 1985 when Sheikh Mohammed led the Maktoum charge, taking the No. 1 spot four times in row in the past four seasons.
And the Sheikh's dominance has been maintained this year as he heads the table with some £1.75m in prize money, half a million ahead of his older brother, Hamdan Al Maktoum, who owns Nashwan, with Sangster languishing in 10th place with a mere £250,000 or so in the kitty.
Silk Slippers may not enable Sangster to challenge the Arab supremacy, but an English Classic success after a five-year gap would come like manna from heaven.
Silk Slippers certainly looks the part, being a staying filly with speed in the mould of Midway Lady, who took the 1,000 and Oaks three years ago.
What was so impressive about Silk Slippers's victory was that she twice had to overcome difficulties in running and William Hill's offer of 33-1 about the daughter of Nureyev for the Oaks is particularly tempting.
She certainly looks a more attractive three-year-old prospect than Digression, who won the big juvenile colts' event, the Royal Lodge Stakes.
Digression won well enough, but the big minus factor against him is the fact that he is by the American stallion, Seattle Slew, whose progeny have tended not to train on over here.
Sheikh Mohammed's Bridal Toast, who finished powerfully to take second place could have more scope to progress as a Derby contender.
Fascinating though they are, thoughts of Classic confrontations to come were put on to the back-burner by another dazzling performance from Zilzal, who stamped himself as one of the outstanding milers of recent years with a thrashing of the French champion, Polish Precedent.
Walter Swinburn finds it hard to believe Zilzal will ever be beaten and the son of Nureyev will attempt to extend his sequence to six out of six in next month's Breeders' Cup Mile in Florida.
The good news is that he will not be rushed off to stud afterwards and will campaign for further honours next year when a move up to a mile and a quarter might be considered.
Meanwhile, as Ladbrokes shortened Nashwan's odds for next Sunday's Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe from 2-1 to 7-4 with a run, French Glory came down a point to 7-1 amid rumours that Pat Eddery would switch to him from Khalid Abdullah's other probable runner, Assatis.
Even more intriguing was a strong rumour that Steve Cauthen is to replace Greville Starkey on Cacoethes, who is trained like Assatis by Guy Harwood.
Starkey said yesterday that he knew nothing of the move and as far as he was concerned he was still on Cacoethes.
‘I shall sleep easy tonight,’ Starkey said.
Willie Carson will also resting easy after suggestions that he had been wrong to bring about the withdrawal of the red-hot favourite, Superoo, before the start of Ascot's opening event on Saturday, having done a similar thing with the favourite, Red Paddy, before the Royal Hunt Cup.
‘I was angry for a while because I was confident that the horse would win, but Willie did the right thing,’ John Sutcliffe, Superoo's trainer, said yesterday.
‘It's true the horse was 100 per cent sound five minutes afterwards, but there was definitely something wrong down at the start and Willie had advice from the starter and a vet.’
Racing: For the Notebook
By JOHN KARTER
A weekly list of horses to follow HUFOOF: Had her stands-side rivals beaten in a 24-runner sprint at Haydock on Saturday but was kept out of the frame by the finishers on the far side of the track.
Coming back to winning form.
(H Thomson Jones).
KATAHDIN: Unplaced behind Triomphe Modest over 6 furlongs at Nottingham on Tuesday, but this colt was not given a punishing race when running on very well to finish only a few lengths off the winner.
Will do better over longer distances.
(G Wragg).
SHIELING: Ran a marvellous race under a sizeable burden behind Kiya at Ascot.
She looked the possible winner a furlong from home, but faded near the finish as the task of conceding so much weight told.
(L Cumani).
TAILSPIN: Looked likely to be unplaced in Double Dutch's race at Ascot, but finished powerfully to take third place and must be followed in similar company.
(B Hills).
