TELEVISION /Bout of morning sickness
By MARK LAWSON
THE STORY was that Breakfast News (BBC 1), the third relaunch of the cereal television which began in 1983 as Breakfast Time with Frank Bough and Selina Scott chummy in jumpers, was going serious.
As the new presenter, Nicholas Witchell is chiefly celebrated for sitting on a lesbian during a news bulletin, you switched on at dawn with some cynicism.
It was soon clear, however, that this was broadsheet television.
Witchell would be doing his party trick only in special circumstances.
The programme pretty well began with an interview with someone from the Bundesbank which, as running orders go, is a bit like a long-jumper beginning his approach with his laces tied.
In fact, almost everything before seven is business news with men in suits watching over the pound like doctors: ‘And the latest news from Tokyo — it seems to be a little better.
..’ Nor is it merely the heavy stuff which comes with serious credentials.
Sally Jones, the sports presenter, clearly knew what the plural of Grand Prix was.
Even the lighter stories tended to be along the lines of parrots who played the commodities market.
There was, it is true, still a funny, tubby chap in a bow-tie — in 1983, Frank and Selina had Russell Grant filling this position of studio poodle — but, where Grant was an astrologer, Paul Callan reviews the newspapers.
Of the original concept, only weatherman Francis Wilson survives and even he seemed to be making conscious efforts not to call clouds ‘white, fluffy bits’, as has been his trick.
Perhaps, though, Wilson was merely distracted by the fact that, during his first appearance, he briefly disappeared before returning partially superimposed on a map.
His eyebrows floated over Glasgow and his mouth seemed to toy with eating Leeds.
The debut of Breakfast News was technically imperfect to a surprisingly high degree.
Apparently uncertain as to camera angles, Witchell and the others frequently gave the impression of having spotted a lesbian stalking across the floor.
But it is better, with a relaunch, to have technical rather than conceptual failings and Breakfast News should yet become a decently serious morning service.
Even so, breakfast television is still one of two areas of programming (situation comedy is the other) in which Britain trails America for quality.
The drive and fire of cereal television like NBC's Today show makes you understand the line about waking up in a city which doesn't sleep.
The British imitators are still whispering to a city that's still in bed.
The hissing cousins of Monday night current affairs coverage — rivals World In Action (Granada) and Panorama (BBC 1)— were both in impressive form.
World In Action questioned the Animal Liberation Front about the paradox of saving dumb animals by exposing dumb humans to incendiary devices.
Because of the Broadcasting Act, four ALF members in Balaclavas were shown on screen but their answers read by an actor.
Once again, it struck you that an actor was more likely to win sympathy from an audience than a slack-jawed garrulous Balaclava.
John Simpson's lucid report for Panorama, following groups of mujahedin through most of this year, attested to both the benevolent power of photography — cameramen Chris Hooke and Peter Juvenal courageouslycaught images of broken bodies and wrecked villages, of fire and snow — and the more dubious power of America and Russia, picking up the tab for the fighters but not the victims.
RADIO /Double acts: Robert Hanks on sexual antics in the Middle Ages and modern-day mirth
By ROBERT HANKS
IF IT worries you that the national survey on sexual habits is not going to take place, you could take comfort from the thought that it probably won't make a vast amount of difference in the long run.
As Jeffrey Richards showed in the first of three talks on Sexuality in the Middle Ages (Radio 3, Monday), you can always get past a lack of obvious data to find out the sort of thing that goes on in bedrooms.
It's a question of finding the right sources — like penitentials, books prescribing penances for a variety of sins, of which sexual sins formed the largest category.
Modern penitentials won't be of much use to future historians of the twentieth century, but eleventh-century penitentials might be, rich as they are in the prejudices of our enlightened age — particularly the inferior status of women.
Richards made it worryingly clear how far the Church was responsible for enshrining such illiberal attitudes, though to do it credit, the Church also introduced consent to marriage and made rape a crime against the person, rather than property.
The essential point was that the medieval Church was a ‘sex-negative’ institution — sex was a bad thing because it interfered with the search for spiritual perfection.
This held true even in marriage (a man who loved his wife too passionately was an adulterer, said St Jerome, who was not a man you'd invite to parties); and rampant millenarianism encouraged the tendency, since if you think that the end of the world, no, this world, is imminent, then procreation must seem something of a waste of time, and preparing your soul for Judgement Day will be pushed up your list of priorities.
The justification seems to have got lost along the way, but the attitude has prevailed until recently — you could argue about precise dates, but Philip Larkin plumped for 1963 — and it's not done for yet.
As Richards pointed out, the fact that the history of sexuality has had to wait so long to be written shows the strength of the taboos we have inherited.
Still, the taboos have been the source of much mirth: the stand-up's traditional reliance on smut and mothers-in-law could only exist in a largely sex-negative society.
But then there came ‘new’ comedy to blow away the medieval cobwebs; and then there came Russell Davies to make documentaries about it, with titles like There's A Racial Stereotype In My Soup (Radio 4 Saturday).
It's only ten years since the Comedy Store opened, but already there is a note of wistfulness creeping in for the good old days.
Arthur Smith sighed for political satire, and wondered what was going to happen to political comedy if we get a Labour government.
In retrospect, though, it was a touch too apparent how many comedians in 1979 thought it was enough just to say, um, ‘Bleep’— rather tamely, nobody got past the bleeper: for shock value, you're better off with Radio 3.
MUSIC /A sometime thing: David Fanning reviews Porgy and Bess in Liverpool
By DAVID FANNING
IT SEEMS remarkable that Gershwin's Porgy and Bess should have to be the object of rediscovery.
If a great opera such as this has difficulty holding a place in the repertoire, what hope is there for the merely excellent?
The main problem is the large, virtually all black cast — chorus, children and all.
Colour-blind casting would be as pointless as translating the libretto into Home Counties English.
So if, as seems likely, we have to wait a long time for a follow up to the triumphant Glyndebourne production, we should be all the more grateful for occasions like the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra's concert performance (sponsored by English Estates).
As it happens, the problems of an unstaged Porgy are hardly less acute — a cast of 24 soloists and a duration of three and a quarter hours are not easily managed in the concert hall.
Doubling up roles and cutting up to two fifths of the score may be practical necessities, but weaken the impact of the whole.
This is not so much in narrative coherence — the programme book gave the complete synopsis — as in dramatic timing.
If the complete Porgy reveals anything, it is that Gershwin did not go straight from one hit to another (as we did here, from ‘Summertime’ to ‘A Woman is a Sometime Thing’).
Perhaps even more destructively, the Philharmonic Hall acoustic does not make for the clarity of diction experienced in the average theatre.
Take the orchestra out of the pit, and unless you emasculate their contribution, the problem is compounded.
Microphones may be no real answer, but with the exception of Louis Hagen-William's Porgy and Daniel Washington's Crown none of the voices had adequate carrying power without them.
Happily these two roles are crucial ones, and the powerful delineation of this central rivalry gave the whole performance its backbone.
Wayne Williams as Sportin' Life justly drew applause for his succulent rendering of ‘It Ain't Necessarily So’ and Jo Ann Pickens had some touching moments as Bess; but none of the female voices sounded entirely in their element.
That the evening could still be counted a success was partly down to the attack and verve of the Liverpool Philharmonic Choir.
It was also partly down to the well-disciplined orchestra, although the jazz idiom of, for instance, Crown's ‘A Red-Headed Woman’ is not really in the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra's blood, and Libor Pesek was inclined to take more time than some of his soloists wanted.
Above all, the evening's success should be put down to music which never ceases to delight by the sophistication of its continuity, by its sheer inspiration.
