BOOK REVIEW /The spy who lunched me: ‘The Ultra Spy’— F W Winterbotham: Macmillan 12.95 pounds
By C J FOX
FOR A gang conspiring to conquer Europe, the Nazis were capable of conduct weirdly out of character.
There they were in 1934 hatching plans for invading Russia but allowing one of their army chiefs —‘a typical monocled, duel-scarred, square-headed general of the High Command’— to reveal the lot to an RAF veteran over lunch at a plush Berlin restaurant.
The astonished Briton, who recounts the event in this new autobiography, also recalls how his Nazi host remarked to him after the general had finished spouting: ‘I'm sure it's not necessary to ask you not to pass any information on to the Communists.’
Even the most myopic Teuton must have been able to see that the politely inquisitive Englishman being entrusted with these confidences had to be an Intelligence man.
Perhaps it was F W Winterbotham's languid County and Oxford bearing that seduced these ruffians.
Or it might have been his membership of that dashing elite, the air fighters of World War I.
In any case, Fred Winterbotham first succeeded in charming the Nazis' arch-ideologue Alfred Rosenberg and through him mingled attentively with the highest elements of the Party.
Amazingly he was permitted to witness the illicit Luftwaffe build-up of the mid-Thirties, the preparations in East Prussia for the drive on the USSR, and much else.
The astounding indulgences granted Winterbotham by the regime apparently formed part of a scheme to woo ranking foreigners and through them impress their governments with Germany's mounting might.
From Britain, Hitler wanted nothing more than neutrality.
Winterbotham, a future mastermind of the ‘Ultra’ miracle that decoded wartime German communications, naturally reporting his chilling discoveries back from the Reich to the minions of MacDonald, Baldwin and Chamberlain.
Too often the evidence of devilish intent was received with disbelief or electorally inspired inaction (though Winston, waiting in the wings, gobbled it up).
The bizarre story of Winterbotham's unhindered wanderings round Hitler's domain is one of the two highlights of The Ultra Spy, the other being his adventures as organiser of the information later garnered from Ultra.
That system of wholesale electronic eavesdropping Winterbotham proudly dubs ‘the greatest war-winning achievement by British brains and money’.
Yet his claims for Ultra, which he originally set out in his book The Ultra Secret, sometimes sound overwrought.
Commanders who undervalued or ignored Ultra get short shrift.
One such sceptic, a certain Montgomery, is likened to a prickly housemaid.
US General Mark Clark passed up Ultra and duly paid the price, according to Winterbotham, by failing to take two objectives at a nasty stage of the Italian campaign.
Later Clark did heed Ultra.
The result: triumph as the first Allied general to enter Rome.
It was in 1929, aged about 30, that Winterbotham came to the momentous realisation, worthy of Bertie Wooster, that ‘I should have to get a job’.
This turned out to be running an RAF section of the Secret Intelligence Service; and it was as an SIS functionary that he criss-crossed Germany.
In The Ultra Spy, he provides some enthralling verbal snapshots of the Nazi moguls he met.
A typical eruption of shouting by the Fuhrer, complete with bristling moustache, flushed neck and bulging eyes, was elicited by Winterbotham's demure suggestion that the leader of the Third Reich ‘obviously felt very strongly about Communism’.
As for Himmler, he ‘looked at you with his beady eyes through his thick-lensed, rimless glasses, yet never seemed to see you.
Perhaps he was only locating the jugular vein for future use.
His handclasp was cold; his black uniform befitting the poisonous beetle that he was.
He had no social graces whatever.’
This last must be the understatement of the century.
There is much of the airy clubman, in fact, about Winterbotham.
For instance, while admitting that Goebbels resembled an ‘evil gnome’, he adds: ‘At least he stood by his leader to the end.
Unless you are insane, it takes guts to sacrifice your whole family and die with them.’
And Rosenberg: ‘Utterly misguided he may have been, but he was honest in his own belief in what he was doing.’
Damn fine fighter, that Winterbotham, but a good sport.
Illiberal liberalism: John Torode finds a seminar on the Salman Rushdie affair dispiriting
By JOHN TORODE
THE Salman Rushdie affair has had two consequences.
It has rendered untenable the simplistic belief that members of all ethnic minorities are part of one undifferentiated ‘black’ mass, supposedly united in making ‘progressive’demands, stemming from the economic and social disadvantages they suffer.
Second, it has splintered the liberal establishment.
On one side stand the absolutists, such as Fay Weldon and Harold Pinter, who feel that burning and banning books is intolerable; on the other stand the pragmatists who feel that freedom of expression is not an absolute good and that censorship (self-imposed, imposed by neighbours or by Parliament) is justified to protect the sensibilities of those whose views are fundamentalist, and thus illiberal.
The Commission for Racial Equality and the liberal Policy Studies Institute this week conclude a series of seminars provoked by the Rushdie affair.
I was invited to chair one session last week.
It was a dispiriting occasion in which the seeds of a repressive new ‘liberalism’ were apparent.
The conference was dominated by pragmatist liberals.
They included academics, members of the race relations industry and journalists.
There were also a few devout Muslims.
I was told that both the new right and those who support the Government's view — that the present blasphemy laws which protect only Christianity should be retained — had been excluded.
Members of both groups either behaved badly at conferences or had no interest in improving race relations.
Fay Weldon and her allies had not been invited either, because, it was felt, they held racist attitudes, consciously or not.
The liberal establishment believes that the law should apply equally to all religions.
Its members would prefer the repeal of the blasphemy laws rather than their extension.
And they insist patronisingly that the religious fervour displayed by some British Muslims symbolises a wider social distress.
Give Muslims decent housing and better job opportunities, put an end to racist attacks and insults, and youngsters will cease to carry banners reading: ‘Die, Rushdie bastard.’
The Muslims present last week were not interested in earthly equality.
Nor did they want equal non-protection from the law — they wanted censorship.
In Shabir Akhtar, an articulate Cambridge graduate in philosophy and a PhD from the university of Alberta, they have a formidable spokesman.
He has an impressive grounding in Western thought and argues that book-banning is an honorable part of the Western liberal tradition.
Dr Akhtar pointed to incitement to racial hatred, libel, obscenity, and breaches of national security as areas in which the liberal state bans publication.
He demanded ‘negotiated compromise’ with Islamic leaders.
Such compromise would, he suggested, lead inexorably to censorship to ‘protect Muslim sensibilities against gratuitous provocation’.
In other words, if Dr Akhtar has his way, it would become unlawful to vilify a person's religion, just as it is to humiliate him because of the colour of his skin.
Superficially, Mr Akhtar's compromise has appeal in a liberal/secular society because it is designed to protect human sensitivities which we all recognise, rather than to appease a deity in whom relatively few believe.
Yet the effect of the proposal would be to ban, for example, Voltaire's Candide, Tom Paine's Age of Reason, Bertrand Russell's Why I Am Not a Christian, Scorsese's The Last Temptation of Christ, as well as Monty Python's The Life of Brian.
It would erode the precious British freedom, gained at considerable cost over several centuries, to shock and insult and to ridicule as a way of testing the faiths of our forefathers.
Even so, no liberal voice was raised in dissent.
Indeed, philosophers such as Susan Mendus, of York University, produced a novel apologia for liberal book-banning: ‘Where free speech is employed in such a way as to destroy the possibility of communication and of mutual understanding, then its raison d'etre is destroyed,’ she argued.
What we are witnessing, I fear, is the birth of a new and dangerously illiberal ‘liberal’ orthodoxy designed to accommodate Dr Akhtar and his fundamentalist friends, who do not pretend to be part of the Western liberal tradition.
I long for the protection of a written constitution like that of the US with its First Amendment, which elevates freedom of expression above freedom to hide from intellectual challenge, or even vulgar verbal abuse.
A quote away from glory
By PETER JENKINS
BRIGHTON: In six verbose years as leader of his party, Neil Kinnock has not a memorable phrase to his credit.
Although not exactly stuck for words, nothing that he has said has yet entered the language.
His speechwriting aides confessed themselves stumped for a Kinnockism worthy of inclusion in a dictionary of modern political quotations.
The best they could recall was his one-liner to Derek Hatton, the Liverpool militant, at Bournemouth in 1985: ‘You don't play politics with people's jobs,’ Mr Kinnock told him.
But that falls into the somewhat different category of intra-party polemic.
I am talking about phrases which speak to the country by capturing its mood or its hopes.
Harold Wilson's words are remembered today, 25 years after he led Labour back to power, from 13 wilderness years.
‘The white heat of the scientific revolution’, which he spoke of in his Scarborough speech of 1963, caught and mobilised the spirit of those times.
‘The candyfloss society’ stung and stuck as a comment on Harold Macmillan's seedy and stagnant Britain.
His mocking of his opponent, Lord Home, served not only to challenge the competence of the Establishment but equally to advertise the superior competence of Harold Wilson.
Wilson said it all when he said ‘after half a century of democratic advance, the whole process has ground to a halt with a fourteenth earl’.
He tagged the Tories with a grouse moor image and mocked Home for his ‘matchbox economics’.
He used language, the politician's only weapon, to build a momentum for change sufficient to carry Labour to power on a modernising platform.
Here in Brighton this week reams of revisionism are being pulped through the decision-making process of the Labour Party conference, loads of ideological lumber jettisoned as Labour endeavours ‘to meet the challenge and make the change’.
In the country, the underlying tide of opinion is favourable to Labour: in six months, Gallup's ‘fitness to govern’ test has turned from a negative to a positive while, remarkably, two-thirds of respondents believe they would be better off under Labour.
For all that, behind the new ring of confidence from Mr Kinnock and the Labour leadership lies a certain hollowness of conviction.
Nobody quite has an answer to the question ‘why Labour for the Nineties?’.
Brains are racked, in vain, for that elusive ‘big idea’— what comes after Mrs Thatcher, the next item on history's agenda — if there is one.
In the absence of the big idea, one good phrase would be a help, something to focus the uncertain and suggestible mood of the country and put its finger on what it is that is missing and wanted after 10 years of Mrs Thatcher.
By the end of this week we shall know what the Labour Party no longer stands for, such as unilateral nuclear disarmament and full-scale nationalisation; but what, in essence, does it stand for?
If it did not exist, would anyone trouble to invent it at a time when, from the Atlantic to the Urals, socialism in all its manifestations is losing the argument to liberal capitalism?
For we should not become too carried away by Labour's changed face and tone of voice, nor too dazzled by the Peter Mandelson image-conjuring.
The party may have put on a collar and tie but it is still the Labour Party, prone to its old reflexes (as it reminded us yesterday on defence spending), prisoner still of its anachronistic structure, its mind set in 100 years of working-class history.
Listening to the first day's proceedings, I found myself not transported into the future so much as revisiting the past.
Here was the Labour Party reverting to its old self, a better self, yes, than the monster it became under the demonic spell of Tony Benn; here was a party responsive once more to its own people, the people it so shamefully betrayed at two successive general elections since 1979, but a party — as somebody once said of the SDP -‘promising a better yesterday’.
Here it is still with its delegations and block votes, composite motions and reference backs of its convoluted proceduralism, its quaint forms of speech and styles of address — comrades, brothers, sisters, chair.
A sufficient moral universe it may remain for those who inhabit it, but they are a dwindling band and for large areas of the country Labour's world is a cultural world apart.
Amid the euphoria of its seven-point opinion poll lead, the party's own pollsters have reminded it that in the South the Conservatives lead 47-33 while in the Midlands and Wales the race remains too close to call.
In these regions, the Conservative vote is down respectively by only 5 and 3 per cent on 1987, not enough to suggest widespread Labour gains come 1992.
In a masterly television interview on Sunday, John Smith, the shadow Chancellor, exuded competence and an almost Gladstonian fiscal probity, but there was a ring of the Sixties about the accompanying discussion between MPs and experts which left the impression that, in squaring circles, the Labour Party remains endemically the party of inflation.
The abandonment yesterday of unilateral nuclear disarmament (although not the intention of abandoning Britain's nuclear deterrent at the earliest opportunity while other countries keep theirs) was done in the same spirit of moralism which had gone into the banning of the Bomb.
Once more the world was treated as a convenience wrapping for Labour's parochial and predominantly internal preoccupations.
The symbolism of Ron Todd succumbing to superior card power, and pointedly declining to fight, fight and fight again, is electorally helpful but not enough to dispel the persisting impression that Labour is not quite serious about defence.
Today gives Mr Kinnock his chance, not to be serious about wanting to win -he has amply proven that — but to say why he deserves to win.
If he could find convincing words to say it in one striking and memorable phrase, he might be truly on his way.
A pot of hubris at the rainbow's end: Fukuyama may have miscalculated ‘the end of history’ by discounting religion, says Eamon Duffy
By EAMON DUFFY
THE view from Francis Fukuyama's window at the State Department in Washington (reflected in his two-part article on 20 and 21 September) is evidently reassuring.
The collapse of Marxism-Leninism has brought us to that ‘absolute moment’ which marks the end of humanity's long journey through the night of political confusion and abortive social and economic experiment.
Everywhere the nations bow in recognition that the political and ethical values and free market economics which characterise the USA represent the ‘final, rational form of society’.
There are now no ‘fundamental contradictions in human life that cannot be resolved in the context of modern liberalism’.
What then will humanity find to do with its hitherto misdirected energies?
Here Fukuyama concedes a snag.
Whatever the past illusions of the imperialist and nationalist ventures of nations, or of the master error of Marxism-Leninism, they did evoke from people ‘daring, courage, imagination and idealism’.
But in the ‘final, rational form of society’, there will be no more of that beautiful nonsense, just as there will be no art and no philosophy.
The virtues born during the millennia of delusion before everybody saw the importance and inevitability of becoming American will be replaced by ‘economic calculations, the endless solving of technical problems, environmental concerns and the satisfaction of sophisticated consumer demands’.
Was it for this that earth grew tall?
Confronted with the evaporation of virtue, heroism, art and philosophy, does Fukuyama feel rage, despair or at any rate some doubt about whether such an ordering of life can really be the ‘final, rational form of society’?
None of these.
He acknowledges that ‘the end of history will be a sad time’, he admits the ‘spiritual vacuity of liberal consumerist societies’, but, in the face of their inevitable triumph, feels, and notices in his friends, only ‘ambivalence (and) a powerful nostalgia’ for a world that has passed away.
The hubris of all this is breathtaking.
The whole human enterprise has been designed to produce Fukuyama and his like.
Anything better, anything different, is hardly conceivable.
The economic casualties of capitalist society in America he explains away as ‘the legacy of a pre-liberal past’, and appears to make no connection between Western prosperity and the victim economies of the third world, still regrettably ‘mired in history’.
Nor is there any need to risk being challenged by alternative social visions, to attend to the views of ‘every crackpot messiah round the world’, since ‘it matters very little what strange thoughts occur to people in Albania or Burkina Faso, for we are interested in what one could in some sense call the common ideological heritage of mankind’.
Just so might the exhausted arrogance of a dying empire have expressed itself on the lips of a Roman senator waving away the news of a ‘crackpot messiah’ among the Jews, and the strange thoughts that occur to people in Jerusalem or Galilee.
It does occur to Fukuyama that religion might have some sort of unease to express with all this, but he appears to conceive of religion under only two modes.
On the one hand, there is fundamentalist counter-ideology, such as the Islamic theocratic state.
This, it is to be assumed, his liberal readers may take seriously as a threat, but hardly as an option.
And on the other hand, there are ‘less organised religious impulses’, religion as individual preference.
This he knows can readily be accommodated as yet another sort of consumer commodity, ‘within the sphere of personal life permitted in liberal societies’.
But there is no need to look to ‘crackpot messiahs’ or fundamentalist theocracies to find a decisive religious rejection of Fukuyama's reading of human history.
For him, the energies driving history have been derived from the interplay between external forces, conflicting visions of the right ordering of society.
With the unchallenged victory of one such vision the conflict ceases, and the millennium arrives.
Catholic Christianity, however, insists that social, political and economic tension, discord and conflict are manifestations of sin, springing from humanity's fallen nature.
According to St Augustine, ‘fellowship among men is secured by giving and receiving’.
But such mutual exchange is just what human beings are incapable of sustaining consistently.
As a result, ‘human society is generally divided against itself, one part, the more powerful, oppressing the other’.
The struggles of history are not, therefore, part of an external dialectic resolvable in principle by the overthrow of one of its polarities.
Instead they issue from the divided heart of humanity, perpetually institutionalised in sinful social and political structures.
One modern variety of this Catholic critique of structural sin in society is represented by the Liberation theology evolved in Latin America, which sees in the economic and political structures of capitalism itself a principal manifestation of sin, oppressing God's poor and subverting true human community.
Fukuyama is unlikely to attach much weight to Liberation theology, which he would no doubt classify as a doomed subspecies of Marxism-Leninism.
He might be less likely to dismiss Pope John Paul II as the stooge of a defunct ideology, yet there is plenty in the conservative tradition of Vatican thinking which is just as subversive of his attempt to present consumerist liberal society as ‘final’.
The head of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, sees in America not the ‘final, rational form of society’, but ‘a world where money and consumption appear to be the measure of everything’.
The liberal bourgeois ethic of the West is a force for alienation, ‘bringing men and women into conflict with themselves and subjecting them to new forms of slavery while claiming to free them’.
Pope John Paul, in his encyclical Sollicitudo Rei Socialis, has repudiated not only Marxism but the ‘so-called civilisation of consumerism’ as destructive of true humanity, substituting ‘having’for ‘being’, and rooted in structural oppression of the poor.
This is not to propose Christianity as a counter-ideology.
There can be no Christian blueprint for the ‘final’ form of society, since it is part of its perception of the human condition that all forms of society are provisional, reflecting human sinfulness, though not always to an equal degree.
It does, however, have a missionary vision of what it means to be truly human, derived partly from rational reflection on human capacities and desires, but supremely from its conviction that we glimpse true humanity in the life, death and teaching of Jesus.
Both Liberation theologians and the policy-makers of the Vatican are agreed that, measured by the pattern of self-giving love revealed in that life, Western consumerism offers a perverted account of humanity.
Both affirm the necessity of translating into social terms a Christian critique of existing society, and both emphasise the theological centrality of the notion of God's ‘preferential option for the poor’ in any such critique.
Fukuyama averts his eyes from the poor, and fears no real threat to the permanent triumph of consumer capitalist society except nostalgia and boredom.
But even by his standards, Catholic Christianity is one of the ‘important social or political forces which are part of world history’.
He would be unwise to underestimate the disruptive potential of its particular form of divine discontent.
Dr Eamon Duffy is fellow and tutor of Magdalene College, Cambridge, and a lecturer in divinity at the university.
English pragmatism and patronising the papacy
By ANDREW BROWN
POOR Dr Runcie!
He has been savaged throughout his visit to Rome by an unusual alliance of fundamentalist Protestants and Tory MPs not usually known for their theological knowledge or zeal.
They are offended by his tentative steps towards recognising a role for the Pope even outside the Church of England.
And while he has successfully offended the doctrinaire Protestants, he does not seem to have pleased the Pope.
So why does he do it?
And why does he look so happy as a result?
Part of the answer is to be found in the life of Cardinal J H Newman.
Newman died in 1890 after a career in which he had been successively the most influential thinker in the Church of England, and then in English Roman Catholicism.
The second Vatican Council is said, at least by English Catholics, to have been the culmination of Newman's ideas.
The Anglo-Catholic movement in the Church of England certainly sprang from the activities of Newman and his friends.
The movement became a tradition which is only now degenerating to a faction, and it is from that tradition Dr Runcie springs.
Newman's central idea, both as a Catholic and as an Anglican, was that one holy Catholic and apostolic Church exists.
This may seem meaningless to non-churchgoers and trivial to churchgoers since it is part of the Athanasian Creed recited every Sunday.
But if you admit the existence of this supernatural body, the question then becomes, where on earth can it be found?
Newman came to the answer Rome; the former friends he left behind in the Church of England replied that the early undivided Church had been the only one wholly to contain this supernatural essence.
Since the great schism and the Reformation, the single truth had been broken up, but the Anglicans, the Orthodox and the Roman Catholics had and have part of it.
No part of the Church has all of it to itself.
All are partially in error and not just by the fact of their division.
Even from this — Anglican — point of view, a papacy makes sense.
But is this in a rather different sense to that in which the papacy understands itself?
Dr Runcie's vision of a primacy for the Bishop of Rome is that when the whole Church is almost agreed on something, the Pope is the man who can articulate this agreement to all Christians and non-Christians with the greatest authority.
Dr Runcie's Pope would be, as it were, the speaker of the universal Church, perhaps with some power to rule members out of order.
Some Anglicans would certainly go further: the Bishop of Birmingham, the Right Rev Mark Santer, who is the Anglican co-chairman of the theological commission trying to overcome doctrinal differences between the two Churches, says: If Anglicans and other non-Roman Catholics really do believe that the Christian Church is called to be at peace with itself, how — given the fact that Christians are sinful — do you actually keep the show together?
‘In the end, you do have to have some sort of juridical power if you are going to keep the institution together.’
This a very English and pragmatic argument for the necessity of a central authority in the Church.
It has been greatly influenced by the tangled confusion into which the Anglican Communion has stumbled over the ordination of women.
It starts from the fact of disunity and asks which existing political mechanism can work best for unity.
But looked at from a Roman point of view, the papacy is not one system of Church government among others.
Primacy is not a technique for resolving difficult questions: it is the logical and necessary outcome of the way God works in history.
The papacy encapsulates the meaning of history.
This used to be a perception shared with Protestants.
When Ian Paisley calls the Pope ‘the Antichrist’, he is not just picking a choice term of abuse from the Bible, but referring back to what was once the mainstream Protestant and Anglican belief that the papacy does play one of the most important parts in sacred history and the Romans are absolutely mistaken about which.
To most Anglicans now, though, the main thing about the papacy is not that it is evil — that seems an absurd accusation — but that it is frequently silly and wrong.
A prime example of this is the genuine difficulty any Pope would have in recognising that Anglican priests are real priests since this would mean that when Pope Leo XIII declared in 1896 that Anglican orders were ‘utterly null and void’, he was either silly or wrong or both.
There is still an atavistic streak of no popery in the English, but it is non-dogmatic.
The liberty of the freeborn Englishman now consists in the right, not to defy the Pope, since that is no longer necessary, but to patronise him.
This actually makes the obstacles to any acceptance of papal authority much greater than the dignitaries gathered in Rome this weekend have realised.
Leading Article: Investing in the long term
By ANDREW BROWN
EUROTUNNEL is in trouble.
The estimated cost of the Channel tunnel continues to rise at an alarming rate, to the distress of both shareholders and the company's bankers.
The initial forecast was £4.7bn.
The last published estimate was £5.4bn.
Only weeks ago speculation was that a further £1bn might be needed.
Now Eurotunnel says that £7bn could be nearer the mark, while the banks and the consortium involved in the construction work believe that far bigger sums will be necessary.
The tunnel is due to open in 1993.
Who knows what the costs will look like by then?
Eurotunnel's bankers are therefore putting increasing pressure on Alastair Morton, British co-chairman of the project, to raise significant new equity.
It will not be easy for him to do so.
Yet, if he refuses, or if he fails in any attempt, the banks could, in theory, take over the company which is in default of several loan agreements.
Mr Morton and his colleagues will have to answer some awkward questions, not least from small investors, many of whom bought into the company attracted by the perks and the sense of excitement as much as by a detailed understanding of the economics of the enterprise.
They will want to know how Eurotunnel got its sums so badly awry.
There are answers to be had of course.
The most powerful is that the figures, inaccurate as they have turned out to be, convinced experts employed by big investors and banks such as National Westminster.
Moreover, it is notoriously difficult to predict the costs of major infrastructural projects, almost all of which run wildly over budget.
In this case, the construction timetable proved wrong, as did very optimistic forecasts concerning the rates of inflation and interest.
Even so, the quality of project management is surely open to examination.
It is not as if Eurotunnel was working at the leading-edge of technological innovation.
It was indulging in a relatively straightforward exercise in civil engineering which could have been undertaken at any time during the last 100 years or more.
The Channel tunnel project is the largest enterprise of its kind to be financed from private sources.
The Prime Minister was adamant on this point.
Yet, whatever the short- and medium-term vicissitudes, it will almost certainly be completed, if only because any other course would be seen, however unreasonably, as a failure of political and diplomatic will on the part of this country.
Once fully operational, the tunnel will generate considerable income.
(Cross-Channel traffic may, according to some estimates, double by the early years of the next century.)
The question for the Government is whether the British financial markets, with their notoriously short-term horizons, are capable of handling long-term projects of this magnitude.
If they are not, Mrs Thatcher will either have to reconsider her faith in the private sector always to do what she deems to be the right thing, or she will have to promote changes in the way in which the markets go about their business.
Whatever the ideological preoccupations of the Prime Minister, it is impossible for the Government to take no view and to play no role when the future of an infrastructural project with the potential impact of the Channel tunnel is in question.
Beware the treachery of autumn
By MILES KINGTON
A HEALTH scandal of unimaginable proportions is about to burst on the Government, experts believe.
It will make the Black Death look like a mild dose of flu.
It will make salmonella and listeria look like peanuts.
It will make peanuts look like microdots.
Because Britain has been covered, during the last few weeks, with record levels of toxic and other dangerous substances.
Here are three typical case histories.
1.
A young boy in Hartlepool picks some bright red berries from the hedgerow.
He takes them home.
He offers them to his friends.
They all nearly die.
His mother says: ‘Why, oh why, must they put these poisonous berries in colours so tempting to children?
It's little short of criminal.’
2.
Somewhere in Lincolnshire, an old man's beard entwines itself around and covers a sign reading: ‘Danger — Unmanned Level Crossing Ahead With Freight Trains Full Of Nuclear Waste Passing Frequently.’
Failing to see this masked sign, a family out for a drive goes on to the crossing at the very same moment as a rare Leopold's Toad, and runs it over.
The father says: ‘It was just sheer luck that that was a toad, not a nuclear train.’
3.
A family go mushroom-hunting in the woods in Yorkshire.
They bring home their haul and cook it.
They all die, except a 15-year-old who had behaved so badly that he was forbidden to taste what turned out to be deadly toadstools.
He says: ‘Well, there you go — crime seems to pay after all.’
What all three things have in common is that they were caused by autumn.
Autumn has occurred every year since records began.
The Government must have known it was coming again, yet has done absolutely nothing to prevent the side-effects.
‘They have no excuse,’ says Stan Gilligrew, secretary of Action Against Autumn.
‘They have known that leaves will fall, and branches be blown across roads and berries go toxic, but what have they done?
Absolutely nothing.
It's a scandal.’
Is Mr Gilligrew saying that the Government is responsible for every leaf that falls, every poisonous berry that turns purple or crimson?
‘I certainly am.
Somebody must be responsible, otherwise who is there to sue?
And if not the Government, then who?
My members demand action now!’
Mr Gilligrew seems ideally cut out to be leader of a protest group: insecure, loud, unhumorous, indignant, unpleasant, small and much given to counting points off on his fingers.
‘We must have a five-point plan for autumn safety: 1) Get all poisonous plants clearly labelled; 2) Put government health warnings on toadstools; 3) Secure all dangerous-looking branches; 4) Spread polythene sheets beneath all major leaf-producing trees; 5) Have a national warning system for cold days on which apples, conkers and so on, are much more likely to fall out of the trees and cause these horrendous injuries.’
What horrendous injuries?
‘The ones we have described in our booklet.’
Like all protest lobbyists, he has a booklet.
Autumn — Action Now! contains horrific pictures of children in agony, car crashes caused by skids on leaves and Fred Astaire.
Fred Astaire?
‘Yes, sorry, that was a mistake,’ says Stan Gilligrew.
‘We're a bit new to this game.
It's our first season as a protest group and we haven't quite got the publishing side sorted out.
But the message is loud and clear.
Autumn is dangerous.
And it must be stopped.’
Is there nothing that the average man wandering down a country lane can do about the effects of autumn?
‘Certainly there is.
He can buy a large tube of Autumnola, the 2-in-1 action cream which not only reduces the risk of bruising to a minimum, but has anti-toxic qualities proof against the most virulent poisoning from autumnal pests.’
Hold on.
This sounds suspiciously like advertising.
And now we look closer at Stan Gilligrew, he bears more than a passing resemblance to a certain well-known PR consultant.
We tear off his false moustache and sun-glasses.
Yes, it's our old friend Adrian Wardour-Street.
‘A good little campaign, eh?’ he laughs.
‘We've really got the Government on the run with this one.
Apparently Maggie is going wild trying to find out who is responsible for seasonal changes.
Anyway, any publicity you can give Autumnola in your paper would be very welcome.
Now, a spot of lunch?’
Leading Article: History outpaces Honecker
By MILES KINGTON
IT IS almost possible to feel a twinge of sympathy for Erich Honecker, the ailing but obdurately anti-reformist leader of the German Democratic Republic.
Only a few days before his state's 40th anniversary celebrations, he has been obliged to accept a deal permitting several thousand of its citizens to flee to the capitalist Federal Republic.
Some 5,000 East Germans had sought refuge in the West German embassies in Prague and Warsaw.
Among those applying the heaviest pressure for their free passage to the West were the Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev and his foreign minister Eduard Shevardnadze.
The state formerly reviled for cleaving too closely to Moscow's line now finds itself berated by the Kremlin as well as the Western world for not following the path of glasnost and perestroika.
In the past few weeks, some 30,000 East Germans have expressed their lack of faith in the GDR's future by abandoning their homes and, often, their relatives for the freedom of the West.
This haemorrhage of enterprising and skilled young people promises to cause serious damage to the GDR's economy.
If it continues, it will cumulatively demolish the government's principal justification for refusing all political reforms: that the country's economy is healthy, and there is no need for change.
For the GDR's ageing leadership, the political pressures are building up inexorably.
In the short term, the crowded encampments of GDR citizens in the West German embassies in Prague and Warsaw would have humiliatingly underlined the emptiness of next weekend's 40th anniversary celebrations in East Berlin, which President Gorbachev is due to attend.
In the medium term, the pace of political reform in neighbouring Poland and in Hungary is bound further to increase the dissatisfaction of East Germans.
If the GDR government cuts off escape routes by banning travel to Czechoslovakia, Hungary and even Bulgaria, the risk of a political explosion will greatly increase.
Although the recent exodus has acted as a temporary safety valve, there is evidence that the more politically minded opponents of the present regime have stayed behind, knowing that reforms cannot be indefinitely postponed.
But reforms to what end?
To implant multi-party democracy in ancient nations like Poland and Hungary makes historical sense.
The GDR is a state trying to be a nation.
Much determination and hard work have gone into that attempt, but it is now seen to have failed.
Without reforms, failure will become more complete.
Yet if the GDR were to become a multi-party democracy, it would lose its identifying ideology and become a pallid shadow of the Federal Republic: less grossly consumerist, perhaps, but also less desirable.
In Bonn it is hoped that there can be orderly change across the border, soon enough to convince more East Germans that life is worth living there.
Perhaps because to think about reform is to think about its purposes, Mr Honecker and his colleagues keep their minds closed to such challenges.
Yet the West Germans, too, may be underestimating the pace at which history is moving today in central Europe: too fast, in all probability, for the smooth transitional arrangements which the Kohl government in Bonn likes to think will one day lead to a painless form of reunification.
Letter: Anticipating a degree of elitism
From Dr ERWIN KRONHEIMER
Sir: Has anyone a suggestion about how, once we have made all our graduates pay for their own education through some sort of lifelong surtax, we should set about stopping those with any marketable skills and sense leaving the country as soon as they possibly can?
Would it be a good idea, perhaps, to introduce exit visas?
Letter: Anticipating a degree of elitism
From Ms ALICE GOLDIE
Sir: I am studying for A-levels at the moment and have just sent off my application form to study medicine at university.
I realise that, if I am accepted, once I have completed my degree I may often have to work for over 80 hours at a stretch during a weekend on call.
But I read in an article this morning ('Students set to pay full fees', 29 September) that if I were applying in a few years' time, I would have to ask my parents to pay the full cost of my tuition.
I have calculated that my tuition, rent and equipment for the five years of my degree would cost at least £54,500.
My parents both have well-paid jobs but without selling their house they could not afford such a sum, and I doubt if many people could.
The Government says that many scholarships will be on offer to make up for the charges, but surely this means that only rich people and the very brightest of the less well-off will be able to afford a degree.
According to another article ('Hospital closes beds as cash crisis bites', 28 September), Barts hospital in London, one of the best teaching hospitals in England, is having to close 75 beds.
The Government seems to be trying to destroy the education and health services in Britain and to set up an alternative system in which wealth rules.
I still intend to train as a doctor, because I feel there is no more interesting and worthwhile way to spend my life, but how many other people will be able to or want to in the future?
Letter: False police statistics
From Mr BARRIE IRVING
Sir: Alan Eastwood, chairman of the Police Federation (letter 28 September), puts the manipulation of crime figures in Kent down to misplaced zeal.
There is lot of it about these days and not just in the police service.
However, such zeal does not fool a wise assessment system which accounts for quality of performance, and does not rely too much on facile numerical criteria.
Mr Eastwood and his colleagues are aware of this — they are therefore concerned about leadership (desirable) and the ‘science of management’(overdone).
But this opposition misleads; charisma is cold comfort without expert management.
Together they are a vital, but a very scarce resource: police centralisation, of which the Federation disapproves, could help optimise the use of available talent.
Mr Eastwood argues it would break ties with local communities.
But where is the evidence for that?
Arguably centralisation would release resources for local purposes.
A decade after the Scarman report on Brixton and on the evidence from our more troubled communities, this is no time for any of us to strike traditional postures.
Letter: False police statistics
From Mr NORMAN GODFREY
Sir: If one wants to understand the reasons for growing public concern about the police one need look no further than the letter from the Police Federation (28 September).
So there was nothing harmful in Kent police officers conspiring with criminals to boost clear-up statistics.
Are we to believe that false confessions were made purely out love of the police?
At the very minimum they must have been made on the basis of a police guarantee that matters would be manipulated so that courts would not impose additional punishment for the illusory offences.
And why should any criminal have co-operated in this process of falsification unless an inducement had been on offer?
Comparable conduct by non-police officers would surely have led, in less than four years, either to criminal charges or to punishment for contempt of court.
Letter: Excessive damages for libel
From Mr GEORGE STERN
Sir: France deals with libel in a simple, cheap and civilised way, illustrated by a case in July where a paper investigated corruption among local authorities.
This was advertised in Tours by the line: ‘Is your mayor corrupt?’
The mayor alleged libel.
Libel in France is a crime, but, as with all crimes, there is a partie civile — the person damaged who is compensated.
The case was heard as a minor offence before a low-level court, the tribunal correctionel in Tours, at which three judges ruled that, although the article exculpated the mayor, the advertisement did smear him, and the newspaper was ordered to pay him Fr10,000 (£1,000 approx).
In Britain, massive libel awards have abolished free speech where criticism of, or reporting about, rich people is concerned, because a rich man can bankrupt anyone by suing for libel, win or lose.
In France, honour is satisfied by a low-level court case taking half an hour.
Our lawyers and judges will never turn off this mad process which, for them, is a fountain of dollars and a source of power: it is up to the Press to publicise civilised European libel procedures and insist that we get them too.
Letter: Excessive damages for libel
From Dr PAUL ROBERTSHAW
Sir: Marcel Berlins's instructive and provocative article (29 September) on juries and libel damages prompts supplementary comment on two points.
He writes that the trial judge is not allowed to give the jury any guidance as to the amount that it can award.
That is somewhat misleading.
What is remarkable — and, I think, indefensible -about English libel trials is that the judge gives directions and guidance on the measure of damages as part and parcel of a single summing-up on the substantive issue.
For example, the last four pages of Sir Bernard Caulfield's summing-up to the jury in the Archer case is concerned with damages, and heavily stresses the aggravating factors.
It is true that no figures are mentioned in such summings-up, but they can certainly point towards the minimal or astronomical.
What is legally disturbing is that this aspect appears in a summing-up at all, since it encourages an assumption that a libel has been perpetrated.
It is as if prosecutors could suggest the sentence while presenting evidence for a conviction.
Marcel Berlins also, rightly, mentions the confusion between recompensing an aggrieved plaintiff and punishing the gutter press with its huge financial resources.
It is worth pointing out — as did Dr Akena Adoko in his book on the Jeffrey Archer trial — that there may have been an additional development in the folkways of the juryroom: the frequent practice of the rich (the typical plaintiffs) to pass on their damages to charity, as did Mr Archer, might act as an additional, and self-legitimating, incentive to take awards through the ceiling.
Maybe excessive and erratic awards are the fault of the jury.
Maybe not.
If it were not for Section 8 of the Contempt of Court Act, we might be able to make reforms more rationally on the basis of, at least, a minimal sample of the recorded deliberations of informed and unidentified jurors.
Letter: Labour's attitude to homosexual law reform
From Mr JOHN JACKSON
Sir: Earlier this year, the Labour Party's National Executive Committee voted to replace a policy commitment to homosexual equality with a reference to ‘greater equality’.
This took place amid rumours of a split within the NEC over support for a common age of consent, and was widely seen as a response to tabloid hysteria on such matters.
This organisation has since been in correspondence with Neil Kinnock's Westminster office, but has yet to receive any clear indication of whether Labour would indeed reduce the age of consent for gay men from 21 to 16.
The Campaign for Homosexual Equality's policy, in favour of such reform, reflects our concern about the inaccessibility to those under 21 of specifically gay safer sex information.
The present law makes it more difficult for counselling organisations to reach gay men in this age group.
Equally alarming, we feel, is the fact that 35 young men aged between 16 and 21 were convicted for a consensual homosexual relationship during 1987; one was sentenced to a year in youth custody.
These are the very same young people whom advocates of the present law would argue receive its ‘protection’.
We naturally welcome Labour's existing promise to repeal Section 28 and to legislate against discrimination in the workplace.
And few would disagree that, given the fanaticism and sheer ferocity of tabloid prejudice, it would be unreasonable for gay people to expect that Labour should adopt our cause as an election issue.
However, the watering down of a basic and principled commitment, within Labour or any other libertarian party, especially in response to intimidation by newspapers of such a spurious morality, could prove deeply discrediting.
It is with regard to this principle, but more importantly to the actual facts of persecution, that we urge the support of Labour's leaders and membership by restoring, this week, a policy commitment to full equality for lesbians and gay men.
Letter: Israeli motives
From Mr GEOFFREY D. PAUL
Sir: The world must be grateful to Charles Richards for his exposure ('Intifada brings out the best in Israel's black art', 30 September) of the depths to which Israelis will sink in what he rightly describes as their news manipulation.
Can there be anything more telling about the deviousness of these people than his account of how they actually put on television and interviewed a man who was said to have died while in a prison cell, and that, moreover, they did it with the sole motive of demonstrating that he was alive and in good health.
They did it ‘hastily’ too, which is also an indication of their amazing, but altogether typical, ruthlessness.
Cannot the British Government instigate action at the United Nations to prevent the Israeli authorities from using television to tell the truth in these matters?
In the unlikely event of this kind of thing being allowed to spread to other countries, it will, mark my words, mean the end of all baseless rumours and a subsequent serious dearth of causes for riot.
Letter: Uppark should be fully restored
From Professor ANDOR GOMME
Sir: Uppark is the third great house which the National Trust has lost through fire since the last war.
Both Coleshill (burnt in 1953) and Dunsland (1967) were subsequently entirely destroyed — decisions which have been deeply deplored ever since.
Uppark is a house of comparable importance and value, and its full restoration is essential.
Anna Pavord's proposal (27 September) that the interior should be rebuilt as ‘a series of simple, clean well-designed rooms’ for the display of the contents saved from the fire ignores the fact that the furniture and paintings at Uppark were either designed or collected by the Fetherstonhaugh family over numerous generations especially for the rooms in which they lived.
Shorn of these surroundings the furnishings would be just another museum collection.
Ms Pavord supports her ‘purist’ proposal by arguing that the National Trust already owns two ‘real’houses — Dyrham and Hanbury — designed by Talman, ‘the first architect of Uppark’and two — Felbrigg and Nostell — by Paine, ‘thought to have made the saloon at Uppark’.
Recent scholarship has rejected the view (based only on nineteenth-century say-so) that Talman designed Uppark, and there is no evidence of his having had anything to do with Hanbury (stylistically most unlikely).
And though Paine designed a London house for Sir Matthew Fetherstonhaugh, there is nothing else to connect him with Uppark, which he mentions nowhere in his thoroughly documented account of his own works.
But the important thing is that there is nothing at Felbrigg or Nostell — or elsewhere in National Trust houses — which closely resembles the saloon (or the drawing room) at Uppark: these rooms were unique and we need them back.
Had Germany taken the ‘purist’ line after the war, we should be without the wonders of Bruchsal and the Residenz at Wurzburg, and the great churches of Nurnberg would look like the clean, well-designed — but totally anaemic -interiors of those in Kassel and Stuttgart.
Where, as appears to be the case at Uppark, it is physically possible to make an accurate restoration of a great building, it should be made — and not jeered at as the creation of a theme park of misnamed pastiche.
Letter: A very Catholic affair
From Mr ALASTAIR FORBES
Sir: In your interesting article (30 September) about the sale to the British Library by Lord Norwich (for a sum left tantalisingly undisclosed) of Evelyn Waugh's letters to his late mother, Lady Diana Cooper, the library's curator of modern literary manuscripts, a Ms Brown, was quoted as follows: I am sure that they did not have a physical affair.
He was a very strict Catholic.
This egregious non sequitur requires further clarification, if only for your myriad younger readers.
Much more cogent reasons for Ms Brown's correct conviction are to be found in Lady Diana's own words, which I quote from Philip Ziegler's biography and which amply confirms others, just as forceful, that she used to me in the course of our more than 40 years of close friendship: I never responded to his dribbling, dwarfish little amorous singeries.
Letter: Facts on embryos
From Dame MARY DONALDSON, GBE
Sir: Your report (2 October) on the Pro-Life conference in Keele must fill many of your readers with dismay.
Deliberately to introduce an amendment dealing with abortion law reform into a Bill dealing with embryos is a blatant attempt to cause confusion.
There is no logic in the Pro-Life argument.
To ban research on a fertilised egg unless it is to be reimplanted, and in the same Bill wish to permit abortion up to 18 weeks demonstrates the movement's illogicality.
We welcome legislation founded on proven facts.
We are in our fifth year as the now Interim Licensing Authority for Invitro-Fertilisation and Human Embryology.
We are accepted as such by all centres undertaking this work.
We have neither the resources nor the finance to launch a campaign to promote any particular aspect.
Nor do we feel that this is necessary.
We feel that our function is to convey accurate information.
With this in mind, each year we publish details of all our licensing.
This year we are producing further information on all research projects licensed since our inception.
We will also be showing why continued research should be permitted, and how disastrous it would be for all women if the policy advocated by the Pro-Life lobby were to be adopted.
I think it will be found that our record and findings are more worthy of public acceptance than the emotional, uninformed and often inaccurate outbursts of this very vocal lobby.
