PCBs explained
From Dame MARY DONALDSON, GBE
PCBs — polychlorinated biphenyls — are very inert organic substances, which were prized because they were flexible (being liquids) but had very high insulating properties for electricity.
They were also used in hydraulic systems because they did not react with the materials used in the pipes and pistons.
They do not occur naturally, but were produced commercially for 50 years, beginning in 1929.
They are extremely hard to dispose of.
Incineration, which claims a 99.999 per cent destruction rate, is the only known way of eliminating them.
But PCBs are a disappearing problem.
In the late Seventies many countries, including the UK (in 1978), banned their manufacture.
Remaining stocks (in electrical equipment, mostly) are being burned, but traces will remain for many years.
PCBs are now ubiquitous at very low levels in the environment, in both town and country.
They are found at about 0.05 parts per million in Northern Europe.
The concentrations are very variable, but though there is evidence of their being at higher levels near cities and urban areas, there is no necessary connection with waste-disposal sites.
At least one study has suggested that high PCB levels in mothers' milk is linked with a higher-than-normal incidence of haemolytic disease, a blood disorder.
PCBs can create dioxins — polychlorinated organic chemicals — if they are burned at low temperatures.
Animal studies have shown dioxins to be carcinogenic and to cause birth defects in rats at very high doses.
There was, therefore, great concern that PCBs should not be subject to inadequate heat treatment.
There is no evidence that dioxins — any more than PCBs themselves — are carcinogenic in humans.
But medical opinion seems to hold that both should be treated as though they were.
In any case, the controlled combustion of PCBs must be a diminishing source of the national load of dioxin pollution.
Government research says that the presence of dioxins in flue gases from plants such as that at Pontypool ‘are in the low range of parts per trillion’(one part per trillion is of the order of 30 seconds in a million years, or one ounce in 28 million tons), and that all the UK PCB-destroying plants together emit only a ‘few grammes per year’.
Ageing municipal domestic waste incinerators are a far greater source of dioxins (and are slowly being upgraded); domestic fires and unleaded petrol are the next biggest sources.
PCBs: The incinerators
From Dame MARY DONALDSON, GBE
THE incineration of PCBs requires a furnace which will hold the material at 1,100C for at least two seconds, in the presence of plenty of oxygen.
Companies wishing to enter the waste disposal business at this level must demonstrate to the local Waste Disposal Authority (usually a county council, but in some cities and in Wales a more local authority) that they can meet various criteria, although the authority may be over-ruled on appeal to the Secretary of State for the Environment.
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution is now the custodian of national standards on emissions from such plants, of which Britain currently has three.
Rechem can take solid and liquid wastes contaminated with PCBs at its plant at Pontypool (30,000 tonnes a year), and liquid wastes (20,000 tonnes a year) at its plant at Fawley, near Southampton.
Cleanaway can take liquid PCBs at its Ellesmere Port establishment, where it is building another plant which will take capacity there to 48,000 tonnes annually.
Ocean Environmental Management has applied for a 30,000-tonne plant at Seal Sands, Teesside, and is appealing against the local authority's refusal to allow it.
Leigh Environmental wants to build an incinerator plant near Doncaster, but also faces local authority opposition, and International Technology Corporation has submitted a joint application with Northumbrian Water for incinerators at Teesside and Tyneside for the incineration of sewage sludge and organic wastes, with a capacity of 43,000 tonnes each.
The figures quoted are for a mix of wastes requiring incineration.
Only a fraction is PCB-contaminated material: the bulk of the load must be wastes with a higher calorific value for the incinerator to work.
About 80,000 tonnes of waste for incineration or treatment is imported every year, as against the five million tonnes which England and Wales produce.
All these incinerators offer what is called ‘merchant capacity’— they sell their facilities to dispose of other people's waste, but do not produce the waste themselves.
There are no in-house incinerators licensed to take PCBs, though many firms run incinerators which can take simpler chemical wastes.
There are a few merchant facilities licensed to take dangerous organic wastes, which are nonetheless not the worst-case highly chlorinated wastes (one of these is the Leigh plant at Killamarsh near Sheffield).
PCBs: What Rechem says about Pontypool
From Dame MARY DONALDSON, GBE
HIGH-temperature incineration converts the carbon and hydrogen in organic chemicals into carbon dioxide and water.
Many of these chemicals also contain chlorine, which is converted to common salt in the gas-cleaning plant.
Stack emissions, which are continuously monitored, meet the strictest standards in the world.
PCBs are used as a ‘marker’ to measure the incinerator efficiency, because they are very stable organic compounds.
Measurements taken over many years show that levels of PCBs in grass and soil in the area impacted by the stack plume are indistinguishable from background levels.
The stack emission comfortably meets the American standard for breathing air.
The stack plume is normally barely visible but appears more prominent at night, when lower ambient temperatures lead to increased condensation of the water vapour.
The water used by the gas-cleaning plant is cooled by a cooling tower which itself emits two water-vapour plumes, the density of which varies according to climatic conditions.
The quality of these plumes is well within the American PCB standard for breathing air.
The inert ash removed from the incinerator and the filter cake produced from the solids washed from the combustion gases are landfilled with a PCB content less than normal background soil levels.
The water effluent from the cleaning process is discharged to sewer with a PCB content less than the level in the blood of the general population.
Finally, the air leaving site is continuously monitored to show that there are no significant chemical releases.
The PCB content is less than one-fiftieth of the American breathing air standard.
Unfortunately, because of mankind's carelessness with PCBs in the past, they are already ubiquitous.
By destroying these wastes Rechem is significantly helping to prevent further pollution of the local and world environment.
An atmosphere poisoned by mistrust
By NICHOLAS ROE
The disposal of toxic wastes is one of the most intractable problems facing industrialised societies.
Even though some of the most dangerous and persistent toxins, including polychlorinated biphenyls, PCBs, are no longer manufactured, quantities of them still exist, and must be got rid of.
But how?
And where?
On this page, Nick Roe visits a plant which, despite strenuous public relations efforts, has failed to convince its neighbours that it has come clean.
And Richard North looks at current provisions for the destruction of PCBs, and at the history of British involvement in a rather uncomfortable growth industry The security guard at the entrance to one of Britain's mightiest hazardous waste disposal plants pressed a button and the gate opened.
Then he pressed another knob and a big toy doll in his office window dropped its trousers.
You had to laugh.
Yet this was Rechem International's high-temperature incineration plant at Pontypool in Gwent, South Wales.
Hardly a laughing matter, surely?
Beyond the barrier lay some of the most toxic chemicals known, awaiting destruction by fire.
What else?
A vast, smoke-blackened furnace; 100 people to do the work; massive investment — the company spent £2m last year on cleaning up smoke emissions.
Plus a backdrop of houses covering the valley walls on either side, a reminder that wherever industrialised societies decide to deal with their most intractable problems, they are unlikely to find a place to do so which is not in somebody's back yard.
Britain grinds out almost five million tonnes of hazardous waste each year, of which about 63,000 tonnes are so difficult to store or treat that they are burnt at high temperatures here in Gwent or at one of three other centres: Ellesmere Port; Fawley, near Southampton; and the unfortunately named Killamarsh, near Sheffield.
Five more incinerators currently proposed in various parts of the country will double capacity.
Then there are the imports: 83,000 tonnes of toxic waste enter British ports annually for incineration or other treatment, a figure which has increased 20-fold in just eight years.
In these environmentally conscious times, this is an uncomfortable growth industry.
Liverpool dockers recently turned back parts of a 1,500-tonne consignment of Canadian PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) bound for this plant in Gwent.
In doing so, they underlined a fact which is likely to attract more and more attention as tankers continue to shift toxins from town to town, country to country: the waste chain is long.
It snakes in and out of ports, along our busiest highways and through our most crowded cities.
Anxieties which are currently felt most acutely by those living near destruction plants themselves may not always remain so localised.
At Pontypool, the collision between a precise, scientific industry and a diffuse, unscientific local suspicion is painfully apparent.
Local people mutter and march, make speeches and throw things; staff face sarcasm in nearby pubs; and for years there have been demands for a public inquiry.
Rechem has responded with a rather desperate open-door policy aimed at soothing fears, and more recently by issuing about a dozen writs against the fiercest critics.
‘We are an aggressive company,’ admitted David Wheeler, operations director at this plant and at Rechem's other incinerator, at Fawley.
For a place so hated, the Pontypool plant looks innocuous inside, like a cross between an oil refinery and a crematorium.
Mr Wheeler, an engineer who worked for many years in the oil business, is a pleasant, slightly worried-looking man who cannot bear the fact that no one seems to realise just what lengths he goes to in order to keep the plant squeaky clean and emission-free.
In hard hats and protective glasses, we walked past the huge ‘fume cupboard’ where the most noxious barrels are opened, and arrived at the vast, closed mouth of the furnace itself.
It was hot, but not burning.
There was a fault on the computer governing the plant, said Mr Wheeler, and the fire had automatically shut down.
These pipes stretching thinly in a bridge across the service road injected a mix of chemicals into the walls of the furnace itself; did I know that fuel was only used in the start-up process, after which the chemicals themselves provided the fire?
Workers in blue overalls drifted around us and cracked jokes in gentle Welsh accents.
In the furnace control office I found shift foreman Keith Thomas and asked innocently if he had any physical problems: ‘Not since my vasectomy.’
A grin.
He lived locally, so how did neighbours view his job here?
‘You get sarcasm mainly.
A lot of my friends are pleased that the company is doing the job they are doing.
Others are not so well informed.
You couldn't hope to convert them.’
At a nearby house, Leonard Hough, a retired schoolmaster, had earlier told me about ‘the fog’ which he says comes from the factory.
‘It blows along the valley.
They've improved the chimney recently and it's very much better than it was but we still get the smells.
And since they've refused repeatedly to have a public inquiry into what is going on there we're not certain of the safety of what's coming out.
We get smoke from the steel works across the valley, but we know what that is and we're not afraid of it.’
Keith Thomas pressed a button and a huge door clanked upwards so that I could peer into the heart of the furnace.
Piles of ruddy-brown ash lay heaped on the floor.
Pumps sucked air inwards.
Heat shone out.
In here, they burn about 30,000 tonnes of chemicals a year, a quarter originating outside Britain.
The waste arrives at the rate of up to seven tanker-loads every day — that is seven lorries passing thousands of doorsteps.
Right here, in this gaping mouth, lies the end of the chain.
The wastes include lindane, DDT, out-of-date drugs, carcinogenic chemicals, old cigars and even pornography (a different kind of pollution).
About 7,000 tonnes of the total waste is PCB-contaminated.
PCBs are so difficult to destroy, that Rechem's emission-monitoring systems are geared to detecting them on the grounds that if you destroy PCBs you destroy everything.
This, of course, is a key point.
If you did not burn chemicals like PCBs, what else would you do with them?
The sea?
The earth?
‘We are not in the business of polluting the environment,’ Mr Wheeler insisted.
‘We are on the side of the angels.’
Environmental organisations, however, put the emphasis elsewhere.
‘There is no incinerator which completely destroys toxic wastes,’ Madeleine Cobbing, Greenpeace's toxics campaigner, told me.
‘The crux of our argument is that we don't need to have toxic wastes and the fact that plants like Rechem exist, providing easy options for companies, is acting as a disincentive for companies to clean up.’
But — another but — what about the PCBs that already exist?
Although they are no longer manufactured, they are still present, for example in electrical equipment.
No one could therefore call for the closure of incineration plants at a stroke, because noxious chemicals have to go somewhere.
So a part of the argument switches to the kind of incinerators you allow while industry is forced to clean itself up.
Also, how these should function and — perhaps most important of all — where you put them.
Mr Wheeler, now moving to the rear of the plant to show off the £2m smoke-cleaning section, which had just broken down, pointed out that his company achieved destruction of at least 99.9999 per cent of all materials.
The company's figures imply that when you have burnt 99.9999 per cent of a 30,000-tonne annual throughput, a figure of 0.03 of a tonne remains.
In 1986, according to Friends of the Earth, a survey of the homes clustered on the surrounding hills found that three-quarters of 800 residents were opposed to the Rechem plant.
‘The plant should be relocated because it's in the wrong place,’ Llew Smith, the local Euro-MP, told me.
‘It is in a valley and in a highly populated area.’
What did Mr Wheeler make of that?
‘If we do it properly any spot is the right spot,’ he insisted.
Stack emissions of PCBs were below the American standard for breathing air -1,000 times lower than the British equivalent.
Regular soil and grass tests showed no difference between PCB contamination in the immediate area and elsewhere in Wales — though there are no established ‘safe’ levels for these.
Five air-monitoring plants had been installed (he took me to see them).
And here were drums of chemicals, each labelled, each with a job number to check against sampling.
And yet there are accidents.
In 1987, aluminium melted in the furnace, reacted with water and exploded, sending a black cloud over nearby houses.
Later, drums supposedly containing carcinogenic drugs were not opened for checking before burning (for health reasons) and three were ‘misdescribed’.
They, too, reacted with water, and a plant operator was burned by a cloud of acid gas.
We walked past a tanker where a huge man named Andy Matthews was pumping vinyl acetate into a 10,000-gallon vat, wreathed in its sweet, sickly smell: ‘I've been here two years,’ he said.
‘My father was an industrial chemist and he said if you want to go and work for them, go and work for them.’
Were there any spillages?
He shrugged.
‘Nothing major.
I might drop a pipe — a little bit of a splash.’
In a large, prefabricated shed we wandered past stacks of 45-gallon drums of PCBs, two drums high, about 10 deep; and there were contaminated transformers waiting to be cut up and roasted in the flames.
Back along the waste chain, the Liverpool dockers who objected to the import of exactly this type of chemical should be aware that PCBs are moving about our roads all the time.
There was no difference between the liquid in these drums and the liquid in the cargoes they refused to touch.
In Liverpool, a dockers' spokesman with the Transport and General Workers Union admitted: ‘Drivers aren't happy handling some of these commodities, but at least a lorry-driver has more idea of what he is handling than a docker, who could have a consignment and just not know what it is.’
Yet he did not oppose all toxic waste movement (after all, the same union represents workers at Rechem itself); he simply didn't like the idea that big industrial nations like Canada could dump their dirty problems on this country and his members.
Driving away, I noticed that the vast chimney was still not functioning, but when I called at a neighbouring house a woman showed me videos she had taken of smoke coming from the plant, settling in her garden.
Certainly the incinerator seems well controlled.
Certainly there is no scientific evidence that living nearby increases the risk of sickness.
Certainly, Mr Wheeler convinced me that his company was going to huge lengths to keep itself clean.
‘We must run it safely in the short term and long term,’ he said, ‘because if people are able to demonstrate that we are causing an environment problem we will be shut down.’
In April 1985 a tanker spilled 200 litres of PCBs over the main Trans-Canada Highway on the border between Ontario and Manitoba.
A section of the road was shut for a week and motorists were warned to clean their cars and to dispose of the rags in plastic bags.
PCBs: The relative risk of grilling a kipper
By RICHARD NORTH
THE most curious thing about the transport and incineration of PCB wastes is that they are, amongst professionals, the least controversial of all the problems they deal with.
Indeed, they see incineration as a solution to toxic waste whose usefulness should be employed on a greater range of materials.
The House of Commons Environment Committee (which could be presumed to care about being popular), the House of Lords Science and Technology Committee (which has more expertise and rather less concern with popularity) and the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution (which has most expertise of all and absolutely no interest in popularity) have all been robustly and consistently critical of most parts of the waste-disposal chain.
They all endorse the technology of incineration used to destroy PCBs.
The only variation is between those who say the provenance of the wastes is irrelevant, and those who argue that imports of PCBs and other hazardous material should be discourged, because only a tough import policy will ensure that other countries build their own plants.
David Mills, the erstwhile head of the Hazardous Chemical wing of Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP)— and well known for his criticisms of the lack of effective policing of what he defends as largely sound rules — says that placing high-temperature incinerators in some sort of hierarchy of risks is ‘a terribly subjective business.’
But Mr Mills, who is now a director of Aspinwalls, an environment consultancy firm, goes on: ‘Because of what I know, I would be perfectly content to live next to any of the plants we have.
They are managed well, they have appropriate technology and conduct an environmentally safe process.
If you compare the transport of PCBs with that of a 5,000-gallon tanker of petrol, or liquid petroleum gas — or any of the hazardous chemicals which are routinely trundling about our roads — PCBs are of a very low order of toxicity or risk.
‘PCBs were designed to be inert.
They are not going to explode or burn.
They are not a risk if you happen to come across them inadvertently.
Compare them with a tanker full of chemicals which are corrosive, taint water at minute levels and kill living organisms at low doses: PCBs aren't like that.
‘What you have to do if there is an accident — and there hasn't been one, thank heavens — is keep the spilled PCBs out of watercourses, because they would accumulate in the fat of organisms which came into contact with them.
But that's not an acute risk; it's a long-term risk.
‘Many other chemicals are far more highly reactive, probably more toxic, certainly more flammable.
‘Look: I can't say this strictly, as a scientist, but it is my feeling that a bonfire, grilling a kipper or lighting a cigarette all release greater concentrations of dioxins than you'd be likely to find at the end of the pipe of a properly run high-temperature incinerator.’
David Mills says that there was increasing pressure in the early Seventies to see a higher percentage of waste materials incinerated.
‘There was general anticipation of regulations which would insist that more difficult wastes were burned instead of being sent to landfill.’
Soon there were 12 high-temperature merchant incinerators, of which four employed the highest technology.
To the regret of professionals such as David Mills, the regulations never materialised and the market for merchant incinerators fell away.
Most, except the PCB burners, have since closed.
This chain of events suggests that Britain got into medium- and high-level waste technology early, but then abandoned the middle tier.
It also means that we now landfill wastes that should be incinerated.
But one cannot have it both ways: for UK wastes (the import of wastes for landfill is now outlawed) the options are landfill or incineration, and people local to either hate the one near them.
There is another option: export.
The UK exports no wastes, but accepts them from countries which either have or should have the capacity to destroy their own ‘chemical arisings’, as scientists call waste products.
The Netherlands, for example, accounts for 43.26 per cent of wastes imported to the UK for incineration or treatment.
There is PCB-burning capacity in Sweden, Finland, Germany and France, of which only the last is, like Britain, prepared to import such waste.
Citizen protest is making the whole industry very cagey; governments are reluctant to allow planning permission or import licences.
On imports, Britain has been uniquely robust in the face of protest.
Less determined countries export their waste and thus acquire an undeserved reputation for being green.
It is a matter of judgement whether Canada, Australia and Japan should be able to dispose of their own PCBs.
At present, none of them can.
Margaret Thatcher will next month tell an international conference that the trade in wastes for incineration should be allowed where it is the best environmental option for existing wastes.
In other words: keep a legal route open, sooner than see dumping.
But, says a refinement of this view — and Mrs Thatcher and Chris Patten, her Secretary of State for the Environment believe this too — wastes should be disposed of in their country of origin: that is a new drift in British policy.
It is a proposal which would still leave small countries, and especially poor countries, with a requirement to export wastes.
It would also leave the neighbours of the incinerator plants exposed at least to UK wastes, and probably to some imports.
These people have fears which the media has shamelesslessly played on over the years, but which are genuine.
Rechem, which runs two of Britain's three plants equipped to incinerate PCB- contaminated wastes, says that local politicians take various approaches.
The firm claims a good relationship with its Fawley neighbours, and has always said it regrets the difficulties with Torfaen council (the local authority for Pontypool).
It hints that it is politicians, not disposal plants, which make the two places differ.
There is a clear value in reducing the amount of chemical waste which has to be got rid of — and that thinking has a long way to go.
What is not at all clear is whether one highly visible target — incineration — is anything like a major ingredient in the pollution cocktail, even at Pontypool.
