Hong Kong Special Report: Portugal takes a stand and Macao celebrates a passport to security: Unlike Britain, Portugal offers a guaranteed home to many of the citizens of its enclave in the Pearl River delta when China takes over in 1999.
Many skilled people are nevertheless still expected to flee, Kevin Hamlin reports
By KEVIN HAMLIN
WHILE the people of Hong Kong, stripped of any useful British nationality by successive immigration laws, fear for their future after the massacre at Peking in June, many Macao citizens, just 40 miles away across the Pearl River delta, rest secure in the knowledge that Portugal will offer them a guaranteed home of last resort after it returns their territory to China in 1999.
Portugal announced earlier this year that it would give up to 130,000 passports to people born in Macao before 1981.
Ironically, the European Community's proposed ‘Europe Without Frontiers’ stands to give these recipients the right to live in Britain which is denied to 3.25 million ‘British’passport-holders in Hong Kong.
Though Macao's small population made it easier for Portugal to make a grand gesture, it triggered renewed bitterness in Hong Kong.
‘There are no Portuguese first-class or second-class citizens,’ said Manuel de Silva, Macao's Secretary for Administration and Justice, alluding to Britain's progressive downgrading of Hong Kong people's nationality status.
‘People born here before 1981 are as Portuguese as myself and they hold Portuguese passports in completely equal conditions.’
Though 130,000 passports represent only about a quarter of Macao's population, most recipients are the professionals and businessmen who make up the backbone of the enclave economy.
It is people of this class who are now fleeing Hong Kong in droves.
When the enclave returns to Chinese rule, it will do so on similar terms to those promised for Hong Kong, with Peking guaranteeing that a capitalist system and lifestyle will be maintained for at least 50 years.
But despite those promises, and despite Portugal's generosity, a recent public opinion survey showed that about 50 per cent of Macao residents had no confidence in the future under Chinese rule.’
The Tiananmen Square incident had a very negative effect on professionals and the upper-class,’ said Alexandre Ho, a member of the Legislative Assembly and nominal leader of Macao's liberals.
‘Their confidence has been shattered.
Many of my friends are preparing to leave.’
Macao's government does not deny the existence of a confidence crisis, but places responsibility for it squarely on Peking.
‘Portugal has completely fulfilled its obligations as far as the Deed of Declaration is concerned,’ Mr De Silva said.
‘We hope very strongly that the attitude of China's authorities will be adequate to change the significant percentage of people who seem to say they have little confidence.’
He added that he could not see ‘what the Portuguese administration can further do to enlarge the Macanese people's confidence’.
Despite reports of strong objections from Peking, Mr De Silva said the government would proceed with plans to increase the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly.
Macao already has a significantly more representative government than Hong Kong.
The Assembly, of 17 seats, has five appointed members, six directly-elected and six indirectly-elected members.
Hong Kong's Legislative Council as yet has no directly-elected seats.
The proposals to increase the number of seats to 23, likely to be made later this year, will not change the balance of power in the Council: two seats each will be added to appointed, directly- and indirectly-elected categories.
Nevertheless, local newspaper reports say Peking is concerned that this could further fuel calls for greater democracy in Hong Kong, where the British government now seems more committed to increasing the pace of political reform.
Despite the democratic element in government, however, the liberal-leaning elected members of the Assembly have little power, because the conservatives dominate the body through appointed indirectly-elected seats.
‘We so-called liberals are very weak in terms of funding and organisation,’ said Mr Ho.
‘It is very difficult to achieve anything against the strength of the conservatives.’
A big problem for the liberals is that recent immigrants from China, who make almost half of the population, have so far not been greatly moved by ideals of democracy.
‘They are too busy fighting for a stable life,’ said Mr Ho.
Despite this, liberals won a virtual landslide at elections last October.
They took 45 per cent of the vote, and took three seats, against one previously.
Macao's economy has weathered the turmoil in China with few signs of damage.
Tourist arrivals have actually increased as a result of Hong Kong people choosing to visit the enclave instead of China.
There have been murmurs of discontent among manufacturers considering diversifying away from Macao, but businessmen say that the only impact so far has been a shift of orders from China to Macao.
The government is now moving ahead with several new infrastructure projects, which it cites as evidence of its own — and China's — commitment to the enclave.
By 1993, a HK$4bn airport that is to be built on reclaimed land off the island of Taipa is due to be opened.
A new HK$350m seaport is also planned and there will be a second bridge linking Taipa with the Macao mainland.
This will eventually be extended to Zhuhai, the special economic zone just across the Chinese border.
China is taking a 33 per cent shareholding in the airport, which will have a capacity for 6.5 million passengers annually.
In a related development, the government has recently decided to approve the setting up of a ‘national airline’ and is currently thinking about who should own it.
The result will probably be a deal to allot equity stakes to the Chinese and Macao governments, alongside some private investors.
Though these developments are seen as part of moves to reduce Macao's dependence on gambling (which contributes 25 per cent of government revenue) and Hong Kong (which provides most of its gamblers), they leave some residents uneasy about China's growing involvement in the local economy.
Portugal's rapport with Peking is certainly far more cordial than Britain and China's sometimes frosty relations.
Following Portugal's revolution in 1974, Lisbon tried to hand back Macao to China.
Peking was not interested, but in 1979 Lisbon formally renounced sovereignty over the enclave, which is now officially a ‘Chinese territory under Portuguese administration’.
As a result, administrative arrangements can be countenanced which would be anathema to Hong Kong's British rulers.
The proposed airport, for example, will have facilities to function as a Chinese domestic facility, with immigration arrangements for visitors to both Macao and China.
Arguably, Macao would worry less about its future were it not constantly exposed to the nervousness of Hong Kong across the water.
The British territory is just an hour away by hydrofoil, and its newspapers, television, and radio carry frequent accounts of the current confidence crisis in the territory.
‘We depend so much on Hong Kong,’ said Mr Ho.
‘Our casinos depend on Hong Kong, our exports depend on it and most of our tourists come from there.
Macao people see a lot of Hong Kong people going, and they too will go.
What is happening in Hong Kong is contagious.’
Hong Kong Special Report: The snakes are in good form, despite the wind: The feet are made for wokking, Robert Cottrell concludes as he adds the extremities of chickens to his range of culinary delights, along with the mysteries of tea, rice and appropriate poetry
By ROBERT COTTRELL
A MILESTONE in food-fetishism: my first chicken's foot, eaten at Zen, Hong Kong, on 13 September.
Boneless.
Chicken's feet used to give the lie to my bravura claim to Eat Anything, so long as it was recently dead.
I would go out of my way to crunch on crisp, mustardy jellyfish; an oily, tissuey-textured sea-slug, slipped into a congee of boiled rice, was my idea of a hearty breakfast; and the pig, from the brains to the balls (of the feet) seemed like a gourmet's theme-park.
So why not chicken feet?
Mainly because they looked like chicken's feet.
Toes, tiny ankles, skin, heels, as per when still attached to the chicken.
Also, because as served in 99 out of 100 Chinese restaurants, they would arrive sticky with grease and boiled to a hue of nauseously vivid waxy-yellow.
Nor could you just shut your eyes and throw them down the hatch; because the whole pleasure of a chicken's foot would come from sucking and nibbling it slowly, seeking out the tasty skin and the fragments of flesh like the last moments of a particularly luscious spare rib.
You have to like them as feet.
Zen, a newly-opened offshoot of the British restaurant group, is in the basement of a just-finished office and shop development called Pacific Place.
Its translucent glass, bare concrete ceilings, exposed pipework and Rennie Mackintosh-ish chairs are miles away from the gilt-and-gingerbread kitsch of the Hong Kong restaurant mainstream.
The menu reads more conventionally, but the food has been thought through with unusual care: witness the unexpected sweetness in the crab and sesame tart; the vinegary bite to a plate of matted e-fu noodles; and, of course, that small plate of perfection, within the narrowly-defined limits of its raw material, the chicken's foot.
The Zen foot is not yellow, but white.
The skin not waxy, but translucent; the texture not oily, but clean and dry.
It still looks like a foot, but a very nice foot really.
Affecting nonchalance, I pluck it up, and begin nuzzling; and, yes, it is a fairly rewarding sort of thing to eat.
Not much flavour, but a fibrous-to-spongy chewiness which sets it apart from the average savoury snack.
Now for the sheep's eyes.
DRINK TEA with Chinese food.
It aids digestion, prevents obesity, soothes the spirit and quickens the mind — or so its addicts would have you believe.
You can try to impress the waiter as a serious customer by specifying the type of tea you want, rather than just the brew in general.
The default blend in Hong Kong restaurants is usually the Yunnan tea called bo-lei in Cantonese dialect, and pu-erh in Mandarin.
Dark, hard and faintly bitter, it is said to have the side-effect of lowering blood-pressure, unlike most other things in Hong Kong.
The restaurant teapot is usually free, and bottomless.
When you have reached the lees, leave the pot on the table with the lid overturned or tilted to one side.
This will cue the waiter to refill it.
Etiquette requires more or less continuous competition among diners to keep one another 's tea-cups topped up.
You will often see recipients tapping the table with the three middle fingers of one hand while their cup is being filled.
The gesture conveys gratitude for the kindness, and allegedly commemorates an emperor who, curious to taste the life of his common people, stayed incognito at an inn with two companions.
When the emperor took his turn at dinner pouring the tea, an unimaginable reversal of protocol, his awestruck fellow-travellers tapped the table to signify the kow-tows of abasement which they would ordinarily have been performing before him.
Chinese philsophers, gourmets and poets have produced over the centuries an extensive literature devoted to tea and its presumed effects upon the body and soul.
For a short and poignant reflection, consider this fragment from Lo Tong, an eighth century poet, translated by T C Lai in his book At the Chinese Table: The first bowl — how soothing to the throat!
The second bowl — all feeling of loneliness vanishes; The third bowl — I start searching my soul to find five thousand volumes of ancient tomes; The fourth bowl — a slight perspiration which washes away all unhappy things; The fifth bowl — my bones and muscles all cleansed; The sixth bowl — I establish communication with the immortal spirit; The seventh bowl — this must not be taken, Already a cool ethereal breeze Emanates from underneath my arms.
HALF THE pleasure of a southern Chinese meal ought to be the rice; its humble utility need not obscure its noble worth.
Traditionally, the fan, the cooked rice, is the essential element of the Chinese meal prepared south of the Yangtze River; north of the Yangtze, breads and noodles take its place.
The function of the cai, or choy — whatever else might be eaten with the staple — is to supply a little variety and additional nourishment.
The finest rice in all China used to be grown in fields around the village of Shatin, in Hong Kong's New Territories.
So distinctive were its qualities that the entire crop was bought by the Imperial Court.
Nowadays, the Shatin rice fields have long vanished beneath a new town of skyscrapers and motorways, with a racecourse at one side and a university at the other.
Chinese rice served in the course of a meal is always white, and usually prepared by steaming.
Ideally, it will be long-grained, rich in taste and slightly sticky.
The grains will be chewy, much as pasta should be al dente; it will be without lumps; and it will be fragrant.
It can be eaten without inhibition, the bowl raised to the lips and the chopsticks used to rake the grains into the mouth.
About the only serious mistake you can make with rice is to stick your chopsticks upright in the bowl: to do so mimics the Buddhist ritual for offerings to the dead, and will quickly reduce your table to an awkward silence.
The autumn winds have risen, The snakes are in good form, It's time to nourish yourself.
(Restaurant advertisement, translated by T C Lai) THE FRENCH gastronomic journal, Gault-Millau, caused major ructions this summer by applying its critical eye to the grandest of Hong Kong's hotel restaurants.
It found, high prices; a frequent want of authenticity in purportedly French cuisine; and it concluded that the least snooty of the bunch, the Restaurant de France at the Regal Meridien, Tsimshatsui, was also the best.
It liked the fact that the chef there, Jean-Yves Gueho, was actually French — as opposed to Swiss, German or Chinese; and that the long dining room, decorated with glass cupolas, achieved an ecclesiastical dignity.
The inspectors awarded Mr Gueho 17-18 marks out of possible 20, a ranking which would put him among the very best chefs of France.
Of his dishes, they recommended lobster with coriander, loup de mer, and pigeon with foie gras and truffles.
They were less enthusiastic about two places which would consider themselves several cuts above the Meridien.
The Pierrot restaurant at the Mandarin, they said, achieved some ‘great successes,’ but also some ‘real disasters’.
The Plume at the Regent Hotel was noted both for its ‘unbeatable view’ and for its prix impitoyables.
Hong Kong Special Report: Future Leaders — Lo Tak-Shing
By ROBERT COTTRELL
‘The trouble with T S,’ says one long-time acquaintance, ‘is that he cannot bring himself to confide in anybody.’
Although many attribute to Lo Tak-shing possession of the most byzantine — and very possibly the cleverest -mind in Hong Kong politics, few claim to understand quite what he seems to be doing with it.
A big, physically powerful lawyer born into the most distinguished of the half-dozen Hong Kong families with a genuine claim to ‘old money’ status, T S Lo was by his early forties one of the grandest figures in the colonial establishment.
Appointed by Lord MacLehose to the territory's Executive Council, he advised the governor, and his successor, Sir Edward Youde, on major policy decisions culminating in sovereignty negotiations with China.
But in 1985, after the Sino-British settlement was announced, he resigned, declaring the move to be a protest against Britain's withholding of full citizenship from Hong Kong passport holders, and set up a trust to advise would-be emigrants on alternative rights of abode.
After a year in the margins, Mr Lo re-entered the political mainstream in a new job — and one which clearly indicated where he thought Hong Kong's future would now be decided.
He was elected vice-chairman of the Basic Law Consultative Committee, the body set up by Peking to promote awareness and discussion of post-1997 constitutional arrangements in Hong Kong.
He began developing his own contacts with the Chinese government, and advocating the view that Hong Kong should learn to accept China as a ‘protector and friend’ with whom a deepening relationship was both desirable and necessary.
‘The illusion that China is our enemy,’ he argues, ‘must be replaced by the reality that on the fundamental questions of Hong Kong's peace and prosperity, China's interest coincides with that of Hong Kong.’
Mr Lo is a central figure in the New Hong Kong Alliance, one of the territory's embryonic political parties.
Its recent proposal for a ‘bicameral’ legislature after 1997, in which directly-elected members would fill just half of one chamber, was derided by local liberals but liked in Peking.
Though he would never say as much, and though his own British nationality might create technical difficulties, few doubt that Mr Lo would like the job of ‘chief executive’— in effect, governor — of Hong Kong after 1997.
Of those commonly identified as potential contenders, he commands some of the shortest odds.
Hong Kong Special Report: The business of realism and caution: As hardliners tighten their grip on Peking, uncertainty has swept industry, Andrew Higgins reports
By ANDREW HIGGINS
AFTER three years of inconclusive negotiations, the Hong Kong conglomerate Hutchison Whampoa had no doubts about the difficulties of doing business in China.
‘There was always one more layer of bureaucracy,’ recalled Simon Murray, Hutchison's managing director.
Talks dragged on so long that some doubted whether the project — an aircraft maintenance joint venture with Lockheed and CAAC, China's national carrier — would ever materialise.
‘Central bureacuracy smothered the deal,’ he said.
But almost overnight, the tables were turned.
Suddenly it was the Chinese, not the foreigners, who were pressing for a deal.
On 8 June, four days after the Tiananmen massacre and the day after rioting in Hong Kong, Chinese negotiators announced they were ready.
‘They were pressing us like hell to sign,’ said Mr Murray.
‘Everything was suddenly ready.’
But, three months on, the venture is still not finalised.
Lockheed is now hesitating.
‘At the moment we are waiting for the Americans.
By the time they make up their mind, the Chinese will probably be back to their old ways.’
Many Hong Kong businessmen can cite similar experiences in the period since the massacre.
Struggling to keep the door open to its largest source of foreign capital, China — particularly the southern coastal provinces of Guangdong and Fujian — has been bending over backwards to encourage new investment and calm investors they already have.
‘They are ten times easier to deal with today than they were six months ago,’ said Mr Murray.
In the short term at least, Hong Kong seems to have succumbed to China's charm offensive.
Despite the anger in Hong Kong over Tiananmen, no major company in the colony has pulled out of China.
Even Mr Murray, who appeared on television to condemn Peking for its butchery, has since acknowledged that ‘at the end of the day, we have to live with these guys.
It is not business as usual with China.
We have sent lots of messages that we are outraged.
But one has got to be realistic.
I don't think this is the moment to go slamming the door’.
The economies of Hong Kong and China have grown so interdependent over the past decade that neither could easily contemplate a rupture.
Hong Kong's investment and know-how have helped transform the Pearl River delta of Guangdong Province into China's most prosperous region.
It accounts for 90 per cent of Guangdong's foreign investment, while 60 per cent of Guangdong's production is exported to Hong Kong.
Cheap land and labour are the main attractions.
With Chinese wages still roughly one-seventh of those in the colony, so many companies have shifted production across the border that at least two million Chinese workers — twice the size of Hong Kong's manufacturing workforce — are employed in Guangdong, processing goods for the textile, toy and electronics firms which are the backbone of Hong Kong's industrial sector.
‘Hong Kong is is a money machine,’ says Dr Miron Mushkat, chief regional economist for Baring Securities.
‘It is not dominated by emotions.
If it was, it would jeopardise its position as the gateway to China.’
Apart from delays at border crossings during the June crackdown, Hong Kong firms experienced little or no disruption at their Guangdong operations.
The province has since been in the forefront of China's efforts to reassure foreign businessmen that its door will be staying open for ‘business as usual’.
‘We are dedicated to the export-oriented economy,’ promised Wu Binghui, the director of the provincial capital's Commission for Foreign Economic Relations and Trade.
‘Our existing policies not only remain unchanged after the Peking incident, we will move forward in pushing forward the economic reform and open door policy.’
But if the anger has faded, and Hong Kong companies continue to trade with and manufacture in China, Peking's crackdown has not been forgotten.
While companies with factories in China show few signs of pulling out in a hurry, some have lost enthusiasm for further expansion.
A survey conducted by the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce showed that 55 per cent of companies had postponed further investment decisions, while another 36 per cent were still debating what to do.
For example, Tomei Industrial (Holdings), an electronics company with 95 per cent of its production in China, accelerated expansion plans in Malaysia and Thailand, and hopes to cut China-based output to about 50 per cent of total production.
Another company, Gold Peak Industries (Holdings), which makes car audio equipment, is also trying to hedge future risks by setting up new factories elsewhere.
In both cases, the companies were worried less about producing the goods than selling them.
Hong Kong manufacturers depend almost entirely on export markets, many of which have been less willing to forgive and forget.
Many buyers, particularly in the United States, have felt uncomfortable buying goods made in China.
Though southern China suffered little disruption, many foreign buyers still look askance at relying on China for goods.
Anger and fear in North America and Europe have also stymied dozens of Hong Kong-led investment projects in China.
Just as unease about China's reliability as a production base has hurt Hong Kong manufacturers, anxiety over China's stability has undermined foreign financial confidence.
Before Tiananmen, Jardine Fleming Investment, a Hong Kong firm specialising in China investments, was exploring 25 possible ventures in China.
After the massacre, enthusiasm plummeted.
Four of the prospective ventures have been dropped and another eight placed ‘on hold’, under pressure from queasy foreign investors.
The most important question mark, however, remains, as always, uncertainty about the future.
Even before 4 June, Hong Kong businessmen had serious doubts about China's economic direction.
An austerity programme begun in September 1988 was beginning to bite, raising fears that Peking would try to rein in the independent-minded southern provinces.
If Guangdong and other coastal regions were to lose their virtual autonomy in dealing with foreign investors and their privileged access to raw materials and fuel supplies, the effect would be far more damaging to Hong Kong's confidence in China than the sight of tanks rolling into Tiananmen Square.
Alarm about China's economic prospects and possible policy changes have also heightened anxiety in Hong Kong about one of its main assets — personal connections in China.
Many businessmen fear that, while Peking may stick to its open door and reform policy in name, officials responsible for implementing it in the southern provinces may lose their jobs as hardliners attempt to tighten their political grip.
A widely-cited instance of this is Hopewell Holdings, the construction and property group controlled and managed by Gordon Wu.
Until 4 June, Mr Wu could boast perhaps the best connections of any Hong Kong businessman.
In 1981, Zhao Ziyang, then China's prime minister, praised him as a ‘bold and patriotic capitalist’.
Mr Wu then enlisted Mr Zhao's support to clear bureaucratic obstacles to his risky brainchild, a 186-mile tollway linking Hong Kong with Canton and the special economic zone of Shenzhen.
But with Mr Zhao in disgrace, Hopewell's prospects have dimmed.
The group has decided to shelve several projects, and to scrap a HK$3.8bn share issue.
Other Hong Kong businessmen may never have had quite the high-level political contacts of Mr Wu, but they too have cause for concern.
Many have spent years establishing close working relations with officials in Guangdong, Fujian and Hainan Island.
But some of these officials will now be tainted by associations with Zhao Ziyang, who spent much of his early career in Guangdong.
The governor of Hainan, a firm supporter of Zhao's liberal economic policies, has already been sacked amid allegations of corruption.
More disturbing still for Hong Kong businessmen, the governor of Guangdong, Ye Xuanping, is said to be under pressure to leave the province to take a new job as vice-premier in Peking.
For Hutchison's managing director, and other investors in Hong Kong, such shifts suggest that a prolonged power struggle may be underway.
‘Where the uncertainty lies is what comes after Deng,’ said Mr Murray.
‘Tiananmen has obviously moved us towards an attitude of caution.’
Hong Kong Special Report: After the traumas, the colony picks up the pieces
By ROBERT COTTRELL
FOUR months after the traumas of 3-4 June, Hong Kong has picked up most of the pieces.
The demonstrations have faded away.
The stock market, which crashed after China's declaration of Martial Law, has recoupedits losses.
The property market has softened, but not collapsed.
Talks with China over the Basic Law, suspended after the massacre, have resumed.
Economic growth is slowing, but should still be a respectable 5 per cent this year.
The public figures who denounced China in June are now sounding more conciliatory notes.
Life has returned to normal, more or less.
In some important ways, the shock of mid-1989 was containable because Hong Kong had learnt from past crises.
During the sovereignty negotiations of 1982-84, for instance, social order had shown its most serious signs of fragmenting when, in the autumn of 1983, accelerating speculation against the Hong Kong dollar sent the exchange rate into free fall.
The Hong Kong government, with considerable help from John Greenwood of the GT fund management group, devised a self-righting mechanism for ‘pegging’ the Hong Kong dollar to the US currency, which has since worked perfectly.
Thus, whatever consequences Hong Kong feared from Tiananmen, a currency crisis was one.
To take another example: Hong Kong's banks were rotten for lack of regulation five years ago, when a series of collapses frightened the government into spending billions of dollars of public money on rescues.
After those expensive lessons in prudence, banks are now properly policed.
Had a serious run developed on the Bank of China in 1983, which thankfully it did not, the result would probably have been catastrophic.
When a run did develop on the bank after Tiananmen, the Hong Kong government was ready to deal with it.
It knew the bank's position; it knew how much liquidity to inject to relieve the pressure.
The most serious damage was to the Bank of China's amour-propre.
Proper regulation of banks, together with the generally lower interest rates made possible by a stable currency, also reduced worries about the property market.
Investors could generally assume, as they could not in 1982-84, that most bank loans made to developers and speculators had been adequately secured and documented.
While the market might continue softening for psychological and cyclical reasons, its woes would probably not be compounded by fraud-tainted defaults.
More recently, and equally significantly, the colony's stock market had mended its ways.
In October 1987, when share prices crashed around the world, Hong Kong disgraced itself by closing for four days to protect local speculators.
Afterwards, the government was finally moved to insist that the stock exchange appoint a competent new management.
Under the ancien regime, the exchange might well have shut again after Tiananmen.
Instead, the management kept it open, and has seen its judgement vindicated by the subsequent recovery.
Tiananmen did not, therefore, produce specific local crises.
If anything, it provided some pleasant surprises — about, for instance, the ability of large crowds to demonstrate peacefully, and the ability of Hong Kong-financed factories in southern China to be all but unaffected by turmoil in Peking.
There will, however, be longer-term consequences which flow from those dramatic weeks, which are still working themselves out and which may prove more serious.
The first is likely to be an increase in emigration.
The government, which used to play down the ‘brain drain', now accepts the need for frankness.
It estimates that 42,000 people will leave this year, 55,000 next year, and perhaps up to 60,000 the year after.
The emigrants are predominantly young and skilled: Hong Kong is now losing more graduates each year than it produces.
Officials describe the exodus as ‘quota-driven’, meaning that numbers are limited only by the number of places made available in resettlement countries.
If South Africa or a South American country made a pitch for Hong Kong entrepreneurs, numbers could rise sharply yet again.
It is a matter of principle for the Hong Kong government that it should not seek to restrict the numbers leaving, whether directly or by influencing resettlement countries.
But, particularly since Tiananmen, it has been echoing the argument that people would be less concerned to leave Hong Kong before 1997 if they could be absolutely confident that other countries would accept them after that date.
The Governor, Sir David Wilson, has argued for a general ‘right of entry’ to Britain — though such a ‘right’could not be of much value if it were not ordinarily convertible into full citizenship.
Officials also talk of an ‘armageddon scenario’, asking that Britain secure international agreement to accommodate millions of Hong Kong refugees in the event of Tiananmen-style repression after 1997.
But this notion would probably do little to slow the emigration rate even if it were realised.
Who, after all, would decline a chance to emigrate because they thought they might later qualify as a refugee?
Though the issue no longer commands the same urgency it did immediately after Tiananmen, ‘right of abode’ has been adopted as a cause by a wide variety of business and professional lobby groups.
The most substantial, ‘Honour Hong Kong,’ is sponsored by many of the colony's biggest companies.
It argues that Britain has a moral responsibility to its citizens in Hong Kong; that Hong Kong people ‘do not want to leave…they seek an insurance policy’; that Britain is ‘markedly ungenerous to its colonies’ compared with other European countries; and that ‘insofar as any Hong Kong people were to move to Britain, they would be a valuable asset to the British economy’.
Hong Kong companies are not well-known moralists: their main interest lies in staunching their own losses of trained workers, and preserving the machinery of government.
To answer that immediate need, the British government has been agonising over how to offer a single tranche of passports, perhaps 100,000, to Hong Kong, in such a way as to target recipients whom it believes play vital roles in the public and private sector.
It had originally hoped to make some sort of announcement last month; but the practical complications have proved immense.
How could the ‘right’ people be identified?
How could they be tied to Hong Kong as a condition of receipt?
Would the anger of those denied passports exceed the gratitude of those who received them?
Hong Kong government officials shudder privately at the thought of having to organise the allocation.
A second legacy of Tiananmen has been increasing tension over the course of Hong Kong's political development, with just six months remaining before China's parliament is due to enact the mini-constitution, or Basic Law, setting out the pattern of post-1997 government.
China has fiercely opposed the introduction of democracy to Hong Kong, and has threatened to reverse any moves in that direction made by Britain before 1997.
Before Tiananmen, Britain had ducked the question by professing to believe that most Hong Kong people cared little about politics, and that those who did favoured little or no change.
Now, though so politically convenient a view is no longer tenable, no easy alternative presents itself.
So far, drafts of the Basic Law have skated awkwardly around the the post-1997 political structure and the role of direct elections.
China has recognised that to rule out direct elections would be bad public relations, but has yet to settle on how to describe its proposed dictatorship.
In the most recent interim text, published last February, the Basic Law Drafting Committee — appointed by Peking but including a minority of Hong Kong members — relegated the problem to an appendix which outlined a scheme to raise the number of directly-elected seats in the Legislative Council, Hong Kong's rubber-stamp parliament, from 15 out of 55 in 1997 to 40 out of 80 two terms (six years) later.
A referendum in 2011 would decide whether to progress to full democracy.
Louis Cha, the Hong Kong member who devised the system, and who resigned from the Drafting Committee in protest against Tiananmen, believes that the referendum would go in favour of democracy, but that the waiting-period would allow Hong Kong people to get used to new political responsibilities.
But would Hong Kong ever get a referendum under Chinese sovereignty?
Peking's response to other calls for ‘democracy’ this summer raised enough doubts.
When the House of Commons foreign affairs committee published its report on Hong Kong soon afterwards, it set democratisation as an urgent priority.
Emboldened by its example, Hong Kong's Legislative Councillors decided that not less than half their number should be directly elected in 1995, and the rest 10 years later; they later scaled the first figure down to 40 per cent, to win the suport of more conservative interest groups.
Rather than risk a clash between the Cha and Legislative Council models, China has opted to muddy the waters by indicating support for proposals unexpectedly advanced last month by Lo Tak-shing, of the New Hong Kong Alliance, for a ‘bicameral’ legislature, in which directly elected seats would account for half of a single house.
Since Chinese officials have also said recently that there will be few major alterations to the Basic Law between its interim and final drafts, their intention may be to declare that proliferation of ideas about political reform indicates an absence of consensus in Hong Kong, and leave Mr Cha's proposal in place.
But they could equally well deem Mr Lo's proposals to enjoy popular support — since Mr Lo is, as it happens, vice-chairman of China's own Basic Law Consultative Committee — and adopt those instead.
Either way, since Peking denies the legitimacy of the Legislative Council, it can afford to deny any special status to its views.
Britain has been muttering that if it perceives a ‘consensus for democracy’ in Hong Kong, it will start ‘talking tough’to Peking at a diplomatic level, and perhaps even adopt the Legislative Council proposals for 1995 in the teeth of Chinese opposition and without regard to ‘convergence’with the Basic Law.
If so, it will come to the negotiating table severely handicapped by its past history of deference: it could as easily have confronted the issue four years ago, when it would have stood more of a chance of winning.
It would also now risk being seen to act as much in the interests of its own credibility, as in support of a sincerely-held belief.
Another post-Tiananmen worry, greater for for Hong Kong than for any other interested party, must be the future of China's economy and economic policies.
The colony has grown rich over the past decade as gatekeeper to China's open door.
Its manufacturers employ more workers in Guangdong than they do in Hong Kong; its hotels are filled with tourists and salesmen en route for Peking and Guilin; its accountants, bankers and lawyers service thousands of foreign firms wide-eyed about the profits which they believe will one day be made from a billion Chinese consumers.
So far, only Hong Kong's tourist trade has visibly suffered, with year-on-year visitor numbers down 22 per cent in July, and 17 per cent in August.
But even the most mercenary of foreign firms grows a little queasier about trading with a regime which shoots dead its citizens, and then tries to score popularity points by offering convict labour to foreign factories; and even the most unreconstructed optimist can see that the resurgence of hard-line Marxists in the Peking power structure is likely to militate against further free-market reforms.
And if, as China warns may happen, foreign debt repayments start causing headaches in 1990-91, then even the most gung-ho foreign lender will grow cautious.
At the very least, Hong Kong must prepare to be a little more self-reliant for growth in the 1990s: public spending, particularly on infrastructural projects, is likely to assume a bigger and more virtuous role.
What, finally, of liberty and justice?
If such notions did not worry Hong Kong before Tiananmen, they ought not to worry it now.
China maintains the same professed intentions.
The Basic Law will still be enacted, promising a panoply of rights and freedoms for 50 years beyond 1997.
But the Chinese Constitution contains all sorts of promises, too — so many that it could probably have been construed to forbid the People's Liberation Army from shooting dead hundreds of unarmed civilians, and to prohibit the arbitrary arrest, summary trial or execution of thousands more.
Tiananmen demonstrated what most people in Hong Kong well knew, but preferred not to admit: that the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party can and will do absolutely anything, however brutal and illegal, to further their grip on power.
The notion that they will be circumscribed by a ‘Joint Declaration’ or a ‘Basic Law’, so confidently advanced in 1984, now seems like a distant dream; 1997, by contrast, suddenly seems very real, and very close.
More than 50,000 Vietnamese ‘boat people’ waste their lives in squalid, overcrowded prison-like camps in Hong Kong, almost certainly having lost their gamble to secure a new life in the West.
Hong Kong says that only a handful of them should qualify as true refugees fleeing persecution, while the rest are ‘economic migrants’ escaping the pitiful poverty of their home country.
It argues that the understanding reached at the United Nations-sponsored Geneva refugee conference in 1979, for South-east Asian countries to offer ‘first asylum’ while Western countries provided permanent resettlement, has now collapsed.
Having attempted, unsuccesfully, to discourage further arrivals by imposing increasingly harsh regimes in its holding-camps, Hong Kong now wants Britain to authorise compulsory repatriation, in defiance of humanitarian objections from the United States.
Hong Kong Special Report: Future Leaders — Vincent Lo Hong-Shui
By ROBERT COTTRELL
THE 41-year-old chairman of the Shui On property and construction group, Vincent Lo, has risen sharply to political prominence since he was chosen by Peking in 1985 as one of the 180 members of its Basic Law Consultative Committee.
A year later, he played a central role in founding the Group of 89, a faction made up of business and professional members of the BLCC who wanted to see a conservative model for Hong Kong's political development.
The group quickly gained substantial influence; its success reflected upon Mr Lo, whose abilities caught the eye of the colonial government.
He was appointed to numerous official committees; a rumour, denied by Mr Lo, held that he was also offered a seat on the Legislative Council.
The Group of 89 first espoused a ‘gradualist’ approach to democratisation in Hong Kong, and was seen in more liberal quarters as pandering to Peking.
This year, shocked by the 3-4 June massacre, Mr Lo decided that Hong Kong was ready for a quicker pace of democracy.
He proposed a slightly more ‘progressive’ political model, and argued that Hong Kong people should unite in order to influence their own affairs.
Mr Lo thus put himself in the forefront of consensus politics in Hong Kong, thereby leaving his unrelated namesake, Lo Tak-shing, to seize the high ground further to the right.
Mr Lo's star is still in the ascendant.
The business community regognises him as ‘one of us’, and he belongs to the generation which will be in its prime in 1997.
He has not sacrificed his credibility by undue deference to Peking, nor has he courted prestige within the British establishment.
He might, for those reasons, be an attractive compromise candidate for the job of post-1997 chief executive; but his abilities as a manager have yet to be underpinned by the more visceral instincts of a committed politician.
Hong Kong Special Report: Future Leaders — John Chan Cho-Chak
By ROBERT COTTRELL
ALTHOUGH the British government would deny ‘grooming’ a candidate from within the ranks of its Hong Kong civil service for the job of chief executive after transition in 1997, it has given John Chan, 46, a series of fast-track official posts which make him a credible contender for the job.
Mr Chan, now the government's Secretary for Trade and Industry, has been a civil servant since 1964 — almost all his working life, with the exception of a two-year excursion as executive director and general manager of a local finance company in 1978-80.
Finding the charms of the private sector unexpectedly resistible, he returned to government, and subsequently caught the eye of Sir Edward Youde, the Governor of Hong Kong from 1982-85.
Under Sir Edward's tutelage, he was closely involved in the Sino-British negotiations which culminated in the agreement to transfer Hong Kong in 1997.
He was also associated with the preparation of the 1988 White Paper on political reform, another constitutional milestone, and is now tipped to succeed Donald Liao, the outgoing Secretary for District Administration, as a member of the Sino-British Joint Liaision Group, the diplomatic body which monitors technical aspects of the transition.
Mr Chan is also considered a probable future member of the Executive Council, the Governor's ‘cabinet’.
Not an obviously charismatic figure, Mr Chan's principal qualities are those of a high-order bureaucrat.
He is held to be efficient, fair-minded, scrupulously honest, and is well-liked by his colleagues.
He also has a sense of humour.
Short and chubby, he once said that he was the only senior Hong Kong official who could see eye-to-eye with the equally diminutive Deng Xiaoping.
Hong Kong Special Report: A brave new world tumbles down: Hong Kong tried to be optimistic about Chinese rule.
Tiananmen ended that, Robert Cottrell reports
By ROBERT COTTRELL
IN 1984, when Britain and China initialled their momentous Joint Declaration on the Question of Hong Kong, the colony still had the successful salesman's ability to counterfeit boundless enthusiasm.
Having learnt its worst fears were about to be realised, that it would be handed over to Chinese rule in 1997 without external protections or guarantees, it immediately put the best possible face on its situation.
Businessmen argued that there would, at worst, be 13 years in which to make money and get out.
More likely, they said, was that China would continue to modernise its economy, so that by 1997 the situation would be more one of China's adjusting to Hong Kong, than of Hong Kong's trimming itself to China.
Others said Hong Kong should be optimistic, not because 1997 meant so much, but because it meant so little.
Britain had governed Hong Kong for at least the past 25 years only because China allowed it.
Had China not, in reality, been the sovereign power for many years?
Would it not continue to need the hard currency and expertise which a westernised Hong Kong attracted?
The form might change, but not the substance.
So why worry?
The stock market's Hang Seng Index doubled within a year of the agreement; over the next two years, it doubled again.
Property prices soared.
But some people did worry, notably those who argued that Britain, having ruled Hong Kong as a benign dictatorship for more than 140 years, should institute a fully democratic government before 1997.
They cited the Joint Declaration's promise of ‘a legislature constituted by elections’, and warned that without democracy, the autocratic machinery of colonial government might prove far less benign in China's hands.
Others worried about passports.
Successively more stringent British nationality laws had denied Hong Kong Chinese the right to live and work in Britain.
After 1997, their ‘British Nationals (Overseas)’ passports would confer no real benefit since, in the eyes of the Chinese government, they would be Chinese citizens.
But if the desire for democracy and passports reflected pockets of anxiety, 1984 to 1989 were remarkable more for their lack of political activism.
The broad mass of people, though worried about Peking rule, also felt twinges of chauvinistic pleasure at the forced departure of Britain.
They felt that the course of events was beyond their influence; they were living well.
For five years, Hong Kong was a bubble of optimism, growing fatter and fatter while its walls stretched thinner.
But when China sent its army into Tiananmen four months ago, the bubble burst.
Before Tiananmen, when the Peking students' mourning for Hu Yaobang, the deposed Communist Party boss, was evolving into political protest, Hong Kong had watched with amazement.
Businessmen fretted that no good could come of such defiance; students delighted in the courage of their mainland counterparts.
But as the Tiananmen movement grew and grew, more and more Hong Kong people were stirred into sympathetic action.
On 4 May, more than 3,000 Hong Kong students from 14 universities and colleges gathered in Chater Gardens, next to the Legislative Council building.
They carried banners, chanted slogans in support of the Tiananmen protest, and collected more than £3,000 to send to Peking.
A small group began a hunger strike outside the Xinhua (New China) News Agency, China's quasi-diplomatic mission in Happy Valley.
It was, by Hong Kong's modest standards, a substantial demonstration, and the nerve it touched was quickly apparent.
Taxi drivers cruised around Xinhua, honking their support.
The agency's own staff gave water and blankets to hunger strikers and let them use the office telephone.
A student union called for a one-day strike at local colleges.
A three-day sit-in at the Star Ferry terminal raised almost £10,000 for Peking.
A student petition calling for the Chinese government to negotiate with student leaders attracted 80,000 signatures and was presented to Xinhua after another rally on 17 May.
The Joint Committee for the Promotion of Democratic Government in Hong Kong, a coalition of 1997-oriented liberal pressure groups, threw its support behind the Tiananmen campaign by staging a rally on 20 May, the day Martial Law was declared in Peking.
Despite an approaching typhoon which ordinarily would have left the streets deserted, the march attracted 40,000 people -the largest political demonstration locally for 20 years.
The committee urged a further show of sympathy with the Tiananmen demonstrators the next day.
It was astonished by the result.
At 2pm, about 100,000 people had gathered at its rallying point in Chater Gardens.
By the time the crowd reached Happy Valley, two miles away, it had swelled to between 500,000 and one million people — 10 to 20 per cent of Hong Kong's population.
‘Down with Li Peng,’ chanted the marchers, ‘It is no crime to love your country.
Long live democracy.
Down with repression.
Free the press.’
Shops and offices hung out banners of support.
Ta Kung Pao, the Communist newspaper regarded as the most reliable voice in Hong Kong of the Peking leadership, displayed a poster reading: ‘Wash away the shame of the country.’
Xinhua staff issued a statement declaring ‘firm support for the patriotic democratic movement of the Peking students and the broad masses.
Long live the students!
Long live the people!
Long live the patriotic unity of the Hong Kong compatriots!’
The rally encompassed students, politicians, teachers, religious groups, businessmen, trade unionists and television stars.
The organisers announced the birth of a ‘Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Patriotic Democratic Movement in China’, and proposed a motto: ‘Today Peking, tomorrow Hong Kong’, which was as close as Hong Kong came to making explicit its interest in the struggles to the north.
The newly-formed Alliance channelled cash and supplies to Peking.
On 27 May it organised a ‘Concert for Democracy in China’ at the Happy Valley racecourse, which attracted 300,000 people, and was broadcast live on two television and two radio stations.
Fifty telephone lines received pledged donations.
The event raised £1m, most of which was set aside for investment in a trust fund.
Some was taken in briefcases to Peking.
Some was used for food and shelter, including the red and blue tents which sprang up across Tiananmen Square at the end of May.
After the 21 May rally, demonstrations became relatively commonplace and on a scale which would have been unthinkable a month earlier.
On 23 May, tens of thousands of school students rallied at Xinhua, subscribing 72,000 names to a petition and collecting about £35,000.
On 24 May, 100,000 people marched through the Causeway Bay shopping district.
On 26 May, a rally organised by Christian students attracted 200,000 people.
Students at the University of Hong Kong announced that they would be organising groups in which students could be ‘educated in concepts of democracy and freedom’.
Members of the medical faculty said they would fax press reports of the Peking democracy movement to as many recipients as they could find in China, to overcome censorship.
After a century or so of political apathy, Hong Kong's young people were making up for lost time.
It was a brave new world -but one which, a week later, came crashing down.
On 4 June, the same crowds which had filled Happy Valley with rallies of pop music and bright colours gathered, now in mourning clothes of black and white.
Many had been awake all night, listening with increasing horror to the first confused reports of the massacre in Peking.
The rally was peaceful, the slogans were angry.
‘Down with the regime of killer warlords,’ read one banner.
Thousands queued to sign an unofficial book of condolence at the Xinhua News Agency.
Along its high white granite walls, hundreds of funeral wreaths were coalescing into one great hanging garden of remembrance.
In the days which followed, a whispering campaign against the Peking-owned Bank of China snowballed into a bank run.
Embassies were swamped by would-be migrants.
On 6 June, a demonstration against a Chinese bank in the tough, working class district of Mongkok turned into a night of localised rioting.
The Alliance called a general strike the next day, but cancelled further demonstrations, fearing fresh violence.
Schools and most offices closed; taxis flew black flags; shops draped black banners from their windows; convoys of lorries clogged roads towards the Chinese border.
A mile-long queue of mourners carried a black coffin to the Xinhua building.
Hong Kong's immediate response to the massacre was, naturally enough, horror for the Peking dead.
Then it began to understand the horror of its own predicament.
It had lost all faith in China; it had sided against the leadership which had prevailed; and now, in its hour of need, it found no prospect of comfort from its own supposedly sovereign power, Britain.
The protesters outside Xinhua now waved banners proclaiming: ‘Wake up Maggie Thatcher…
Rescind the agreement with the barbarous Chinese government.’
But in the House of Commons, when Mrs Thatcher rose on 6 June to express ‘revulsion’ for the massacre, she also restated her government's intention to proceed with the handover in 1997.
Sir Geoffrey Howe, then Foreign Secretary, also spoke, but only, from Hong Kong's viewpoint, to add insult to injury.
Grim as events might seem, Britain could not contemplate a ‘massive new immigration commitment’ which could ‘more than double the ethnic minority population of the United Kingdom’.
He also said that the Prince and Princess of Wales would not make a planned visit to China in November ‘so long as those responsible for the atrocities over the past weekend remain in control of the Chinese government’.
China could be trusted with almost six million people in perpetuity, but not the royal family for a weekend.
Sir David Wilson, the Governor of Hong Kong, did his best to reconcile the passions of his subjects with the caution of his masters.
Before the massacre, he had allowed Hong Kong's sympathies for the Peking protests to flow freely, judging that demonstrations could and should be allowed to proceed without police interference.
But after the massacre, as his city raged and mourned, his expressions of distress were encoded in the Mandarin of Whitehall, rather than the Cantonese of Hong Kong.
He ‘deplored’ the violence; he ‘understood’Hong Kong's feelings; he felt Britain needed to provide ‘positive support’to the colony.
The Governor had been due to fly to London on 5 June to testify to the Commons foreign affairs committee on the condition of the colony following the Joint Declaration.
He delayed the trip by two days, arrived in London on 8 June, and went into a series of meetings with the Commons committee, Sir Geoffrey, Mrs Thatcher and the Press.
He urged the Government to restore a ‘right of entry’ to Britain for Hong Kong people, which would fall technically short of right of abode, but would imply surety of refuge.
He was rebuffed.
He pressed particularly for the granting of full British right of abode to Hong Kong's civil servants, a category which, on the broadest interpretation, might embrace 180,000 public-sector employees.
Again he was rebuffed, though with indications of ‘flexibility’ for some smaller number.
He returned to Hong Kong with his own credibility increased, and that of his government diminished.
At the end of June, Sir Geoffrey made his own last vain attempt to reassure Hong Kong, flying in briefly for one of the most uncomfortable few days of his long diplomatic career.
On his return, he said a Bill of Rights would be entrenched into Hong Kong law.
The foreign affairs committee rushed out its revised report, supporting the Government's closed-door policy towards immigration, but saying more emphasis should be placed on introducing democratic government.
The latter view might have been applauded a year previously: after Tiananmen, it sounded merely cynical.
A member of Hong Kong's Legislative Council, Nellie Fong, said the British were ‘trying to wash their hands in the mantle of democracy’.
Another, Selina Chow, said the MPs had ‘an unwavering determination to ignore the single most urgent problem that our people are facing — fear’.
But the question which struck at the heart of the matter was put to Sir Geoffrey on 5 July in the Commons by Jim Sillars, the Scottish Nationalist.
‘If the people in Hong Kong were white,’ he asked, ‘would you be taking the same view?’
Hong Kong Special Report: The spectre haunting Hong Kong's future: The ‘Jewels of the Orient’ are now a string of tarnished beads.
Derek Davies, editor-in-chief of the Far Eastern Economic Review, fears that this is the fate which might befall Thatcherite Hong Kong.
The British government, he says, has capitulated too readily to the demands of Peking
By DEREK DAVIES
OLD ASIA hands still talk nostalgically about the Good Old Days in many of the region's cities and ports, which have since had much of their former life and glamour squeezed out of them by oppressive regimes, overcrowding or economic decline.
Several such cities once claimed the title of ‘Jewel’ or ‘Pearl’of the Orient.
Today they make up a sad string of tarnished beads, from Bombay, Calcutta and Rangoon to Saigon (now Ho Chi Minh City), Hanoi and Canton.
The city which became the most depressing ghost of its former self was Shanghai.
Although it harboured the worst sort of poverty, inequality and exploitation during the 1930s and 1940s, not least because its bright lights attracted millions from the surrounding countryside, it seethed with exuberant life and economic activity.
Then, under Mao Tse-tung's triumphant Communists in the 1950s and 1960s, it declined into a depressing, monochromatic shell of its former self.
Today, the spectre of Shanghai's past haunts the Hong Kong's future.
There was a time, just after Britain and China signed in 1984 their Joint Declaration on the Question of Hong Kong, when the colony looked forward with high hopes to the 50 or more years of capitalist autonomy which both parent-governments had promised would follow its reversion to Chinese sovereignty in 1997.
After two years of difficult negotiations, the agreement seemed to be a brand plucked from the burning.
Hong Kong adopted Deng Xiaoping, China's leader, as its political pin-up boy.
Business and political leaders praised his liberalism and his pragmatism, the assurance with which he presided over China's opening to the West and the dexterity with which he dumped much of its communist ideology.
But they failed to notice, or preferred to ignore, that Deng's ‘liberalism’ was limited exclusively to matters of an economic nature.
When he brusquely told visitors that of course China was going to station units of the People's Liberation Army in Hong Kong after 1997, the colony shuddered.
But it took five more years, and the Tiananmen massacre, for its residents fully to grasp their prospective vulnerability as citizens of China.
Peking officials now seek to excuse the June atrocities by claiming — all too credibly — that they had neither the resources nor the expertise to cope with the escalating civil disorder culminating in the Tiananmen Square assault.
But Hong Kong was chilled as much by the implications of Tiananmen as by the spectacle.
On its own streets, too, massive crowds had gathered during those remarkable weeks to demonstrate support for their Peking compatriots.
There, too, under China's post-1997 regime, Peking would be free to declare Martial Law; and there, too, a garrison of the People's Liberation Army would stand ready to suppress opposition or criticism by whatever means Deng and his successors deemed appropriate.
More grist has filled the pessimists' mill in the years since the Joint Declaration, as Peking has grown more assertive and London more timid.
Within months of the signing ceremony, China was objecting vigorously to British proposals for introducing a meaningful degree of democracy to Hong Kong's political structure.
Britain bowed limply to China's demands — even though this meant weaseling-out of previous pledges to put a representative elected government into Hong Kong before 1997, and even though Peking itself had promised a ‘Hong Kong run by Hong Kong people’.
The Foreign Office and the Hong Kong government tried to camouflage their retreat with windy evasion, talking piously of the need to create ‘convergence’ between what Hong Kong wanted for its future, and what China was prepared to permit.
The British allowed other principles to crumble in the face of Chinese displeasure.
They accepted an objectionable, racially-discriminatory basis on which Hong Kong citizenship would be decided.
They accepted limitations on the jurisdiction of Hong Kong's post-1997 Supreme Court, and proposals which would diminish the independence of judges.
They refrained from responding to a long series of statements by senior Chinese officials which contradicted both the letter and the spirit of the Joint Declaration -including an assurance, for example, that the post-1997 Hong Kong press would be free for ‘as long as it did not publish anything detrimental to China's national interest’.
London was all too obviously selling Hong Kong down the Pearl River, despite its protestations to the contrary.
Even now, and though the events of June triggered a brief period of reappraisal, the British still seem besotted by their vision of China as a billion-strong market for their goods and services — and either unaware, or unimpressed, that their exports to Hong Kong itself are currently worth three times as much as those to its northern neighbour.
The optimists dismiss China's ballooning inflation and swelling money supply as mere potholes on its road to the level of prosperity already enjoyed by many of its East Asian neighbours.
Nothing, as responses to the June crackdown have confirmed, can puncture their confidence in Peking's authority or China's stability.
Already, President George Bush is talking about a full restoration of Sino-US relations.
Other nations, especially Japan, wait impatiently in the wings with their offers of soft loans.
To those who see China in primarily economic terms, the ‘golden goose’ argument comes most easily: that its government would never be so foolish as to constrict or repress Hong Kong, the tiny territory which has proved such a powerful catalyst for the growth of its hinterland.
In eight years, such optimists claim, China will be adjusting to Hong Kong, rather than vice versa.
Great tracts of the Middle Kingdom will be virtually indistinguishable from the tiny entrepreneurial enclave.
Already, China is breeding its own Hong Kong-style businessmen — financiers who welcome foreign investors into joint enterprises to build everything from factories to golf courses, former peasants making fortunes from rural industries, former factory workers opening photographic shops and beauty salons.
Such optimism may still prove to be justified: but the bets are much riskier, now that China's leadership has shown its continued reliance on the mailed fist and its continued vulnerability to factional disputes.
While Deng is doing his best to assure the world that nothing has changed, that China will push ahead with its reforms and will hold its door open for foreign business and investment, the post-Tiananmen purging of liberal intellectual elements and the new emphasis on ‘political education’ have enormously strengthened the position of the Communist Party's hardline Marxists, led by Yang Shangkun, the president, and Li Peng, the prime minister.
The People's Liberation Army has strong-armed its way back into the centre of China's political power-structure, after a decade of relative decline.
As a consequence, though Deng is advertising the moderate Jiang Zemin, recently appointed Party general secretary, as his heir-apparent, the hardliners may have it in their power to change China's course when the 85-year-old leader dies.
Britain, too, has been reshuffling its politicians.
A new Foreign Secretary, John Major, has replaced Sir Geoffrey Howe.
Francis Maude has replaced the unimpressive Lord Glenarthur as the minister in charge of Hong Kong affairs.
Though both are still being briefed, there are indications that they would like to use the shock of the Tiananmen massacre as a negotiating tool with which to recover some of the concessions made by their predecessors in respect of Hong Kong.
But that hope seems slim.
Mildly critical statements have been greeted angrily by Peking as intolerable acts of interference in China's sovereign affairs.
Senior Chinese officials have blamed the damage to Hong Kong's confidence variously on Hong Kong people themselves, for daring to demonstrate; and on the British, an astonishing claim which was made by China's principal representative in Hongkong, Xu Jiatun, the director of the New China News Agency, who said that the responsibility for restoring confidence in Hong Kong rested with London.
Rather than match China's firmness, it can be confidently predicted, the Hong Kong authorities will follow past form, cease muttering about their shock and horror over Tiananmen, and return to bland assurances that the negotiations with Peking about a post-1997 ‘Basic Law’ for Hong Kong are going well.
This patronising obfuscation was never very convincing.
Now, after every Hong Kong citizen with a television set has seen how Peking treats its dissenters, it offers nothing to a public whose mood has become one of restrained panic.
Hong Kong was always a free-wheeling, highly materialistic city, with more than its full share of pirates and crooks.
Today, the pressure to make hay while the sun fitfully shines has led to a massive slump in both public and private standards.
The professions have lost many of their better men; many of those who remain are concentrating on maximising profits and fees to feather nests in the US, Canada or Australia.
It has been estimated that about $280m a month has been flowing out of Hong Kong into the city of Vancouver this year.
Scandals have proliferated in business and banking, and have tainted the civil service and the judiciary.
Retiring public servants now routinely move into jobs where their previous contacts and responsibilities can enrich themselves and their employers.
Recruitment is increasingly difficult, particularly to the police force where morale has sunk to a new low.
The sense of community has not been improved by Britain's promise of an ungenerous package which will limit refuge to those deemed to have served the Crown well, or to hold ‘sensitive’ positions.
For obvious reasons, the people of Hong Kong have long been reluctant to speak their minds.
Chinese and expatriates alike, they have the resilience of refugees.
They have survived civil unrests, bank runs, the Cultural Revolution, and soldiered on in silence.
When Tiananmen finally broke their reserve, a million or more, a fifth of the population, turned out for the biggest of several demonstrations in sympathy with the Peking students.
In its wake, tens of thousands are slipping off, quietly once more, to sanctuaries abroad.
The Hong Kong government, no longer able to down-play the exodus, admitted that at least 45,000 of its best and brightest left last year.
The 1989 total is likely to be at least a third higher.
If this trend continues, Hong Kong could lose 750,000 or more of its better-qualified people, leaving behind a sandwich-society with capital on top, unskilled workers beneath, but little or no middle-class in between.
The emigration has been encouraged by a series of British Nationality Acts stripping even the 3.25 million people holding Hong Kong ‘British’ passports of any rights to residence in Britain.
The sense of betrayal has been deepened by London's refusal to acknowledge any moral responsibility to provide general refuge; instead, it has claimed that domestic political considerations demand the exclusion of potentially millions of Chinese immigrants.
It has, meanwhile, steadfastly ignored the argument that people who cannot get out will do their best to leave; while those with the ‘insurance policy’ of a passport in their back pockets are more likely to stay on and try to make their home-town work.
Those who ultimately fail to get out of Hong Kong will do what Hong Kong people have always done.
They will adjust, bending like bamboos before the prevailing wind from the north.
As they do so, yet another Asian city -ironically in the circumstances, the most Thatcherite of them all — will be dying.
Hong Kong Special Report: Slogans
By DEREK DAVIES
‘Hong Kong People Rule Hong Kong’: the slogan propagated by China during the 1982-84 sovereignty negotiations, to encourage popular local support for its demand that Britain withdraw completely from the administration of Hong Kong on 30 June 1997.
The ‘Basic Law’: a mini-constitution for post-1997 Hong Kong now being prepared by a Peking-appointed committee.
Two drafts have already been published.
A final version is due to be endorsed by China's parliament, the National People's Congress, in March.
‘Convergence’: China's strategy for influencing Hong Kong's development in the remaining years of British rule.
It argues that Britain must move Hong Kong into alignment with the terms of the Basic Law before 1997, to avoid instability during the transition itself.
Hong Kong Special Report: Future Leaders — Martin Lee Chu-Ming
By DEREK DAVIES
DEPENDING on who you talk to, Martin Lee is the most admired or most reviled public figure in Hong Kong; a man of principle and courage, or a megalomaniac; a defender of democracy, or an advocate of chaos.
Reputedly Hong Kong's highest-paid barrister before politics began to consume virtually all his time, he has many fans among other lawyers, who elected him to the Legislative Council in 1985 and 1988 as their profession's representative.
A few businessmen admit privately to admiring his honesty, if not always his fervour.
The British still tend to treat him with a faintly hostile embarrassment: as well they might, since for the past four years, his principal message has been condemnation of their duplicity in, as he sees it, backing away from promises to introduce democratic government by 1997.
If Hong Kong does espouse democracy, Martin Lee will be unbeatable.
Alone of its present legislators, he accepts the demands of grassroots politics, building support through ceaseless slogging, always available for a meeting here, a press conference there, a Sunday rally or a television interview.
He unnerves and often offends colleagues on the Legislative Council, many of whom believe their institution is safer in the hands of appointees and amateurs than of populists.
It is easy enough to say What Makes Martin Run: a sincere belief that Hong Kong needs true democracy, even if most of its present leaders disagree.
The more difficult question is how long he can continue as a one-man movement.
He has been one of the Legislative Council's most diligent members, a demanding enough job; he accepted China's offer of a seat on the Basic Law Drafting Committee, helping to write Hong Kong's post-1997 mini-constitution, and was embroiled in more unsuccessful arguments for direct elections, opposed by mainland communists and Hong Kong conservatives.
He has been an energetic supporter of the democracy movement in China; and of Hong Kong campaigns to secure right of abode in Britain.
Not surprisingly, from time to time, his fatigue shows: the voice cracks, the temper frays, the judgement falters.
He never seems to take time off: a friend tells of how Joey, Mr Lee's young son, once protested by scrawling his own name in his father's diary for an appointment.
If Hong Kong ever does achieve democracy, it will owe Mr Lee a monument: for the time being, it owes him a holiday.
The monster of Greater Lebanon: In the first of two articles on the origins and architects of the situation in Lebanon, Robert Fisk describes the events which Muslim historians would later refer to as ‘the betrayal’
By ROBERT FISK
IN THE FADING sepia postcards on sale in the antiquarian shop in Makhoul Street, General Henri Gouraud appears as a stiff little figure in a dark kepi, his right hand held out to a British officer.
The 69-year-old photograph shows him arriving in Beirut in the aftermath of the First World War.
The British officer got there first, but knew there was a secret agreement for the French to control Lebanon.
To the right of the picture, ignored by Gouraud, is a small group of Beirut notables, preparing for what several Lebanese Muslim historians would later refer to as ‘the betrayal’.
Its effects were to be felt long after Gouraud and his successor, General Weygand, had died.
Today there are a few very old men in Lebanon who have lived to watch the monster which the general helped to create.
For most Arabs, the original betrayal occurred at the height of the First World War, when the allied powers made conflicting promises to each other, as well as to the Jews and Arabs.
Britain told the Arabs they would receive independence in return for help in the struggle against the Turks.
But they also said the Jews would have a homeland in Palestine and agreed that when the war ended the French would control Syria and what was then called Mount Lebanon.
As the Turkish forces collapsed, King Faisal's army advanced on Aleppo, while Arab cities in the Levant rose up.
Even today Lebanon's Christian leadership is unwilling to admit that Lebanon has an ‘Arab identity’, although the people of Beirut, Tripoli and Baalbek joined the rising.
Even then, however, this fact was to be obscured.
Here, for example, is an extract from a memorandum to a US delegate to the Paris Peace Conference by Lawrence of Arabia, who had led the Arabs to victory while torturing himself with the secret knowledge of his part in their betrayal: ‘On 1 October (1918), the people of Beyrout, in emulation of the Damascenes, turned on their Turkish garrison of 700 men, and took them prisoner…
On 8 October allied troops entered Beyrout.
The Arab rising there had been suppressed in the newspapers, so that the French troops might claim the honour of its liberation from the Turks.’
At the Paris conference the Lebanese Christian Maronites fought hard to have their small area of Mount Lebanon extended into a Greater Lebanon, which would include Tripoli, Sidon, Tyre and Baalbek at Syria's expense.
The French, traditional protectors of the Christians since the Druze massacres of 1860, at first resisted, but the Maronite patriarch, Elias Hoyek, personally demanded the expansion of Mount Lebanon.
He did this even though the large Maronite majority in Mount Lebanon would be much reduced if the extra territories were taken from Syria.
If the Christians obtained their enlarged Lebanon, they would only be in a small majority over the Sunni and Shia Muslims.
The Shias of the south, the Sunnis of Sidon and Tripoli, would not only oppose such a state, but produce more children than the Maronites, who would then be a minority in the country they had created.
But the Maronites persisted and on 1 September 1920, Gouraud, the newly-installed French high commissioner, proclaimed from his Beirut residence ‘the state of Greater Lebanon’.
It was a fateful, many would say tragic, announcement, for from that day the seeds of Lebanon's disintegration were sown.
In retrospect, it was ironic that a year after Syria was partitioned, another small ethnic group took the opposite path to protect its identity.
While Lebanon's Christians were demanding more territory, Protestants in the north of Ireland were safeguarding their future statelet within the United Kingdom by accepting less than they might have claimed.
Under the Government of Ireland Act of December 1921, Ireland was partitioned.
Northern Ireland came into being, but only after the Protestants had decided to give three of the counties of historic Ulster to the new Irish Free State.
The Unionist leader, James Craig, abandoned the Protestants in those three counties because their Catholic population was so high.
Thus the Protestants preserved their future, although it was to be one which mimicked, in smaller fashion, the tragedy of Lebanon.
If the Maronites had taken a similar path, perhaps seeking a confederated state within a Greater Lebanon, the catastrophe that befell their grandsons might have been averted.
The Christians gave no indication at the time that they foresaw any such developments, although Arab nationalists in Lebanon and Syria at first refused to recognise that a nation-state existed which was separate from Syria.
This is the genesis of so much of the rhetoric from Syrian leaders today who talk of Syria and Lebanon as ‘one country’.
Despite all the criticism of President Assad, there is no evidence that Syria wishes to annex Lebanon.
But the Arab nationalist belief that the two countries contain one Arab people — that there was therefore something immutably wrong in the creation of Greater Lebanon — has never been abandoned.
Maronite collaboration with the French — and the support for a Maronite state which later came from Israel — contaminated the community in the eyes of its opponents.
The change in the Christian community from the largest community to minority status has never been officially acknowledged in Lebanese statistics.
The last official census was in 1932, when France was still exercising its League of Nations mandate for Lebanon in neo-colonial fashion.
It showed that the Maronites constituted 29 per cent of the population (229,378), the Sunnis 22 per cent(175,925) and the Shias 19 per cent (154,208).
When the Maronites were added to other Christian groups (Greek Catholics, Greek Orthodox, Armenians and others), the Christians formed 52 per cent of the population.
Together with the Druze, the Sunnis and Shias comprised a Muslim total of 48 per cent.
The French were not blind to the bitterness of many Muslims in Lebanon, especially the Sunnis, who under Turkish rule had held a privileged position.
The Turks, after all, were also Sunnis.
When the French proclaimed the Republic of Greater Lebanon in 1926, they proposed a Greek Orthodox as president, because he would be acceptable to Muslims, as well as trusted by the French and the Maronites.
But in 1932 the French suspended the constitution to prevent election of a Muslim as president.
For the Maronites, a Muslim leader represented the victory of Arab nationalism (and Islam) over a country which they and the French regarded as a pro-Western, Christian homeland.
US steps in to back the League
From ROBERT FISK in Taif, Saudi Arabia
THE United States has discreetly intervened in the gathering of Lebanese parliamentarians in Taif by sending two State Department officials to emphasise Washington's support for political reform in Lebanon.
David Sutherfield — who was a political counsellor at the US embassy in east Beirut until American diplomats were evacuated a month ago — arrived here over the weekend in the company of another American official for talks with Hussein Husseini, the Speaker of the Lebanese Parliament.
Christian deputies have been trying to obtain some form of timetable for a Syrian military withdrawal before accepting political reforms, but at their fifth meeting yesterday, the 62 MPs — half of them Christians — were persuaded to debate the future powers of a Christian Maronite president.
The Arab League's proposals call for cabinet veto power over presidential decisions, thus reducing Maronite control over the government and more accurately reflecting the strength of Lebanon's majority Muslim population.
Mr Sutherfield and his colleague, Richard Johns, presented to Mr Husseini a letter from 16 members of the US Congress who supported the league's peace plan.
According to Lebanese Muslim deputies, the Americans assured Mr Husseini that the Bush administration was ‘100 per cent’ behind the Arab League.
For their part, the Saudis are applying more pressure upon the Lebanese Assembly members.
Prince Saud al-Feisal, the Foreign Minister, has been calling upon the MPs to urge them to put the future of their country before any factional ambitions.
He has been telling them that both the Soviet Union and the United States have reiterated their support for the league's plan and that political reform is the only way for the Lebanese to solve their crisis.
What this means is that Christian Maronite domination of the Lebanese body politic appears to be effectively at an end.
Whatever future peace Lebanon can obtain, it is not going to be under the power-sharing system that existed before the start of the civil war.
If the parliamentary debates here have aligned Christians against Muslims they have also proved that both sides appreciate the need for change.
MPs spent two hours discussing the make-up of a committee to draw up a new system of presidential power and cabinet veto, and it was significant that the 12 names mentioned for the committee included several Christian deputies, but only one Maronite.
BEIRUT — Syrian forces freed a Lebanese air force pilot who had been picked up by a gunboat after ditching his plane in the Mediterranean yesterday, Reuter reports.
Security sources said Major George Serhal was handed over to the former Lebanese president, Suleiman Franjieh.
Christian political sources had warned that unless Major Serhal was freed immediately the incident would be a severe blow to Arab-sponsored peace efforts.
Britain and US ‘gave new rockets to the mujahedin'
From AHMED RASHID in Kabul
THE HEAD of Afghanistan's Supreme Defence Council has accused Britain and the United States of supplying the mujahedin with long-range cluster-bomb rockets and additional supplies of the British-made Blowpipe anti-aircraft missiles.
He also said that the Soviet Union was ready to supply any sophisticated weapons that the Afghan regime wanted.
Lieutenant-General Abdul Haq Ulomi, who heads the country's most powerful military and political body, said in an interview the two countries were testing the new surface-to-surface rockets in Afghanistan by supplying them to the mujahedin to use on Kabul.
‘These new cluster rockets have a range of 30 to 40 miles, and each one has 90 small mines in it.
These are weapons of mass destruction,’ he said in his well-guarded office near the presidential palace in Kabul.
The mujahedin have been using US-supplied Chinese and Egyptian-made rockets in recent years to shell Kabul, but there has been no previous evidence of Western rockets being given to the guerrillas.
There are no American or British diplomats in Kabul to answer the allegations because both countries pulled out their embassy staffs before the Soviet troop withdrawal last February.
General Ulomi said that as more powerful rockets were provided to the guerrillas, so the Afghan army is extending its security perimeter around the city.
The outer security ring is about 22 miles from the city and this would be extended to about 62 miles as deals are struck with local tribes, he said.
The guerrillas still fire rockets from well inside the security perimeter.
General Ulomi also accused Britain of sending more Blowpipes to the mujahedin.
Last week an Afghan army helicopter crashed between Bagram and Kabul, killing 26 soldiers.
The government attributed the crash to a technical fault, but foreign diplomats speculate that the helicopter was shot down by a Blowpipe.
Britain first supplied Blowpipes to the guerrillas in 1986 and since then there have been no reports of additional supplies.
The combination of Blowpipes and US-supplied Stinger missiles has been effective in the past, because the Blowpipe is best against low-flying aircraft, while the Stingers are best against high-flying aircraft.
In a long briefing on the country's military situation, General Ulomi said the Afghan army has proved since the Soviet withdrawal it is too powerful to be defeated and that the military option pursued by Pakistan and the US will fail.
He said the military's main task is to keep open main roads and supply routes, and that about 60,000 former guerrillas are acting as pro-government militias, helping the defence forces.
‘There will soon be 100,000 such militias, which will mean we have won over two thirds of the opposition,’ he said.
‘Another 45,000 guerrillas have secret protocols with us not to fight.’
He strongly denied the suggestion that the militias were unruly, and said they were being slowly incorporated into the regular army.
He exuded confidence, and even cracked jokes, at what he described as the pitiful state of the mujahedin's strategy conducted by Pakistan.
He and his brother, Colonel-General Nurul Haq Ulomi, the governor of Kandahar, play a decisive role in Kabul's military strategy.
Asked if the Russians had provided the Afghans with the latest MiG-29s, he said: ‘Anything we desire will be given to us but we do not want to escalate the war.’
He said the Afghan army had enough ammunition to defeat even a regular army.
Pakistani regular army units took part in the summer fighting around Jalalabad, he said, but had moved back, although Pakistani artillery experts, commandos and officers are still fighting with the mujahedin.
Pakistan has frequently denied such allegations.
TEHRAN — Afghan mujahedin leaders and delegates from the Soviet Union, Pakistan and Iran began a three-day meeting here yesterday to discuss a future government for Kabul and an end to outside interference in Afghanistan, AFP reports.
The Iranian press said a solution to the Afghan war was unlikely.
Aquino in favour of US base plebiscite
From KEVIN HAMLIN in Manila
A PROPOSAL for a referendum on the future of US military bases in the Philippines has paved the way for the possibility of keeping them there.
Opinion polls show that most Filipinos want the bases, which are the biggest employer after the government, to stay.
One diplomat said he saw the referendum, proposed by an important ally of President Corazon Aquino, as ‘a way to manoeuvre around the Senate block, to isolate the Senate as an elite that is unresponsive to public opinion’.
The referendum, put forward by Ramon Mitra, the speaker of the House of Representatives, was backed by Cardinal Jaime Sin.
Fifteen members of the 23-member senate, which must ratify any new treaty with a two-thirds majority, want the US bases, which provide 68,000 jobs, out of the country.
Mr Mitra said Mrs Aquino ‘has agreed to (the referendum) in principle, and most likely she will ask the senators to look at the proposal with an open mind’.
But senators opposed to the bases vowed to block its passage, calling it illegal.
During a visit to Manila last week, Dan Quayle, the US Vice-President, expressed confidence that Manila and Washington could reach a new agreement.
Communists opposed to the bases shot dead two US base employees during his visit.
The lease on Clark Air Base and Subic Bay naval base, two of the biggest military facilities in the world and the centre of the United States' military presence in Asia, expires in 1991.
Washington and Manila will in December begin discussions on a new lease.
Mrs Aquino has said she is ‘keeping her options open’ on whether to renew the lease, but diplomats say the US is privately confident her administration will agree to a five-to 10-year extension.
But they add that Washington knows the Senate will be a difficult obstacle to overcome.
Diplomats say the referendum would probably violate the constitution.
‘There are hopes that the senate can be out-manoeuvred and forced into reluctant acquiescence,’ the diplomat said.
Speculators haunt Cambodia's Riviera: Cambodia hopes to restore Kep to its former glory as a holiday resort.
But Terry McCarthy sees little immediate prospect of package tours
By TERRY MCCARTHY
THE SEAFRONT at Kep, on the southern coast of Cambodia, is lined with villas built in the dashing concrete style of the 1950s.
During Prince Sihanouk's rule, he and the Phnom Penh aristocracy would drive down to Kep for weekend parties and gambling in the casino.
By the early 1970s, the Khmer Rouge controlled the surrounding countryside, and the parties stopped.
Since Pol Pot took power in 1975, Kep has been deserted, and the villas stand windowless and empty.
The locals say the villas are haunted, but party officials from the provincial capital of Kampot, 15 miles away, have no such fears.
In 1987, when hopes of a political settlement in Cambodia were raised, the People's Committee ditched Marx and quickly moved into real estate, buying up all the villas in anticipation of a tourist boom.
Sok Hay, the 35-year-old head of propaganda for the Kampot People's Committee, proudly showed the two-storey villa he had bought for 20,000 riels (£65).
Today, he could sell it for 300,000 riels, he said.
And the tourists have not started coming yet.
Even Hun Sen, the Prime Minister, has asked the province committee to find him a village in Kep, according to Mr Sok Hay.
This may be difficult, because most of the villas have already been spoken for —‘except Sihanouk's house.
That hasn't been sold’.
It stands on a small hill, higher than the other villas, with a private approach road and a large balcony looking out to sea.
Whether the government, which is collecting the money from the sale of the villas, was hoping Prince Sihanouk would come back, or whether no one dared to take over the house, Mr Sok Hay would not say.
Further down the seafront, past the pedestal on which a statue of a naked woman, now smashed, used to stand, is the domed casino.
It is set back from the road with a sweeping drive and an ornamental fish-pond in front, now stagnant.
The gaming tables are long gone, and the building is now used as a cattle shelter.
The cowherds have covered the walls with graffiti.
One grotesque figure with a snarling beast's head and enlarged genitals is captioned ‘Pol Pot’.
Close by are the old Shell petrol pumps, which became a killing station for the Khmer Rouge.
The underground petrol tank was used as a mass grave for the bodies of those judged to be tainted by Western decadence.
Human bones and scraps of clothing are still strewn through the undergrowth.
Kep is suffering the same fate as the 800-year-old temples of Angkor in the north of Cambodia.
The luxuries of the past are being reclaimed by the jungle in both places.
But the authorities in Kampot are already dreaming of an influx of tourists, and have ordered the villagers in Kep to start clearing some of the undergrowth from the villas.
A travel company from Thailand has contacted the People's Committee about the possibility of bringing in tourists, and the governor of the province, An He, is keen to talk to the few foreigners who pass through about his hypothetical Riviera.
But only days before Mr Sok Hay stood in front of his villa speculating on how much his property might be worth in the future, Khmer Rouge guerrillas had ambushed a Phnom Penh army patrol in the hills close by.
Unfortunately for the landowning gentry of the Kampot People's Committee, Kep is likely to remain slightly too exotic for package tour operators in the foreseeable future.
Cambodian guerrillas raiding from Thailand
By TERRY MCCARTHY
BANGKOK — Cambodian guerrillas are staging raids from Thailand on government positions in the northwest of the country but are not trying to hold territory, a guerrilla spokesman said yesterday, Reuter reports.
Maen Reuan, a spokesman for the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, said fighters of the non-communist movement killed eight soldiers in attacks on government outposts on Sunday.
He said that up to 1,000 guerrillas were trying to rout or encircle government posts to force defenders to flee.
The KPNLF, which launched an attack on Saturday, four days after the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops, had given up attempts to occupy the town of Svay Cheak and the capital of Banteay Meanchey province, Sisophon.
Crew survives 4 months adrift
By TERRY MCCARTHY
WELLINGTON (AFP, AP)— Three New Zealanders and an American given up for dead were found alive yesterday after drifting for four months on an upturned trimaran in the south Pacific.
The ordeal ended when they were picked up from Great Barrier Island, 123 days after they had set out from New Zealand.
They were thin and weak, but looked surprisingly well.
The skipper, John Glennie, said he and his crew members ‘needed a miracle, and we got one’.
Mr Glennie and the other men, Phillip Hoffman, Rick Hellriegel and Jim Nalepka, were washed ashore on Saturday night, after drifting since 3 June.
The men said they had survived by eating seabirds, fish and seaweed, in addition to a limited supply of stores, which included apples and kiwi fruit, mouldy rice, tinned soft drinks and a small amount of fresh water.
The four, in their thirties and forties, had set out on board the 43ft Rose Noelle on 1 June for a three-week voyage to Tonga, but were reported overdue on 24 June.
An aerial search of the area proved fruitless, and they were presumed dead.
Mr Glennie, who designed the trimaran, said it had turned over about 700 nautical miles east of the International Date Line during a gale.
They were trapped inside, but were able to cut a hole through the hull.
Mr Glennie activated an emergency locator beacon, and they were confident of being rescued within a week.
He said there was never a day when he did not believe they would survive.
Around the World
By BRUCE PALLING
Uncle Sam's man in Madrid THE BEST way to become an American ambassador to a Western country is not to be a good diplomat, but merely to contribute hefty sums to the winning presidential candidate.
Spaniards are now discovering the rude truth of this following the naming of the Bush administration's ambassadorial choice for Madrid.
He is Joseph Zappala, a Florida property developer, who has never been to Spain and perhaps, more to the point, speaks no Spanish.
American diplomats were so appalled by Mr Zappala's nomination that they leaked to the Spanish press a copy of the misnamed competence certificate, which is sent to the Senate, which has the final say on ambassadorial posts.
Mr Zappala's qualifications, even padded out, only filled three paragraphs.
All that could be dredged up was that, apart from owning a property firm, Mr Zappala is also an active member of the Florida Policemen's Athletic League.
The second paragraph goes straight to the core: Mr Zappala is a member of the 100 Team of Republicans, who chipped in with more than $100,000 (£62,000) to elect Mr Bush.
The report says ‘Mr Zappala's…experience…along with his civic activities make him an ideal candidate for the US embassy’.
Spaniards and many diplomats may think otherwise.
Gentler salute President FW de Klerk's government is very keen to present a modern progressive image, to dispel any nagging doubts the rest of the world may harbour about what a deeply repulsive ideology apartheid really is.
In line with this cosmetic policy, out went the sjambok, the rhino-hide whip used by police.
As another step in this direction, the South African army is toning down its salute from the existing bellicose method of raising the entire arm above the shoulder.
Instead, General Jannie Geldenhuys, head of the armed forces, has decreed that when saluting, soldiers will now raise their right forearm only and touch their eyebrow or cap with the tip of the index finger.
The general told a news conference that it had not been copied from the Americans, but because it was an ‘easier, natural movement’.
Taxing problems The arrest of the former head of the Mexican Treasury's personnel section may go some way to explaining why government departments always appear to be overstaffed, but incapable of offering decent service.
Amadeo Franco Perez allegedly spent six years sending himself more than £1.25m of pay cheques for non-existent employees and selling fake tax receipts.
He and nine accomplices were said to have hacked into a bank's computer and gained access to the Treasury's accounts.
When in Auckland A cultural misunderstanding has led to a young Cook Islander being fined £75 by a New Zealand judge for squeezing the buttocks of two white women in a Wellington street.
Auckland District Court heard that the 20-year-old man ‘was merely trying to attract their attention, so he could start a conversation’ and that such behaviour was perfectly normal on his archipelago.
However, the judge said that even though the man promised not to do it again, he found such behaviour extremely offensive and ordered him to give £50 to each of the women.
Court faces dilemma of right to life and death
From JOHN LICHFIELD in Washington
THE GREAT modern, moral questions of the right to life and the right to death will dominate what may be a landmark session of the US Supreme Court which begins this week.
With the political dust not yet settled from a controversial abortion ruling in July, the nine Supreme Court justices must rule in the next nine months on three other attempts by US states to regulate abortion as well as the right of parents to terminate the life of a brain-dead daughter.
The cases should provide evidence on the conservative course of a court heavily influenced by appointments made during the Reagan years.
But its decisions also have implications for an international debate on the frontiers of medical science, morality, government action and individual privacy.
The three abortion cases, which may be reached in December, are unlikely to lead to a clean reversal of Roe v Wade, the 1973 Supreme Court ruling which granted an absolute right to abortion in the first three months of pregnancy and an almost unrestricted right in the next three.
On the basis of a 5-4 majority in a Missouri case judged in July, the cases are expected to lead to expansion of the right of individual states to pass laws regulating abortions.
Laurence Tribe, Professor of Law at Harvard University, said he thought the session would continue to chip away at the broad right to abortion.
‘The court may never say Roe v Wade is overruled, but it is likely to say, ‘Roe v Wade…never heard of it’.'
In two cases, involving a Minnesota state law and an Ohio law, the court must decide whether a teenager should inform one or both parents before having an abortion.
The Minnesota law, requiring both parents be told, was upheld by a local federal appeals court, since the parents' consent was not required.
But another federal appeals court struck down an Ohio law requiring a doctor to inform at least one parent before performing an abortion on a teenager, on grounds that it infringed Roe v Wade.
In the third abortion case before the Supreme Court, the state of Illinois is appealing against a federal appeals court decision to quash a law which obliged abortion clinics to be designed and equipped like small hospitals.
Perhaps the most emotive case of the Supreme Court's term involves a young Missouri woman kept alive for six years in what doctors call a ‘persistent vegetative state’.
The Missouri Supreme Court rejected efforts by her parents to allow Mary Beth Cruzan, 32, to be disconnected from her life-support machines.
The state court said the state's ‘unqualified interest in life’ should prevail over their assertion that her right to privacy gave her the right to die gracefully.
There is no previous Supreme Court ruling on this subject, although state courts have made conflicting judgments since the 1970s.
Race politics prove the wrong card for Giuliani
From LEONARD DOYLE in New York
THE TACTICS which brought George Bush back from the political dead in last year's presidential election have backfired badly on Rudolph Giuliani, the Republican candidate for mayor of New York.
Five weeks before the election, he lags behind his black opponent, David Dinkins, in the polls.
Now his campaign is threatening to self-destruct because of a controversy over racial politics involving the comedian Jackie Mason.
The Bush campaign used the story of a convicted black murderer and rapist to convince voters that Michael Dukakis was soft on crime — especially black crime.
The Giuliani campaign — advised by Roger Ailes, the media guru who turned the Bush campaign around — has been trying to persuade Jewish voters that Mr Dinkins is a clone of Jesse Jackson and no friend of Israel.
The racial card has been used to effect in previous New York elections, but in Mr Giuliani's case he is being criticised as an opportunist for his attacks on the city's first black Democratic nominee.
The problems began when Mr Mason said that Jewish support for Mr Dinkins was a manifestation of Jewish guilt.
‘There is a sick Jewish problem of voting for a black man no matter how unfit he is for the job,’ he said.
‘All you have to do is be black and don't curse the Jews directly, and the Jew will vote for the black in a second.
Jews are sick with complexities.
They feel guilty for the black predicament, as if the Jews caused it.’
Mr Mason resigned as a Giuliani volunteer when the remarks were published in the Village Voice newspaper.
Then Newsweek magazine dredged up some remarks which Mr Mason made at a lunch a few weeks earlier.
The comedian had described Mr Dinkins as a ‘fancy shvartzer with a moustache’, using a derogatory Yiddish term for black servants or employees.
To make matters worse, Newsweek said that ‘Giuliani joined in the nervous laughter’ and made no attempt to rebuke Mr Mason.
From extradition chief to lawyer for extraditables
From MARC CHAMPION in Washington
THE Colombian drug wars have added a new variation to Washington's ‘revolving door’ syndrome, whereby former US officials use the knowledge they gained in government for profit on returning to the private sector.
It now appears the lawyer representing some of the drug cartel's ‘extraditables’ once headed the Justice Department's extradition division.
Michael Abbell worked at the Justice Department for 17 years until 1984, the last five of them as first the director and later deputy director of the Office of International Affairs.
According to Mr Abbell, his case is of interest only because of the nature of his clients.
It is a rule of honour in the US legal profession that all criminals equally deserve representation, drug barons included.
And, according to Mr Abbell, it is common for US attorneys to use their experience in government once they move to private practice.
Yet at the same time as he was representing members of the Cali cartel, Mr Abbell was on Capitol Hill lobbying for changes in the international treaty on extradition which would favour the defendants in such cases.
Last month, at the height of terrorist violence in Colombia, he also floated a ‘compromise’ plan between the US and the cartel leaders, under which the drug lords would stand trial in the US, but return to Colombia to serve their sentences.
State Department officials variously described that idea as ‘surreal’ and ‘wacky’last week, rejecting out of hand any negotiations with the cartel.
‘The question that has to be put is, do we have a cartel lobbyist in Washington?’ said Jack Blum, a former chief investigator for the Senate Foreign Relations sub-committee on terrorism and drugs.
But Mr Abbell is adamant that he is doing nothing untoward.
When he appeared in a Spanish court as an expert witness concerning US extradition laws for Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela, otherwise known as ‘The Chessplayer’, the prosecutor pilloried him as a turncoat.
In Los Angeles, prosecutors yesterday charged four men in connection with the world's largest drugs seizure.
The four, believed to be Mexicans and described as major drug dealers, were arrested on Friday after police seized 20 tons of cocaine from a Los Angeles warehouse.
‘They are about as large as you get outside Colombia,’ said a Los Angeles county district attorney, Ira Reiner.
BOGOTA — The most important drug suspect seized since Colombia began its big crackdown on the cocaine barons six weeks ago will shortly be flown to Bogota to face smuggling charges, authorities said here yesterday, Reuter reports.
Evaristo Porras Ardila, linked to the powerful Medellin cocaine cartel, was being held in the south-western city of Pasto after being deported from Ecuador on Sunday night.
The authorities said that Mr Porras, who was deported on the grounds of having an expired visa and using falsified documents, had lived in Ecuador under an assumed name since 1987 and ran a Quito company trading in farm machinery, glassware and industrial security equipment.
Mr Porras is not on the list of 12 ‘most wanted’ suspects whose extradition is sought by the US.
Bogota's El Tiempo newspaper said Mr Porras was the administrator of the Medellin cartel's operations in southern Colombia, especially its Amazon cocaine laboratories on the borders with Brazil and Peru.
President Rodrigo Borja of Ecuador said the decision to extradite Mr Porras was a sign of support for Colombia's crackdown.
Moscow reviews aid to Managua
From DAVID ADAMS in Managua
THE SOVIET Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, arrives in Nicaragua today, the highest-ranking Moscow official to visit the country in its 10 years of revolutionary rule.
The hastily-arranged visit has been prompted by growing concern in the Soviet Union over the state of economic ties between the two countries.
As a by-product of perestroika, Moscow is keen to reduce and restructure its aid to Nicaragua, and to put it on a more commercial footing.
Officially, the visit marks the 10th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the two countries.
But its last-minute scheduling following disarmament talks in the United States between Mr Shevardnadze and the US Secretary of State, James Baker, suggests a more urgent agenda.
During those talks, Mr Shevardnadze said all military aid to Nicaragua has been frozen since the beginning of the year, but that weapons may still be reaching Nicaragua from Cuba.
Mr Shevardnadze will be travelling from Managua to Havana tomorrow, where he will meet the Cuban President, Fidel Castro.
The Sandinistas recognise that perestroika will bring changes in their relationship with Moscow, which has in recent years been worth around £625m annually, according to European diplomats.
‘The USSR has gone through very profound changes and these changes require a reappraisal of our commercial and economic relations,’ said President Daniel Ortega.
The Sandinistas may also use the visit to discuss US foreign policy in Central America, and the question of whether improved Soviet-US relations could lead to a lifting of the US economic embargo on Nicaragua.
Yazov marches into history at the Pentagon
By MARC CHAMPION
WASHINGTON — General Dmitri Yazov became the first Soviet defence minister to visit the US yesterday, beginning a week of talks as the guest of his opposite number, Dick Cheney, writes Marc Champion.
Mr Cheney greeted General Yazov, who was resplendent in his uniform and military ribbons, and the Soviet ambassador to the US, Yuri Dubinin, in the pouring rain outside the Pentagon.
The two men then retired for goodwill talks, which one US official described as ‘not negotiations’.
General Yazov is expected to meet President George Bush on Friday.
Today he is to visit Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, the site in 1863 of the bloodiest battle of the American Civil War.
In the afternoon he will go to Capitol Hill for discussions with members of Congress.
For the remainder of the week General Yazov will visit army, navy, air force and marine bases in California, Arizona and North Carolina.
The tour will include a look at the air force's newest operational bomber, the B-1B, but not the radar-evading B-2, also known as the Stealth bomber.
General Yazov is also due to address the Council on Foreign Relations in New York and Washington's National Defence University.
The visit completes a number of exchanges which began after General Yazov met the former US Defence Secretary, Frank Carlucci, in Switzerland last year.
As a result of that meeting, the first face-to-face talks between senior US and Soviet defence leaders since the Second World War, Mr Carlucci later visited the Soviet Union.
The two countries' chiefs of staff, Admiral William Crowe and General Sergei Akhromeyev, have also exchanged visits since then.
Admiral Crowe was replaced as chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on Sunday by General Colin Powell.
General Powell was present at the meeting between the two defence ministers yesterday.
As Mr Cheney and General Yazov walked down a Pentagon corridor, Mr Cheney stopped General Yazov to point out a display honouring Dwight Eisenhower, who commanded Allied forces in Europe during the Second World War.
Blind despair
By TIM MCGIRK
MADRID — A distraught blind man, Manuel Eulogio Suarez, cornered his three tiny children in their flat in Vigo, north-west Spain and tossed them over the sixth-floor balcony, apparently after a row with his estranged wife.
Then he jumped after them, writes Tim McGirk.
Mr Suarez, who sold lottery tickets on the street to support his family, died instantly, and so did his two-year-old daughter and his five-year-old son.
Another son, six, survived the 70ft push but died in hospital from his injuries.
Marcos petition
By TIM MCGIRK
MANILA (AP)— Ferdinand Marcos' followers petitioned the Philippine Supreme Court to allow the late president's body to be returned from Hawaii, and one of them threatened a huge protest if the tribunal turned them down.
Keep it quiet
By TIM MCGIRK
JAKARTA (Reuter)— Indonesia's President Suharto, who heads the world's largest Muslim nation, told his country's five million Catholics to give a modest welcome to the Pope next week.
‘Catholics should not be demonstrative in welcoming the Pope.
It is hoped they will be calm,’ he said.
Proksch caught
By TIM MCGIRK
VIENNA (Reuter)— Austria's most wanted man, Udo Proksch, a coffee-house owner sought in connection with a £10m shipping insurance swindle, was arrested at Vienna airport.
He was carrying a false passport when he arrived from London but was recognised during a routine check.
Deaths mar truce
By TIM MCGIRK
COLOMBO (AP)— Soldiers retaliating for an ambush at Girikola village shot dead six Sinhalese extremists in southern Sri Lanka during a ceasefire due to end today.
Some 21 other people were killed in Sri Lanka within 24 hours.
Ceasefire offer
By TIM MCGIRK
NEW YORK (Reuter)— El Salvador's President, Alfredo Cristiani, announced in a speech to the UN that he would make a proposal for a ceasefire in his country's 10-year-old civil war at a meeting with FMLN rebels in two weeks' time.
Short stay
By TIM MCGIRK
BANGKOK (Reuter)— Eduard Ryabtsev, a Soviet political columnist, said the Soviet Union would withdraw from Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam because the military base cast a shadow on Moscow's policy of promoting peace in the Pacific region.
Poll delay
By TIM MCGIRK
KAMPALA (Reuter)— Uganda's President, Yoweri Museveni, whose government's four-year term ends in four months, wants to extend it by two years to draft a new constitution.
Polish message
By TIM MCGIRK
PRAGUE (Reuter)— The Czechoslovak dissident playwright Vaclav Havel said he had received a message from Poland's Prime Minister, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, that he would work for the release of two Czechoslovak human rights campaigners, Jan Carnogursky and Miroslav Kusy.
Opponent seized
By TIM MCGIRK
PANAMA CITY (AP)— Panamanian police arrested Ricardo Arias Calderon, the Christian Democrat former vice-presidential candidate, and some supporters as they toured remote provinces urging people to boycott the military-controlled government.
The military said Mr Arias Calderon and others were later released.
Hungary rejects interference
By TIM MCGIRK
BUDAPEST (AFP)— Hungary rejected calls by Romania for action by Warsaw Pact nations to prevent a Solidarity-led government in Poland from taking office, Geza Kotai, the head of the central committee's international department, said.
He said the party told Romania last month it was up to the Poles to choose their future through free elections.
Kaifu vows to keep sales tax
By TIM MCGIRK
TOKYO (AP)— Japan's Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu, said his government would strive to restore public trust, but would fight opposition efforts to abolish Japan's new sales tax.
‘It is the most urgent task for the cabinet to restore public trust in politics,’ he said in his first important policy speech since taking office.
‘I am determined to promote political reforms.’
Mr Kaifu said he was not considering scrapping the 3 per cent sales tax that contributed to severe election setbacks for his party in July.
He said the levy was ‘absolutely essential for Japan's future’.
De Klerk gives ANC talks the seal of disapproval
By CHRISTOPHER GILBERT
SECRET talks in London between the African National Congress and a group of liberal Afrikaners, including President FW de Klerk's brother, ended yesterday with the ANC playing down the significance of the event and President de Klerk dissociating himself from it.
Thabo Mbeki, the ANC's external relations director, who led the movement's delegation, said in Washington yesterday that the talks were informal.
He was swift to deny that the Afrikaners were an official delegation from the Broederbond (Brotherhood), an influential secret society with close links to South Africa's ruling National Party.
‘The people that were there were not representing anyone except themselves,’ said Mr Mbeki.
‘They were not representing the Broederbond, and they were not representing the government.’
Another ANC spokesman said: ‘It's possible some were members, but this was a meeting with Afrikaner intellectuals, not the Broederbond.’
The talks should be seen in the context of previous meetings in recent years between the ANC and Afrikaner verligtes.
Although Willem ‘Wimpie’ de Klerk, the President's brother, was a member of the team, it is not the first time he has met Mr Mbeki.
Dr de Klerk, who has acted as an adviser to the anti-apartheid Democratic Party, is known to be close to his brother, but politics is rarely on the agenda when they meet.
In a statement issued in Pretoria yesterday, President de Klerk made it clear that the South African government was not involved in the London talks, and disapproved of them.
‘The general result of such discussion is that they are exploited by the ANC and others to conceal the true nature of revolutionary organisations,’ he said.
It is also extremely unlikely that the ANC would ever receive an official Broederbond delegation.
‘We've had 20 meetings with Afrikaner intellectuals in recent years, in various places, most of them unpublicised,’ the ANC spokesman said.
‘This only aroused so much attention because of the press reports that we were meeting the Broederbond.’
JOHANNESBURG — An estimated 25,000 blacks demanded clemency for two condemned African National Congress guerrillas yesterday in the largest protest march ever held in one of South Africa's nominally independent tribal homelands, AP reports.
The marchers, most of them schoolchildren, paraded peacefully through the centre of Umtata, capital of Transkei.
Some carried ANC flags and displayed placards urging the release of the two, who are on death row in Transkei.
They were convicted for a 1986 bombing in which two people were killed at the Wild Coast Sun, a gambling resort overlooking the Indian Ocean.
The plane that would not take off without the khat
From RICHARD DOWDEN in Djibouti
CAPTAIN Mirko Pintar stormed out of the cockpit and sat down in a passenger seat.
‘I am the pilot, I will not take the responsibility.
The plane is overloaded,’ he shouted at the ground staff, the colour rising in his face.
Overloaded?
A DC-9 with 39 passengers?
The Air Djibouti flight from Addis Ababa had stopped at Dire Dawa but had picked up no passengers.
It had, however, collected eight and a half tons of khat, the mild narcotic leaf on which Djibouti feeds like caterpillars on cabbage.
With a street value of £18.50 a kilo, it is more valuable than airline passengers.
Eat your hearts out Colombian drug barons, this is legal.
The arrival of the flight from Dire Dawa, where the khat is grown, is met by crowds desperate for the leaves.
The little country goes into withdrawal if it is delayed.
No one would take responsibility for off-loading it, and Captain Pintar and his Yugoslav crew would not fly with it.
‘You see that mountain at the end of the runway — I have to get round that,’ he said.
‘If the plane is overloaded and I lose an engine, maybe we don't make it.’
‘The Air Djibouti manager is away — it's not my department.
I am just a hireling.
I cannot take the decision,’ said the man from the airline.
‘If we take off the khat…’ said the air hostess, drawing her finger across her throat.
A terrible argument ensued, involving the passengers, crew and ground staff.
The air was heated with French, Arabic, English and Amharic, Somali and Serbo-Croat.
The small khat traders from Djibouti, who travel the route as if it were the local bus, shrieked and angrily rearranged their shawls and robes.
Their brows were fierce and their teeth flashed gold every time they shouted.
The Austrian Ambassador tried to make peace.
A Kenyan chartered accountant threatened to sue for loss of business.
A senior Ethiopian civil servant said he would stay in Dire Dawa, for a week if necessary, rather than fly on an overloaded plane, a sentiment we all shared.
Everyone discussed the khat trade.
Some said the syndicate that runs it is so powerful it can order the airline, and even the government, to do whatever it wants.
Someone said it owned the airline and was the government.
Despite the ambassador's protest that he would have to present his credentials in his shirt-sleeves the next morning, our baggage was unloaded.
Two bulky Somali women were persuaded to stay behind.
Captain Pintar did his sums again and agreed to fly, three hours late.
As we thundered down the runway, the ambassador asked: ‘Do you think they weighed the khat properly?’ 'Almost certainly not,’replied the civil servant.
‘It won't have been on a weighing machine since it left the village where it was grown.’
The plane climbed ponderously but the mountain slid beneath us.
There was a round of applause for Captain Pintar.
Soviet Union helped the refugees go West
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
THE SOVIET UNION played a key role in the agreement under which thousands of East Germans who had taken refuge in the West German embassies in Prague and Warsaw were allowed to go to the West on Sunday, government officials said yesterday.
Eduard Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister, worked for a solution in telephone calls with East German, Czechoslovak and Polish leaders, they said.
President Gorbachev, with whom Chancellor Helmut Kohl had been in frequent contact, clearly gave his approval.
Since the agreement to let the original refugees out had been on a once-only basis, it was not clear what was going to happen to yesterday's 1,000-plus new arrivals in Prague.
West German officials said they hoped similar arrangements could be made.
But the East Germans, apparently furious at the latest development, accused West Germany of a ‘gross breach of trust’.
The head of the Bonn Chancellery, Rudolf Seiters, said the West German government had made it clear that it could not make any concessions regarding its embassies in other countries and that no East German would be turned away from any West German mission abroad.
Government officials insisted that they were not going to build walls or put up barbed wire round the embassies.
When Czechoslovak police sealed off the Prague embassy on Sunday, Bonn protested and they left.
The first hope of a breakthrough in the saga emerged during a meeting between Mr Shevardnadze and Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the West German Foreign Minister, at the United Nations.
The Soviet minister was ‘shattered’ by Mr Genscher's account of the nightmare conditions in which the refugees were living in Prague and promised to do all he could to help.
Even if the Soviet Union is no longer able to give orders, it still has great influence, and Mr Shevardnadze is believed to have used this in calls to Prague, Warsaw and East Berlin.
Mr Gorbachev's role is unclear: Hans Klein, the West German government spokesman, would say only that Mr Kohl's last telephone message to the Soviet leader was on Friday, with a reply on Sunday.
The final decision, it is believed here, was made by Erich Honecker, the East German leader.
West German officials imagine that the Russians were particularly keen for an end to the crisis because President Gorbachev would have disliked attending East Germany's 40th anniversary celebrations on Saturday while this spectacular testimony to his hosts' illiberalism continued.
Mr Honecker doubtless also wanted no unpleasantness to cloud the great event.
Pressure on East Germany to solve the problem of its fleeing population by reform has redoubled.
Chancellor Kohl again urged East Berlin not to isolate itself and to open the way for change.
MOSCOW (Reuter)— Thousands of Soviet citizens crowded outside the American embassy yesterday clamouring for new forms to apply for emigration to the United States.
The US Consul General, Max Robinson, said 30,000 forms had been distributed and a further 270,000 would be available within a week.
He said the US authorities planned to allocate 50,000 places to refugees from the Soviet Union in the next 12 months.
New defeat spells bleak forecast for Kohl and party
From PATRICIA CLOUGH in Bonn
HOPES THAT Chancellor Kohl's Christian Democrat party can reverse the long downward slide to possible defeat in next year's Bundestag elections have been dashed by its poor showing in Sunday's North Rhine-Westphalia municipal polls.
At the same time the success of the West German foreign minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, in getting an agreement to bring out the thousands of East Germans from the West German embassies in Prague and Warsaw in the 24 hours before the polls closed boosted the results of his small Free Democrat party.
It gained 1.7 per cent to reach 6.5 per cent.
The elections, which involved well over a quarter of the electorate, were seen both as a dress rehearsal for the North-Rhine Westphalian Land elections in May next year and as a test of the political mood in the country.
The CDU, led by the relatively popular health minister, Norbert Blum, suffered more heavy losses, dropping by 4.7 per cent to hit 37.5 per cent, its worst result in municipal elections for 33 years.
The Social Democrats who have ruled the Land for many years, although in opposition in Bonn, emerged strengthened by the CDU's defeat, although their own share of the vote only grew by 0.4 per cent to reach 42.9 per cent.
Many of the CDU votes went instead to the ultra right-wing Republicans who polled over seven per cent in the bigger cities with problems of unemployment, the housing shortage and a high percentage of foreign immigrants.
The Republicans also picked up an estimated 14,000 votes from the Social Democrats and yet more from people who have not bothered to vote before.
The Republicans put up candidates in about half the constituencies and their overall share of the vote stayed low at 2.3 per cent.
Hundreds of young people chanting ‘Nazis get out’ demonstrated in Dortmund, Dusseldorf and other cities in protest against the election of Republican members to the city councils.
In Dortmund a 56-year-old man, apparently an even more extreme right-winger, was in a critical condition after being kicked and pelted with bottles by left-wingers.
And in Dusseldorf police said a member of the Republican party suffered a heart attack after being beaten up by demonstrators.
The Greens remained the third strongest party with 0.2 per cent more than before at 8.3 per cent.
Mr Blum tried his supporters saying they had done better than predicted.
But it was a bad start for the CDU to the series of eight rounds of municipal or Land elections between now and the Bundestag elections.
It showed that despite the Chancellor's unopposed re-election as chairman of his party and his tactical victory over leading rivals, voters are unimpressed with his performance and that of the CDU.
A car and a life left on the other side of the fence
From EDWARD LUCAS in Prague
DIPLOMATIC niceties have been exploited to the utmost during the continuing occupation by would-be East German emigrants of the West German embassy in Prague, where a West German diplomat yesterday intervened dramatically to add to the number of new arrivals inside.
An East German — unwisely, perhaps, in view of the easy access through the front door — made a desperate bid to scramble over the embassy railings.
When he was half-way over, the Czechoslovak police guarding the back of the embassy grabbed the man's belt and began hauling him down.
Alerted to the scuffle, East Germans inside the building seized his arms and legs.
As more East Germans joined the cries for help, the diplomat burst through the front door and sprinted 300 yards around the embassy perimeter until he reached the grotesque tug-of-war.
He leapt into the tussle and embraced the man from behind.
The police, on realising that he was a diplomat, drew back.
Conferred temporary and somewhat metaphysical diplomatic immunity by the embrace, the would-be emigrant and the diplomat walked, with their arms on each others' shoulders, into the embassy.
For many of the East Germans arriving in Prague, there is a unique emotional wrench when the time comes to make their way to the embassy doors.
Every one of the scores of abandoned Trabants and Wartburgs which clog the streets around the embassy has been one of the most cherished possessions in its owner's life.
The price of a car in East Germany can be a significant proportion of a lifetime's earnings, and the wait for the car can last a significant part of that lifetime.
The congestion caused by their hurried, and sometimes vengefully random, parking is a source of great aggravation to Prague's citizens, for whom it is a major talking point of the emigration crisis.
Although police remove the illegally-parked cars almost as fast as they are abandoned, the local body responsible for administering parking is insisting that someone pay the hefty excess charges incurred by the prolonged presence of other cars in legal spaces.
This has not, however, prevented a touching detail in the exodus of the original 4,000 emigres over the weekend.
As they left the embassy, those who had arrived in cars were invited to leave their keys, and in return were promised that their vehicles would be brought eventually to the West.
Comrade Springer tries to liven up the party
From ANNE APPLEBAUM in Lublin
‘JUST because I wasn't interned in 1981 doesn't mean I'm not a Polish patriot too,’ fumed a member of the Karczmiska Communist party committee.
‘We simply went to work like normal citizens during martial law and now it seems that's a crime,’ he went on, gesturing at the 20 heads of party factory cells who were gathered to discuss the future of communism in Poland.
The meeting was in its third hour.
Andrzej Springer, a Central Committee member and the first secretary of the Lublin region, was there.
Comrade Springer, as his subordinates addressed him, was collecting ‘views and opinions’.
According to a recent Politburo dictum, the party will turn itself into a ‘left-wing parliamentary party’ at its next congress early next year, and the Central Committee members were consulting local leaders about how to do it.
Mr Springer held a questionnaire, distributed to all party members.
The group was analysing the results, which are to be discussed by a local central committee plenum today.
‘A motion has been put forward that the Polish United Workers’ Party (the Communist Party) should…give the right to vote to all of its members.
Is the comrade in favour of this solution?(a) yes,(b) no?’
The most heated discussion revolved around the question of changing the party's name.
One delegate opted for Polish Labour Party because he thought the present name would scare away farmers and intellectuals.
‘Maybe people would think we were something like the British Labour Party,’ he said hopefully.
Another disagreed.
‘If we change the name, we show disrespect for all of the good things the party has done for Poland.’
Mr Springer then took the floor -for 30 minutes.
‘The party must fight for its new image, not only for its own members, but also in front of the whole nation.’
He sat down.
It was not clear whether he thought the name should be changed or not.
The next meeting was in Opole Lubelski.
The local party secretary opened the meeting by welcoming the Lublin first secretary, and announcing the presence of a Western journalist.
‘Comrade Rakowski (the party leader) set the precedent for this by allowing some foreign journalists into the last meeting of the Central Committee,’ he explained nervously.
The Opole meeting was dominated by elderly party members, who refused to talk about such problems as names, new programmes, and new membership laws.
‘I want to talk about socialism,’ said one.
‘This new government, what is it doing?
Is it realising the socialist ideals that we stood for?
Before I joined the party 46 years ago, there wasn't even a paved road from Lublin to Warsaw.’
Throughout the day, Mr Springer diligently took notes, nodding when members complained that the Communists had no economic programme to match Solidarity's, and when others questioned the acceptance of privatisation.
Later, Mr Springer said he had attended dozens of these meetings in recent weeks all over his district.
‘You can see, there are no more hysterical discussions.
Now, after three change of government, people are calmly discussing the future.’
Is he an optimist?
Mr Springer joined the party 25 years ago, and admitted that this era could be the most difficult he had ever lived through.
‘But, Madam, I have a university education, and I'm a teacher by profession.
I will have no trouble finding something else to do.’
ZURICH — Switzerland was responding to Polish appeals for economic aid by sending five million Swiss francs (£1.9m) of food — 40 per cent of it wheat bought in Hungary — the Foreign Ministry said yesterday Reuter reports.
Last month President George Bush announced that the US was sending $100m in food aid to Poland.
SPD still fails to ride the wave: Setbacks for Chancellor Kohl and his team have not convinced voters the Social Democrats would do any better, writes John Eisenhammer
By JOHN EISENHAMMER
MUCH TO their chagrin, the woes of Chancellor Kohl's centre-right coalition have yet to produce a solid wave of support for the Social Democrats.
Successive state elections have seen the governing parties pummelled by a dismayed electorate.
But the SPD, instead of exuding the sort of assurance suggesting that the general election in December next year belongs to it, struggles to hide its edginess.
The party reacted with unnecessary embarrassment and defensiveness to government attacks on general talks it has been holding with the Greens, and its desire, as part of its traditional Ostpolitik, to press on with contacts with the Communist party in East Berlin despite the sudden surge of open opposition to the government by East German citizens.
Two impressive victories this year, in Berlin and in Frankfurt, producing municipal coalitions with the Greens, were a fillip for party morale.
But at the European elections in June the SPD failed to break through despite heavy CDU losses.
The West German electorate lacks confidence in Chancellor Kohl and his team, but has yet to be convinced that the SPD, with whatever future coalition partner it chooses, will do much better.
The Social Democrats have come a long way since the early 1980s when, newly tossed into opposition, the party was crippled by defeatism.
It is now rushing to finalise a bold programme of reforms.
But the emphasis on new priorities is troubling some of its traditional clientele.
The change has been striking in two areas, with women's issues and environmental concerns thrust to the head of the party agenda.
There has been an influx of women into the party, accompanied by a decision to have equal representation at all levels of the party by the mid-1990s.
And the party has been devising an environmentally-friendly economic strategy.
Its central theme is to make polluters pay, starting with a proposed 30 per cent rise in the price of petrol.
‘We are getting away from the labour party for industrial workers,’ says Walter Momper, the SPD mayor of Berlin and one of the new generation of leaders.
‘We are strong now on women's rights, the environment and disarmament.’
This sort of language dismays the traditional ranks of SPD supporters, especially the big trade unions, who fear their voice within the party is being muffled.
It has not always been easy for those working class voters who see the Greens as an undisciplined bunch, inimical to the interests of industrial society, to keep up with the SPD's enthusiastic appetite for environmental matters.
There has been a noticeable shift of working class support from the SPD to the far-right Republicans — not as much as the losses from the Christian Democrats, but enough to worry party managers.
‘The differences in our electorate are much bigger than for the conservative parties,’ says Heidi Wieczorek-Zeul, a member of the party praesidium.
‘Tactically to combine the interests of a miner and an environmentalist just does not work.
It can only be done with conviction, with the sort of approach we used in 1969 with Ostpolitik.
Today, ecological and women's issues are the equivalent of Ostpolitik for us.’
The party leader, Hans-Jochen Vogel, a rather uninspiring figure, has nonetheless proved adept at managing this delicate evolution which, bolder than anything the Labour party ever contemplated, has avoided the sort of fratricidal bloodletting which ravaged its British counterpart.
The traditionalist camp has had to swallow some bitter pills.
Oskar Lafontaine, the SPD leader in the Saarland, has argued vociferously that a modern mass party like the SPD could not afford to have its policies confined to the narrow interests of employed industrial workers.
In the party's new programme, the trade unions have had to backtrack on their central demand, now accepting that a shorter working week will mean reduced wages.
But Mr Lafontaine, standard-bearer of the up-and-coming generation, and the second most important figure after Mr Vogel on the committee drafting the party programme for the next decade, has certainly not had things all his own way.
His attempts to link reductions in working hours to more flexible work practices, for example, have run into powerful union resistance.
The SPD's candidate for Chancellor seems to be narrowing to a choice between Mr Vogel and Mr Lafontaine, between a cautious compromiser and an erratic reformer.
The party is far from sure which message it wants to send to voters, and is likely to leave the choice until the last minute.
Neither of these two men can control with any certainty, however, the factor that will perhaps exert the most influence on the SPD's election chances.
Whether the party likes it or not, its fortunes are hostage to the still youthful coalitions in Frankfurt and Berlin, and their notoriously unpredictable Green allies.
If these coalitions fall apart, as an earlier version did in Hesse in 1987 amid much rancour, the repercussions could be disastrous, with the Christian Democrats poised to exploit any hint of ‘red-green chaos’.
‘If we are not successful in Berlin, then the chances of a red-green coaliion in Bonn are gone for five to ten years,’ says Walter Momper.
‘If it works, it will be a model for government whether the SPD likes it or not.’
