Court Circular
By JOHN EISENHAMMER
BUCKINGHAM PALACE 29 September: The Duke of York, Colonel-in-Chief of The Staffordshire Regiment (The Prince of Wales's) this evening received Lieutenant-Colonel NHC Brown upon relinquishing his appointment as Commanding Officer of the 1st Battalion and Lieutenant-Colonel CT Rogers upon assuming the appointment.
2 October: The Princess Royal this morning opened Hassy Carrot Growers' new Carrot Complex at Whitehall Farm, Isleham, and was received on arrival by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Cambridgeshire (Mr Michael Bevan).
Her Royal Highness subsequently visited Lincolnshire and was received on arrival by Her Majesty's Lord-Lieutenant for Lincolnshire (Captain Henry Nevile).
The Princess Royal opened the new George Adams &Sons Factory at Spalding.
Afterwards Her Royal Highness visited the Recording Studios of the National Tape Magazine for the Blind, Lilac Cottage, New Bolingbroke.
In the afternoon Her Royal Highness, President of the National Agricultural Centre Rural Trust, opened a new Housing Development at Mareham Le Fen.
The Princess then opened the extension to Kirkby on Bain Church of England Primary School.
Her Royal Highess travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight.
Mrs Richard Carew Pole was in attendance.
The Princess Royal, Patron, College of Occupational Therapists, this evening attended a Reception and Dinner at St James's Palace and was received on arrival by the President of the College of Occupational Therapists (the Right Hon Lord Ennals of Norwich).
Mrs Malcolm Wallace was in attendance.
Mrs James Lonsdale and Lieutenant-Commander Patrick Jephson RN were in attendance.
YORK HOUSE 2 October: The Duke of Kent, as Vice Chairman of the British Overseas Trade Board, today left Royal Air Force Northolt for a visit to Sweden and Finland.
His Royal Highness, who travelled in an aircraft of The Queen's Flight, is attended by Mr Andrew Palmer.
The Duchess of Kent, as Patron, this morning attended the launch of Cancer Relief Macmillan Fund's leaflet ‘Help is There’ at London Weekend Television, South Bank Television Centre, London SE1.
Her Royal Highness was attended by Miss Sarah Partridge.
THATCHED HOUSE LODGE 2 October: Princess Alexandra and Sir Angus Ogilvy were present this evening at a Reception given by the Prime Minister and Mr Denis Thatcher at 10 Downing Street to launch the Harold Macmillan Trust.
The Lady Mary Mumford was in attendance.
ROYAL ENGAGEMENTS The Princess of Wales, President, Wales Craft Council, presents prizes to the winners of the Council's Daffodil Design Competition at West Glamorgan County Hall, Swansea; and, this evening, as Patron, Swansea Festival of Music and the Arts, attends a concert to be given by the London Philharmonic Orchestra in the Brangwyn Hall, Swansea.
The Princess Royal, President, Save the Children Fund, visits the Save the Children Fund Shop at 104 High Street, Orpington, Kent; opens and tours the new Head Office Building of the Woolwich Equitable Building Society, Watling Street, Bexleyheath, Kent, and receives a cheque from the employees for the Save the Children Fund; as Chancellor, London University, visits the Institute of Zoology, London Zoo, Regent's Park, in celebration of the accession of the Institute of Zoology of the Royal Zoological Society to the University of London; and, this evening, as Patron, The British Nutrition Foundation, attends a dinner at the Natural History Museum, South Kensington, London SW7.
Princess Alexandra attends a Service being held in Westminster Abbey to celebrate The Revised English Bible.
Anniversaries
By JOHN EISENHAMMER
On this day: the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes was renamed Yugoslavia, 1929; the first British atomic device was exploded in the Monte Bello islands in the Pacific, 1952; the Bolshoi Ballet appeared at Covent Garden for the first time, 1956.
Birthdays
Gazette Page 16
Obituary: Manuel Clouthier
By CHRIS MCGREAL
MANUEL CLOUTHIER, last year's presidential candidate for Mexico's conservative National Action Party (PAN), made civil disobedience a by-word of his short political career.
The heavily-built millionaire businessman, commonly known by his childhood nickname ‘Maquio’, helped put conservative thought back into Mexican politics after he entered the fray outraged at the nationalisation of the banks in 1982.
His anger set the tone for his aggressive campaigns against the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) 's long history of corruption and election fraud.
PAN members chose him as their presidential candidate because privately he scorned his party's old and, as he saw it, timid leadership almost as much as he scorned the PRI.
The white-bearded campaigner prided himself on blunt, outspoken views.
Despite his lack of political experience, Clouthier's 20-year leadership of business organisations stood him in good stead.
After the banks' nationalisation he sold most of his interests in the dozen or so companies he had created and drawn his wealth from, and committed himself to combating the existing political system.
He quickly established himself within the PAN, challenging its professional politicians with the support of his business colleagues and unifying the fractious party.
He took conservative ideas on privatisation and land reform, gave them a populist anti-government bent and managed to woo over many poorer voters -especially in northern Mexico — who previously feared that the PAN represented only business interests.
He promised to demystify the all-powerful presidency and make it more accountable to congress and the voter.
Clouthier's policies were frequently ill-defined but they nevertheless brought back into the political debate conservative ideas that had been scorned since the 1917 Mexican revolution.
At times his language turned crude and made him look foolish.
Some of his tactics were similarly frowned upon.
During one of his many civil disobedience campaigns, which ranged from non-payment of taxes to blocking border posts into the US, he led a hunger strike in protest at alleged vote rigging in the presidential race.
But few people took seriously the idea of such a hulk of a man going without food.
When he called off his fast a week later, a pro-government newspaper headlined its story ‘Maquio ends his diet’.
Shortly afterwards Clouthier suffered a heart attack.
He was popular as a man of the people who toured Mexico with his wife and 10 children in a mobile home during the presidential campaign, a very different strategy from the typically aloof approach of the PAN's other wealthy and middle-class leaders.
His blustery manner brought out large crowds despite frequent government attempts to intimidate rural populations into staying away.
Ultimately Clouthier's campaign fell victim to the rise of the left and the governing party's shift to the right.
Clouthier pulled in 17 per cent of the vote, falling into third place.
Many of the PAN's traditional supporters appeared to abandon the party to support Salinas for fear the left might win.
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari's policies reflect the Clouthier manifesto, especially on privatisation.
Similarly the many Mexicans looking simply to cast an anti-government vote supported the left, which stood a greater chance of winning and emerged in second place amid evidence of substantial fraud by the government.
But Clouthier remained at the centre stage of Mexican politics, as the most visible leader of the PAN.
In July he saw his party make history when it won the first governorship conceded by the ruling party in 60 years.
Clouthier was travelling to a rally for the victorious PAN candidate when he was killed in a car accident.
Obituary: Professor Henricus Kuypers
By GEORGE GORDON
A GENERATION ago mammalian neuroanatomy seemed a scholarly subject, a frame for functional studies but unlikely to provide an impetus for the astonishing advances in understanding of the brain over the last four decades, in which Hans Kuypers became one of the leaders.
It cannot be given to many scientists to be outstanding as experimenter, technical innovator and teacher; Kuypers was unquestionably all of these.
As a young doctor in Leiden he paid a seminal visit to the neuroanatomist WJH Nauta, at that time developing a revolutionary anatomical technique for investigating the nervous system by staining degenerating fibres cut off from their parent cell-bodies.
Kuypers was the first to use this technique in studies of the brain and over the next 10 years, now in the United States, he charted at a new level of detail the connections made by the cerebral cortex with nervous elements in the brain-stem and spinal cord that control movement in a number of higher mammals.
Kuypers then started a long series of collaborative studies in which injuries to some of these connections in the monkey's brain were correlated with the defects they produced in performance of movements; the poising of an arm, for instance, to carry out an operation with the fingers could be dissociated from the ability to use the fingers skilfully.
These studies continued, with increasing sophistication, after his return to Europe in 1966 as Professor of Anatomy at the new Erasmus University in Rotterdam.
He showed that injury to connections within the cerebral cortex could cause the dissociation of hand movements guided by vision from those guided by touch.
Separation of the two hemispheres of the brain showed each could only sustain a full range of visual control over the opposite hand.
These studies bear directly on defects seen in human disease.
His primary insight being anatomical, Kuypers was concerned with increasingly powerful ways of tracing fibre connections.
He was among the first to exploit the fact that living nerve fibres pick up and transport protein molecules like the enzyme horseradish peroxidase, whose presence is easily demonstrated and so acts as a marker.
In a similar way, he developed a totally new technique for studying branching fibres by using pairs of fluorescent dyes, with the potential for being picked up by separate branches.
In his last few years Kuypers and Gabriella Ugolini made use of viruses which travel into the nervous system and multiply in a pathway so that they cross nervous junctions and spread detectably along a whole connected system: a quite novel labelling technique whose full potential now remains to be realised.
In 1984 Kuypers accepted the chair of Anatomy at Cambridge.
He was nearing 60, with warnings of ill health, but immediately undertook with his departmental colleagues an imaginative restructuring of anatomical teaching, introducing new techniques and persuading the university to fund new posts.
He was himself a greatly talented teacher, a master of clear explanation and a fine blackboard artist.
He also had a feeling for phrase and idiom and a very personal way with English, all of which endeared him to his audience.
I recall a Saturday midday lecture to Oxford undergraduate and graduate students in the 1970s when, after riveting them with a talk about double fluorescent labelling, he asked if they would be interested in hearing about experiments on motor systems; they said they would and they abandoned lunch to listen.
Hans Kuypers thrived on communication with other scientists.
On his return to Europe he missed the wide forum he had experienced in America, and was instrumental in founding two European neuroscience societies, at whose meetings he was constantly receptive to new ideas.
A vigorous and sociable man, he attracted loyalty and friendship.
He was a man with whom, often far into the night, I have had the most challenging and memorable scientific discussions of my life.
He disliked long-term plans.
He was a scientific adventurer, for whom every discovery revealed immediate new possibilities; and he saw no end to his work.
Obituary: Professor Roger Howell
By DAVID UNDERDOWN
THE AMERICAN liberal arts colleges — small, intimate, of high quality academically and often capable of inspiring deep devotion in their graduates -have no real counterpart in Britain.
Their very excellence makes heavy demands on the time and energy of their teaching faculty, so people who stay long in such places rarely produce the books and articles commonly published by their counterparts in bigger universities, and are therefore often little known outside their own institutions.
Roger Howell was an exception: for many years a professor at Bowdoin College in Maine, he was also an historian with a considerable reputation, and many friends, in Britain.
Howell was unusual not only in combining attachment to a small college with a distinguished scholarly career, but also in his success in continuing that career even while president of the college.
Throughout his life he had an enthusiastic curiosity about British history and culture.
He came to England as a Rhodes Scholar in 1958, and after a year of teaching at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore he returned to Oxford for three years in the early 1960s as research fellow and junior dean at St John's College.
His first book, Newcastle-upon-Tyne and the Puritan Revolution (1967), quickly established him as an important contributor to seventeenth-century studies, and put him in the forefront of the group of scholars who were beginning the process of reinterpreting the English Revolution of the 1640s at the grass roots.
Among a number of significant later works were biographies of Sir Philip Sidney and Oliver Cromwell, as well as a long list of stimulating articles, essays and reviews.
Howell was a Fellow of the Royal Historical Society, and he gave unstinting service to the promotion of the study of British history in the United States.
He edited a new journal, the British Studies Monitor, and was an active figure in the New England Historical Association, the North American Conference on British Studies, and other professional societies.
This was one side of Roger Howell.
But there was another side, marked by loyalty to the college which he had attended as an undergraduate (he received his BA from Bowdoin in 1958) and whose history faculty he joined after his return from Oxford.
In 1969, at the early age of 32, he became president of Bowdoin.
It was a turbulent time for college principals, and many were unable to cope with the urgent demands for change which constantly assailed them — not least from their own undergraduates.
Howell rose to the occasion and during the following nine years Bowdoin was transformed: among other changes, women were admitted for the first time, and hitherto neglected subjects like Afro-American studies added to the curriculum.
He also did what any American college president is expected to do — he raised money, leaving the college on a sounder footing, both financially and academically, than it had been when he took office.
Attempts to lure Howell away from Bowdoin to larger and better-known institutions all foundered on his love for the college and for the state which had adopted him.
Obituary: Superintendent Mhoira Robertson
By JOAN BURNIE
HIGH-RANKING women police officers, even in the 1980s, are fairly unusual anywhere in the UK.
But senior women officers in Scotland are very rare indeed.
For the Scots do not like their women tough and authoritarian.
And Scottish policemen do not like women much at all.
So for Mhoira Robertson to achieve the rank of superintendent while still in her early forties was as surprising and, to some of her colleagues, as unwelcome as female preachers were to Dr Johnson.
Robertson recognised that women in her profession must be twice as good as men to progess as far in their work.
And progress she did, by application to her duties.
Mhoira Robertson was always ambitious and passed the sergeants' examination at 24.
But the police force she joined in 1963 was a very different and difficult place in which to be ambitious.
Not only did women earn less than male officers but they were kept to shoplifting, domestic violence, child cruelty and sexual crime.
All of it important and worthwhile work but not giving the breadth of experience which is necessary for promotion into the higher grades.
But the Equal Pay and Opportunities Acts, introduced in Scotland in 1975, changed all that.
Or were meant to.
Above the rank of inspector, promotion is a matter of performance and most tellingly, other senior (male) officers' assessment.
There were times, as Mhoira once wryly remarked, when she wished she could join the Masons or even use the gents' lavatory.
Mhoira Robertson did take up golf, which became her favourite pastime, and eventually the promotions came, first as Director of studies and Chief Inspector at Tulliallan Police College and finally in 1987 as Superintendent within the Lothians and Borders force.
Mhoira hugely enjoyed being one of only two women to reach this rank in Scotland.
It was as well that she did because she had forfeited most of her private life for the sake of her chosen career.
Not that she would have seen it as any sacrifice that she had neither husband nor child.
Especially the former.
Having worked with too many men for too long, she confessed to having found them out only too soon.
But there were times when the superintendent's hat sat a trifle uneasily on the severe grey-haired head.
Superintendent Robertson did not care about the mutterings from the lower ranks against her strict disciplinarian attitude.
Particularly towards the proper wearing of uniforms.
In fact she agreed cheerfully that she liked to see the whites of the eyes of any constable stupid enough to encounter her with tie undone or shirt unbuttoned.
Nor did she worry overmuch that she had a reputation for being harder on women officers than men.
In her opinion it was necessary if they were to have any hope of advancement.
However Mhoira Robertson did accept that the rank cut her off from any real intimacy with ordinary people who were in awe of her power.
At the same time she knew that her gender isolated her from the ritualised socialising of other senior officers.
You could never, as she said, pretend to be one of the boys in a skirt.
But Mhoira, in and out of the uniform she wore with such pride, was equal to any of them.
Obituary: Gordon Hargreaves
By PATRICIA INGLETON and JOHN BALL
GORDON HARGREAVES was a man of strikingly diverse interests and achievements and an engaging and well-loved character in London's academic, musical and artistic life.
Born in 1930 in Southport, he was schooled in his home town before studying chemistry at Liverpool University.
After a few years in atomic energy research he then discovered his vocation as teacher and enthusiast as a lecturer in chemistry at Birkenhead Technical College, where he also voluntarily taught about theatre, literature and music in a humanities section.
At this time he published his widely used text-book Elementary Chemical Thermodynamics, which was translated into several languages.
Hargreaves returned to research in 1965 as Senior Experimental Officer in the Sheffield University zoology department, where he gained his PhD.
He was vital to much of the department's internationally distinguished research in comparative endocrinology, assaying minuscule levels of hormones in experimental animals by physico-chemical techniques.
Even this demanding job left energy for much else, and at this time he began to organise art exhibitions, building on his own strong interest in the visual arts which had been fired by visits to Florence and Venice and by the mammoth Van Gogh show in the 1950s, and which led early to his abiding love of the Italian Renaissance giants and of such British artists as Prunella Clough, Keith Vaughan and RobertMedley.
Hargreaves mounted each year a series of exhibitions, mainly of young artists, but also including two important shows by Clough and Vaughan.
These exhibitions became central to Sheffield's cultural life, and were the turning-points in the careers of several young artists.
To his professional duties he had added the role of Departmental Safety Officer, and it was this experience which took him in 1977 to Imperial College in the new post of College Safety Director.
This was a time when the universities were meeting the new challenge of implementing the Health and Safety at Work Act, which was designed for industrial and commercial organisations much less individualistic and varied than academic institutions.
The Safety Director's is a delicate job, requiring diplomacy in dealing with academics and researchers traditionally used to autonomy in their laboratories.
Very much to the benefit of the college, Hargreaves had the personality and the authority of experience needed to implement the legal requirements in the academic workplace without causing rancour or resentment.
Hargreaves continued the Sheffield pattern by mounting exhibitions by young artists in Imperial's Consort Gallery, quality shows that soon attracted a following and that for years formed a regular feature of the London art scene.
His advocacy aroused the interests of some of his many friends in the gallery world, bringing several artists to wider notice.
Hargreaves was a rich amalgam of natural gifts and sensibilities.
His lively and passionate nature, disciplined by a formal scientific training, was expressed creatively in his own paintings, his intense love of music, and in his relationships, personal and professional.
He retained his northern direct honesty of judgement, was absolutely without pretence and intolerant of humbug; he could be devastatingly acid in deprecating affectation in others, yet was, in so many ways, unfailingly and practically kind.
One of his greatest pleasures came from the landscapes of the Lake District, a life-long source of spiritual renewal.
He did not know that in his last months he had developed a fatal heart condition.
It seems extraordinarily right that he should have died, suddenly and without struggle, on a lovely day, gazing from the Catbells ridge over Newlands to the Derwent Fells.
Obituary: Walter Mimpriss
By MARION CROUCHMAN
I WAS SAD to hear that ‘Gaffer’(Walter Mimpriss) is dead, but sadder still that his obituary (by John MacDougall, 25 September) did not evoke the memory of a tall, lean, gangly man, with bent shoulders, who always looked as if he should have cow-dung on his theatre wellies, writes Marion Crouchman.
I remember his telling us how the first time he encountered stress incontinence was as a young boy standing at the foot of the ladder while a little old country woman handed him down apples from the tree.
The other story — perhaps apocryphal — was supposed to explain why he would never allow us women to assist at operations.
It was said that on the first occasion that a female student ‘scrubbed’ with him he was reaching the end of a long case and held up the piece of cat-gut slung under the ureter (to identify it and keep it safe during the dissection), saying ‘Cut!’
Instead of cutting the sling, she cut the ureter, and the rest of us were henceforth dismissed as equally brainless.
Male chauvinism was rife in medicine in those days, and he is forgiven.
Obituaries
By MARION CROUCHMAN
Archbishop David Penman of Melbourne, died Melbourne 1 October aged 53.
One of the new generation of non-English church leaders in Australia, he led the campaign for Anglican women priests, and planned to ordain the first in Melbourne next year.
He was ordained in 1961 and appointed Archbishop in 1984.
John Bright, scriptwriter, died Los Angeles 14 September aged 81.
Wrote screenplay for The Public Enemy, based on his own novel Blood and Beer, including the scene where the character played by James Cagney pushes a grapefruit into the face of his girlfriend.
He was one of the co-founders of the Screenwriters' Guild in 1933.
