Law Report: Solicitors' copy of affidavit not covered by privilege: Dubai Bank Ltd v Galadari and others — Court of Appeal (Lord Justice Dillon, Lord Justice Farquharson and Sir John Megaw), 7 August 1989
By YING HUI TAN, Barrister
A photocopy of an affidavit in the possession of solicitors was not privileged by the mere fact of its being handed to the solicitors for the purpose of legal advice if the original was not privileged.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the first and second defendants' appeal against Mr Justice Vinelott's order that the defendants permit the plaintiff's solicitors to inspect and take copies of an affidavit in the possession of the defendants' solicitors.
A former employee of the defendants swore an affidavit relating to his claim against the defendants for wrongful dismissal.
The second defendant was sent a photocopy of the affidavit and he sent it to the defendants' solicitors for advice in the context of the wrongful dismissal claim.
That claim was then settled.
Subsequently, in an unrelated claim by the plaintiff bank against the defendants, the bank sought discovery of the copy of the employee's affidavit in the defendants' solicitors' possession.
The defendants objected to disclosure on ground that it was protected by legal professional privilege.
Mr Justice Vinelott ordered discovery.
Nigel Davis (Norton Rose) for the defendants; John Mowbray QC and Claire Staddon (Lovell White Durrant) for the plaintiff bank.
LORD JUSTICE DILLON said that it was not in doubt that if the copy was privileged in relation to the employee's then claims because obtained for the purpose of advice in relation to those claims, it retained its privileged condition in respect of the subsequent claims now being advanced by the bank: Pearce v Foster (1885) 15 QBD 114.
The basis of the privilege on grounds of law went back many years.
It was for the party refusing to disclose to establish his right to refuse.
The onus therefore was on the defendants.
Affidavits from the defendants' solicitors established that the photocopy affidavit was supplied to them by the second defendant for the purposes of seeking legal advice in circumstances where litigation was contemplated, but did not indicate whether the photocopy sent was a photocopy which the second defendant made for the purpose of instructing his solicitors or a photocopy which had been sent to the second defendant by the employee himself, prepared for the employee's own purposes which had nothing whatever to do with the defendants obtaining legal advice from their soliticors.
On the facts the court had no clear evidence that the copy sent to the defendants' solicitors was made by or on behalf of the second defendant.
It could equally well have been a photocopy supplied by the employee.
Accordingly, it must follow on the facts that the claim to privilege was not made out.
Quite apart from the facts, however, his Lordship found the greatest difficulty in seeing that the claim was made out in law.
Pearce v Foster indicated why it was that if the original affidavit or a copy made by the employee had been sent to the solicitors, that would not have been privileged from disclosure by the first and second defendants, although sent to the solicitors for the purpose of advising them on their position against the employee.
The document itself was not privileged and to that extent the other side was entitled to see part of the materials with the brief.
There were two decisions which were binding where the rule of privilege had been applied to copied documents: The Palermo (1883) 9 PD 6, and Watson v Cammel Laird &Co (Shipbuilders and Engineers) Ltd (1959) 1 WLR 702.
The principle indicated in those cases was a long way from the circumstances of the present case and was far from warranting the conclusion that by making a photocopy of a document which in the hands of the maker of the photocopy was not privileged, and then sending the photocopy to a solicitor for the purposes of obtaining advice, privilege was thereby cast on the copy sent to the soicitor.
The employee's affidavit was already in existence and the copy when first received by the defendants was not privileged.
To produce a further copy, albeit for the purposes of obtaining advice, was closely parallel to obtaining further copies for the purposes of litigation when the original was not privileged, so that Chadwick v Bowman (1886) 16 QBD 561 was closely in point.
The difficulty arose in the present case because of the Divisional Court's decision in R v Board of Inland Revenue, Ex parte Goldberg (1989) QB 267.
The applicant, a member of the Tax Bar, had been served with notices under the Taxes Management Act 1970 requiring him to produce copies of documents which were in his possession for the purpose of providing legal advice to clients, who had not authorised disclosure.
The Divisional Court felt that the copy documents which the solicitor had prepared for counsel were necessarily franked by professional privilege.
The solicitor confirmed in his affidavit that he had photocopied the documents which he sent to counsel for the sole purpose of obtaining legal advice from him.
The Divisional Court felt that it followed inexorably that privilege must attach to the photocopies made in those circumstances.
The circumstances of Goldberg's case and of the present case were distinguishable from those of The Palermo, and of Watson v Cammel Laird in the way indicated in Watson v Cammel Laird when explaining the decision in Chadwick v Bowman.
With deference to the Divisional Court and without considering whether its decision could be supported on alternative grounds, his Lordship took the view that the Divisional Court's judgment went too far and did not support the conclusion it reached.
Anger over proposal for toll bridge to Skye
By MARK DOUGLAS HOME, Scottish Correspondent
THE NARROW stretch of sea dividing the island of Skye from the Scottish mainland is embroiled in a debate over private investment in road building.
The famous ferry crossing between Kyle of Lochalsh and Kyleakin on Skye attracts enough traffic to justify a bridge.
But the Government has said public money will not be available for at least 15 years.
It is backing a privately-built toll bridge, the first of its kind in Scotland.
The proposal provoked anger on Skye and the mainland.
But fresh controversy arose after the Scottish Office said discussions with industry indicated that the tolls would, at most, be no more than ferry fares — currently £3.80 for a car.
The £18m project, including a government offer to pay for approach roads, will be discussed this month by the Highland Regional Council which must decide whether a private toll bridge is better than no bridge at all.
Alexander Russell, the council's convener, said: ‘It's a Hobson's choice’.
But Duncan Grant, councillor for South West Ross which includes Kyle of Lochalsh, said: ‘The Government should be forced to change its mind.
I don't accept there is no public money.
I'm going to be arguing and voting for a no-toll bridge.’
The debate about linking Skye and the mainland has continued for 20 years.
The latest proposals coincided with yet another summer of delays as tourist traffic queued to go over the sea to Skye.
Caledonian MacBrayne, the State-owned ferry company, runs two car ferries on the crossing.
They are almost 20 years old and should have been replaced, but the company has accepted that it is unlikely to get government approval for new ferries until the bridge controversy has been resolved.
It intends to switch the boats to other routes if the bridge goes ahead.
The earliest completion date is 1994.
The most likely route is from the Plock of Kyle, west of Kyle of Lochalsh, landing on Skye west of Kyleakin.
Despite frequent delays on both sides of the crossing, a Skye lobby still says there should be no bridge.
Elizabeth Tolan, who runs a coffee house in Kyleakin with her husband John, said: ‘We don't want it.
It's going to ruin the village and cut it off completely.’
Mike Barlow, who has a tourist business in Kyleakin, opposes the bridge because it would spoil the island's ‘magic’.
‘Part of the charm is that you cross the sea to Skye.’
But Angus McHattie, chairman of the Sleat and Strath branch of the Scottish Crofters Union in south Skye, said: ‘Not everybody is in favour of a bridge, but the vast majority are.
The general opinion is that a bridge is necessary, though not a toll bridge.’
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton MP, Scottish Office environment minister, described the private toll bridge proposal as ‘a very practical way forward’.
Highland Regional Council had to judge ‘the balance of advantage’.
In a letter to Brian Wilson MP, Labour's Scottish transport spokesman, Lord James added that the bridge could become toll free in about 15 years.
It would be better than the ferries, cost travellers no more and ‘would be toll free before it was ever likely to be publicly funded’.
Local people and regular travellers would also retain their concessionary fares on the crossing.
However, Mr Wilson said that other Scottish bridges, like the one being built at Dornoch, had been publicly-funded.
Skye was next on the priority list.
He accused Scottish Office ministers of ‘doing their bit for the ideological shift on road building in the Department of Transport’.
He added: ‘If they get away with this one it won't be the last.’
Private cash to build ‘fastlink’
By MARK DOUGLAS HOME, Scottish Correspondent
PROPOSALS for a £100m, privately financed dual carriageway linking the M8 and M74 motorways in Scotland were unveiled yesterday by the Government.
It could be the first modern private toll road north of the border.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton MP, Scottish Office environment minister, said it would be ‘additional’ to the public road building programme and could start by 1992 or 1993 — against a delay until the next century if it had to await public funding.
He added: ‘At this stage I can't give you any indication of what level the toll might be…it depends on the amount of interest from industry and commerce.’
He expected it to become toll free after 15 to 20 years.
The project is contained in a Scottish Office consultation document proposing £200m-plus of improvements to the trunk road system south of Edinburgh.
It describes the suggested ‘fastlink’— stretching 25 miles from the M8 Edinburgh-Glasgow motorway to the M74 at Douglas in Lanarkshire — as ‘the most important road proposal to emerge from the study’.
It adds: ‘The viability of this proposal will need to be further explored with the private sector and others as it is too early at this stage to value the commercial opportunities a road might bring for improved coal and mineral extraction, forestry, recreation and other developments to defray construction costs.’
However, Lord James seemed in no doubt it would be ‘particularly attractive’ to private industry and commerce.
They had ‘called for its development’.
The Scottish Office has asked for responses to the consultation document by 27 November.
The Government intends to hold a competition for the ‘fastlink’ road if investors are found.
The document also proposes extending the dual carriageway section of the A1 east of Edinburgh to Haddington and, eventually, to Dunbar.
Other main proposals concern the two main roads leading from Edinburgh to the Borders, the A7 and A68.
The ‘most important immediate improvement’ for the Borders would be the A68 Dalkeith by-pass.
But, longer term, the Scottish Office is proposing to improve either the A68 or A7 to dual carriageway.
Accident prevention schemes are also planned and regional councils will be invited to suggest schemes costing up to £1m.
The Government has already announced two private toll road proposals in England — the Birmingham northern relief road and a Birmingham to Manchester road, parallel to the M6.
Russia launches space technology sales drive
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
RUSSIA is coming to Britain to sell space technology — including materials for hip joints, rocket sub-assemblies, superglues and remote sensing data on Earth — and cash in on what they believe to be a treasure trove of research.
A clutch of companies involved in technology from the Soviet space programmes has been given permission for the first time to deal direct with foreigners.
The marketing drive is their latest attempt to commercialise space and earn hard currency, Until now any deals have been largely through the Soviet Space Agency, Glvacosmos.
Mark Raggett, a businessman spearheading the effort, said: ‘If I was to take some of these materials and technologies back to the Soviet Union, I would probably be breaking the law.’
Many Western companies, frustrated by restrictions on sales to the eastern bloc, are likely to find the Soviet technology sales drive particularly galling.
Last year, the Russians spent 1.3bn roubles on space research for science and economics, but made 2bn roubles in profits.
According to Soviet sources, a catalogue of 600 scientific and technical innovations from the space shuttle Buran and the giant rocket booster Energiya have been prepared for exploitation worldwide.
Many of these will be unleashed in Britain by Lynmart, a company headed by Mr Raggett, who worked closely with the Russians to set up the British Astronaut Project, JUNO.
‘In the past one Soviet space firm was not allowed contact with another, let alone with companies in the West,’ he said.
The Russians say that work on Energiya and Buran has yielded more than 20 new metals, alloys and materials which can operate in temperatures from minus 253C to 800C.
Using anti-friction materials developed for space, excavators can be made to work at very low temperatures without lubrication, while materials developed for Buran are ideal for artificial limbs and, in particular, hip joints.
Of great interest, Mr Raggett says, are sophisticated aluminium metal matrices which are lighter than aluminium yet stronger than steel.
The Russians are also keen to sell their Earth remote sensing data and sophisticated systems which they claim can improve monitoring of hurricanes.
Next year, a technology module will be docked on Mir, the Soviet space station, and used as a futuristic electronics laboratory.
In conditions of zero gravity, the Russians will begin experimenting with making semi-conducting materials for electronic chips.
Mr Raggett says he is interested in finding industrial partners and financial backing to set up companies to sell and make products under licence in the UK.
Bank opens nursery for staff
By HELEN HAGUE
MIDLAND BANK launches its first nursery today in Sheffield, spearheading a national drive to retain and recruit staff as the jobs market tightens, writes Helen Hague.
Up to 300 more are planned over the next four years, under a plan to help parents on the bank's payroll.
Midland, whose staff is 56 per cent female, is the first major clearing bank to start a nursery programme: others are expected to follow in the drive to woo mothers back to work.
The Sheffield nursery, costing £35 a week for each child, has spaces for 46 children aged between six months and five years.
It will be open between 8.15am and 6.15pm, with provision for care outside these hours.
Anne Watts, Midland's equal opportunities director, said: ‘When a women gives up her job to care for children her employer loses immeasurable training and experience.
If industry wants to retain its increasingly-important female workforce, employers must be sympathetic to the needs of women to balance work and family life’.
The bank already runs a five-year career-break scheme as part of its equal opportunities policy.
Nurses' lobby
By HELEN HAGUE
The Royal College of Nursing is to lobby Parliament on 24 October in protest at the Government's plans to shake up the National Health Service, the union has announced.
The nurses will be joined by Age Concern, Mencap and the Carers' Association.
Murder charge
By HELEN HAGUE
A man has been accused of murdering his wife — 10 years after her body was found in the Grand Union Canal at Berkhamsted, Hertfordshire.
David Lockley, 43, of Sussex Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk, who changed his name by deed poll from John Byatt, was remanded in custody until Friday when he appeared before Hemel Hempstead magistrates charged with killing Mary Angela Byatt in August 1979.
Broadlands store plan is rejected
By HELEN HAGUE
A plan to build a superstore and garden centre at Broadlands in Hampshire, the former home of the late Lord Mountbatten, has been rejected by Chris Patten, the Environment Secretary, overturning a decision of the inquiry inspector.
During the inquiry, Lord Romsey promised he would spend £9m on urgent restoration work on his estate, but that the income from visitors to Broadlands was insufficient to carry out the renovations.
The Environment Department said yesterday that Mr Patten could not agree with the inquiry inspector's judgement that the needs of the historic house justified the introduction of unacceptable shopping developments in the countryside.
Radio 2 chief will play to ‘her peers’
By MAGGIE BROWN, Media Editor
FRANCES LINE was appointed controller of BBC Radio 2 yesterday.
Aged 49, married, and living in Croydon and Eastbourne —‘a lovely place’— she seems to personify the Radio 2 listener.
‘I suppose you could say I am playing to my peers.’
The network deliberately woos the over-40s and housewives.
The first woman controller of Radio 2 has risen from the BBC typing pool, where she started 32 years ago.
The BBC has a much-trumpeted equal opportunities policy.
‘But you can't be generous, you have to go for the best person for the job.
Through the BBC giving opportunities to women I was there to be chosen.’
As head of Radio 2's music department for the last four years, Ms Line has been responsible for the blend of easy listening that makes up 80 per cent of its 24-hours-a-day output, along with presenters such as Derek Jameson and Jimmy Young.
Before moving to Radio 2 she was chief assistant at Radio 4, handling schedules.
She favours a bit of ‘danger and adventure’ as far as musical output is concerned.
‘I am always sending my producers off to the BBC music library, telling them to seek a breadth of listening: let's be adventurous, dangerous and interesting.’
She says the extensive music library represents a unique resource which the BBC can draw on in its forthcoming battle for listeners with new national commercial radio channels.
‘We can go from opera, to the Beatles, to a 30s classic, then back to the 60s.
Others can't do that: they haven't got the records to choose from.’
The Labour Party Conference: Deadline for end of nuclear power narrowly rejected
By JUDY JONES
THE LABOUR leadership won a narrow victory over hard-line opponents of civil nuclear power yesterday when the conference rejected attempts to impose a strict deadline for phasing it out.
It accepted the policy review proposals for an open-ended programme of diminishing Britain's reliance on nuclear energy despite demands led by Arthur Scargill, the National Union of Mineworkers' president, for a commitment to complete the process within 15 years.
Delegates agreed by 3,243,000 votes to 2,859,000 to throw out the NUM's proposed deadline, which was overwhelmingly supported by last month's TUC, against the wishes of the trade union leadership.
Mr Scargill said Labour's commitment to strengthening environmental protection would ring hollow with the electorate without a target date for eliminating nuclear power.
‘Nuclear power is not needed.
It is 40 per cent more expensive than coal, and there is an abundance of alternative energy sources.
If the worst conceivable accident were to occur in Britain at a nuclear power station, one million men, women and children would die.
It is a price too high to pay.’
Frank Chapman, an executive council member of the EEPTU electricians' union, was hissed and slow-handclapped when he asserted that scaling down nuclear power would put a brake on economic development in third world countries.
‘If we abandon nuclear power, we abandon them to competing for declining energy sources at a price they will clearly not be able to afford.’
To scoffs of disbelief from some delegates, he asserted that, where managed safely and sensibly, nuclear power was one of the few energy sources which did not pollute the atmosphere.
Moreover, to close all nuclear power stations would consign 100,000 workers to the dole queues.
But John Evans, for the national executive, insisted that it was unreasonable to tie the party to a strict timetable since scientists and technologists did not yet agree on how nuclear plants could be decommissioned safely.
‘For us to promise the removal of nuclear power generation within 15 years would be to delude ourselves and mislead others.’
The Labour leadership's alternative strategy for the industry would produce a ‘substantial reduction’ in nuclear power generation by 2000, he said.
Tony Blair, Labour front-bench energy spokesman, said the next Labour government should seek a higher aim than ‘meeting some arbitrary timetable’.
He added: ‘For the first time in energy policy history, the environment will govern our energy policy.
We will attempt to meet a substantial part of our energy needs from benign, renewable sources of energy.’
Anxious to exploit government embarrassment over the delay in its programme for electricity privatisation, he added: ‘Energy policy is too critical to the future of this nation to leave to the short-term whims of market forces.
We don't want privatisation to be postponed.
We want it abandoned.’
In the vote on the NUM motion three factors helped to tip the balance in favour of the Labour leadership: the NUM lacked the support it commanded last month at Blackpool from Nalgo, the local government officers' union, since the latter is not affiliated to the party; the pro-nuclear EETPU, absent from Blackpool since its expulsion from the TUC, cast its votes in favour of the leadership's stance; and Ucatt, the construction union, previously in favour of the 15-year deadline, has recently withdrawn its opposition to the policy review plan.
The Labour Party Conference: Gould tells of economic plans
By JUDY JONES
BRITAIN'S projected £20bn trade deficit for this year is the market's ‘definitive judgement’ on a decade of Tory government, Bryan Gould, Labour's trade and industry spokesman told the conference yesterday, writes Judy Jones.
He told delegates: ‘After all the Tories have taken, the end result is a country which cannot pay its way, which lives on tick and with the highest interest rates of the advanced world.
That is why things have got to change and a Labour government is needed to bring about that change.’
Labour would not tolerate the regional imbalances that disfigured the economy, and the waste of resources which had occured under the Tories.
Rather, it would intervene where needed and invest in research and development and training, he said.
Mr Gould promised the party would restore ‘the great utilities’ to public ownership and insist on higher standards of regulation than those which had prevailed under the Conservatives.
However, the conference overwhelmingly rejected attempts from the left to commit the party to a major extension of public ownership, and to take control of at least one leading company in each of the main manufacturing sectors.
Roger Lyons, of MSF, the scientific and manufacturing union, welcomed the leadership strategy for expanding and modernising the manufacturing base.
But he warned that correcting the mistakes of the present administration would not be easy.
He said: ‘Look at the problems 12 years of Tory mismanagement will bequeath to us; a balance of payments deficit financed by hot money, casino-type operation — money which will fly away at the prospect of a Labour victory.’
The Labour Party Conference: Policy review ‘a symbol of party renewal’
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
LABOUR'S policy review was a symbol of the party renewing itself and becoming again a force for change, Tom Sawyer, deputy general secretary of Nupe, the public sector workers' union, said at the start of four days of debate on the review reports.
Mr Sawyer, chairman of the party's home policy committee which co-ordinated the work of the seven policy review groups, insisted there had been no sacrifice of principles.
Values and principles did not change, he said, but the times in which they had to be applied did change.
There had been changes in technology, in the workforce and in the class system.
That was why the party's polices had been reviewed.
He attributed recent by-election and European Parliament election success to the review.
‘We are 10 points ahead in the polls two years after starting the policy review.’
Giving strong backing to participation in the European Community, Mr Sawyer continued: ‘We are now Britain's European party.
Europe must be a social and environmental Europe, a full-employment Europe, not a Europe divided between rich and poor as Britain is under Mrs Thatcher.’
The Tories had promised bigger incomes and delivered bigger debts.
Margaret Thatcher had created a ‘supermarket society’ where the only thing a society needed was a credit card and the only freedoms that mattered were those that could be bought.
‘We have the agenda for the Nineties,’ Mr Sawyer said.
Labour was moving on as a renewed party —‘a party that cares as much about consumers as it cares about producers; a party that wants to make the economy work as much as it wants to change the economy; a party that embraces as much of the green as it does of the red’.
The Labour Party Conference: Voices labouring for a lost cause
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
PENNED-IN by steel barriers between a noisy crowd of gay liberationists and the lonely emissary of the oppressed African Dinkas, few of the street-corner causes besieging this week's conference seem as hopeless as the campaign for Labour to organise in Ulster.
About 15 mainly Protestant and professional Belfast-based activists have made the trip to Brighton this year, adding their voices to the clamour as the largely indifferent stream of Labour delegates pours from the conference centre at lunchtime.
The speaking invitation to Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president and MP for West Belfast, and vague expectations that a Tory Party branch may be recognised in North Down, have provided little encouragement of a parallel shift by Labour.
‘It is an absolute bloody shame that the Labour Party won't take this thing seriously,’ David Morrison, 45, a systems analyst and secretary of the campaign of 200-300 members, said.
‘I don't know why.
You will have to ask them — they won't even talk to us.
If we planted a bomb in the conference hall, they would listen to us soon enough.’
In the meantime, they were pressing on with the task of handing leaflets to anyone prepared to take one, and taking limited encouragement from the presence of a junior Labour front-bencher, Kate Hoey, at their conference fringe meeting.
The party leaders show no sign of relenting.
Extending Labour's front into Ulster, they say, would run counter to the policy of reunification of Ireland by consent.
There is also a suspicion in some circles that the campaign is to some extent driven by a form of ‘closet unionism’; a motive the Belfast campaigners attribute freely to their Tory counterparts.
They angrily deny any such hidden agenda in their own ranks, insisting their campaign spans the religious divide and citing non-sectarian politics as the route to breaking down traditional divisions.
Mo Mowlam, a Labour Northern Ireland spokeswoman, was prepared to accept their good faith.
But she said: ‘Because Labour is for a united Ireland, nationalist support would home in on us.
Unionists would move towards the Conservative Party, and all we would be doing is providing another cul-de-sac for the people of Northern Ireland.’
Outside, the Campaign for Labour Representation in Northern Ireland was already planning to return next year, spending around £250 a head on travel and accommodation and hoping for an unforeseen breakthrough.
The Labour Party Conference: Anger as new defence policy is accepted
By STEPHEN GOODWIN
A UNILATERAL move by a Labour government to get rid of nuclear weapons could be reversed by a later administration, Gerald Kaufman, the party's foreign affairs spokesman, argued yesterday as the Brighton conference swung behind a multilateral approach to disarmament.
‘I share the objective of all in our party who want a nuclear-free Britain.
But I want a Labour Britain to play its full part in bringing about a nuclear-free world,’ Mr Kaufman said.
The debate on the defence section of the party's policy review report, Britain in the World, brought to a head the anger felt in sections of the party over Neil Kinnock's shift away from unilateralism.
Joan Ruddock, former chair of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and now a member of Labour's front bench team in the Commons, said she and many others were ‘deeply saddened’ by the change.
‘Of course most of us, including myself, will accept the democratic decision.
But we cannot change our view that no political system, and no national interest, can justify the threat to devastate this planet.
I believe that in time our view will prevail,’ Ms Ruddock said.
British nuclear weapons were ‘a total anachronism’ in an era when political reform had swept the Soviet Union and Poland had a non-communist government, she said.
‘No responsible leader would press the button and we should have the courage to say so.’
Mr Kaufman called in his support the view of Hans-Dietrich Genscher, the German foreign minister, who he said had told the review group in Bonn that ‘agreements are better than unilateral moves because they can be verified and cannot be reversed’.
‘A move by a Labour government to get rid of nuclear weapons without agreement internationally could be reversed by a non-Labour government for humankind can never unlearn how to make nuclear weapons — but a nuclear disarmament treaty signed on behalf of Britain by a Labour government could not be reversed.’
Mr Kaufman began the debate with a resume of the ‘encouraging and exciting’ developments of the past year in eastern Europe and disarmament.
To assist this process, the review group recommended that in Nato a Labour government would oppose modernisation of short-range nuclear weapons.
It should press for Nato to make its objective the removal of all short-range tactical nuclear weapons from Europe — the third zero option.
He said by the time of the next election it would no longer be possible to cancel Trident.
Most of the money would have been spent or committed.
One of the four subamarines would be complete and construction work well advanced on two others.
A Labour government should cancel the fourth and end all British nuclear testing.
Supporting the leadership, Garfield Davies, general secretary of the shop workers' union Usdaw, said delegates should not forget the objective was to create a nuclear-free world, not just a nuclear-free Britain.
Bruce Kent, chair of CND, was cheered when he declared his belief that nuclear weapons did nothing for Britain's security.
‘They are suicidal and nuclear threats by anybody are wicked.’
But he maintained that was not the purpose of the composite he moved on behalf of the Tottenham constituency party.
It aimed at reducing defence spending to the European average and transfering the savings to the health service, pensions, housing and education.
‘If we pass this policy we can save at least £5bn to help to put this country on its feet again and to make decent lives for ordinary people possible,’ he said.
‘It is a time of historic opportunity.
We do not face outside military threats.
We face real threats internationally from pollution, over-population, from famine, from nuclear accidents and from the collapse of an unjust world economic order which means we take more money from the poor than we lend them every year.’
Ron Todd, Transport and General Workers' Union general secretary, was applauded as he reaffirmed his union's commitment to unilateralism.
‘I am convinced that we need to push the British disarmament boat out from the shore.
Once it's properly launched, where everyone can see it, you won't have to worry too much about rocking the boat,’ he said.
Labour should ‘face the challenge’— the slogan of the policy review — by carrying out a full-scale programme to implement nuclear disarmament, he told the conference.
‘Labour needs to walk tall in a world of challenges.
The challenges of hunger, of poverty, of ecological crisis.
We can't be credible in that great human crusade if we can't face the real challenge of getting rid of British nuclear weapons.’
Barbara Switzer, deputy general secretary of the manufacturing, science and finance union MSF, condemned the review as ‘dated and timid’.
‘We are unilateralist because it is the only sane, only moral and only effective thing to be.
But we are not pacifists so we will keep conventional weapons to defend our shores and our land,’ Ms Switzer said.
Supporting the review, Tom Burlison, northern regional secretary of the GMB general union, said the public would expect a Labour government to use whatever was the most effective means of eliminating nuclear weapons.’
Let's have the courage to admit that there is no betrayal in providing the next Labour government with the scope to give Britain a leading role in a movement to a non-nuclear Europe,’ he said.
Martin O'Neill, the party's defence spokesman, said the road to arms control now lay through the process of negotiation.
It would require patience and a Labour government would have to continue to meet its obligations to Nato, to service personnel and to workers in the defence industries.
‘Most of all we cannot renege on our responsibilities to our own people,’ Mr O'Neill said.
A Labour government would immediately initiate the widest possible review defence commitments world-wide and set up an arms conversion agency.
Tony Benn, who Mr O'Neill recalled was a member of a Labour Cabinet committed to nuclear defence, insisted that Britain did not need nuclear weapons because there was no Soviet threat.
‘Every Labour MP was elected two years ago on a pledge to rid Britain of nuclear weapons.
We cannot go back on this pledge,’ Mr Benn said.
‘Who would believe us if we said we are changing our policy to win votes?
Who would believe us on anything if that was the basis of our policy?’
Bill Jordan, president of the engineers' union AEU, was hissed when he told delegates a Labour government should be ready to play a positive role in a Nato that was now ‘reaping a spectacular harvest of peace’ from years of multilateralism.
The Labour Party Conference: Sinn Fein president defends IRA's barracks bomb attack
By JOHN PIENAAR, Political Correspondent
GERRY ADAMS last night discounted the anger and embarrassment of Labour leaders as he used a party conference fringe meeting to defend IRA terrorism, including the bomb attack on the Royal Marines at Deal, Kent.
The Sinn Fein president's appearance, and the invitation of the unofficial Labour Committee on Ireland, was condemned by senior party figures, and was met with a candlelight protest by local Conservatives.
Inside, about 12 demonstrators, believed to be National Front members, were ejected by police after attempting to disrupt the meeting.
Mr Adams scotched speculation that he might take up his Belfast West parliamentary seat, and use parliamentary privilege to overcome the broadcasting ban against Sinn Fein.
And he told reporters before the meeting: ‘I support the IRA's right to engage in armed struggle — where it wages armed engagements is a matter for itself.’
Pressed on the justification for killing non-combatant musicians at Deal, he added: ‘Your Minister of Defence gave the answer to that when he said they were marines first and musicians second.’
Earlier Kevin McNamara, Labour's shadow Northern Ireland Secretary, described his own meeting on Ulster policy as ‘overshadowed by a man coming to gloat at the scene of one the gravest blows to democracy carried out in these islands: the bombing of the Conservative Party conference’.
Mo Mowlam, a Labour Northern Ireland spokeswoman, said it was appalling that Mr Adams, ‘supporting violence as he does’, had been invited to speak.
The Labour Party Conference: Livingstone loses his seat on the national executive
By COLIN HUGHES
KEN LIVINGSTONE was yesterday knocked off Labour's national executive in a vote which took the Brent East MP and his left-wing associates by surprise.
The likeliest explanation of his defeat in the executive's constituency section vote is that party activists wanted to rebuke him for publicly rocking the boat during the passage of the policy review.
Robin Cook, the party's health spokesman, who retained his executive seat by coming second, said the vote showed the degree to which the party wanted to elect people who devoted their energies to helping Labour to win the next election.
‘Ken Livingstone's problem is that he is always on the television slagging the party off.’
It may also turn out Mr Livingstone lost because more constituencies this year balloted their full membership, rather than leaving it to their activist general committees to decide.
The party leadership — Neil Kinnock included — could barely conceal their delight when the vote was declared.
His defeat gives a further boost to Mr Kinnock's already overriding executive majority.
The confirmed hard left on the executive is now reduced to two: Tony Benn, and Dennis Skinner.
Mr Livingstone was replaced by John Prescott, the transport spokesman, who came third and said he would work for organisational and campaigning reforms in the party.
He added: ‘Of course I'll support Labour policy and the leadership, but I also believe constructive criticism has a role to play.’
Mr Kinnock said he was delighted at Mr Prescott's election, adding he was ‘a dear and close friend’.
He made it plain that he now wants to forgive and forget Mr Prescott's deputy leadership challenge to Roy Hattersley last year.
It had been thought that Mr Prescott would replace Bryan Gould, the trade and industry spokesman.
But Mr Gould took the sixth out of seven constituency places.
The vulnerable national executive member is now Jo Richardson who came seventh.
David Blunkett, MP for Sheffield, Brightside, was top.
The Labour Party Conference: Conference quotes
By COLIN HUGHES
‘My view of the Common market can be summed up in four words and three of them are…the Common Market.’
— Austin Mitchell, MP for Great Grimsby.
‘I am not representing CND, I am not representing the Vatican, I am representing Tottenham and I think many other people as well.’
— Bruce Kent.
‘I want to tell you fellas, if you are at risk (from nuclear contamination) it's your semen and sperm which is at risk.’
— Elaine Kidney, Stafford Labour Party.
‘If the price of ending nuclear power is to close every pit I will pay it because my interest is in the future of the human race,’— Arthur Scargill.
‘It is for a constituency Labour Party to welcome Mr Scargill with open arms, or any arms.’
— Roy Hattersley, on Mr Scargill's reported attempt to become an MP.
The Labour Party Conference: Revised policies approved
By COLIN HUGHES
The conference approved the Productive and Competitive Economy policy review, which proposes: A full employment target; the creation of a strengthened trade and industry department to steer strategic investment; A nationwide information technology cable network; Anti-inflation measures; Intervention only where the market fails; To regain a majority shareholding in British Telecom by buying 2 per cent of privatised shares at the market price; To regain majority control of other privatised utilities when funds allow.
The conference also approved the Britain in the Modern World policy review, which proposes: Cancelling one of the four planned Trident submarines; Putting other Trident missiles and Polaris into international arms reduction talks; Opposing the modernisation of short-range nuclear weapons in Europe; A commitment to continued Nato membership, while arguing for the abandonment of its flexible response strategy; Aiming to eliminate all nuclear weapons by 2000; Adoption of a policy of no first use of British nuclear weapons; Decisions The conference yesterday: Rejected a motion which would have committed the party to phasing out nuclear power stations within 15 years.
Affirmed the party's commitment ‘to reduce defence spending initially to equal the average level of other West European countries’ and use savings for social spending.
Approved a committment to secure the reduction of conventional and nuclear weapons by taking advantage of multilateral and bilateral negotiations, and unilateral initiatives.
Rejected reaffirmation of Labour's former policy of unilaterally renouncing the use or possession of British nuclear weapons, and the ‘unconditional removal of all nuclear weapons and nuclear bases from British soil and waters within the first parliament of the next Labour government’.
Reaffirmed its support for the Palestine Liberation Organisation as the ‘sole legitimate representative’ of the Palestinian people and stated that it should play a full role in a UN conference to negotiate a settlement to the Middle East conflict.
Rejected moves to make the European Parliament the principal legislative body of the EC, and transform the Council of Ministers into a consultative body with no powers of veto over the parliament.
Today the conference will debate representation for black members; the policy review report on economic equality; discipline procedures, constituency rules; and women's representation and organisation in the party.
Neil Kinnock will deliver the leader's speech.
Smacked children are more likely to become delinquent
By PETER WILBY, Education Editor
CHILDREN who are smacked or beaten are more likely to become troublesome adolescents or to have a criminal record before they are 20, new research shows.
The link between corporal punishment and delinquency remained strong even when the researchers had allowed for class, sex and family size.
The findings are from John and Elizabeth Newson, founders and joint directors of the Child Development Research Unit at Nottingham University.
They have followed the histories of 700 families in the city since the late 1950s.
Their research is published by Approach (Association to Protect All Children), which wants to extend to the home the ban in schools on physical punishment.
Despite changes in official and media attitudes to corporal punishment, the Newsons' research suggests parental habits have altered little in nearly 30 years.
In 1958, some 62 per cent of mothers smacked their year-old babies.
For another generation, in 1985, the proportion was 63 per cent.
The research suggests smacking reaches a peak at four years but remains significant — particularly for working-class boys — at 11.
At four, three-quarters of all children were smacked at least once a week and only 3 per cent were never smacked.
The large majority of the mothers believed in smacking; only 17 per cent disapproved on principle.
By the age of seven, more than half the boys and nearly a third of the girls were being hit at least once a week.
Some 22 per cent of the mothers had used an implement — a strap, cane or slipper — and another 53 per cent had threatened one.
By 11, the majority of children were hit less than once a month or never.
But 18 per cent were still being struck at least once a week.
An implement was used by mothers — apparently the main punishment agents — on 15 per cent of boys and 3 per cent of girls.
At all ages, boys are hit more frequently and more severely than girls.
Boys from unskilled, working-class homes tend to have the hardest time; at 11 years, 36 per cent were beaten with an implement by the father, the mother or both.
On an index of potential or actual delinquency at the age of 11 — based on stealing, truancy and trouble with neighbours, police or school — high scores were associated with severe or frequent corporal punishment.
The question whether the children are delinquent because they are smacked, or the reverse, cannot be answered, the Newsons add.
‘What we can say, however, is that smacking and beating mothers do not succeed in producing non-delinquent children.’
Among those with a criminal record at 20, some 73 per cent had been smacked or beaten at least once a week when aged seven and 40 per cent when they were 11.
Corresponding proportions for other children were 47 per cent and 14 per cent.
The Newsons suggest these associations stand out to such an extent that they ‘can be fairly assumed to be causative’.
Fathers who are highly involved with their children at 11, but who do not punish them, are the best protection against a criminal record in adolescence, the research suggests.
Salesman jailed for food poison plot
By PETER WILBY, Education Editor
A SALESMAN who threatened to poison food at Marks and Spencer stores unless his demands for £140,000 were met was jailed yesterday for five years.
William Shooter's blackmail scheme was described by the judge, Lord Allanbridge, as ‘a calculated, carefully planned and shocking crime’.
Shooter, 40, tampered with the labels of three soft drinks bottles at company stores in Luton, Leicester and Derby, Glasgow High Court was told.
Then, in a letter to the company's London headquarters, he said that unless he was paid, items would be injected by a qualified chemist, causing ‘pain, suffering and possibly death’ to customers.
Shooter, of Southbrae Drive, Jordanhill, Glasgow, claimed to represent an organisation called Midas which had political objectives and was in desperate need of funds.
He went on to threaten to give details to the media, backed by further contamination of items of food throughout the country, the court was told.
By this time the money involved would be £200,000 and the blackmail would run for two years.
Kevin Drummond QC, for the prosecution, said Shooter had hatched the elaborate plot on his home computer.
Details of it were stored on a floppy disk.
Shooter, described in court as a salesman, was caught after a plain-clothes police officer posed as a courier taking the first of the blackmail money to a pick-up point at Edinburgh Airport.
The court heard that a desperate financial crisis and debts of more than £40,000 drove Shooter to hatch his unsuccessful plot.
Edgar Prais QC, for the defence, said the offence was committed in a climate of food poisoning scares.
He appealed for leniency on the grounds that nothing had been touched.
He said Shooter, who admitted the blackmail plot at an earlier hearing, was an author of several works of fiction.
In one unpublished crime novel, the extortion plan was mentioned, he added.
In a statement read to the court, Shooter described his crime as ‘a cry for help from someone who could no longer handle the pressures of life’.
Lord Allanbridge said he took into account the stress Shooter was under at the time.
Hospitals may refuse no-contract patients
By NICHOLAS TIMMINS, Health Services Correspondent
PATIENTS needing non-emergency treatment will face hospital checks to see if their health authority will pay — and may be turned away if the doctor sending them is from a district not having a contract with that hospital.
The need to check if, and how fully, an authority will meet the cost in such cases is outlined by the Department of Health in guidelines to authorities on how the NHS market will work.
The department adds that GPs must remain free to send patients to hospitals with which their district has no contract.
Such freedom is one of the most controversial areas in the scheme.
The general principle is that the cost of those referrals will be met by each district's contingency reserve, the guidance says.
They will only be challenged if ‘it can be shown that the proposed referral is wholly unjustified on clinical grounds, or where an alternative referral would be equally efficacious, taking into account the patient's wishes’.
But it adds that the principle ‘cannot be interpreted as a licence for GPs to disregard the contract arrangements’.
And it warns: ‘A presumption of the right to make an extra-contractual referral cannot be a guarantee that the DHA would in all cases agree to meet the cost.’
To cope with such cases a ‘simple, quick, non-bureaucratic’ procedure is needed.
Each district should have a clinical panel of doctors whose advice can be sought.
The document says such cases should be minimised by discussions with GPs on where they wish to refer patients before contracts are agreed.
Consultants will remain free to refer patients to a specialist in another hospital although the department has yet to decide the mechanism for payment.
The decision, however, will be that of the case doctor ‘and must be made solely for clinical, not financial reasons’.
Firms win TV rights to Commons committees
By MAGGIE BROWN, Media Editor
A PRIZE contract to televise the select and standing committees of the House of Commons, which handle much of the nitty-gritty of government, has been won by George Carey, founder editor of Newsnight, a year after leaving the BBC to start his own company.
Coverage for an initial eight-month experiment starts next month alongside the introduction of cameras to Parliament.
The contract, which contains the same strict rules as those governing coverage of Parliament, has been awarded to Barraclough Carey Productions -which Mr Carey founded with a BBC documentary producer, Jenny Barraclough -and Sevenday Productions, whose director, John Underwood, is a former ITN home affairs correspondent.
Mr Carey, 46, a distinguished BBC journalist for 23 years, said he expected to liaise constantly with broadcasters on what footage they required.
Payment would be based on a pooled system: if everyone wanted the same coverage costs would be shared.
If only one broadcaster wanted something, it would bear the cost.
Covering the mass of routine committees raises many more problems of choice, discretion and topicality than recording events in the main chamber.
Very little debate about how to manage it has taken place.
The contract was first advertised in August and attracted bids from Visnews; WTN, part-owned by ITN; and a host of independents.
Mr Carey said: ‘We submitted a bid which tried to be clear about the problems, and to arrive at a view of what is practicable, which disturbs MPs as little as possible, while giving the broadcasters what they want.
Many details still have to be sorted out.
‘Our job will be to be flexible.
I think it could really be interesting, a view of democracy in action, where backbench MPs, expert witnesses, judge whether the Government is performing.
A lot depends on how the public's taste of committees is cultivated.’
Oil spill clean-up in Southampton Water
By MAGGIE BROWN, Media Editor
TEAMS of workmen yesterday cleared oil-covered shingle from Calshot Spit (above), a nature conservation area, as part of a big clean-up operation after a tanker spilled 6,000 gallons of heavy Middle East crude into Southampton Water.
Booms stayed on standby at the mouth of the Hamble River to protect it from the slick.
Tidal action prevented the oil, which spilled from the Cypriot-registered MV Worthy, from washing into the Solent.
A sea valve had been left open on the tanker as she discharged her cargo at Esso's Fawley Refinery on Sunday.
The tanker had earlier been involved in a collision in Spain, but the refinery manager, Reg Clay, said there was no underwater damage that could have contributed to the incident.
Refinery staff, who had earlier feared that more oil had been lost, launched contingency plans and the nearby Oil Spill Service Centre was placed on alert.
Booms were used to contain the oil, and tugs sprayed hundreds of gallons of chemical dispersant on the oil, which had initially formed a 100ft slick.
Skimming operations recovered about 1,000 gallons.
Fawley power station, which supplies electricity to the National Grid, operated at reduced capacity to avoid sucking up the oil in its water cooling system.
By last night, six oil-soaked birds had been found and taken to an RSPCA shelter at Fareham, Hampshire.
Mike Ward, the shelter's manager, said birds covered in oil became waterlogged and were unable to fly, but the biggest danger was that they could be poisoned.
Esso said a veterinary surgeon was also standing by.
Grotesque and tragic images of the embryo overshadow debate: The ‘pro-life’ lobby is to launch its biggest campaign to limit abortion.
Sarah Helm profiles a leading group
By SARAH HELM
OUTSIDE the Society for the Protection of Unborn Children conference hall at Keele last weekend, two young women from Antrim branch were discussing how a woman had recently given birth to a hairy baby with dog's ears.
They were planning to raise the issue.
‘We read about it just the other day.
The baby is 13 months old and is 70 per cent dog and 30 per cent human.
The woman was impregnated with a dog's sperm.
‘After a year a dog is a fully grown, fully independent individual, but the baby is still dependent on its mother.
How do you bring up a child like that?
It's just terrible,’ Siobhan Gallagher, 18, said.
Nearby, pale young men wearing Save the Baby T-shirts were selling Let me Live tapes, Silent Scream videos, Mother Teresa postcards, ‘precious feet’ badges, ‘stop doctors starving babies to death’stickers, Even Nice Girls.
.. comics — and a pile of pink things in plastic wrappers.
‘There you are — you'd better have one to remind you what a foetus looks like at 12 weeks,’ an enthusiastic PR said.
‘You can even see it's a boy, look.’
Celeste Hinds, mother of a Down's syndrome child, took her place at the rostrum, dominated overhead by SPUC's ubiquitous emblem: the crying foetus.
‘The handicapped reach out to us in simplicity and trust…rejecting them we create a cynical selfish world for us to live in…we are walking a path which after Nuremberg it was said we would never be walking again,’ she said to loud applause and a standing ovation.
At the back of the hall a handicapped woman sat quietly in a wheelchair and a man paced up and down, a tiny Down's syndome baby gurgling in his arms.
This was a conference where images of the macabre and the grotesque mingled with the moving and the tragic; where the children and the handicapped were feted as survivors of a silent holocaust; where people went to learn the difference between pro-life and pro-death, between cloning and twinning, between a blob of jelly and a living foetus, between a terminated pregnancy and murder and to learn how to counter difficult questions.
For members of the society it has never been so important to know these things.
With the forthcoming publication of a government Bill on embryo research, SPUC has probably its best chance to challenge abortion laws.
As well as campaigning against embryo research, it plans to introduce an abortion amendment to the Bill, thereby forcing a free vote for the first time since abortion was legalised in 1967.
The society was founded in 1966 when David Steel's abortion Bill was moving fast towards the statute books.
It was the first anti-abortion group in the world.
When first formed it had only 12 members; it now has 30,000.
Despite a large Roman Catholic following and a Catholic convert, Phyllis Bowman, as its national director, the society's leadership has always insisted that it is not — unlike its ally Pro-Life — a primarily Catholic organisation.
It argued in the early days that to be too closely allied with Catholicism would deter a broad membership, which is now drawn from among protestants, muslims, baptists, Jews — and, it emphasises proudly, atheists.
The religious group increasingly providing new membership is the evangelicals.
Politically, the organisation says its grass roots are in working class Labour-voting families.
The age range is wide and the sexes balanced equally.
Large women sit knitting alongside neat men in tweed jackets, teenagers in torn jeans, mothers and children and the elderly.
A SPUC conference generates little fundamentalist fervour, just a quiet earnestness and obedience to the call from the rostrum: ‘We have ways of making you sign your commitment forms,’ grinned John Smeaton, the grey-suited general secretary.
‘If are late for workshops you will be penalised.
And remember to go to the video boutique if you haven't seen the videos recently.
We have the old favourites — The Silent Scream and a number of new hits as well.’
Members also obediently answer the calls for funds.
The society raises about £250,000 a year from membership contributions — about a third of its annual income.
Its biggest benefactor is the property developer Godfrey Bradman, who is believed to have donated £250,000 to the last campaign, and has pledged £65,000 to the embryo Bill campaign.
Much of its money comes from church fund-raising groups, although the society denies there are direct church contributions.
To its opponents, who often complain that the Roman Catholic Church gives SPUC an unfair advantage — an automatic communication network — it is quick to point to the feminist movement, trade union affiliations and Labour Party pro-abortion campaigns which it says ignore the views of the membership.
The organisation finances a full-time staff of about 20 with offices in Westminster, Preston and Glasgow.
It has about 200 branches, the most active in the North, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
Leaders say students and trade unionists are joining in increasing numbers.
The society boasts that it has become the most successful single-issue pressure group since William Wilberforce and opposition to the slave trade.
It believes its success has come because of the ‘single issue’ approach.
This has avoided complex questions, debate or dissent in its ranks — it has blocked from their vision that difficult and muddling word emblazoned on every pro-abortion banner: ‘choice’.
Being ‘single issue’ means SPUC has no position on contraception or women's rights.
Its policy is damage limitation, not prevention.
It will campaign on support for single mothers and on care for the disabled, and pay for research into Down's syndrome.
But it has no position on pre-marital sex or on censorship.
It allies itself with no political party, no outside cause.
The society, which has a permanent parliamentary lobbyist, has always been politically pragmatic and astute, compromising to make any progress, however small.
‘We are not absolutists.
We never pretend we have majority support for all the hard cases — pregnancy through rape, for example,’ Mrs Bowman said.
But concession and compromises are still made only with one end in sight.
This approach makes campaign by diktat clear and simple.
‘Please make sure you go to the press desk and get your personalised press release to send to the local papers,’ Mr Smeaton announced.
And at the press desk the computer churns them out, photograph and all.
Days later, MPs and newspapers will be swamped by Identikit letters and Identikit amendments tabled to numerous parliamentary Bills.
Concentrating on the single issue, the conference talks — for there can be no debates — pose no questions, and therefore no reason to tone down emotions.
Abortion clinics are ‘killing centres’ the media set out to ‘betray’and ‘sabotage’and abortion is ‘killing for convenience’or ‘the holocaust’.
The approach deters anyone who doubts.
‘They just wanted me to swallow it hook, line and sinker,’ a disillusioned student said.
Society leaders argue that their single issue approach works — which is all that matters to them.
For every supporter who becomes alienated, there is another who is moved by The Silent Scream.
And SPUC does not have a monopoly on horror.
For every image of ‘foetuses down the sink’, the pro-abortionists can conjure up visions of a knitting needle back street abortion.
The society's old adversary, the British Pregnancy Advisory Service, says the society is in disarray after so many defeats.
But SPUC says BPAS is in decline, hit by the loss in feminist fervour and decline in powers of the pro-abortion lobby in the trade unions and Labour.
Who is really winning will not be known before the free vote on the embryo Bill in the new year.
Ban urged on firms' HIV tests
By PATRICIA WYNN DAVIES, Legal Correspondent
TESTING for HIV as a condition of employment should be banned except where the absence of Aids or HIV infection is a bona fide requirement of the job, the Council of the International Bar Association decided at the opening of its ninth biennial conference in Strasbourg yesterday.
A resolution calls on the 21 member states of the Council of Europe to bring forward effective legal measures to ensure equal access to employment and prohibit HIV tests as a condition of employment in most cases.
The association recognises Aids and HIV infection as requiring laws to prevent discrimination in housing, employment, public housing, granting of credit and the delivery of services.
It says that employers should be encouraged to make reasonable workplace accommodation for people with HIV and draw up guidelines and educational programmes for dealing with Aids at work.
Mosaics focus attention on Cyprus politics
By GERALDINE NORMAN
SMUGGLED mosaics go on show at the Mall Galleries today in a highly political show of artistic treasures from the area around Famagusta in Cyprus, writes Geraldine Norman.
It spans 36 centuries, from 1600BC to AD1974 — the date of the Turkish invasion which left the ancient city of Famagusta in their hands.
The exhibition, mounted until Sunday by the Cypriot government, aims to make propaganda over what it calls the cultural devastation of the Turkish sector since the invasion — a claim disputed by the Turks.
Attention has recently focused on four sections of the sixth century wall mosaics from the church of Panayia Kanakaria, near Famagusta, which the Cypriot government is seeking to reclaim through the courts from an Indianapolis dealer.
The two mosaic sections from the church which went safely home to Cyprus in the early 1980s have, however, avoided the limelight.
These pieces, on view in London, also went along the smugglers' network.
They were first sighted in the Munich home of the Turkish art dealer Aydin Dikmen in 1983.
Walter Hopps, curator of the Menil Foundation, a museum in Houston, Texas, and the London dealer Yanni Petsopoulos, visited Mr Dikmen's and Mr Petsopoulos recognised a panel over the mantelpiece as a section from the Kanakaria murals.
Mr Hopps later mentioned to the Cypriots that the Kanakaria mosaics might be on the market.
Mr Petsopoulos was contacted by Constantine Leventis, the Cypriot delegate to Unesco.
While the dealer refused to reveal the mosaics' whereabouts, he succeeded in obtaining four mosaic sections from Mr Dikmen which were deposited in a Frankfurt warehouse.
He sent Mr Leventis the weigh bill and the Cypriot embassy in Bonn picked them up and sent them to Cyprus.
Two turned out to be genuine while two, according to the Cypriots, were fakes.
Mother is ‘saved’ by liver transplant after TV appeal
By ANDY GLINIECKI
THE MOTHER of a five-week-old girl was critically ill but improving last night after undergoing a liver transplant made possible by a television appeal.
Doctors at King's College Hospital, London, believe that Aisling Barnett, 35, who suffered liver failure after reacting to a drug prescribed after the birth of her daughter, would have died yesterday if not for the operation.
A donor was found within 24 hours of a television appeal by her husband Colin, from Hackney, east London, after all other avenues had failed.
Dr Roger Williams, director of the hospital's liver unit, last night called for change in legislation in line with American law which would oblige medical staff to approach the relatives of suitable donors for permission to transplant healthy organs.
At the moment this was not done systematically.
Dr Williams said: ‘The operation was very difficult because of the poor condition of the patient.
All seems well at the moment.’
Simon Griffiths, a hospital spokesman, said last night: ‘Mrs Barnett's general condition has improved over the last few hours and her liver is functioning well.’
She was still critically ill.
Speaking as the operation began, Mr Barnett thanked the person who gave permission for the donation: ‘I know that Aisling, even if she does not survive, would want me to express my eternal gratitude to them for giving her the chance to live.’
Mrs Barnett was in the operating theatre for 11 hours.
The transplant was carried out by a team of surgeons headed by Kai-Chah Tan.
She returned to the liver unit ward just before noon but was not expected to regain conciousness for some hours.
Her husband was allowed a visit.
The liver donation came from a UK resident but hospital authorities are releasing no further details.
It was rushed to King's College Hospital by an emergency medical team.
Dr Williams said problems relatedto blood pressure and her recent pregnancy meant that Mrs Barnett's condition was perilous.
Before yesterday's operation she spent three days in a deep coma as a result of liver failure.
‘Another 12 hours and I am sure she would have been dead.’
He said that there was a 65 per cent chance of survival for liver transplant patients with complications in the hospital's specialist unit and that the next 24 to 48 hours would be crucial.
Mrs Barnett fell ill because of a drug prescribed after the birth of her daughter.
But Dr Williams said it was a ‘very rare’ reaction and the drug would continue to be used because it was safe for most patients.
The hospital refused to reveal the name of the drug.
Dr Williams said doctors should be put under a legal obligation to approach relatives of patients who have died in intensive care units and would make suitable organ donors.
Special counsellors should be employed to aid this process.
‘At the moment this is not always done and yet there are people who, if they'd been approached, would have been willing to give permission.’
Radio wave users may have to bid for space
By MARY FAGAN, Technology Correspondent
PLANS to sell the UK's radio waves to the highest bidders are likely to be considered by Department of Trade and Industry ministers within the next few weeks.
Department sources said: ‘We want to increase the efficient use of the spectrum by introducing market forces in what is a very scarce commodity and a finite resource.’
Overcrowding is becoming a significant problem with the explosion in mobile communications and broadcasting services.
An auction would increase prices for spectrum users.
Licence fees are little more than department administration costs.
Police, emergency services and military users would almost certainly be exempted from any auction.
Defence now takes up half the frequency spectrum, with broadcasting and telecommunications using a large slice.
The Government is keen to increase competition in broadcasting and mobile telephone services.
To do so, the UK must clear out parts of the spectrum being used by something else, or develop technology to squeeze more into a given piece.
This year, the police and fire services will be removed from their radio waves.
Switching to another bit of spectrum means new radios and transmitters have to be developed and installed.
A draft consultative document approved by Lord Young of Graffham will go before his successor as secretary of state, Nicholas Ridley.
If he gives the go-ahead, the auction plan would be submitted to industry and other users for comment before any necessary legislation was considered.
Good diet ‘curbs cancer risk’
By LIZ HUNT, Medical Correspondent
WOMEN who have abnormal cervical smears can reduce the risk of developing cancer by improving their diet, a leading nutritionist said yesterday.
Low levels of vitamin C and another nutrient, beta-carotene, have been linked with abnormal smear tests, Dr Vishwa Singh, an American clinical nutritionist from New Jersey, said.
An abnormal smear shows that there are pre-cancerous cells in the cervix.
These may or may not progress to cervical cancer.
Dr Singh said the findings were preliminary, but he would ‘have no objection to a woman increasing her intake of these nutrients’.
Yellow-green fruit and vegetables such as carrots, apricots and water melon, broccoli and other leafy greens, are rich in beta-carotene, which is converted to vitamin A by the body.
Citrus fruits are a good source of vitamin C.
Dr Singh was speaking on the opening day of a three-day international conference in London on antioxidant vitamins and beta-carotene in disease prevention.
During the meeting, doctors and nutritionists will report on studies from around the world which show that certain vitamins may prevent or halt the progression of heart disease, cancer, rheumatism, and nervous disorders such as Parkinson's Disease.
More and more doctors realise that diet can influence disease, William Pryor, professor of chemistry and biochemistry at Louisiana State University, USA, told the conference.
The National Cancer Institute was sponsoring more than 30 studies to assess the role of certain nutrients, he said.
Radioactive dust ‘forced move’
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
LEVELS OF radioactive dust found in a home near the Sellafield nuclear reprocessing plant in Cumbria were so high that the owners felt they had to move their two young sons to safety immediately, the High Court was told yesterday.
But no one wanted to buy Mountain Ash, their four-bedroom house with its panoramic view over the Ravenglass estuary, because of its contamination with plutonium.
After two years, Christine and Christopher Merlin were forced to sell the property at auction for £35,500 — compared with its valuation of £60,000 — to a worker at the nuclear plant.
In a case which could pave the way for other people living near Sellafield to bring similar claims, the couple are suing British Nuclear Fuels, which weekly pumps millions of gallons of low-level nuclearwaste into the Irish Sea from Sellafield.
They are claiming more than £100,000 compensaion for what they allege was the ‘catastrophic’ effect the contamination has had on their lives.
Stephen Sedley QC, for the family, told Mr Justice Gatehouse that radioactivity in the Merlins' house dust was ‘enough to cause real concern, in particular about the health of their two young boys, Sam and Ben.
‘It was an extremely painful decision to leave the house.
It was not alarmist or panicky, but a rational response to a real risk.’
Mr Sedley said the Nuclear Installations Act, 1965, required BNFL to recompense the family for the catastrophic effects on their property, direct and consequential, from the ‘massive discharge of radioactive waste into the local environment’.
The couple were also forced to sell at a loss, the nearby post office and general store, which were also found to be contaminated.
Since 1982 they have been living at Grass Gars Farm, Ulpha, Broughton in Furness, in the Lake District — bought with a bridging loan, until Mountain Ash was sold in November 1984.
BNFL claims the levels of contamination in the house dust are harmless.
Kenneth Rokison QC, for BNFL, said the company would not be contesting the alleged levels of radioactivity in Mountain Ash, but would contest the levels at the post office.
The Merlins moved into Mountain Ash in 1973.
In the early 1980s the contents of a vacuum cleaner bag were analysed and ‘worryingly high levels of radioactivity in the house dust’ were disclosed, Mr Sedley said.
The case, which is expected to last several weeks, continues today.
Acid house riot charge
By HEATHER MILLS, Courts Correspondent
HORACE NOTICE, a former British and Commonwealth heavyweight boxing champion, was one of four men remanded in custody last night for a week accused of rioting at an acid house party.
Mr Notice, 32, of Welling, Kent, undefeated before detached retinas forced him to retire from the ring, appeared before a special magistrates' court in Reigate, Surrey.
Another four men face riot charges today.
He was one of 60 security guards at the weekend party in a field near Reigate.
Sixteen policemen were injured in clashes.
The Home Secretary has asked the chief constable for a report.
Inner Circle claim over RUC fuels security row
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
THE ALLEGATION that the Royal Ulster Constabulary contains an ‘Inner Circle’ of officers preparing private lists of IRA suspects and working against the Anglo-Irish agreement has lent a new dimension to the security force-loyalist collusion saga.
The claim came in yesterday's Irish News, Belfast's Roman Catholic morning paper.
Terry McLaughlin, its deputy editor, said he had been shown sensitive and detailed files by a representative of the ‘Inner Circle’.
He said he had met the man, whose bona fides he had checked.
The man said his group held 64 documents relating to IRA suspects in the Irish Republic and claimed the group had members in every police sub-division, of which the RUC has 38.
The RUC said: ‘It appears the journalist met a man who is unknown to him and whose identity he is unable to verify.
He did not actually handle or take possession of any documents, and is unable to substantiate the detail or authenticity of papers of which he had some sight.’
The existence of ‘Inner Circle’ was immediately questioned by loyalists.
Nonetheless, the fact that there have been up to a score of document leaks in the past month means the report is being given widespread credence.
The problem for the authorities is that it may be impossible to confirm or disprove the existence of ‘Inner Circle’.
The Northern Echo, based in Darlington, Co Durham, yesterday said it had received pictures of 150 terrorist suspects from a former soldier who said he wished to illustrate ‘shambles’ of Ulster security.
Sinn Fein said 49 such photographs had been sent to its office in Monaghan in the Irish Republic.
Runcie ends talks with dream of unity
From ANDREW BROWN in Rome
THE ARCHBISHOP of Canterbury ended his ecumenical talks in Rome yesterday with an agreed statement that reaffirmed the commitment of the Roman Catholic and Anglican churches to unity, yet admitted they saw no solution to the difficulties presented by the Anglican ordination of women.
Ian Paisley, who had travelled to Rome to disrupt the visit, accused Dr Robert Runcie of ‘treacherous and lawless behaviour’ when talking of the Pope's role in the universal Church.
Dr Runcie denied his vision of a universal primacy would affect the Queen's position under the British constitution, which lays down that the monarch must be a Protestant.
‘I was talking about a spiritual leadership,’ Dr Runcie said.
He explained his vision of primacy stemmed from the way the Pope can sometimes speak for all Christians in a way that no other bishop can.
The only concrete point to emerge from the visit was a reaffirmation that the long-delayed Roman Catholic response to the authoritative statements of theological agreement on ministry, eucharist and authority, known as Arcic I, will be forthcoming.
‘Even if we don't like everything in the response to Arcic I, it will be progress,’ Dr Runcie said.
The declaration, with its renewed emphasis on the importance of unity and on the obstacles to it, reads like the triumph of hope over experience: ‘We urge our clergy and faithful not to neglect or undervalue that certain yet imperfect communion we already share.
‘Against the background of human disunity the arduous journey to Christian unity must be pursued with determination and vigour, whatever obstacles are perceived to block the path.
We here solemnly recommit ourselves and those we represent to the restoration of visible unity and full ecclesial communion.
This is by no means to be unrealistic about the difficulties facing our dialogue.
The question and practice of the admission of women to the ministerial priesthood in some provinces of the Anglican communion prevents reconciliation even where there is otherwise progress towards agreement in faith of the meaning of the eucharist and the ordained ministry.’
Cardinal Johannes Willebrands, head of the Vatican Secretariat for Christian Unity, said: ‘There has been real ecclesial community.
I am sure that Arcic has had a new encouragement to continue.’
Dr Runcie said that the great point of the meeting would be in its ripple effect and symbolic effect all round the world.
Buckingham Palace distanced itself from claims of a constitutional row over Dr Runcie's remarks about Papal primacy and the Anglican Church.
Reports of a crisis meeting between the Queen and legal experts were mistaken, a spokesman said.
He declined to say if the Queen had been informed in advance of Dr Runcie's statement or if she was concerned about its content.
Church-state law experts said a role for the Pope in the Anglican church was unlikely to provoke a constitutional crisis, if he was given only an honorary position.
‘RUC cell working against the IRA’
By DAVID MCKITTRICK, Ireland Correspondent
First Edition THE ALLEGATION that the Royal Ulster Constabulary contains an ‘Inner Circle’ of officers preparing private lists of IRA suspects and working against the Anglo-Irish agreement has lent a new dimension to the security force-loyalist collusion saga.
The claim came in yesterday's Irish News, Belfast's Catholic morning paper.
Terry McLaughlin, its deputy editor, said he had been shown sensitive and detailed files, including ‘top secret’ material, by a representative of the ‘Inner Circle’.
He said he had met the man, whose bona fides he had checked, in a Belfast hotel, and had been told his group held 64 separate documents relating to IRA suspects in the Irish Republic.
The man claimed the group had members in every police sub-division, of which the RUC has 38.
Mr McLaughlin was interviewed by detectives twice yesterday.
Afterwards the RUC said: ‘It appears the journalist met a man who is unknown to him and whose identity he is unable to verify.
He did not actually handle or take possession of any documents, and is unable to substantiate the detail or authenticity of papers of which he had some sight.’
The existence of ‘Inner Circle’ was immediately questioned by loyalists.
Peter Robinson, a Democratic Unionist MP, said people were sceptical of ‘the idea of rogue cops going around to take out IRA terrorists — it's the sort of stuff you might expect to see on television with Clint Eastwood’.
Nonetheless, the fact that there have been up to a score of document leaks in the past month means the report is being given widespread credence.
Seamus Mallon, an SDLP MP, said if the report was true it was a direct challenge from within the police to the authority of the Chief Constable and the Government.
The problem for the authorities is that it may be impossible to confirm or disprove the existence of ‘Inner Circle’.
There is no doubt that almost every officer in the RUC, a largely Protestant force, would be opposed to the Anglo-Irish accord.
It is also clear that an unknown number of officers have individually, over the years, passed material to loyalist terrorists.
But it is impossible to say whether a structure, along the lines alleged, exists.
One widespread assumption is that the documents shown to the Irish News were probably genuine, but this does not necessarily indicate an organisation is in operation.
Nonetheless, given the scale of recent leaks, many will now suspect that ‘Inner Circle’ is an actual organisation, an illustration of the significant decrease in nationalist confidence in the security forces which the controversy has brought about.
The Northern Echo yesterday said it had received pictures of 150 terrorist suspects from an ex-soldier who said he wished to illustrate ‘the shambles of security in Northern Ireland’.
Sinn Fein said a further 49 photographs had been sent to its office in Monaghan in the Irish Republic.
Council says 6 billion pounds money market deals ‘unlawful’
By CHRISTIAN WOLMAR
A LONDON borough has admitted £6bn worth of deals it undertook on the money market were unlawful, the High Court was told yesterday.
The admission by Hammersmith and Fulham was disclosed on the first day of a case brought by Anthony Hazell, the local district auditor.
He wants the transactions declared ultra vires— beyond the council's legal powers.
John Howell, for Mr Hazell, told Mr Justice Woolf and Mr Justice French the council would suffer ‘very substantial losses if the deals proved enforceable’.
All were transactions ‘depending on movements in the interest rate market’.
The majority were interest rate swaps or options.
Mr Howell said: ‘The council has accepted the deals carried out in its name were unlawful.’
Financial staff had not given councillors detailed information about the scope or extent of its involvement on the money market.
If the deals are proved to be legal, ‘it is a potentially grave situation’ since the ratepayers and future community charge payers would have to meet the bill.
On the other hand, if they are not enforceable, it would be the banks, with whom the transactions were arranged, that would lose out as they had taken out further deals to offset their exposure.
As a result, five banks — Midland, Security Pacific National, Chemical Bank, Barclays Bank and Mitsubishi Finance Corporation — have been joined as respondents with the council.
In the two financial years 1987-88 and 1988-89, the council had been involved in 592 deals amounting to a notional £6,052.5m.
On 31 March this year 297 deals were still current, representing £2,996m.
Hammersmith's portfolio was almost entirely geared to an expectation that low interest rates in 1987-88 would remain.
Mr Howell said: ‘Those dealing in the council's name had no previous experience of these markets.’
That inexperience was to prove disastrous, although in the first two financial years there was a £12.5m profit.
Last February, Phillips and Drew, a stockbroking firm, said if interest rates stayed at 13 per cent, losses would amount to £292m.
If they remained at the current 14 per cent rate, they would be £402m.
Hammersmith has been prevented from alleviating its position because in February Nicholas Ridley, then Environment Secretary, blocked further transactions.
Mr Howell said Phillips and Drew calculated in February that to sell the portfolio would have cost the council £69.1m.
The first swap was in December 1983 but the council had not begun to play the market in earnest until late 1987.
However, there was no committee report until February 1988 and even then information was sketchy, providing merely a summary of activity which did not reveal its scale.
Mr Howell added: ‘No advice was obtained about the legality of the deals.’
That lack of authorisation by councillors was one of the four grounds on which the auditor was trying to prove the transactions were unlawful.
The others were that there was no power conferred on the council by Parliament, that the activity would not have been engaged in by a ‘reasonable’ authority, and the capital markets fund, through which the transactions were undertaken, ‘was not reasonably organised or maintained’.
Speelman makes nervous start to chess tournament
By WILLIAM HARTSTON
ANATOLY KARPOV looking pensive at the Pilkington Glass World chess championship semi-finals, which opened with considerable elegance on the grey and green carpeted stage of Sadler's Wells theatre yesterday, writes William Hartston.
Two huge screens above the chess boards carried illuminated chess graphics to display the games.
After short speeches, the national anthems of The Netherlands, the USSR and Britain sounded through the theatre before silence fell and the chess clocks were started.
The opening moves were automatically registered on the screens, then the lights over one game failed, the press room photocopier jammed and the typewriter refused to function.
Five minutes later, however, everything was working again.
The speed of the opening moves reflected the nervousness of the occasion.
Jonathan Speelman and Jan Timman rattled off a dozen moves each and Karpov and Artur Yusupov sped to move 15.
Speelman, with the black pieces, found himself under pressure after Timman produced a new idea late in a Queen's Gambit.
Timman won a pawn, then Speelman gave up a second one to create counterplay.
With the white pieces Yusupov copied an opening that had brought Karpov success in an international tournament game last year.
Karpov came prepared with an improvement and it equalised comfortably.
At one moment he even seemed to have a small advantage, but after 44 moves a draw was agreed in a level position.
The other game was far more interesting with Speelman looking for much of the time as though he was spending a very unhappy 33rd birthday.
Surprised in the opening by a new idea from Timman, he lost one pawn, then gave up another in order to create activity.
After 40 moves, he had regained one of the pawns, but had a miserably passive position to defend.
In the last hour of play, however, he played with great accuracy to keep the Dutch grandmaster at bay.
When the game was adjourned after 60 moves and six hours play, he was still a pawn behind but is now within sight of salvaging a draw.
Today the second games of each match will be played; the unfinished game between Timman and Speelman will be resumed tomorrow.
Reservoir body
By WILLIAM HARTSTON
The body of a man shot, trussed and dumped in a reservoir near Halifax, West Yorkshire, has been identified as that of Laurence Conrad Winstanley, 24, who owned a motor repair business in Oldham, Greater Manchester.
He was last seen alive on 2 October last year.
3,000 pounds fine for polluting stream
By WILLIAM HARTSTON
Thames Water Authority was fined £3,000 with £1,000 costs by Newbury magistrates after it admitted pumping ‘virtually raw’ sewage into a stream flowing through land owned by Peter Palumbo, chairman of the Arts Council, at Bagnor Manor, Winterbourne, Berkshire.
Mr Palumbo took out a private prosecution on his behalf and that of other residents after the sewage killed animals, fish and plants.
Ford plant ‘worst in Europe’
By WILLIAM HARTSTON
The Ford plant at Dagenham in Essex, has the worst record for stoppages and vehicle quality in Europe, according to management, which has urged union leaders to co-operate to improve the production record.
The criticisms come ahead of pay talks due to begin on Thursday.
An increase of at least 10 per cent will be demanded by union representatives, who will argue that only a substantial rise will improve morale.
Last night, speaking in Brighton, Jack Adams, a national officer of the transport workers' union, said directors had warned that, although they had no plans to shut Dagenham, employees themselves could close it if their work record did not improve.
Pollution inspectorate unable to recruit staff
By NICHOLAS SCHOON
THE GOVERNMENT admitted yesterday that its pollution inspectorate lacked almost a quarter of its quota of professional inspectors, nine months after saying it was recruiting 13 extra staff, writes Nicholas Schoon.
None of these posts has been filled, and it is now short of 27 professionals out of a complement of 119 — with little immediate prospect of filling the vacancies.
The vacancies came to light as the Department of the Environment announced a reorganisation of Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution, prior to giving it new powers in the ‘green’ Bill.
Environmental groups said the long-running shortages cast severe doubts over government commitment to the environment.
The Commons' Environment Committee also accused the Government of starving the inspectorate of resources and staff.
The Department of the Environment admits it is almost impossible to recruit the calibre of inspectors it wants on salaries starting at about £15,000.
It has been negotiating with the Treasury for a pay increase.
‘We are now in our second recruitment round, and if that doesn't succeed we will go on to a third.’
The inspectorate was formed in 1987 from the inspectorates for hazardous waste, radioactive chemicals, industrial air pollution and water pollution.
It has suffered staff shortages since its inception.
Lonrho boss intervenes in Ward case
By STEPHEN WARD
‘TINY’ ROWLAND, chairman of the Lonrho group, which has extensive interests in Kenya, yesterday said he had discussed the Julie Ward case with the country's president, Daniel arap Moi.
He was replying to the disclosure by John Ward, the dead woman's father, that he had written to Mr Rowland earlier this year asking for assistance in persuading the Kenyan authorities to open a murder inquiry.
Throughout the long inquest, which resumes on Thursday, Mr Ward's counsel has suggested there was a sustained cover-up after her disappearance and the discovery of her severed and charred remains in the Masai Mara game reserve.
One of the mysteries of the case has been how high up the Kenyan establishment the details of the case were known.
During the latest six-day adjournment — to allow two witnesses to be called from abroad — Mr Ward said he had written to Mr Rowland on 31 January, asking for his help and recounting details of his daughter's death.
Mr Ward told The Independent: ‘Mr Rowland himself telephoned me the next day, said he was appalled at what had happened to my daughter, and gave me his direct line telephone number, saying he would be there every day from 9 to 6.
‘He said he would be seeing Mr Moi in Bonn the following week, and asked if I would like him to set up a meeting with the president.
I said, ‘great’.'
He had since heard nothing from Mr Rowland.
Yesterday, Mr Ward's account was put to Paul Spicer, a Lonrho director.
He said Mr Rowland had spoken to Mr Moi about the case.
Mr Spicer declined to disclose details.
Archbishop sees letters that led to split
By STEPHEN WARD
THE ARCHBISHOP of Canterbury was yesterday shown love letters written by King Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn, the affair that caused the Church of England to break with Rome.
Dr Robert Runcie visited the Vatican archives and looked at original documents relating to the split between the the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches in the sixteenth century.
A Vatican statement said he saw love letters written by Henry VIII to Anne Boleyn before the schism.
These had been in Rome since at least the end of the sixteenth century.
The king wrote to his bride-to-be: ‘I promise to take you as my only lover, banishing from my mind and heart all others and serving only you.’
The churches split in 1534 after the Pope refused to annul the king's first marriage to Catherine of Aragon so he could marry Anne.
MacGregor delays teacher appraisals
By NGAIO CREQUER
A SCHEME for appraising teachers' performance is being delayed because they are overloaded with extra work for the national curriculum and school budgets, writes Ngaio Crequer.
John MacGregor, Secretary of State for Education, made the announcement to the Secondary Heads Association, in Huntingdon, Cambridgeshire, yesterday.
But Her Majesty's Inspectorate, whose survey of appraisal in the education service was published yesterday, suggested the delay was due to teacher shortages and cost.
Its report said a good national appraisal system needed the equivalent of another 1,800 teachers and increased spending of £35m a year.
The Government had planned to make regulations this autumn requiring statutory appraisal.
Mr MacGregor told the meeting he was ‘sensitive and sympathetic to your pleas that overstraining goodwill and commitment can endanger the very success of the reforms themselves’.
