WISDEN MARCH 1992
Letters
Wisden Cricket Monthly welcomes Readers Letters on any cricket topic, contemporary, controversial, historical or humorous.
Please keep letters brief as possible, and legible; we reserve the right to edit them.
Letters should be sent to:
John Arlott
I HAVE JUST read David Frith's tribute to the late John Arlott in WCM Feb.
As I expected from one who knew him well it is a very sympathetic account of his life and its impact on both cricket and the wider world.
However, I did not anticipate it would be quite so moving to one who had never met the man himself.
Of course, like thousands of others around the world, I felt I ‘knew’ him from the wireless and his writings on the game; but the training of binoculars on him in the commentary-box at Lord's or The Oval was the nearest to physical contact.
And yet now that he has passed away I feel as if a close friend has been lost.
It is good to see that he was remembered so kindly by at least one of his colleagues.
As far as I have seen, the BBC has not even seen fit to broadcast a single programme in his memory.
The way in which you concluded your tribute by quoting from the most evocative of his works was truly fitting.
Perhaps you would agree that one could say of him, that through commentaries and writing…your hand/Reshaped the history of the bat and ball.
Five keepers
FURTHER to recent correspondence in WCM , there were in fact five wicketkeepers on the field simultaneously during the England v Sri Lanka Test match at Lord's last August.
In addition to Stewart, Russell, Kuruppu and Tillekaratne, Asanka Gurusinha kept wicket in his first Test match against Pakistan at Karachi in November 1985.
Runners run riot
I THOUGHT you might be interested in what happened during the Cornwall League Division 6 match last summer between Barripper and Rosudgeon.
Set 156 to win in 48 overs, Barripper reached 91 for 9 in reply.
I was still at the crease, but having pulled a muscle in my leg I was batting with a runner.
The last man in, John Bendall had already injured himself when we were fielding and he also came in to bat with a runner.
The outcome was that we won the match, reaching 159 for 9 with our unbroken last-wicket partnership of 68 being completed entirely with the assistance of runners.
Surely a record?
Cup favourites
AS A LEAD-UP to the World Cup, I thought I would check to see who can rightly claim to be called favourites for the tournament.
The following table is a record of all limited-overs internationals since but not including the 1987 World Cup.
At time of writing the World Series Cup is incomplete and not included, but South Africa's historic tour of India and the October Sharjah competition are accounted for.
Australia's record at home in this period is even more impressive, with 33 wins from 42 matches (78.57%).
New Zealand have suffered heavily at the hands of their co-hosts, winning just two from 15 matches, both of those by just a single run.
England's second place is slightly surprising, as they seem either to win all their matches (as in two series against Richards's men) or lose them all (as in 4–0 against Australia last winter).
Pakistan have failed badly when overseas, being walloped in the Caribbean and losing badly down under, even after beating all comers in Sharjah only weeks before.
West Indies have won only two of their last 14 matches, and then it took them six games in this season's World Series Cup to win another.
As the Nehru Cup showed, making each team play the others once each makes it difficult for one side to win most of their matches.
All the semi-finalists in that series lost two of their five preliminaries.
It is a good idea and makes this a truly World Cup.
My prediction?
Australia and Pakistan should make the semis, with a resurgent England and an improved India.
Australia to win (or at least make the MCG final), with Pakistan the other likely finalist.
Not that I'm putting money on any of them!
Gower v Gooch
FOLLOWING the article by Warren Bagust on the raw deal David Gower has been given by the England selectors (WCM Sept), I have been doing some research of my own on the relative merits of David Gower and Graham Gooch as batsmen and as captains of England.
I have considered only those Tests in which both have appeared together, when one has been captain.
Their records in these Tests are strikingly similar.
Gooch has scored 2124 runs at an average of 50.57, whereas Gower has made 2183 runs at 50.76.
AS, in thee matches, they both faced the same bowlers on the same pitches, it may be deduced that, as batsmen, they are of roughly equal merit.
The interesting part emerges when we consider how well each one supported the other when he was not captain.
Gower scored 1485 runs at 49.50 for himself, and 698 runs at 53.70 for Gooch; whereas Gooch scored 946 runs at 33.78 for Gower and 1178 at 84.14 for himself!
The only time that Gooch performed well for Gower was in the 1985 Ashes series, when England won 3–1 and David had his finest hour, but on the two occasions when Gooch's help was most desperately needed — against West Indies in 1985–86 and Australia in 1989 — Gooch's total contribution was 459 runs at 24.16.
It is a good thing that Graham Gooch's integrity is beyond reproach, because anyone not knowing the full story might feel that something somewhere was not quite right!
Unique threesome
ENGLAND'S first-Test victory in New Zealand would seem to mark the completion of a unique achievement in the history of Test cricket.
It is the first time that a country has ever won three successive Test matches, each against a different country (in this case West Indies, Sri Lanka and New Zealand).
This represents a fitting illustration of what has been achieved under the fine example and leadership of Graham Gooch.
Cricket in Australia
THE THIRD Kitzbühel cricket match will take place from July 23–26, 1992, and the first Velden cricket match will be held from August 21–23, 1992.
If any British club is interested in ‘competing’ against the Austrians, please could they either contact Mr Michael Stifel, CC Kitzbühel, or myself at the Austrian National Tourist Office in London.
BEAT THE PRICE RISE
IF YOU are not already a direct subscriber to Wisden Cricket Monthly , you can beat the forthcoming annual price rise by taking out a one-year subscription POST FREE now (see page 22).
WCM 's cover price will be raised next month to £1.90.
Cup facts
AS THE World Cup gets under way, it is interesting to note that, in the previous four tournaments, it is Viv Richards and Graham Gooch who have won the most Man of the Match awards.
Both have achieved this distinction five times.
Overall, West Indies head the list with 17 awards; England have 16, Pakistan 14, Australia and India 12, New Zealand seven.
Zimbabwe three and Sri Lanka two.
There have been five occasions when the Man of the Match award went to a player on the losing side: David Houghton of Zimbabwe has been the unfortunate soul to be on the losing team twice.
In the first four tournaments there were 84 matches scheduled, but only 83 completed (West Indies v Sri Lanka in 1979 was abandoned).
Taking time difference into account the match between West Indies and South Africa at Christchurch on March 5 should be the 100th World Cup encounter.
Finally, if Imran Khan and Javed Miandad appear in the fifth tournament they will be the only players to have participated in all five World Cup tournaments.
Viv Richards is the only player to score 1000 runs in these matches.
Testing times
IN HIS preview of England's tour of New Zealand (WCM Jan), Steven Lynch alluded to the first England tour of New Zealand in 1929–30 as being the only time a country has been engaged in two Test series simultaneously.
In 1891–92 two England sides were undertaking simultaneous series.
In Australia, W.G. Grace captained Lord Sheffield's side to defeat in a three-match series, while Walter Read led England in the solitary Test at Cape Town (Harry Wood scored the first Test century by a wicketkeeper and England won by an innings).
The assertion is correct if ‘simultaneous’ play is taken in its strictest sense.
The South African match ended two days before the third Test in Australia began.
Busy Compton
I REFER to the interesting article on Wicketkeeper-Bowlers (WCM Feb).
I recall Leslie Compton of Middlesex bowling and keeping wicket in the same match and, somewhat to the annoyance of the spectators, padding and unpadding at the end of each over.
There would certainly be trouble with over rates today.
I think the matches concerned were in 1949 with Worcestershire at Lord's and with Somerset at Bath.
Michael Laws was Compton's deputy for that season, but he did not play in either of these matches.
Unfortunately Wisden at that time did not put symbols against the name of the wicketkeeper to tell if someone else was roped in to keep.
EDITORIAL
Tightrope to Melbourne
ENGLAND'S HIGHLY competent performances in New Zealand, coupled with certain reservations about Australia's collective reliability, led to a shift in odds as the competitors gathered for the World Cup, with West Indies' failure in the recent triangular World Series Cup reducing their stocks proportionately to the lift achieved by India in that tournament.
Punters' money might well have drifted towards Pakistan but for the uncertainty over Javed Miandad's fitness.
And yet it is no more than a nine-horse race, even if one of the teams is more pony than stallion, and no extreme predictions will be found in this column; the taste of the printed page proved far too unpalatable in 1983, when criticism of India, eventual World Cup winners, was duly exposed as unwarranted and the urgent suggestion that one should eat one's words was honourably met.
At the start of the final segment of the hectic 1991–92 season — the one month of truly global box-office appeal — some early impressions emerge of the new International Cricket Council code of conduct as it prevailed in the Tests and one-day series in New Zealand, Australia and Pakistan.
Over rates seem to have been maintained (memo to ICC: congratulations, but do not forget to raise the requirements to something nearer 18 an hour), and no serious instances of player misbehaviour have caused the overseeing match referees, Messrs Burge, Smith, May and Carr, to impose penalties.
Where murmurs have been heard is in the area of bouncer-restriction.
Craig McDermott and some other fast bowlers have predictably labelled the one-bouncer-per-over-per-batsman rule as ‘ridiculous’.
They would, wouldn't they?
The rule does lack conviction when poorly interpreted, as was the case when the umpire at square leg ‘called’ Prabhakar at Adelaide after a ball passed just over the batsman as he ducked .
(It was widely assumed he was not adjudging the ball to have been thrown!)
The ICC definition of a ‘fast, short-pitched ball’ is one which ‘passes, or would have passed, above the shoulder of the batsman standing upright at the crease’.
Had the batsman not ducked, the ball might have struck him in the solar plexus.
The occasional aberration in judgment aside, the curbing regulation has been not merely a success but possibly the finest piece of administration in modern times.
Merv Hughes and McDermott are still bowling as many ribticklers as they dare, but the blatant ‘throat ball’ is no longer the monotonous, stultifying stock ball of the exterminators.
Instead, it has rightly be forcibly restored to being a surprise element.
This leaves one glaring improvement in need of adoption.
Never mind reverting to the back-foot no-ball law: bowlers, greedy for every millimetre, have plenty of ground upon which to plant the front foot, and have only themselves to blame for being no-balled.
There are few more pathetic sights than aggrieved bowlers staring down at the popping-crease after being no-balled, craning neck insinuating that the umpire was in error.
In fact, the most pressing need, which should be addressed without any further damaging procrastination, is the elimination of erroneous run-out decisions, which are so often crucial, the difference between winning and losing, enjoyment and infuriating distraction.
Just before the umpire no-balled Prabhakar's long-hop in the Adelaide Test match, he had missed a run-out while Marsh was still scoreless.
While only Superman or Wonderwoman could have detected the gap between crease and outstretched bat as the bails were dislodged, the all-important fact is that a million or two television viewers on that Australia Day were shown the truth on the slow-motion replay.
India had earned, but were denied, Marsh's wicket.
Within seconds the fact of the ‘dismissal’ was universally available.
For all we know, it could have been the 500th unnecessary and spoiling miscarriage of justice since Test matches were first televised with the playback facility.
There is nothing more baffling in cricket than the continuing reluctance of umpires to move for the adoption of TV assistance for narrow run-out and stumping decisions.
Most of them seem apprehensive at the prospect of a possible loss of authority, failing to see that, on the contrary, their grip on matters would be greatly strengthened.
No longer would their errors be held to ridicule in respect of run-outs, stumpings and certain other contentious issues (but not lbws or bat-pad catches — though there could be a case for relieving the umpires of the task of no-balling); nor could players justifiably feel disgruntled for the superior eye of the camera would be deciding their fates with pronounced accuracy, ensuring that justice was done and seen to be done.
Is Test cricket less significant and less enlightened an event than horse-racing?
For many years our brethren of the turf have been making sure of the accuracy of their finishes (as well as the propriety of conduct around the bend and down the straight) by employing photographic scrutiny.
The current generation of umpires will probably never summon the wisdom or even the self-effacement to request this aid, sot the ICC should examine closely the prospect of adopting the practice in the wake of Sir Colin's momentous charter which came into effect last October.
The match referee, a technician at his side if necessary, could be the magic eye, unless it is to be someone from the ranks of the umpires themselves.
Perhaps, to convince the doubters, it would be no bad thing if the World Cup final at Melbourne were to be decided by their ‘glorious human fallibility’— a run-out given not out — as millions around the world stare aghast at the reality on their screens and know, in all Heavenly justice, how it should have been.
NEWS REGISTER
LAWRENCE INJURY
GLOUCESTERSHIRE and England fast bowler David Lawrence faces a battle to regain fitness after breaking his kneecap in an horrific incident in the closing stages of the third Test at Wellington.
The burly Lawrence, who was 28 on Jan 28, fell in his delivery stride: several fieldsmen heard the crack as the kneecap broke.
As the agonised Lawrence was stretchered off, team manager Micky Stewart and some of Lawrence's teammates were involved in a scuffle with a TVNZ cameraman.
Tour manager Bob Bennett issued a statement the following day ‘regretting’ the incident, and TVNZ agreed that the matter was closed.
As the break was a clean one it is hoped that Lawrence can make a full recovery, although he seems unlikely to play during the coming season.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA came within one run of a 96-year-old first-class cricket record when they scored 506 for 6 in the fourth innings to defeat Queensland (334 and 301 for 4 dec) at Brisbane from Feb 7–10.
SA, dismissed for 130 in the first innings, reached their target from the fourth ball of the final over, when Peter Sleep, in his testimonial season, inside-edged the winning single towards wicketkeeper Ian Healy off Queensland captain Carl Rackemann.
The highest score reached in the fourth innings to win a match was 507 for 7, by Oxford University against MCC at Lord's in 1896.
The previous-highest this century was 502 for 6, by Middlesex against Notts at Trent Bridge in 1925.
The historic scorecard was:
Former Test opener Andrew Hilditch made 137 as South Australia scored 506 for 6 to beat Queensland at Brisbane
South Africa's Test ‘comeback’ seems likely to take place next month in Bridgetown, Barbados, against West Indies.
The tour, also containing three one-day internationals, will take place if sponsorship can be found.
West Indies and Pakistan will visit South Africa in Feb 1993 for a one-day triangular series.
Former West Indies captain Sir Garfield Sobers, 55, underwent successful surgery in Miami, Florida recently for a detached retina in his left eye.
North Zone (279 and 393) have retained India's Duleep Trophy, beating West Zone (216 and 220) in the final at Bulsar.
In the final of the Deodhar Trophy, South Zone (158 for 7) beat Central Zone (122; Arshad Ayub 5 for 23) at Calcutta in a match reduced by rain to 35 overs-a-side.
The final of the women's Rosebowl Tri-Series, between England and Australia in Christchurch, New Zealand, was washed out after Australia had scored 282 for 4 from their 60 overs.
Denise Annetts making 100 not out.
Australia took the trophy on the strength of their performances in the qualifying matches.
Rakesh Patidar, 10, died after being hit by a cricket ball while watching a match at Anjad in India's Madhya Pradesh.
John Carr, 28, who retired from county cricket two years ago, has rejoined Middlesex.
Tony Pigott's 1991 benefit with Sussex amounted to £60,025.
South Africa (171 for 6; Peter Kirsten 64) defeated Zimbabwe (170) by four wickets with four balls to spare in the first-ever meeting between the two countries, in front of a crowd of 8000 at Harare on Feb 5.
Phil Tufnell's performances in New Zealand moved him up 13 places to 13th in the latest lists of the Coopers &Lybrand Ratings for Test cricketers.
Tufnell, with a rating of 634, is the highest-rated England bowler apart from his Middlesex team-mate Angus Fraser (647).
Waqar Younis (904) tops the bowling list, ahead, of West Indians Malcolm Marshall (874) and Curtly Ambrose (804).
Despite a drop of 40 points in his personal rating, Graham Gooch (836) remains top of the batting list, ahead of Richie Richardson (823) and Robin Smith (784).
Tetley Bitter have signed a sponsorship dal with the TCCB, which will see the Yorkshire brewers putting over £3 million into the game over the next three years.
The agreement started with the tour of New Zealand, where England's players sported the ‘Tetley’ logo on their shirts.
Tetleys will continue to sponsor the ‘County Challenge’ matches, between counties and tourists, during 1992.
The World Cup organising committee has agreed that two white balls shall be used in all the matches.
It originally had been suggested that one ball only might be used on the supposedly lusher New Zealand grounds.
Neil Foster has signed to play in the Currie Cup for South African province Transvaal, as cover for Richard Snell and Clive Rice, who will be in Australasia for the World Cup.
Rice, a controversial omission from South Africa's World Cup team, has stepped down after 10 years as Transvaal's captain to take up a position as a TV commentator during the competition.
Playing for Old Anandians against Rio Sports Club at the Ananda College ground, schoolboy Anjana Jayasuriya scored 339, the highest-ever score in any tournament under the aegis of the Board of Control for Cricket in Sri Lanka.
Jayasuriya, 19, shared a third-wicket partnership of 472 — a record for all Sri Lankan cricket — with Sanjeye Attanayake (159).
Over 800 admirers of former Test fast bowler Geoff Lawson attended a $A75-a-head black-tie testimonial dinner in his honour at Sydney in January.
NSW's captain Lawson, 34, has missed several matches this season because of injury, but he still managed, in the match against SA at Sydney, to move past Jeff Thomson and Terry Alderman (both 355) into second place in the all-time Sheffield Shield wicket-taking table, behind Clarrie Grimmett (513).
Limited-edition commemorative plates of W.G. Grace and Vivian Richards were stolen in a recent burglary at Nubern Products' Kent workshop.
Anyone offered similar plates from unauthorised sources is asked to contact Nubern Products on .
Orange Free State have won South Africa's Nissan Shield limited-overs title after beating Eastern Province by four wickets.
EP's total of 120 was the lowest-ever in the final.
David Hookes, in what could prove to be his last match at Sydney after 17 years, registered his highest score on the ground, 87, for South Australia against NSW.
He hit 20 in one over from fast bowler Wayne Holdsworth, the last four balls going to the boundary: Hookes was out immediately afterwards.
In the same match, NSW batsman Trevor Bayliss hit a ball from off-spinner Tim May to within 15ft of the SCG pavilion clock during his innings of 133.
Tony Dodemaide, 28, the Victoria and Australia allrounder released by Sussex at the end of last season, is to play for Lancashire League club East Lancashire in 1992.
The cricket collection of the late Sir George ‘Gubby’ Allen, who died in Nov 1989, is to be sold to auctioneers Dreweatt Neate at Donnington Priory, Newbury, Berkshire on March 4.
Included in the sale are numerous letters, photographic albums, and Sir George's notes while chairman of the England selectors — and his last car, a 1968 T-Series Bentley.
Railways (334 for 8; Shashi Gupta 121 not out) have won India's national women's championship for the sixth successive season, defeating Karnataka (161) on first innings in the final at New Delhi.
Railways went on to defeat the Rest of India at Calcutta.
Worcestershire made a profit of £20,872 in 1991, but Kent (£68,256), Leicestershire (record £69.000) and Yorkshire (£13,000) report losses.
The TCCB has ruled that counties will not be able to replace their Australian overseas players if they leave to join their country's tour of Sri Lanka early in August.
Durham captain David Graveney, whose country is likely to lose the services of Dean Jones at a crucial stage of the season, said the decision was ‘very disappointing’.
Tony Lewis gave the address at the memorial service for John Arlott at the Church of St John the Baptist in Alresford, Hampshire on Jan 20.
Arlott's son Tim read two poems written by his father, and the congregation sang God Whose Farm is All Creation , a hymn written by the former broadcaster.
Meanwhile John Arlott's birthplace, Cemetery Lodge in Basingstoke, has been restored after standing empty for more than three years.
New owner Ena Giles spent over £30,000 in renovating the building, which had been vandalised while unoccupied.
Daryl Foster is stepping down as Western Australia's coach after 17 seasons.
He is continuing in this capacity for Kent during 1992.
Glamorgan fast bowler Steve Watkin: Caribbean call-up with England ‘A’
England's ‘A’ team for their West Indies tour has undergone several changes of personnel.
Michael Atherton, still recuperating after a back operation, has withdrawn, and his place was taken by Essex batsman John Stephenson.
Next to pull out was Surrey fast bowler Martin Bicknell, who dislocated his shoulder in training.
His replacement is Glamorgan's Steve Watkin, who played two Tests against West Indies last summer.
The final casualty (to date) was Atherton's Lancashire team-mate, wicketkeeper Warren Hegg, who was suffering from glandular fever: Worcestershire's Steven Rhodes stepped up.
The ‘A’ team's ranks were swelled when Mark Ramprakash joined the side after being omitted from England's World Cup squad.
Desmond Haynes hit 246 for Barbados in their Red Stripe Cup match against Windward Islands at Bridgetown.
Glamorgan have made three prominent Welshmen — former MCC president Lord Griffiths, Labour Party leader Neil Kinnock and comedian Sir Harry Secombe — honorary life vice-presidents of the club.
West Indies captain Richie Richardson, who will play for Northern League club Blackpool in the coming season, broke a finger during Leeward Islands' Red Stripe Cup match against Windward Islands.
He recovered in time to lead his side in the World Cup.
Australian Test umpire Peter McConnell is suing the Daily Telegraph Mirror for damages over an article by Sunil Gavaskar in which the former Indian batsman made comments in some of the umpiring decisions in the Sydney Test, in which McConnell and Steve Randell officiated.
As part of the regular tours of Lord's, the last hour of both World Cup semi-finals (March 21–22) and the final (March 25) will be shown on a large screen at no extra charge.
Telephone  for further details.
Janet Tedstone (65 not out) and Susie Kitson (35) shared a Test-best ninth-wicket stand of 99 in the rain-affected drawn first Test against New Zealand at Auckland.
New Zealand saved the follow-on after Nancy Williams defied doctor's orders and resumed batting after being hit on the head by a fielder's return.
England has won the second Test at Wanganui by four wickets: during the match, Carole Hodges became the fifth Englishwoman to score 1000 Test runs.
Wendy Watson hit 153 not out for the tourists against NZ's Under-23 XI at Napier.
England's Under-19 side drew the three- ‘Test’ series against their Pakistani counterparts, winning the third match at Lahore by an innings and 22 runs.
Pakistan had won the first ‘Test’, at Karachi, by an innings and four runs.
The second ‘Test’, at Gujranwala, was a rain-affected draw.
Pakistan won the one-day series 3–0.
Former Test opener Graeme Wood, 35, has retired from first-class cricket after being dropped by Western Australia.
He is WA's highest runscorer, and led the State to successive Sheffield Shield titles in 1986–87, ‘87–88 and ‘88–89.
He played in 59 Tests, scoring 3374 runs (31.83).
Somerset had completed the signing of 23-year old Transvaal fast bowler Richard Snell, a member of South Africa's World Cup squad, as their overseas player for 1992.
The Yorkshire committee voted 11–8 against a proposal to elect one of their number, Geoffrey Boycott, as an honorary life member.
The committee also turned down a request from batsman Philip Robinson, who declined a new contract with the county, to be classified as a ‘non-contested’ registration.
Robinson, 28, has found other counties unwilling to take him on as they are allowed only one such signing every five years.
Robinson is considering legal action against TCCB for restraint of trade.
THE INTERNATIONAL panel of umpires for the World Cup is as follows: B.L.
Aldridge (NZ), S.N. Bucknor (WI), D.P. Buultjens (SL), Khizar Hayat (Pak), K.E. Liebenberg (SA), P.J. McConnell (Aust), S.G. Randell (Aust), P.D.
Reporter (India), I.D.
Robinson (Zim), D.R. Shepherd (Eng), S.J. Woodward (NZ).
The huge new stand at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, which is costing $A150 million, is to be known as the Great Southern Stand: the four entrances are being named after former Test captains Sir Donald Bradman and Bill Woodfull. and Australian Rules football legends Dick Reynolds and the Coventry brothers (Gordon and Syd).
Rooms in the stand will be named after Jack Ryder, Lindsay Hassett, Keith Miller and pioneer Aussie Rules player and cricketer Tom Wills.
In the Australia Day honours list, Colin Egar (chairman of the Australian Cricket Board and former Test Umpire) and Lawrie Sawle (chairman of selectors, manager of the 1989 and 1991 touring teams, and former WA batsman) were both made Members in the General Division (AM) for services to cricket administration.
Middlesex have signed a three-year sponsorship agreement, worth over £500,000, with SmithKline Beecham, the producers of Brylcreem and Lucozade.
Middlesex's players will wear the Lucozade logo on their shirts, although their president Denis Compton was the original ‘Brylcreem Boy’ in the 1950s.
Northamptonshire will become the first official touring team to play in South Africa when their pre-season tour starts in Natal on March 24.
Northants, captained by South African-born Allan Lamb, will play four matches in all.
Northants' Rhodesian-born allrounder Kevin Curran has been told by the TCCB that he must wait until Oct 1994 before becoming England-qualified for registration purposes.
Curran, 32, played for Zimbabwe in the 1983 and 1987 World Cups.
Hampshire captain Mark Nicholas (above left) caddied for Chris Moody, winner of the 1988 European Masters title, in the recent Asian Classic golf tournament in Bangkok, Thailand
Queensland batsman Greg Ritchie was dined $A500 for abusive language when dismissed in the NSW match at Sydney, the penalty being suspended for 12 months.
Dirk Wellham was reported to the ACB for knocking the stumps over after his dismissal, but no action was taken.
NSW won what was seen as a ‘grudge’ match, with Greg Matthews (85 not out and 67, plus 11 wickets) becoming the seventh Australian to perform the ‘match double’in a Sheffield Shield game, after G. Giffen (eight times), J.N. Crawford (1913–14), C.J. Hill (1932–33), T.J. Jenner (1973–74), P.H. Carlson (1978–79) and J.C.
Scuderi (SA v NSW, 1991–92).
A Tottenham teenager beat his stepfather to death with a cricket bat after an argument about mess caused by his puppies.
Paul Davies, 19, admitted manslaughter at the Old Bailey in February.
Worcestershire have signed James Brinkley, 17, an allrounder who was born in England but has lived in Australia since the age of two.
Australian batsman Geoff Marsh, an asthmatic, is contributing to a TV advertising campaign to help people recognise and deal with the health problem.
Eastern Province, captained by South African skipper Kepler Wessels, will paly two one-day matches against a World XI on Aug 29–30 during the 1992 Scarborough Festival.
Yorkshire CCC plan to hold an auction of cricket memorabilia in June/July.
Anyone wishing to donate items for auction is asked to contact Tony Coleman at 
Sports Minister Robert Atkins launched a new initiative at Headingley on Jan 29, designed to encourage increased black and ethnic-minority participation in Yorkshire cricket.
BIZARRE DISMISSALS
RARELY does a five-Test series produce a definite result in every match, but the 1977–78 rubber between Australia and India did.
Australia had rebuilt their side after World Series Cricket decimated their originally star-studded line-up.
The selectors had brought Bobby Simpson back to international cricket to skipper the side, while India's hopes lay with the well-respected Bishan Bedi.
The first Test at Brisbane set the tone for the series: Australia disappointed with 166, routed by Bedi's 5 for 55, but redeemed themselves by dismissing India for just 153.
One of the Indian batsmen the top-scorer in that innings was Dilip Vengsarkar with 48.
Vengsarkar was to go on to complete a successful series, scoring 320 runs in the five Tests at an average of 35.56.
One of Australia's few remaining stars was Jeff Thomson, and much was being made by the media of his non-defection to WSC.
Thomson, it seemed, rallied to the call, and bowled throughout the series with characteristic flamboyance and speed.
In this match he took seven wickets, the strangest of which was India's first-innings stalwart Vengsarkar.
Late-1977 was the beginning of the helmet era: WSC was to bring about its widespread usage, but it was not yet common in traditional Test cricket.
Vengsarkar's method of playing the Thomson bouncer was to try to avoid it.
Having got to within two of his fifty he slightly misjudged the next short one from Thommo, and had to jerk his head rapidly out of the line of the ball.
In doing so his cap fell off, and on its way groundwards dislodged a bail.
Vengsarkar was out hit wicket.
Australia went on to win an exciting Test with Simpson (89) and Thomson the batsman (41 not out) helping to set India 340 to win in the fourth innings.
Despite a valiant 113 by Gavaskar, they fell 16 runs short.
Strangely, in the second Test, won again by Australia (this time by two wickets), a similar incident occurred.
Thomson's new-ball partner, ‘Sam’ Gannon (who, taking seven wickets in the match, found brief international success late at the age of 32), bowled short to Venkataraghavan.
As Venkat parried the lifter he too lost his cap — but on this occasion not his wicket.
India's fortunes changed dramatically as they won the next two Tests by large margins; the third by 222 runs (Chandrasekhar distinguishing himself with 6 for 52 in each innings with the ball and 0 in each innings with the bat), and the fourth by an innings and two runs.
Australia though came back to win the decisive fifth match by 47 runs, to take an eventful and exciting series 3–2.
UNDER STARTER'S ORDERS
Cricket's fifth World Cup started on Feb 22.
Keep track of one-day cricket's greatest spectacle with our free pull-out wallchart (between centre pages).
Here is the cast list for the big event:
AUSTRALIA (from)
CO-HOSTS Australia were one of only two countries not to have finalised their World Cup line-up before we went to press.
Bevan, Matthews, O'Donnell, Reiffel, Scuderi and Zoehrer seem to be the likely omissions from the final 14 if Bruce Reid is fit.
Geoff Marsh, controversially omitted from the Final Test against India, will definitely return.
ENGLAND
ENGLAND, beaten finalists in 1987, include only one surprise selection, Warwickshire fast bowler Gladstone Small, who had a season with South Australia apart from his two tours Down Under in 1986–87 and 1990–91.
From the team in New Zealand, Mark Ramprakash, Jack Russell and the luckless David Lawrence went home early.
Alec Stewart takes over the gloves for the World Cup, while Neil Fairbrother will deputise if necessary.
INDIA
ALTHOUGH India's selectors resisted the temptation to make wholesale changes after their disastrous tour of Australia, they did bring in two young batsmen who missed the trip: Ajay Jadeja, 21, who has been in fine form for Haryana this season, and left-hander Vinod Kambli, 20, who has already appeared in one-day internationals and made 262 for Bombay against Saurashtra recently.
Vice-captain Ravi Shastri, who missed the final stages of the Australian tour after injuring his knee, took his place in the side after passing a fitness test.
NEW ZEALAND
DESPITE fears that Martin Crowe's knee problems might force him to withdraw, New Zealand's captain took his place in the co-hosts' World Cup squad.
All his team have appeared in one-day internationals, the most recent debutant being the impressive Murphy Su'a, the first player of Samoan descent to play for the Kiwis.
PAKISTAN (from)
NOT FOR the first time, Pakistan's selectors kept onlookers guessing about the make-up of their team.
First Javed Miandad was definitely out with a back injury; then he was a possible addition to the team; finally he was included, and will become, with his captain Imran Khan, the only player to take part in all five World Cup competitions.
Pakistan's youthful side includes exciting young batsmen in openers Aamer Sohail and Inzamam-ul-Haq, with the wristy Zahid Fazal down the order.
The bowling is in good hands, with Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis (if he can shake off a persistent back injury) likely to rank among the star names of the tournament.
Notable omissions were Abdul Qadir (still recovering from injury) and Shoaib Mohammad.
SOUTH AFRICA
THE South African selectors, having dumped their previous three captains, relented slightly by including Peter Kirsten in their final World Cup squad of 14, but there were still no places for prolific opener Jimmy Cook, 38, and 42-year-old Clive Rice.
Kepler Wessels's young side will shine in the field, while Allan Donald, in an early warmup match at Perth, impressed onlookers as being yards faster than Craig McDermott, the destroyer of India in the recent Test series.
Left-arm spinner Omar Henry, 40, is the only coloured player in the party.
SRI LANKA
DESPITE a disappointing tour of Pakistan, where they went down 1–4 in the one-day series, Sri Lanka have stuck by the same players for this competition.
Aravinda de Silva heads the talented batting line-up, but the bowlers may struggle to keep the runs down.
The islanders will be hoping that former skipper Arjuna Ranatunga can put his wretched Pakistan tour form behind him (he could manage only six runs in four Test innings), and that left-hander Sanath Jayasuriya can continue his good form in that same series (238 runs at 79.33).
WEST INDIES
IT WAS something of a surprise, after West Indies' modest performances in the World Series Cup matches in Australia earlier this winter, that the selectors resisted the temptation to bring back their ‘old guard’.
The most notable absentee, of course, was former captain Vivian Richards, who had made it clear that he wished to end his career in the World Cup where, in the previous four tournaments, he was the only batsman to exceed a career total of 1000 runs.
But the selectors have stuck to their policy of forward thinking, which also means there is no place for wicketkeeper Jeff Dujon or fast bowler Courtney Walsh.
The new face among the fast men belongs to Anderson Cummins, the latest product of the Barbados fast-bowling factory.
He took 5 for 31 in the WSC match against India on January 11.
ZIMBABWE
OUTSIDERS Zimbabwe are led by David Houghton, a veteran of the African country's previous two World Cups, and coached by the enthusiastic Essex seamer Don Topley.
With the bat, much will depend on the impressive Flower brothers, Andy and Grant, while the experienced Eddo Brandes will take the new ball.
Zimbabwe are without experienced allrounder Kevin Curran, while a certain G.A.
Hick, a member of their 1983 World Cup squad when only 17, will be opposing them this time.
AUSTRALIA v INDIA FOURTH TEST MATCH
India's heroic effort
AUSTRALIA v INDIA FOURTH TEST MATCH
Adelaide Oval January 25, 26, 27, 28, 29
AUSTRALIA clinched the series at Adelaide, but their path to a winning, 3–0 lead was obstructed by an excellent performance from India, whose captain Mohammad Azharuddin waited until the exciting last day before exhibiting his undoubted skills with the bat for the first and only time in the series.
It was the 50th Test to be staged at the picturesque Adelaide Oval, where the pitch had been relaid in an attempt to put an end to a run of six drawn matches (only Kanpur, with seven, had staged more successive inconclusive Tests).
India were handicapped by the absence with a knee injury of allrounder Shastri: left-arm spinner Raju replaced him.
For Australia, left-arm seamer Whitney returned for the injured Reid.
Australia, put in on the new surface, struggled: both openers played on, and with Border collecting his second duck of the series, the home side slumped to 81 for 6 before the Victorians, Jones and Hughes, steered them to the relative prosperity of 145 all out.
Even so the total was Australia's lowest at Adelaide since 1954–55, when England — in the shape of Tyson, Statham and Appleyard — put them out for 111.
Hughes, dropped by wicketkeeper Pandit when 17, survived for two hours, and sent short-leg Srikkanth off the field with a headache after a slog hit the fielder on the helmet.
It was not Srikkanth's day: he recovered to open the Indian reply, but was unhappy at being given out caught behind off McDermott (Healy's 100th Test catch), indicating that the ball hit his forearm.
Manjrekar, another Indian enduring a disappointing series, was also gone before the close, which found India exactly 100 behind at 45 for 2 (Sidhu 15, Vengsarkar *).
The next morning, four quick wickets tumbled to the pacemen.
From 70 for 6, allrounders Kapil Dev and Prabhakar shared a stand of 65, Kapil hitting 10 fours in his 56, which occupied 83 balls.
Prabhakar received two bouncers in an over from McDermott, the second of which was called a no-ball under the new regulation.
Both McDermott and Border queried the decision with umpire McConnell, and shortly afterwards umpire Darrell Hair, standing in his first Test, had to no-ball Hughes for his second bouncer of an over, again to the adhesive Prabhakar.
Pandit, Raju (let off early on when Taylor at slip grassed an easy catch) and Srinath (whose innings included an all-run straight-hit five) all reached double figures as India stretched their total to 225, a lead of 80: McDermott finished with 5 for 76.
The Indians, whose faith in Australian umpires waned throughout the tour, were aggrieved again when Marsh, short of his ground, was not given out (Prabhakar soon let fly with a second — no-balled — bouncer).
The decision was not costly for India — Marsh was bowled shortly afterwards — but most onlookers were convinced that Boon, when 1, must have been lbw to Kapil Dev.
He survived, and went on to score 135.
By stumps on the second day Australia were 36 for 1 (Taylor 18, Boon 11), and on Day 3 the pair took their stand to 221, only 15 short of Australia's best against India, by Sid Barnes and Don Bradman (who was watching the play from the committee-room) in 1947–48.
Taylor made a round 100, shrugging off a blow on the chin from a Srinath bouncer after a caught-behind appeal had been turned down.
It was the left-hander's eighth century, in his 29th Test, and at 382 minutes (nine fours) is the slowest-ever for Australia: he was out to the first-delivery with the new ball, which was taken 16 overs after it became due.
Boon, meanwhile, joined his captain Border and coach Bob Simpson in completing 1000 runs in Tests against India: his 12th Test century (fifth against India) came up in 321 minutes (250 balls), with 13 fours.
At the close Australia were in command at 245 for 2 (Boon 121, Border 18).
India were handicapped by Prabhakar's stomach strains, which kept him out of the attack.
Mohammad Azharuddin returned to form with 106 at Adelaide
Three quick wickets went down early on the fourth morning, the first being Boon's as he strolled a single, only to be embarrassed by keeper Pandit's throw to the far end.
Two balls later Kapil Dev had Jones caught behind, and next ball Waugh was adjudged caught at second slip, the ball perhaps eluding bat and touching only pad.
Three wickets had done down in four balls with the score 277, and had Kapil Dev at backward square leg held on to a straightforward catch offered by Healy off Tendulkar, India might have taken charge.
But Healy, 8 at the time, went on to make 41, adding 71 with Border, who finished undefeated with 91, his highest score in 55 Test innings since his last century, at Faisalabad in Sept 1988.
The captain passed a career total of 5000 Test runs in Australia during his innings.
Useful contributions from the tail swelled the score to 451, leaving India a distant victory target of 372.
Kapil Dev, who took five wickets in a Test innings for the 23rd, time took his overall  haul to 397.
India reached 31 without loss by the close, both Srikkanth and Sidhu making 13, but the latter was lucky to survive a chance to Taylor at first slip off the first ball he faced.
The slow, low pitch and the sluggish scoring of the first four days suggested that India might survive, but would not approach their target: but the reality was different, the tourists producing the most attacking batting of the match on a thrilling final day.
India's openers produced their first half-century stand of the series, but they lost three wickets before reaching three figures, and another at 102, when Vengsarkar, stretching down the pitch, was unamused to be given out lbw to Hughes's slower ‘googly’.
Taylor had earlier missed another straightforward slip catch, offered by Manjrekar.
The first byes of the match eluded keeper Healy at 172, the same score at which Manjrekar departed, run out after attempting a quick single to a Warne misfield.
Azharuddin, so out of touch earlier in the tour, now came to the fore, stroking his wristy way to 106, his 11th Test century.
He scored 80 between lunch and tea, at which point India (252 for 6) needed another 120 to win.
‘Azha's’ first century against Australia contained 17 fours, and he shared a stand of 101 with Prabhakar in under 90 minutes.
Eventually McDermott, who bowled impressively all day, had the Indian captain caught by Taylor at slip.
He had earlier been dropped (at 37) by Waugh at short cover off the luckless legspinner Warne.
Prabhakar went on to 64, but McDermott worked his way through the tail, finishing with 10 wickets in the match: his final scalp (Srinath) was his 150th in Tests.
India's brave resistance (they had scored 302 runs on the final day) had ended 39 short of an unlikely victory, the exciting climax forcing Channel 9 to do the unthinkable and postpone their 6 pm news programme by 10 minutes.
Watched by encouragingly large crowds — a total of 57,684, with over 13,000 on each of the first three days — this match was a reminder of much that is good about Test cricket.
The Indians, though, will always wonder about the umpiring…
DAVID FRITH WRITES: Australia's comeback after first-day dismissal for only 145 was a strong effort, with McDermott and Hughes highly-charged throughout and the recovery sealed by massive concentration by Boon, Taylor and Border.
But the overall Australian performance contained a number of false notes, and Messrs Sawle, Benaud (J.), Higgs and Simpson extended themselves by dropping two from the squad, the doughty vice-captain Marsh and the toast of cricket a year ago, Mark Waugh.
Whitney was lucky to hold his place in the twelve for Perth.
Taylor's slip catching had suddenly become a worry, though he recovered his poise with a good take late in the match, no longer rigid as he threw himself low to his right.
His century, the slowest ever for Australia, almost endorsed the selectors' view that he had no part in the one-day side, while underlining what truly Test calibre he was.
As for Boon, he and McDermott might well find places currently in a World XI.
His touch is so sure and he is stoutly unruffled — apart from when he was embarrassingly run out.
David Boon scored centuries in the third, fourth and fifth Tests, on his way to a series aggregate of 556 runs at an average of 79.43
Some of the lbw decisions — out and not-out — left distinctly uncomfortable feelings not only with the players concerned but with viewers and commentators.
The solution is not readily forthcoming.
More experience for umpires by way of preparation?
Stick only with the best two?
The most highly regarded Australian umpire, Tony Crafter, has had to wait until the final Test of the series for his first match this summer.
With it, he passes Bob Crockett's Australian record, and without ever having had his name chanted in derision: ‘Crock!
Crock!
Crock!’ screamed the Sydney crowd 88 years ago when he gave Clem Hill run-out.
Wilfred Rhodes confirmed, years later, that Hill was well out.
Pity there was no television then to prove the point.
Azharuddin left it late to show Australia his unique kind of magic.
Another half-hour of it would have sealed a momentous victory.
And Shane Warne's education continued the hard way.
He spun, toiled and grimaced, and perhaps one day his reward.
QUOTE:IF THAT was out then I'm a Dutchman.
Ian Chappell, commenting on TV about Dilip Vengsarkar's second-innings lbw dismissal
QUOTE:ONE JUST wondered if we had been provided with all the changes of the new laws relating to lbws.
Indian cricket manager Abbas Ali Baig 
AUSTRALIA v INDIA FIFTH TEST MATCH
Easy for Australia
400 up for Kapil Dev
AUSTRALIA v INDIA FIFTH TEST MATCH WACA Ground, Perth
February 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
AUSTRALIA wrapped up the series 4–0 with an ultimately easy victory over a dispirited Indian side, whose last 10 wickets went down for only 59 in the final innings.
With the series won, Australia included two new caps, the omission of local favourite Geoff Marsh after 50 Tests causing ripples, in the media and the Australian dressing-room, where Border made his displeasure at the loss of his vice-captain known to the selectors.
Shane Warne, whose solitary wicket of the series had cost him 228 runs, was rested, while Tom Moody came in for the out-of-form Mark Waugh.
New to Test cricket were Victorians Wayne Phillips, an opener and no relation to the former Test wicketkeeper/batsman, and fast-medium bowler Paul Reiffel.
India had keeper More back after injury.
Marsh's absence may have contributed to a disappointing first-day crowd of 7708, but those present witnessed an interesting day, Australia reaching 222 for 4, with the prolific Boon again to the fore.
Missed by Tendulkar in the gully when 12, by stumps the Tasmanian had made 91: he completed his 13th Test century early next morning having batted for 359 minutes, hitting 12 fours.
It was his sixth hundred against India, an Australian record.
Boon's innings helped Australia recover from an indifferent start.
Taylor fell for 2, then the small, balding right-hander Phillips, after collecting two streaky boundaries, fell to Prabhakar for 8.
Boon and Border added 117 before the captain became Kapil Dev's 399th Test scalp, and after the early departure of Jones, Boon and Moody combined in a stand of 77.
Kapil Dev became the second bowler to take 400 Test wickets when he dismissed Mark Taylor at Perth
Moody, in his first Test for two years, departed early on Day 2, having made 50, but Boon reached his century before falling to the persevering Prabhakar, who finished with 5 for 101, including his 50th Test wicket.
Healy reached 1000 runs in Tests when 19, becoming the third Australian wicketkeeper after Rod Marsh and Bert Oldfield to complete the Test ‘double’ of 1000 runs and 100 dismissals.
Hughes and McDermott also scored usefully to raise the total to 346, the Queenslander once off-driving Kapil Dev for six.
Srikkanth equalled the Test record (shared by Vic Richardson, Yajuvendra Singh and his captain Azharuddin) with five catches in the innings — three at short leg, one at silly mid-off and another at short midwicket.
Srikkanth continued to delight the statisticians, reaching 2000 runs in his 43rd Test when he had scored 10.
His 34, though, was the best score of the day (and he was dropped three times, at 17, 19 and 25) as India declined to 135 for 5 (Tendulkar 31, nightwatchman Ruju 1) by the close, with the fiery Hughes taking three wickets.
Manjrekar fell to a remarkable driving catch by Jones, fielding in sunglasses in the gully, while McDermott dismissed Azharuddin to eclipse the previous Australian record of 29 wickets in a series against India, shared by Alan Davidson and Richie Benaud (both in 1959–60).
Two towering Indian performances lit up the fourth day, with the ‘boy wonder’ Tendulkar going on to his second mouthwatering century of the series, lifting his side to 272 after a ninth-wicket stand of 81 with the stubborn More, who made 43.
The 18-year-old's third Test century came from only 135 balls, and contained 14 fours: he hit two more before giving a catch to second slip, where Moody had earlier dropped Kapil Dev on 0.
Whitney and Hughes both took four wickets, and all 10 wickets fell to catches, as in the Australian first innings: only once previously (WI v India, Bridgetown, 1982–83) have the first 20 wickets in a Test fallen to catches, and the eventual 33 catches in this match was a new Test record (as was the fact that no-one was bowled — a first for a completed Test).
Australia extended their lead of 74 by 104 for the loss of the openers by the end of the day.
Taylor fell at 4.05, in the first over after tea, giving Kapil Dev his 400th Test wicket (full analysis on page 23).
Although the ball might have been slipping down the leg side, Taylor was adjudged lbw by umpire Tony Crafter, who was officiated in his 33rd Test, breaking Bob Crockett's previous Australian record.
Most of those watching on TV round the country missed the historic moment ‘live’, as Channel 9 were screening  their nightly news bulletin at the time.
Boon, 35 overnight, added only three more on the fourth morning before falling to Prabhakar.
The chunky Tasmanian had taken his series run-tally to 556 (79.43).
Having scored 530 (75.71) against England last winter, Boon became the third Australian, after Don Bradman (three times) and Greg Chappell to exceed 500 runs in successive series in Australia.
Jones, making the most of his promotion in the order, now shared a partnership of 173 with Moody who, perhaps uniquely, got off the mark with a five (two plus three overthrows).
Jones, in his 49th Test, atoned for an otherwise disappointing series with his 10th century (his first in 28 innings): he ended with 150 not out in 6½ hours.
The lanky Moody rode his luck to score his second century at the highest level.
He was dropped by Prabhakar in the gully when 73, and at 89 should have been run out by yards, but Srikkanth's throw from close range missed the stumps and went for four overthrows.
Border, who scored 20 not out at No. 8, declared at 367 for 6: although India's target was 441, memories of Adelaide suggested an exciting final day, especially after Sidhu (24) and Srikkanth (26) knocked off 55 of those runs by stumps.
There was to be no Indian miracle, however, as left-armer Mike Whitney swept the batting aside, taking 7 for 27 on his way to match figures of 11 for 95, his first 10-wicket haul in first-class cricket.
India declined from 82 for 0 to 141 all out, giving Australia a 300-run victory.
First to go was Sidhu, another fine gully catch by Jones providing his fellow-Victorian Reiffel with his first Test wicket.
Two runs earlier Sidhu had been dropped by Reiffel in the gully off McDermott: it was the 29th chance dropped by the home side in the series, nine of them off McDermott.
The fact that the Australian batting rarely fired on all cylinders either during the series merely served to show-up the large gulf between the two sides, with the home team's 4–0 triumph not flattering them unduly, although India were unlucky not to win at Sydney, and might have won at Adelaide too had their fielding not let them down.
The Indian batting, though, was often at sea, and their selectors will have much thinking to do before next winter's tough series against South Africa and England.
The hearty Sydneysider Whitney, 33 on Feb 24, was called up after 80 minutes' play, and never looked back after disposing of Srikkanth with his third ball: the remaining wickets tumbled as India's batting fell apart.
Whitney had taken seven wickets in a Test innings once before: 7 for 89 against West Indies at Adelaide in 1988–89.
His reward then was to be summarily dropped from the side, missing the 1989 tour of England: it is doubtful whether the sometime mountaineer will received such shabby treatment this time.
Azharuddin, the only man apart from the openers to reach double figures in the second-innings debacle, later summed up his team's performance succinctly: ‘Crap.’
Craig McDermott, who took 31 wickets in the five Tests, was named Player of the Series
DAVID FRITH WRITES: Records and milestones come thick and fast.
We all like to feel we have been witness to something out of the ordinary, preferably unique, and that is why the unprecedented sight of 33 catches in a Test match was titillating.
The marks set by Healy, Srikkanth, McDermott, Whitney and umpire Crafter were all pleasurable.
But Kapil Dev's feat in taking his 400th Test wicket towered above everything else.
The achievement was all the more enjoyable for the nature of the cricketer concerned.
He is, and always has been, a true sportsman, smiling, chivalrous, gentle (except when he has a bat in his hands), and possessed of the genuine amateur's clean outlook.
He has not relied on intimidation.
He has based his game on the prime virtues of line and length, backed by great stamina.
Almost 25,000 balls has he sent down in Test cricket, and although Sir Richard Hadlee, in an otherwise gracious radio tribute immediately after the 400th wicket had been bagged, pointed to the greater number of Tests and deliveries needed by the Indian, it is by assessing the amount of support from the other end over the years that we gain a full picture of Kapil's place in history: he has carried India's bowling almost throughout his career.
I vividly recall meeting the young man in 1979 for the first time.
His shyness was offset by the bubbling enthusiasm of Bishan Bedi, who posed the question: Would this promising allrounder be of more value to India as a batsman or bowler in the years to come?
There seemed only one answer, for India had seldom boasted fast bowlers of sufficient quality to operate much beyond the first half-dozen shine-removing overs before the spinners came on for the rest of the innings.
Yes, young Kapil could be the answer to Indian prayers: a bowler with real pace, variation and powers of endurance.
But 400 Test wickets in the next dozen years?
That would have been a preposterous estimate.
And therein lies the deepest fascination about records and milestones.
Now for Tendulkar: how many Test runs will this elegant little genius make in the next dozen years?
Suffice to say a fair few.
Australian Diary
TREVOR GRANT wonders if loyalty is being taken too far
THOSE OF US who are convinced there is no longer room for sentiment at the hard edge of professional sport would have found it difficult to comprehend the outpouring of emotion that followed the exclusion of Geoff Marsh from the Australian tam for the final Test against India.
Marsh, relieved of his post as vice-captain and opening batsman after producing just 185 runs at 26 in four Tests against India and 226 at 25 in West Indies early in 1991, appeared to accept the logic behind his demise, the first time in a 50-Test career he had been dropped.
‘When you look at the scorebook the runs aren't on the board,’ he said after the announcement that the Victorian opener Wayne Phillips would be Mark Taylor's new partner in the Perth Test.
The announcement, though, set off a wave of sympathetic outrage that had to be seen, and heard, to be believed.
Newspapers ran editorials, the electronic media was locked in fierce debate, while grown men with tears welling in their eyes questioned the value of loyalty in cricket today.
The Australians even refused to sing their traditional victory song at the end of the Adelaide Test, having just gone to an unbeatable 3–0 series lead.
The only things missing were the black armbands when the team took the field at Perth.
Captain Allan Border, as hard and uncompromising as any professional cricketer could be, was so shaken by the news of the loss of his right-hand man that he refused to take the field for the start of the final day's play of the fourth Test.
Instead he sent out 12th man Paul Reiffel to cover for him whole he rang chairman of selectors Lawrie Sawle to vent his feelings about the news he had been given that morning.
The captain ordered the attendants to clear the dressing-room as he dialled Sawle, who was at home in Perth.
The contents of the discussion were not revealed but it can safely be assumed Border made it clear he felt Marsh, dropped along with Mark Waugh, should have been spared, not least because of his loyal service.
Border, who once said that the day Marsh and David Boon are out of the Australian side will be the day he goes as well, got back out on the ground soon enough, but he continued to fuel the fire by staying behind in Adelaide that evening while the rest of the team flew on to Perth to prepare for the fifth and final Test.
By the next day we had big, black frontpage headlines that suggested Border's job was on the line over his angry reaction to the loss of his close mate and deputy.
Border described it all as media nonsense, saying he had, in fact, stayed behind to attend to some personal business.
But he made it clear when he arrived in Perth the next day that he disagreed with Marsh's sacking, an interesting observation given that the players' code of behaviour specifically states that they are not permitted to comment on selection decisions.
But no-one at the Australian Cricket Board was about to apply the letter of the law and find Border.
They needed the captain back on the rails immediately, and they knew the best way to do this was let him simmer down for 24 hours.
Border has a history of reacting to situations before considering all the consequences.
Four Australian cricket-writers and one Australian team manager will never forget the day at net practice in Christchurch on the 1985–86 tour of New Zealand when, during a routine discussion with the journalists on preparation for a one-day match, he made mention of the fact that he intended to resign if his shattered team did not win the match the following Saturday.
He hadn't bothered to inform anyone in the team of this intention, and manager Bob Merriman suddenly found himself plunged into a crisis of seemingly immense proportions.
Four days later, after the front-page splash headlines, intense team meetings and streams of trans-Tasman phone calls from ACB headquarters, Border said he didn't really mean to give the impression he would ditch the team.
He just wanted to try to fire them up.
Basic honesty
Border has too much basic honesty to plan his responses in these situations.
When Marsh was dumped it did not concern him that as Australian captain anything he said or did might be misconstrued or magnified many times over.
His position did not come into it.
A loyal mate had been wronged, in his opinion, and he wanted to let those responsible know exactly how he felt.
Well, after all the fuss, life carried on as normal in Perth.
Marsh accepted his fate honourably, as everyone expected, and the Australians got on with the job of keeping their boot on the Indian throat.
But poor old Wayne Phillips was always going to suffer for the demise of the local hero, unless he got at least 100 in his first trip to the crease.
Instead the plucky, unassuming little accountant, who has only his name in common with the dashing former Test batsman/keeper of the mid-1980s, got a streaky 8 and was then hit between the eyes by the Perth media.
‘Phillips Flops’ was one headline on a day that saw David Boon move within nine runs of his third century of the series as Australia took command.
Boon duly got it next day and took his average to a Bradmanesque 86.
Boon's run-gathering in this series — he is only the fifth Australian after Don Bradman, Kim Hughes, Bob Simpson and Border to score more than 500 in a series against India — has been a spectacular highlight in a summer of relatively poor returns from a supposedly top-flight batting line-up.
Victoria opener Wayne Phillips; controversial replacement for Geoff Marsh in Perth Test
Sawle acknowledged this on the eve of the final Test when, asked to defend the dumping of Marsh, he made the point that it had been the bowlers — Craig McDermott (whose 31 wickets made him the highest Australian wicket-taker in a series against India), Bruce Reid (a wrecker in the second Test before breaking down again) and Merv Hughes — who had been the key figures throughout the series.
When you consider that going into the final Test the Australians, renowned for their safe catching in recent times, had missed 24 chances against India's eight, you get some idea of the home bowler's dominance over the fragile Indian batting throughout the series.
Even though experienced Australian batsmen like Marsh and Dean Jones (before his second-innings 150 at Perth) have flopped badly this summer at international level, perhaps the most disappointing has been Mark Waugh, who after his sensational century on debut against England at Adelaide last year was expected to forge a long-term place in the middle order.
Instead he was back in Sheffield Shield ranks looking to recover form by the time the fifth Test had begun.
Waugh, whose highest score in four Tests against India had been 34, responded magnificently, scoring 153, his 30th first-class century, against the limited South Australian attack at the Sydney Cricket Ground.
Marsh was always expected to return for the World Cup, and Waugh, with this superb innings, made it extremely difficult for the selectors to ignore him too.
Waugh's domination of the SA bowlers also played an important role in lifting his State back into calculations for the Sheffield Shield final.
With three matches to go, NSW's, outright victory over SA pushed them up into equal second place with WA, two points behind leaders and defending champions Victory and two points clear of Queensland, who have a game in hand.
Even though the World Cup will swamp the domestic competition, the Shield will still continue to provide some of the most riveting cricket of the summer as these four highly-competitive sides battle for the two places in the five-day final.
Trevor Grant is the cricket correspondent to the Melbourne Sunday Herald-Sun.
Neil Mallender, the ‘nearly man’
Somerset seamer Neil Mallender was called up as a standby for England in New Zealand.
David Foot looks at the amiable ‘Ghost’
THEY called Neil Mallender ‘Ghost’— and there was a lingering chance that he might materialise as England's additional seam bowler out in New Zealand when Lawrence, DeFreitas and Lewis were all in varying states of fitness.
He was already out there, virtually his spiritual home according to his team-mates back in Taunton, and it made sense to put him on alert.
Test recognition has eluded him, though his ‘workhorse’ attributes have occasionally been mentioned with approval at selection meetings.
He probably accepts that the ultimate accolade for the county cricketer will now remain inaccessible.
As a Yorkshireman, born near Doncaster, he does not lack steel.
That adopted Somerset man and captain Brian Close would have admired the way Mallender keeps going, rather more medium than fast, but invariably straight.
Yorkshire may have been slightly tardy in not monitoring his schoolboy progress.
When they eventually went for him, at the end of 1986, they were pipped by Somerset.
He was ready to leave Northants and had gone off, with his customary annual zeal, to coach and play for Otago — and think about a geographical change of scenery in England.
Somerset were healing their wounds after the tempestuous exits of Viv Richards, Joel Garner and Ian Botham.
They were anxiously engaged on a hurried recruitment policy.
Mallender's fair complexion gave rise to his nickname ‘Ghost’
All sorts of names, including that of Graham Dilley, were being whispered.
Back in the West Country, Mallender looked like a better long-term bed.
‘We can't rely on phone calls and second-hard contact,’ Somerset resourcefully agreed.
And the then manager, Brian Rose (now back with the county as chairman of the cricket committee), hopped on the next plane.
A three-year contract was quickly sorted out.
Mallender joined Graham Rose, Adrian Jones and Neil Burns in a Somerset side with a very different appearance.
It could be argued that he saw it as something of a homecoming: Neil had attended Yeovil Grammar School for a time when his father's work took the family there.
He was a promising young rugby player, either at full-back or three-quarter.
As a town Yeovil had impressive soccer roots, and Mallender's schoolboy loyalties were divided.
Today his interest veers to Rugby League.
But it was as a young cricketer, distinctive even then with his fair complexion and blond hair (hence ‘Ghost’, years later), that he particularly impressed his games master, John Kitson.
‘Neil was a natural sportsman from junior level up.
He was a good learner.
When someone advised him to do something, he worked on it and did it.’
Mr Kitson, himself a fellow Yorkshireman and a former member of the county club, added: ‘I was sad to see the way we lost so many fine young players, not just Neil, to other sides.’
Mallender's enthusiasm for the game was boundless.
When he played cricket at school, he opened the bowing and the batting.
With his brother Graham he attended local indoor nets, supervised each Monday night by Peter Robinson, the Somerset coach.
‘There were many boys, all equally keen.
I must admit I didn't remember Neil from those Yeovil days when he turned up at Taunton as our newcomer in 1986,’ said Robinson.
‘He has remained our best ‘control’ bowler since then.’
He's essentially a 50-wickets-a-season man, always suggesting he will take more.
Last summer, bothered by a groin injury, his tally was still 42 and he came 12th in the national bowling averages.
Good-natured critics in the dressing-room wink and ask him why he saves all his best cricket for New Zealand.
Robinson believes Mallender is at his best when he cuts down his pace, and cites what happened on the slow Bath pitch.
David Graveney agrees.
‘Neil hits the seam in the old-fashioned way.
Sometimes I think he's one of a dying breed.’
The Somerset attack suffered a good deal from injuries and an unsettled side in 1991, and there were times when Mallender found himself carrying perhaps an unfair burden.
Somerset seamer Neil Mallender came close to a surprise Test cap in New Zealand recently
Like most bowlers, he works on his batting and, privately, no doubt, thinks it is sparingly recognised.
The wondrous hundred may not be beyond his reach.
His 88 for Otago seven years ago earned slightly sceptical, second-hand acclaim from his county colleagues.
But there could be no begrudging the 1990 innings at Hove that put him in the Somerset record-books.
Sussex were beaten by an innings, Somerset declared their first innings at 529 for 9.
Chris Tavaré made a double-century before being caught.
Mallender, inordinately proud of the majority of his strokes, was 87 not out.
The ninth-wicket stand of 183 equalled that of debonair Chris Greetham and that purveyor of suicidal singles, Harold Stephenson, at Weston in 1963.
‘Ghost’ has been described as one of the most quiet and diffident members of the Somerset team.
Peter Robinson says he is also one of the most popular.
The sense of humour is Yorkshire-dry.
It can be detected out on the fairways, where he is acknowledged as being among cricket's best golfers.
He and wife Caroline have two children.
In 1980 he went on a Young England tour of West Indies.
Nowadays the limit of his touring is New Zealand, where each year the bowling statistics are impressive.
That flicker of glamour and unscheduled elevation came and went in January.
The summons came from Micky Stewart, but no more.
Meanwhile he reassesses his immediate targets.
They incorporate a summer of renewed fitness and a 70-wicket haul.
Somerset's new director of coaching, Bob Cottam, will be looking to him to provide the stability and experience which will complement the emergent talents of bowlers like Caddick and Van Troost.
History Workshop
Huw Richards's series continues with a talk with veteran researcher and writer Gerald Brodribb
A KEY ELEMENT in the rich mix of cricket's attractions is the wealth of quirk and oddity thrown up by the game.
No writer has been more aware of this feature, or more effective in recording it, than Gerald Brodribb.
His Oxford tutor, C.S. Lewis, dedicatee of his first book,The English Game (1948), told him: ‘Though never a cricket man, after reading your book I feel that I have enjoyed it all my life.’
That gift for conveying enthusiasm survives in him at 76, sill an active researcher and watcher who talks as warmly about current players like Matthew Maynard and Martin Speight as of the heroes of his youth.
A prolific contributor to magazines — first The Cricketer since his teens and, since 1981,WCM — he can look back on more than 20 books, and forward to a number still in gestation.
They include biographies of Jessop, Tate and Felix, anthologies of cricket verse and fiction and — further proof that the best writers have interests extending far beyond the game,— the standard work on Roman Stone and Brick, based on the doctoral thesis resulting from his post-retirement work on the baths at Beauport Park, close to his Sussex home.
Idiosyncrasies
But it is as a recorder of the game's idiosyncrasies that he has carved his distinctive niche: ‘I delight in recording the oddities and unusual happenings in which the game abounds,’ he says.
He started, like many a cricket-crazy youngster with statistics — at the age of 14 writing to The Cricketer with a list of first-class hat-tricks, the first to be drawn-up, culled from research in Wisden .
Mutual interest in statistics led to a meeting with accountant Anthony Weigall, and the foundation of the group that became The Cricket Society.
But statistics by themselves were never enough to satisfy the inquiring mind of a man who says: ‘The measure of greatness in a cricketer is nothing to do with numbers, but is in the occasions which watchers remember with joy — think of McCabe and his three extraordinary innings.’
As a watcher, he says: ‘At the end of the day I ask myself how many really memorable moments there have been.
If there haven't been any it has been a pretty poor day's play.’
While always concerned to get his numbers right, his interest is in the memorable moment more than impressive numbers — he regards many statisticians as self-important nit-pickers.
His first day in 1924 watching his county, Sussex, convinced him that there is no greater moment than a big hit: ‘As I walked into the ground a ball came bouncing off the Town Hall roof and nearly hit me on the head.
Amid a buzz of excitement I heard that it was ‘one of old Maurice's hits’, and I pushed my way through the crowd just in time to see another ball sail up into the sky towards the Castle.
I became there and then the cricket fanatic I have remained ever since,’ he recalled in Maurice Tate (1976).
Six-hitting remains the one area in which he acts as a straightforward statistician — as co-ordinator of WCM 's annual award.
His book Hit for Six (1960) was the literary consequence of Tate's assault at Hastings, a ground commemorated in his most recent work Cricket at Hastings (1989).
Hit for Six is full of statistical detail, but the number is still second to the moment and a fascination with the really big hit, the occasions when, as Mike Gatting told him: ‘Something happens magically and the ball goes for miles, and you have no idea why or how.’
Gerald Brodribb: student of the game's oddities and unusual happenings
He argues that cricket has too little regard for these moments, and wishes baseball's practice of measuring and recording big hits was adopted.
He has measured several fabled hits himself — notably Charles Fellows' long-accepted 175-yard record: ‘It is clear from the geography of the ground that this was impossible.
The report was put in the papers by a former professional named Martin who used it as an advertisement for his shop.’
He argues that a more legitimate record is C.I.
Thornton's 168-yard hit at Hove in 1876, verified by historian James Pycroft, who happened to be in the firing-line.
This leads on logically to an interest in fast-scoring feats — Jessop was a natural choice for his first biography The Croucher (1974).
A book on big hits and remarkable innings is among his continuing projects, using another favourite research skill — reconstructing innings from scorebooks: ‘You can, for instance, work out how many balls, a batsman faced during an innings, provided there aren't too many byes or leg-byes,’ he says, having illuminated several of Jessop's feats this way.
All this research is underpinned by a longstanding habit of collecting cuttings on issues that interest him: ‘I've got about half-a-dozen files on things like big hitting, underarm bowling, reverse sweeps and so on.
If I see anything on the subject it goes into the file, and eventually I have enough material for a book or an article.’
The Lost Art , a study of underarm bowling, should be published next year.
Cuttings are supplemented by systematic newspaper research and by conversation and correspondence with former players such as near-neighbour Tom Barling, 85: ‘I like to drag in stories and anecdotes.
That's why I like the first-hand bits,’ he explains.
The benefits can be seen in the book he regards as him important,Next Man In (1952; totally revised edition 1985), a study of the Laws of the game.
This potentially dry subject is illustrated with an extraordinary wealth of anecdotal detail, doing for cricket what Leo Rosten did for his native language in the fabled Joys of Yiddish .
He says: ‘Writers like Richard Streeton tell me they carry it around with them as a work of reference, using it to find out whether odd events have happened before.
I use it myself the same way.’
He regrets the decision not to re-title the revision: ‘It was completely rewritten, but keeping the title meant that a lot of people decided not to buy it.
We should have changed it.’
Ghost-writing
Working as a teacher, he was always able to choose his own subjects.
The one marginal exception is his only excursion into ghost-writing,A Yankee Looks at Cricket , written with Philadelphian cricket fanatic Henry Sayen in 1956, which helped tide him over a tricky period between jobs.
And his other current project returns to another enthusiasm — fellow teacher Nicholas Felix, artist and star of the mid-19th Century.
After finding Felix's grave in Wimborne, he wrote a biography (1962), with a reprint of Felix's own book Felix on the Bat : ‘He was a remarkable character.
It seems that the only people who didn't like him were his own family.
Any boys who were taught by him were very lucky,’ he says.
He worries at the extent to which known Felix pictures have disappeared in the last 30 years, and can detail those that have gone missing from Brighton, The Oval and a Piccadilly pub.
Owner of several Felixes himself, he plans in the next year or two to publish the player's illustrated scrapbooks for the 1851 and 1852 seasons: ‘They were intended for publication and are a remarkable social document,’ he says.
Still coaching a boys' football team, and taking immense pride in a four-year-old grandson who is already demonstrating an enviable left-handed off-drive, he continues to look to the future.
But looking back on his past he can say simply: ‘I have had a good time.’
So, without question, have his many readers.
Arlott the actor-manager
Last month we featured a full-length tribute to John Arlott, who died on December 14.
By way of follow-up we are glad to be able to print an appreciation of cricket's favourite communicator by another who knew him very well, former Guardian sports editor John Samuel
THE VOICE of summer is dead.
The eye that saw the detail, substance and soul of the game of cricket gazes no more.
John Arlott's armour was his honest thought and simple truth.
It protected a complex, vulnerable man of many shades and distinctions.
A self-disparaging poet, he wrote of his greatest cricketing hero, John Berry Hobbs:
There falls across this one December day
The light remembered from those suns of June
That you reflected in the summer play
Of perfect strokes across the afternoon
Arlott could have written that of himself, but would have been profoundly embarrassed to have done so.
‘You never know how little you have to beat,’ he once said, a doleful look momentarily clouding his large, countryman features and global eyes.
‘C'mon.
Let's have a drink.’
A drink with Arlott was an Augustan experience, a passport into a private land where wine would flow with the constance of the Gironde or the Rhone.
It irrigated the vast areas of his knowledge, humours and concerns.
Arlott, someone said once, seemed to know things he had no right to know.
All the same, he was a professional's professional, his knowledge hard-won and shrewdly counted, his ignorance despaired and worked upon.
Comfortable in his room of rooms, he would point and say mirthfully, ‘Uninsurable except against catastrophe.’
The buzz of countless conversations was in its air and woodwork.
It easily unlocked his heart, one that bore more than the usual share of tragedy.
He was born a biggish baby, of Nellie Arlott, Feb 25, 1914, in the Old Cemetery Lodge, Basingstoke.
He never thought he would make old bones, but not for this reason.
His beloved father, Jack, had no especial love for cricket, although later on young John would delight in a recollection that when cricket began to seek better playing surfaces it found them in the graveyards.
His third cricket book, on the Australians of 1948, with whom he is imperishably associated, was ‘To my father, who knows nothing about cricket and cares less, but who was very good to me.’
His mother Nellie, stuffing Liberal tracts into envelopes long into the night, was his induction into radicalism, so often at odds with his Hampshire traditionalism: ‘The bastards are closing the Watercress Line forever…‘
It was sometimes hard to find the right thing to say.
His instant emotion was the actor-manager's: theatrical cordite, writer fire.
As you scrambled for response, the philosopher took over.
Often you could wish you were an audience of millions instead of one.
The mildest remark about an honest Dao enjoyed in an Algarve beach café could draw a withering response: ‘The most evil colonial power the world has known.’
MCC were to reel under a similar onslaught on the matter of South Africa.
One visit in 1948–49 persuaded Arlott of the rightness of multiracialism and wrongness of apartheid.
It was typical of him to find a place for Basil D'Oliveira in English cricket after the South African had written to him in desperation that his talent would ever find outlet.
Cyril Connolly had offered a similar generosity and recognition to the young Arlott, then a police sergeant in Southampton, given to writing poetry.
His poems in Horizon and elsewhere, collected in book form in 1944 and 1945, led to his appointment by the BBC as a staff producer and then an instructor in broadcasting technique.
As Head of Poetry in the early days of the Third Programme he grew to know Dylan Thomas, Roy Campbell and the post-war generation of poets and writers.
They influenced him for a lifetime, though he would sometimes grump, ‘I write like a copper, dun I?’
Sport, and especially cricket, projected him into a much wider domain, though it came about almost by accident, and over the dead bodies of some in the BBC establishment of the time who thought his Hampshire burr ‘vulgar’.
Arlott knew plenty of pusillanimity and meanness in high places.
At best it was a snobbery which wholly overlooked his timing, eye and exactitude of judgment and imagery.
Throughout the land radio listeners could sense the lethal pace of Lindwall or Miller running in to bowl at Hutton, Washbrook or Compton in that rejoicing, post-war Ashes summer of 1948.
Arlott's punctuation of those events remains as evocative as the half-remembered smell of linseed oil on willow.
His voice was heard to the ends of the earth — at least the earth wherever cricket is played: Australia, New Zealand, India, Pakistan, Canada, and of course West Indies.
Small boys swaying on the branches of trees overlooking Bridgetown, Kingston and Port-of-Spain sought to imitate him.
But to others who knew nothing of cricket he sounded like home.
He had a poetically economic gift of phrase or image.
Asif Masood reminded him of Groucho Marx pursuing a pretty waitress.
The South African van der Bijl, bowling for Middlesex, was like a younger Lord Longford, ‘though not nearly so tolerant’.
He was not wholly a man of nostalgia, and the road accident which cost him his son at the age of 21 all but destroyed his religious faith.
The hurt never left the depth of his eyes  and each day of his life he knotted a black tie.
A second son, Tim, to his great pride, became a television executive.
Valerie, his second wife, brought him great happiness.
She bore him a third son, but a difficult carriage and birth presaged troubles which eventually cost her her life in her forties.
Suddenly again it was a deeply unhappy time.
The BBC had for a period turned from county commentaries to one-liners.
A presenter who gabbled the Hampshire score switched over to John Arlott at Bournemouth for an update.
‘You've given it,’ said Arlott.
‘Back to the studio’.
He was never unprofessional, but he knew a professional retort.
Test-match broadcasting and his writing helped bind many personal wounds.
In the 1950s he wrote soccer for The Guardian under the pseudonym ‘Silchester’.
Only the last-minute availability of Donny Davies, his soccer senior and a formidable broadcaster, writing for the paper as ‘Old International’, saved Arlott from the broken Elizabethan and the Manchester United catastrophe on Munich's wintry runway.
To his grief, Donny's widow would not find it in her heart to speak to him again.
For a while John was active in politics, twice standing as a Liberal.
He described himself as a passionate Liberal, not a radical one.
In 1970 he refused to broadcast the proposed South African tour.
Persisting with the tour, he said, was a social, political and cricketing error.
It brought him abuse from the Tory Press and suspension from Twenty Questions .
It was an issue on which he never bent.
When he filled in a South African immigration questionnaire in 1947 he wrote ‘Human’ in the space marked ‘Race’.
He lived to see South Africa bend instead.
After writing for The Observer and The Times he returned to The Guardian as cricket and, subsequently, wine correspondent in the late 1960s.
For a dozen years it was a vintage period in all respects.
The outflow of his books ranged from his early verses to English Cheeses of the South and West (1956),Jack Hobbs: Profile of the Master (1981) and Arlott on Wine .
The books seemed never to cease, from Burgundy Vines and Wines and a history of the house of Krug, to Fred , the story of Freddie Trueman, and, together with Sir Neville Cardus,The Noblest Game .
Lunch at the Old Sun, his temporal and spiritual home at Alresford in eastern Hampshire, would usually end with the lamplighter.
Libation began in a vast library-living room, often the bottle a newly discovered chateau or domaine, gleefully introduced with the latest ripe tale.
Treasured bookcases
No man told a raunchy story with more relish and less offence.
Much that was important in Arlott's life was in this room, lined with treasured bookcases and priceless first editions.
John Piper, John Betjeman, Hardy, Hogarth, Cobbett, Kingsley Amis, and so much more.
The aquatints, the countryhouse topographies, the ship's glass.
No Arlott journey of the middle years was without a chart of secondhand bookshops, antiquarian caves.
In the Old Sun the loom seemed never to stop, yet no-one was turned away, and conversation went on long into the afternoon and night.
Arlott's golf day was an ‘at home’ among the closest of friends, a liberal bunch preceding nine holes on the Alresford course.
In a corner of the great library Arlott would gleefully construe his winners and losers, shed a tear as Leo Harrison or Barry Reed presented an ornamented mug as token of thanks, serve the unchanging banquet of watercress soup and venison, then watch with avuncular pride as the best arms in Hampshire cricket, Reed or Harrison, laid low the last coconuts of Alresford Fair, the midnight lights now glowing.
Arlott loved Hove as he did all those counties of the chalk downs and Weald.
The deckchairs flapped, the youngsters played on the outfield, the old gentlemen put on the caps and began to leave as Arlott summed up one more day of country cricket.
It was among his last.
The voice wheezed and trembled a little.
The sweat ran.
Peter Baxter, producer and cricket-lover who had done much to restore outside sports broadcasting, confessed himself happy.
‘C'mon.
Let's have a drink.’
We did.
On the way home the recorded voice on the car radio gave its weathered, sweet, mellow report of the day's play.
On the last day of the Centenary Test of 1980, Arlott signed off as a commentator in a much more formal setting.
A swig of claret, then, as the sweat ran, he took a handkerchief to his brow.
The Lord's PA announced that Arlott had finished his final stint.
The huge crowd spontaneously broke into applause.
Boycott dropped his bat to clap.
Lillee waved a fisted salute.
The players applauded.
Arlott took another gulp and walked out of regular broadcasting forever.
His decision to retire to Alderney with his third wife, Pat, was never easy.
The family had spent warm and happy holidays in the 1950s on the sea-girt rock, 1½ miles by 3½.
A fortress over the centuries, now it beckoned him with a fine house, The Vines, where once the German commandant had surveyed the desolated scene.
At the last Arlott could not bring himself to sign the contract.
In that frozen moment his advisor said, ‘C'mon, you bloody fool.
Sign it and sell it if you must.
You can't lose.’
Sign he did, giving up his past at the Old Sun.
Next day he broke out in a savage rash, but the move began to Alderney and the last, comfortable, well-solaced years.
He'd auctioned his wine cellar and chuckled at the £28,000 it made.
‘Only the big-money stuff I'd choke if I drank…
’ A comfortable residue travelled with him to Alderney.
In 1980, Robert, The Vines and its master still needed a great deal of looking after, but Patricia, once secretary to Billy Griffith at Lord's, was equal to the task.
‘She'll sort me out like a good Daily Telegraph lady,’ Arlott had said when she first came to look after them at Alresford.
Then, a little less mischievously, ‘I think I'm going to marry her…if she'll have me.’
Marry they of course did, and now the honours came fast.
An OBE was followed by life membership — of MCC and Somerset.
Not, strangely, of Hampshire, well as he served that county as committee member, guide, counsel, and lifelong follower.
His best book, he once said, was of Maurice Tate (1951).
But his Book of Cricketers — of 1979, about players most ‘enjoyed by one cricketer’(he never used the first person), was half made up of Hampshire men.
‘But for the intrusion of editorial conscience there would have been many more,’ he wrote in the preface.
In Alderney he finally and grudgingly got to work on his autobiography,Basingstoke Boy , using only the third person.
He hated pettiness as much as he did superficial quotation.
He was saddened by the degeneration of soccer, a sport he genuinely loved, suffering first-hand when he was attacked on a train at Leamington Spa.
He was a proud, caring president of the Cricketers' Association, especially during the difficult Packer years, the implications of which he read better than any.
Asked once how he would like to be remembered, he said, ‘for producing Dylan Thomas's Under Milk Wood and getting Basil D'Oliveira a cricketing job in England.’
Unlike a Guardian predecessor, Cardus, he was not intensely musical, perhaps not finding the time he might have liked.
In choosing Beethoven's Eroica on Desert Island Discs , it was for the timelessness of its slow movement.
Fond as he was of aquatints and textured design, colour rarely entered his commentary vocabulary.
He was never in the business of perfection.
What he perceived were human characteristics, above all the truth of the heart.
The voice is dead and not only cricket-lovers will suffer the hush.
John Arlott, businessman
DURING THE last 10 years of his life, John Arlott was chairman of Craigie Robertson, a public relations and sponsorship agency.
From a turnover of less than £50,000 during its first year of business, the company expanded rapidly and has recently been instrumental in negotiating the £3 million Tetley Bitter sponsorship of the England team.
Managing Director Marcus Robertson paid tribute to the unsuspected business skills that John Arlott showed: ‘Right from Day 1 John was very quick to spot sponsorship opportunities.
One thing he always wanted to do was to improve the lot of all sports players, and the Tetley deal, which includes a large element that goes directly to members of the England team, was the last one the company was involved with before he died.
Although less active in recent years, he was absolutely delighted when the agreement was reached with the TCCB.
‘He also showed a remarkable capacity to look at any form of contract and identify both the things that needed taking out and what has been wrongly omitted.
I am quite sure that over the years he saved the company substantial legal costs!’
CRAWFORD: The Missing Years
JIM SULLIVAN fills an undocumented gap in the career of Surrey and England allrounder J.N. CRAWFORD
JOHN NEVILLE CRAWFORD was one of the outstanding young cricketers of the era before the First World War.
Selected for Surrey during his last year at Repton School in 1904, he went on to tour South Africa with MCC in 1905–06 and Australia in 1907–08.
He was even a youthful cricket author, telling the story of a tour of Australia in Trip to ‘Kangaroo’ Land (published 1909).
His break with Surrey in 1909 is well documented.
As captain, he did not agree with the committee over the composition of the team to meet the Australians, and in the end he left England to settle in South Australia, where he coached at St Peter's College, Adelaide.
Some histories say he returned to England during the Great War, but most comment that he spent the war years in Australia and New Zealand before returning to Surrey in 1919.
In fact, Crawford's war was spent entirely in New Zealand, and is a story well worth telling.
New Zealanders first saw Crawford during a tour by an Australian XI in 1914.
When the Australians played South Canterbury at Temuka, Crawford scored a memorable 354.
In the neighbouring province of Otago, Crawford's record-breaking efforts did not go unnoticed.
The Otago Cricket Association, at its March 1914 meeting, heard a report from Dunedin businessman Arthur Fisher, an ex-New Zealand representative.
Fisher, who had gone to Melbourne briefly in 1897 with high hopes of being selected for Australia, was determined to see Otago cricket prosper, and convinced the local authorities that Crawford would be the type of coach who could bring on the young Otago players.
The Australian team had just played the first ‘Test’ at Carisbrook, in which Crawford had done nothing to harm his reputation, taking 3 for 64 of 0 to 18, as well as knocking up 53 in his only innings.
The cricket correspondent of the Otago Daily Times reported that ‘rumours are flying about dangerously at street corners that the local authorities have approached J.N. Crawford with a view to securing his services as a coach.’
Crawford was quoted as saying he could not decide ‘off the bat, as it were,’ but that he was interested.
So keen were the locals to see Otago cricket strengthened that there was no difficulty in getting assurances for the £350 a year salary which was to be offered to Crawford.
Crawford's acceptance (having secured his release from the South Australian CA) was welcomed with delight in Otago, where a new ‘era of revival’ was heralded in the newspapers.
The money involved was a considerable sum, but in those days Dunedin was New Zealand's commercial capital and many big businesses were represented on the Otago CA.
Donations to the ‘Coach Fund’ at once began to pour in.
Speights, the country's foremost brewery, started it rolling with five guineas.
J.N. Crawford: went to Australia, then to New Zealand, after falling out with the Surrey committee
By August, Crawford was well established in Dunedin, having found board in the seaside suburb of St Clair, and he set about grooming a training squad from which the Otago team for the coming season would be selected.
But, in the same week that Crawford was selecting his squad, New Zealand joined Britain in declaring war on Germany.
The war to end all wars would have far-reaching effects on Crawford's New Zealand cricket career.
At first, the war seemed a long way away, and the Otago CA reported that the 1914–15 summer promised to be a most successful one, with the ‘services of world-renowned player, J.N. Crawford’ ensuring that Otago cricket would be second to none in New Zealand.
The ‘Coach Fund’ was heavily subscribed; Crawford had taken on an extensive schedule which saw him coaching his protégés (‘Crawford's Colts’) four evenings a week at Carisbrook, and coaching at the Boys' High School twice a week.
On Saturday mornings he would watch the schoolboy games before turning out for his club, initially Dunedin and later St Kilda.
‘Crawford's Colts’ acquitted themselves well during the representative season, and Crawford himself took regular five-and six-wicket bags, as well as scoring an unbeaten 178 against Wellington, which critics described as ‘a brilliant reminder of his play with Australia last season’.
However, the shadow of war was beginning to cloud the cricket world.
Gate takings from designated provincial matches were being given to the Patriotic Fund, the first lists of killed and wounded were being published, and, as the season drew to a close, newspaper pages were filled with the photographs of the casualties from Gallipoli, New Zealand's bloody initiation into modern warfare.
The Otago CA, like other sporting bodies, was moved publicly to urge young men to enlist (each man who did was kept on as a financial member of the association for the duration).
Inevitably, many of the young men Crawford had been engaged at great expense to coach found themselves in khaki instead of cricket whites.
Internationally, there were already questions being asked about the place of sport in a time of war.
In Britain, comments like those of Admiral Lord Charles Beresford were typical: ‘I put it to the men who play cricket and football that we must now all be prepared to stand by our country and to suffer for our country.’
As cricket activity wound down during the first two years of the war the Otago CA was finding Crawford to be an expensive acquisition, with only £103 in the Coach's Fund and £169 being paid out for a six-month period.
Crawford himself was keen to start an intensive three-month coaching school during the winter months, but he was already becoming unpopular with some administrators.
His 1915 report to the committee arrived weeks late, and complained that some players were missing practices.
He suggested regular attendance be required of any man expecting to play for the province.
Lists of players who had gone to the front were now being compiled, and by Aug 1915 Crawford himself realised that things could not continue as they were.
He offered to forgo part of his salary as long as some employment would be found for him to make up the difference.
Otago CA chairman J.J. Ritchie suggested a ‘billet’ might be found for Crawford during the day.
This appears to have been done, as Crawford's occupation in the street-directory guide changes from ‘cricket coach’ to ‘agent’.
As the war dragged on cricket was bound to suffer.
During 1915 many Dunedin cricket clubs had to withdraw teams as so many players were enlisting.
The Otago CA report for that year had to report that the  early high hopes for Otago cricket were now being ‘affected by the Great War, and the necessity for all men to play the greater game for the Empire’.
Crawford was reported to be doing excellent work, but as the inter-provincial matches were cancelled as the war worsened, the association's finances worsened too: the Coach's Fund was now deeply in debt.
Early in 1916 complaints had been received about the conduct of the coaching, and the suggestion was made that Crawford's contract be terminated.
Crawford wrote to the committee responding to their charges, and their reaction cam in terms probably familiar to many professional cricketers dealing with committees of enthusiasts: ‘Mr Crawford should have shown more enthusiasm in his work, but the committee is willing to overlook past shortcomings on the understanding that improvement is shown.
Mr Crawford is to obey all instructions from the coaching committee.’
In April 1916 the association asked Crawford if he would accept a reduced salary of £200 a year and, although in a previous letter Crawford had offered to drop to £245, he now insisted on at least £300.
The association, now fully aware of its precarious financial position, countered with an offer of £150 for agreement to an immediate termination of the contract.
Crawford reminded the committee that he had not received any salary for a month, but offered to accept £245 for termination.
In the end, both parties agreed on a payment of £200, and Crawford's contract came to an end.
The annual report noted that ‘owing to the war it was impossible to obtain funds to pay Mr Crawford and it was also difficult to get colts to coach, and the contract was terminated with deep regret on June 1, 1916.
Had times been normal we are sure that Mr Crawford would have made Otago the foremost province in the Dominion.’
Compulsory call-up
Crawford, now 30, was eligible for military service, but as volunteers were eager to join up during 1914–16 there had been no need to impose conscription in New Zealand.
However, when calls for a compulsory call-up which would share the burden became stronger, the government passed a Military Service Act which came into force in August 1916, six months after similar United Kingdom legislation.
Ballots for service began in Nov 1916, and recruits for the infantry and engineers were sent to Trentham Camp, near Wellington, for training before being posted overseas.
Although Crawford was one of the few Test cricketers to play in spectacles it would seem that his eyesight was not so poor that he could not be used by the military.
By 1917 Crawford was in camp, and so available to play for Wellington when interprovincial cricket began again.
Once more the war had dealt an unfair blow to Otago cricket.
Crawford was still in camp during the 1918 season, and was able to perform great feats for Wellington.
Against Auckland at Eden Park he took five wickets in each innings and scored 110 in his first appearance at the crease.
In the return match at the Basin Reserve he took five wickets in the first innings and scored a handy 42.
With the war coming to an end, Crawford did not see overseas service and was able to rejoin his wife, who had remained in Dunedin during his military training.
When county cricket began again in 1919, Crawford was back with Surrey, and had lost none of his old form after an absence of 10 years.
Against the Australian Imperial Forces he played what Wisden called ‘the innings of his life’.
Batting down the order at No. 8, he scored 144 not out, which included a last-wicket stand of 80 in 35 minutes, his partner making only two of those runs.
Against Kent he opened with Jack Hobbs, and the pair knocked off the 96 required to win in 32 minutes.
Crawford retired from first-class cricket two years later, having scored over 7000 runs and taken more than 600 wickets in his career.
He died in a Surrey hospital in May 1963, aged 76.
In England obituaries regretted that he had not appeared more regularly for his country, while in Dunedin cricketers could only dream of the great things Jack Crawford might have done for Otago cricket…if only a World War had not interfered with something as important as cricket.
TROUBLING THE SCORERS
JONATHAN RICE plays the name game
DID YOU notice the unusual, if not unique, feature of the scorecards for the first Test between England and New Zealand at Christchurch?
I was not thinking of the fact that two New Zealanders were out for 99, which is stupid and by no means a Test match first, nor to the fact that seven of England's XI were born outside Britain.
I refer, of course, to the coincidental oddity that each side had a Smith and each side had a Pringle.
Players with the same name on either side is comparatively common, especially in domestic cricket where two members of the same family may play for different teams, but two players on each side sharing surnames in a Test is one of those statistics whose arrival is well overdue.
In county cricket it is rare enough, happening only once last summer when Warwickshire played Hampshire in the NatWest semi-final and both teams had two Smiths on their side, but in Test cricket, the Christchurch match chalked up what looks like a first.
There are few more obvious ways of troubling the scorers and confounding the commentators.
Perhaps only the first Test between New Zealand and South Africa in 1952–53 can rank with it, when each side had four players whose surname started with the letter M. South Africa had McGlew, McLean, Murray and Mansell, while the New Zealanders fielded Meuli, Miller, Mooney and Moir.
There have been four players with the same initial letter of their surname playing for a Test side both before and since, but there has only been four of the same letter on each side.
Hobbs, Hutchings, Hardstaff and Humphries played together for England in 1908, for example, and Hassett, Hole, Harvey and Hill played for Australia in two matches of the Coronation series, Hunte, Holford, Hendriks and Hall were all picked for West Indies in 1966, and Hedley Howarth, two Hadlees and Hastings played for New Zealand in 1974.
These were the first examples my research threw up, which leads me to wonder why the letter H hunts in packs.
It is possible that the selectors only had the E-K telephone directory to hand, and thus were limited in their options, but there is no evidence that this policy is a winning one.
Australia lost the Ashes in 1953, New Zealand won one and lost one against Australia in 1974, Australia won two of the three 1908 matches against a fully aitched England, and even West Indies lost one of the three Tests they played in 1966 with their four Hs.
The South African selectors enjoyed their bit of alphabetical licence, though.
Their Ms made 379 of their side's 524 runs, but the New Zealand Ms were far less successful.
They made only 105, as South Africa won by an innings and 180 runs.
The first instance of namesakes on either side in a Test match occurred in March 1889, at Port Elizabeth, when Fred Smith kept wicket for South Africa against an England side captained by C.A. ‘Round The Corner’ Smith.
A few months earlier, Sammy Woods of Australia and Harry Wood of England had had a near miss in this particular department, but it took a brace of Smiths to achieve a Test first.
Sir Aubrey also became the first man in Test history to dismiss a namesake when he bowled F.W. for 7 in the first innings.
This Test, though, was but the start of something much more complicated.
In 1892, England played South Africa at Cape Town, and the Hearne family took over.
Three Hearnes played for England and one for South Africa.
But although Frank took two wickets for South Africa and cousin J.T. took one for England, they failed to get each other out.
Four of the same name in a Test remains a record to this day, as does the ludicrous fact that three of the players making their debuts for their country in the match had already played Test cricket, but under different colours.
Come home Kepler Wessels, all is forgiven.
There were more unrelated Smiths playing against each other in the Triangular Tournament of 1912, when Tiger of England came up against Dave of Australia.
At The Oval, Tiger caught Dave for 6 off the bowling of Woolley, to become the first person to dismiss his namesake in Test cricket on English soil.
Since then, Barnetts have crossed swords in 1938, and in the third Test, Ben of Australia (supported no doubt by fellow Bs Bradman, Brown and Badcock) caught Charlie of England in both innings.
In the final Test of that series, incidentally, Australia played five Bs, as Sid Barnes made his debut.
Between them, they made 215 runs in the two innings (with byes scoring an extra five), but England's three Hs (Hutton, Hardstaff and Hammond) made 592 out of 903 for 7 and that was that.
South African fast bowler Meyrick Pringle, one of three players sharing that surname who are likely to play in the World Cup
We've seen Turners opposing each other for Australia and New Zealand, Richardses for West Indies and England, Manns for England and South Africa (they both dismissed each other during the 1948–49 series, but it was George catching Tufty which gave rise to John Arlott's legendary comment about ‘Mann's inhumanity to Mann’), and yet more Smiths (T.P.B. and F.B.) for England and New Zealand and for England (D.V.) against West Indies (O.G.).
We've had names that rhyme (Lillee c Willey b Dilley), and even amazing technicoloured opening attacks (Brown and White for England against Pakistan), but until this year, we had never seen two sets of namesakes in the same match.
The Smith family are everywhere, of course, so it is no surprise that over the years more Smiths have been dismissed by Smiths in Test cricket than any other self-destructing name.
But the Pringle clan has been less ubiquitous, and I note with glee that another of that name has been picked for the South African World Cup squad.
Meyrick of that ilk, of Western Province, is apparently a fast bowler like his New Zealand and (sort of) England colleagues, so it will make life easy for the commentary team: ‘It's Pringle to take the new ball,’ will apply in almost half the matches played.
If only Sri Lanka could find a Pringle as well, it would solve all the tongue-twisting problems encountered by Ray Illingworth and Jack Bannister last summer.
If only Clive Rice had not been dropped by South Africa, maybe I could have persuaded the England selectors to give me a chance…
IT HAPPENS in one-day cricket too.
In the finals of the 1990–91 World Series Cup, Australia fielded twin Waughs and two unrelated Taylors, while both Australia and New Zealand had a Jones and a Reid.
— ED.
THE QUIZ
Compiled by Derek Lodge
TEST captains:
1.
Who was the only West Indies captain born outside West Indies?
2.
Which South African captain was born in Yorkshire?
3.
Who was the first man born outside England to captain that country?
4.
Who scored more than 100 runs in his last match as England's captain (contemporary players excluded)?
5.
What is the highest score to be made by a captain in his last Test as captain?
6.
Who was the first captain to score a Test fifty?
7.
And the first to score a hundred?
8.
And a double-hundred?
9.
And the first to be out for a ‘pair’?
10.
And who completed the Test double of 1000 runs and 100 wickets in his last match as captain?
11.
Five Test captains of the 1960s: who are they?
Answers on page 55
WISDEN CROSSWORD
Compiled by David Peck
ACROSS
5 &6.
Sort of a rich twist is just right for this latterday England bowler (5, 5)
8.
Sounds like one of those Dad's Army England defenders seen in England's attack (6)
9.
Darling cricketer's revelation (4)
10.
One who cleans up by playing a certain shot?(7)
14.
Unfinished ton and a pair from Murray on a foreign expedition (4)
15.
See 13 down 
17.
Parfitt's nominal first part…(5)
18.
…and the numerical first part of his England average (5)
DOWN
1.
Close isn't long (5)
2.
Succeeds in driving one in three directions (4)
3.
The Gunn who averaged 18 across in his England outings (6)
4.
A cricket rep could have a sales one, but probably not one for sale!(5)
7.
His England Test-wicket tally equalled Aussie Bob Cowper's highest Test score (7)
11.
One who put the old England skipper on his guard?(6)
12.
Record-setting modern Kiwi batsman whose forename appears at 15 across (5)
13 &15 ac .
Former England keeper was in the dark, we pieced together (5, 6)
16.
Don't catch, don't keep (4)
For the Record
Kapil Dev's 400 Test wickets: Steven Lynch's analysis
KAPIL DEV, India's Pride, became the second bowler to take 400 Test wickets when he trapped Australian opener Mark Taylor lbw in the first over after tea at 4.05 on the third day in the final Test of the recent series.
It was February 3: on Feb 4, two years before, Richard Hadlee had become the first to reach this once-unthinkable total.
Hadlee's victim that day was Sanjay Manjrekar, a delighted onlooker this time and one of the first to congratulate the ‘Haryana Hurricane’ on his fine achievement.
Kapil hopes to go on to break Hadlee's overall record of 431 Test wickets.
His aim is to do this before Allan Border, who currently has 9532 runs, topples Sunil Gavaskar (10,122) as Test cricket's leading runscorer: India would then boast the leading batsman and bowler in Tests.
Kapil Dev's overall record is an impressive one.
Since making his debut against Pakistan in 1978–79 as a 19-year-old, he has never missed a Test through injury, a truly remarkable performance for a fast bowler.
The only break in his 115-Test career came during the 1984–85 home series against England, where an unwise stroke against Pat Pocock in the second match at New Delhi triggered an Indian collapse and set up an England victory.
Kapil Dev was omitted from the following Test as a disciplinary measure, but returned to the side immediately afterwards and has been ever-present ever since.
Another noteworthy aspect of his success has been that throughout his career he has rarely enjoyed the luxury of playing alongside another bowler of similar pace.
Kapil's early partners were busy medium-pacers in Karsan Ghavri and Madan Lal, while Chetan Sharma looked promising for a time before fading out of contention.
Although the bustling Manoj Prabhakar is Kapil's current opening partner, India have high hopes that Javagal Srinath, who made his debut in Australia, will eventually succeed Kapil Dev as their strike bowler.
A look at Kapil's performance against each country is revealing.
Surprisingly, perhaps, his worst record comes against England, where his overall average with the ball is 38.99.
He has reserved his best efforts for West Indies, against whom his average is an impressive 24.90, while he needs just one wicket for a century against old rivals Pakistan:
Kapil Dev has, naturally enough, had to do much of his bowling in India, a country whose pitches were always reckoned to be a graveyard for fast bowlers.
Although Kapil's arrival led to some sportier tracks around the country, he has often had to contend with unhelpful pitches, which makes his overall record at home even more praiseworthy: 204 wickets in 58 Tests, at an average of 26.73.
In 57 overseas Tests, he has taken 197 wickets at 32.70.
His country-by-country figures — note again his fine record against West Indies — are as follows:
Kapil Dev appeals, and Australian opener Mark Taylor is lbw, giving the popular Indian his 400th Test wicket.
The ‘Haryana Hurricane’ is the second bowler to reach this landmark, after Sir Richard Hadlee
Since he has taken most wickets against Pakistan it is no surprise that a Pakistani, Mudassar Nazar, is Kapil Dev's Test ‘rabbit’, having fallen to him 12 times.
Other batsmen dismissed frequently by him are Allan Border, Graham Gooch, David Gower and Malcolm Marshall (all 10), Gordon Greenidge and Zaheer Abbas (8), Jeff Dujon, Desmond Haynes, Kim Hughes, Javed Miandad and Vivian Richards (7): a distinguished catalogue!
Quite apart from his bowling, Kapil Dev has performed wonders with the bat for India.
At present, his forthright batting has brought him 4690 Test runs, at the creditable average of 30.26, with seven centuries.
In one-day internationals he is the only bowler to have taken over 200 wickets, and his astonishing 175 not out against Zimbabwe in the 1983 World Cup has been exceeded only twice — both times by Viv Richards — in limited-overs internationals.
Kapil Dev's first Test wicket back on Oct 21, 1978 at Faisalabad was Pakistan's Sadiq Mohammad (caught by Gavaskar).
A record one year and 105 days later, Taslim Arif of Pakistan became Kapil Dev's 100th victim in his 25th Test.
No. 200 came in his 50th Test, at Port-of-Spain in 1982–83, when he bowled Andy Roberts of West Indies.
The next century took a little longer, but in his 83rd Test Kapil Dev brought up 300, bowling Sri Lanka's Rumesh Ratnayake at Cuttack in 1986–87.
And now Mark Taylor has become the genial Indian's 400th victim.
What price 500?
NEW ZEALAND v ENGLAND
FIRST TEST MATCH
The final, fatal gamble
The Christchurch Test came alive in a remarkable final session which saw Phil Tufnell bowl England to their first victory in New Zealand since 1977–78.
BRIAN MURGATROYD was there
WHEN TEA was taken at 3.10 on the final afternoon of the first Test, even the more fervent student for the long game could have been forgiven for switching to automatic pilot.
As the players trooped off, the home side seemed on the verge of safety, and England's hopes of capturing seven wickets in the final session seemed, at best, remote, given their success rate of just two in the first two sessions of play.
But by 5.20, England's streetwise spinner Phil Tufnell, with 6 for 14 from 69 balls, had altered everything.
He had 10 wickets under his belt, was searching for an 11th, and at 264 for 9, New Zealand captain Martin Crowe knew if either he or last man Chris Pringle fell, the Test was lost; but if they could gather four runs, the match would be saved, for even if they were out immediately afterwards there would be no time for England to begin a run-chase of any kind before the scheduled close of play at 5.30.
(However, Peter Burge, the former Australian batsman who was the ICC's match referee throughout this series, said afterwards that there would have been time for one over if a wicket had fallen in the same Tufnell over.)
So, Crowe had a choice as he prepared to face Tufnell.
He either could go for the vital boundary himself, or back his and his partner's ability to hold fast for the remaining three overs and also gather the runs as insurance.
He backed himself, tried to loft Tufnell into the wide open spaces down the ground, but instead miscued to extra cover.
Circling under the catch was Derek Pringle.
He steadied himself, held it coolly, and England had achieved what had seemed impossible only two hours earlier.
A delighted England team celebrate their first Test win in New Zealand since 1978–78.
Man of the Match Phil Tufnell bears the brunt of the beer shampoo
Indeed, a draw had looked the most likely result for much of the match.
The early life in the pitch, which the New Zealand bowlers had failed to exploit after Crowe had put England in to bat, soon gave way to a surface which offered precious little to any bowler, Tufnell included.
So for the tourists to take 20 wickets was a feat worthy of note, particularly as they were without David Lawrence, their one bowler of genuine hostility, after he suffered a side strain while flogging himself on a lifeless strip at Napier a week before the Test.
The home side were lacking a key bowler too, in seamer Willie Watson, whose absence with a thigh strain was to prove a chronic handicap to Crowe.
Without Watson's steadiness, the New Zealanders quickly lost control after a promising opening from Morrison and Cairns, which saw Gooch record a rare failure, the victim of a beautiful late outswinger.
Watson's replacement Chris Pringle went for 50 in his first 11 overs, and England were away, never to be caught.
Hick contributed a pleasant cameo, notable not only for a superb back-foot force through the covers but also for his continued struggles against the short ball, and a debatable lbw decision which ended his stay.
But the stand which really set the tone was the third-wicket pairing of Stewart and Smith.
They added 179 in just 50 overs, with Smith scoring 70 of his runs in boundaries, an indication of his ruthlessness in punishing the bad ball.
New Zealand captain Martin Crowe: backed himself to hit Phil Tufnell for a matchsaving four — and lost
Stewart meanwhile belied his dislike of opening and played his  most assured (and highest) innings yet for his country.
His driving was a delight, and he moved smoothly to a century in four hours without offering a chance.
Smith, by contrast, was missed by Crowe at slip off Thompson when 44, but, that apart, they gave the bowlers little encouragement.
And though both were gone by the close — Stewart to just about the only ball to misbehave badly all match — the balance of power remained unaltered, a fact emphasised by Lamb and nightwatchman Russell on the second morning.
The pair added a fluent 80 before a mix-up saw the latter depart, although TV replays suggested he was unlucky.
England vice-captain Alec Stewart acknowledges the applause for his 148, he second century in successive Tests
Lamb got the loss out of his system by driving Patel for six.
He eventually fell, seven short of a century, ‘gated’ by the offspinner after being stuck fast for 25 minutes, but Dermot Reeve, in his first Test, and watched by his mother Monica, who had flown halfway around the world to see him play, and Lewis, who unfurled drives and cuts of genuine quality, ensured progress was maintained as the weather closed in.
The New Zealand openers, veteran John Wright and debutant Blair Hartland, who was appearing on his home ground, were glad to face just 14 balls before a halt was called for the day.
Their rearguard began in earnest the following afternoon, after overnight rain washed out the first session.
Although Wright was  missed by Gooch, low down at third slip off DeFreitas when 3, the serious stuff began only when Tufnell was given the ball for the 26th over.
New Zealand slide closer to defeat as Jack Russell acclaims Robin Smith's bat-pad catch which sent back Mark Greatbatch for a duck
Showing no ill-effects from the ‘chucking’ accusation he had faced earlier in the tour, the Middlesex man soon removed Wright, driving out of the rough and caught at slip; ended Hartland's defiant debut at silly point; had Greatbatch snapped up at short leg after a couple of desperate drives; and broke through Thomson's forcing shot via an arm ball.
With Jones gone too, New Zealand had slipped to 91 for 5 when Crowe, in pain after damaging a finger during practice, walked out to join Dipak Patel.
The Kenyan-born allrounder had once come close to playing for England.
But now he was a naturalised Kiwi, and he set about breaking Tufnell's rhythm, as he had done in making a century when the left-armer made his county debut at Worcester six years earlier.
He clobbered six fours and a six in a fluent half-century, and used his feet, something the other batsmen seemed reluctant to try.
And although Crowe was gone before the close, Patel continued to try to break England's ascendancy.
Patel's seventh-wicket pairing with Cairns had reached record proportions on Day 4 by the time, when 97, he pulled Lewis towards the midwicket boundary and sensed a first Test century.
But, hesitating over  the vital third run, he was beaten by Pringle's bowled return, and was left to rue his error.
Dermot Reeve (seen here celebrating the dismissal of Andrew Jones in the first one-day international) made a promising start to his Test career, scoring 59 and taking a wicket with his eighth ball
New Zealand newcomer Blair Hartland watches anxiously as his edge eludes the driving Allan Lamb.
Hartland made 22 and 45 in this match, but had the misfortune to bag a ‘pair’ in the second Test at Auckland
After lunch, Reeve removed Cairns with his eighth ball in Test cricket after making a belated entry into the attack in the 108th over, but only after Nottinghamshire's new signing had made an increasingly fluent 61.
With the pitch playing easily, the tail wagged, led by Morrison, who hung around for an hour while England fretted.
And although enforcement of the follow-on was a formality with just four sessions remaining, the New Zealanders' lower-order resistance, coupled with English tiredness, made the likelihood of an away win  more open to question.
Indeed, Hartland and Wright almost carried New Zealand to stumps without loss in their second innings, and probably would have done so but for a debatable bat-pad decision against the former.
And although England removed nightwatchman Morrison without fuss on the final morning, the draw looked odds-on as the tourists toiled for a third day in the field.
DeFreitas and Lewis were struggling with muscle stiffness, Smith and Stewart were in the wars from close fielding, and Reeve, picked ahead of the extra batsman Ramprakash for just such a position, was off the field all day with food poisoning.
Watched by wicketkeeper Ian Smith, Alec Stewart collects one of the 17 fours which contributed towards his highest Test score of 148.
Stewart shared a third-wicket partnership of 179 with Robin Smith, one of four men who passed 90 in this match but failed to reach four figures
Tufnell was still there to wheel away, but after his earlier successes, he was enduring something of a lean spell.
Gooch even turned to the rarely-seen legspin of Robin Smith either side of lunch as England strained for the breakthrough, but Wright and Jones were proving models of self-denial.
Even though Jones eventually fell, mis-hooking Pringle just before tea, after 3½ hours of defiance, the last session looked set to be little more than batting practice for the home side.
But still England persevered, and at last they found their reward.
Tufnell produced two nerveless overs straight after the break to keep Wright fretting one short of a seemingly inevitable hundred.
After being stranded on 99 for 25 minutes, he finally lost both patience and nerve and became the fourth player in the match to be dismissed in sight of a century as he charged down the pitch.
And with Wright gone, the floodgates were opened.
Never toss fruit at a spinner;
No matter how hungry he feels.
It may curb his craving for dinner,
But snacks do not constitute meals.
I'm preaching no dietary fable;
Remember Phil Tufnell and how,
Impatient to dine at the table,
He's taking ‘elevenses’ now!
Skipper Gooch urges on his opening bowlers, former schoolmates Phillip DeFreitas (left) and Chris Lewis.
Lewis had earlier scored a brisk Test-best 70
Greatbatch and Thomson — again to the arm ball — were swept aside in the space of four deliveries, Patel chose once more to live by the sword and this time died by it, and Cairns fell meekly, to the ever-increasing cluster of fielders around the bat.
And when  departed to Lewis, the equation had become critical: 35 minutes left, and an England lead of 18.
A moment of discomfort for Allan Lamb during his 93, as he is hit on the helmet by medium-pacer Shane Thomson
Meanwhile Crowe, who had been watching the carnage unfold from the other end with increasing horror, unfurled some strokes of class in an attempt to ease the situation.
But with tension mounting, he might have run his partner Pringle out had the substitute Ramprakash gathered the ball cleanly at backward point.
The Middlesex man soon made amends, however, with a brilliant save, later repeated by Hick, as the runs/time equation narrowed.
And it was then that Crowe took his life in his hands, gambled, and the Test was lost.
Afterwards, the New Zealand captain, speaking softly, confessed he was ‘devastated’, while Gooch, not normally known for emotion, seemed more than a little chuffed.
It was a great advertisement for Test cricket, with the instant variety of the World Cup just around the corner.
What a pity then, that only a meagre 11,768 people watched it.
NEW ZEALAND v ENGLAND
SECOND TEST MATCH
Auckland's awkward pitch
England clinched the series with a workmanlike victory at Auckland — a win which had seemed unlikely when the visitors were 91 for 6 on the first day.
TERRY POWER reports
THE APPROACH of the Eden Park Test initially was viewed with trepidation, and the majority of the five changes to the home team were seen as signs of disarray rather than as providing fresh blood.
Ken Rutherford's return for Greatbatch, the most discussed of the changes, was clearly justifiable on recent form, and was welcomed everywhere except in the Crowe camp.
Dave Crowe's prediction in his Daily Telegraph preview that the Otago man would be 12th man was not only mistaken, but far away from what almost everybody else was thinking.
England captain Graham Gooch acknowledges the applause for his 16th Test century: it was his third against New Zealand
There was a big surge of local optimism when Martin Crowe won what appeared to be a very important toss — not that winning it in the first Test had done NZ much good.
The pace bowlers capitalised during the abbreviated first day, even if the close catchers didn't.
Cold reality returned on the second evening.
After being a fairly even contest, the match was decided by New Zealand's first-innings collapse, and by the mixture of maturity and gung-ho that Graham Gooch and Allan Lamb displayed in their second-innings stand on Saturday afternoon.
Philip DeFreitas dances for joy after trapping Andrew Jones lbw, leaving New Zealand's second innings in doleful disarray at 7 for 3 after both openers had departed for ducks
Phil Tufnell celebrates the return catch which disposed of New Zealand's Dipak Patel, who had taken the long handle to the left-arm spinner in the previous Test
Typical Eden Park pitches over many years were low and slow, and that led to a lot of drawn Tests.
This strip was a lot different.
The amount of moisture left in it  became even more important than the substantial amount of relatively thick green grass left on it.
The cracks widened each day.
It became increasingly questionable whether New Zealand did a gain a big advantage by being able to insert England, for when the early sideways movement died down, it was replaced not be a comfortable batting surface but by increasingly variable bounce.
The tendency for the ball to keep low, especially, became more marked, and Martin Crowe's initial decision meant that his country had to bat last on it.
In leaving Ramprakash out, England retained the victorious team from Christchurch.
The return from pantomimicry of Ian Botham made no difference in the selection.
After early rain cleared, the Test started at 2.15pm on Thursday, with 59 instead of 90 overs to be bowled.
The opening phase gave a sensational impression of New Zealand dominance.
In total batting command early in the tour, Gooch had his third successive single-figure score when one which angled in through the air and left him off the pitch induced a nick that Parore tossed high.
Morrison had Gooch very similarly at Christchurch, and again this was to be his only success of the innings.
Stewart also scored his only runs behind the wicket on the off side, with a deliberate one-day shot over slips elevated to Test use.
He had less necessity to play than his boss when dismissed.
Drawn forward by Cairns to drive well outside off, the catch Stewart gave was again straightforward.
The third was not.
Smith was unkindly greeted by one of the most difficult of first balls — dragging him forward, zooming in at his front pad, then ducking away at speed.
Parore had been heading down the leg side — too far, ex-Central Districts keeper Jack Vernon assured me later — and had to change direction.
On a rapid return journey he took the catch of the series so far in his right glove while airborne.
Three down for 9.
An occasional past thought recurred: New Zealand have never had a great combination of fast bowlers to rank near the likes of Lindwall and Miller, Hall and Griffith, Larwood and Voce.
Can Cairns and Morrison become the first?
Lamb survived the hat-trick, with a single to cover point, but Su'a's different angle did him in his Test spell.
Lamb allowed too much for the ball going across him, and dragged one that was coming back off the pitch onto his leg stump from side off.
Su'a said he thought the ball would otherwise have gone over the sticks.
Hick played what in others is a plain forward-defensive shot but for him is so sweetly timed that it brings four through mid-off.
He was lucky to stay but unlucky to go.
Wright, who at 37 chortles about being one of NZ's so-called ‘young guns’, five years ago probably would have caught one which dropped just in front of him at gully.
And anyone qualified to be a Test first slip should have caught the straightforward edge which instead dribbled between Dipak Patel's feet while he was too high and too casual.
Hick (8) celebrated with a hooked four off a no-ball: then Cairns, the wider of two gullies, did admirably to reach a hard slash, and deflected it up, but our of Jones's reach.
But at 30 Hick was not given the benefit of the doubt when lbw to a Cairns ball which had no more than a 50–50 chance of hitting the top of the leg stump.
Reeve repeatedly played a shot that began as a hook but became a tennis lob when he refrained from bending a the elbow: unique, but not worth patenting.
He became the fourth of the afternoon to be caught behind off one which left him, this time off Watson, who did the stock-bowler's job much better than Pringle and in Christchurch.
Lewis drove and hooked stylishly for an hour when opportunity offered, before Cairns showed the close fieldsmen how to do it by taking a superb diving catch at gully.
Skipper Martin Crowe top-scored in both innings, but New Zealand needed him to turn scores of 45 and 56 into centuries and more
England, at 146 for 7 by stumps, looked in trouble, but could have been much worse off.
There had been no third man all day as Crowe attacked, and those edges which eluded the close field went for fours.
Most of the second day was more routine.
The pitch looked browner and, initially, easier.
Russell lived and died interestingly outside off — four over slips; dropped by Rutherford as soon as Cairns started; Parore's fifth victim when he dabbled once too often.
DeFreitas played a daffy stroke: he tried to pull one from Cairns which was not short enough.
It still needed a fine catch from Crowe, who hared back to wide mid-on and sprawled towards the boundary.
Pringle, 8 overnight, deservedly had top score of 41.
His six rebounded onto the playing area from the Tetley Bitter sign just beyond the rope at long-on.
This deceived umpire Steve Dunne into signalling four, until Wright returned with the ball to report the true state of affairs.
When Pringle swung across the line to be lbw, England had done well in the conditions to score 203.
Cairns had all three morning wickets to take 6 for 52 with speed, height, heart and intelligence.
New Zealand seemed to weather the loss of Hartland straight after lunch to one which bit back and had him lbw.
Wright somehow avoided the feared fracture when Lewis hit the index finger of his left hand.
While he was away being x-rayed, Crowe and Rutherford raised the first half-century stand of the match within 80 minutes, scoring faster than in the earlier stages of the game.
They were never entirely secure: Crowe nearly chopped  DeFreitas on, and both were among the big majority of those who stayed any length of time in being beaten repeatedly just outside off stump.
But Rutherford hooked well, Crowe provided several of his best cover-drives, the groundstaff captured a dog before it could interfere with play, and Tufnell's effort to prevent a boundary by slide-tackling the ball had the same result as when he tried it on the same ground a year ago: four.
Rutherford played a loose swing — one hand off the bat in its later stages — at an even looser leg-side ball from DeFreitas to feed Russell.
Lewis donated a no-ball an over in his first spell, but seemed to learn from Pringle, slowed down, gained more movement leg to off from the pitch, and became even more dangerous.
A quality innings of 46 from Crowe ended after 135 minutes when he had to play a Lewis leg-cutter and the ball carried to second slip Hick, who lunged forward to reach and hold it.
Gooch's century was a triumph, in that he had looked far from certain in the early part of his innings, particularly against the unlucky Morrison.
Here Watson hits a sore spot as the England captain's defences are breached again
Patel and the returned Wright took the score to 123 for 4 by 5pm.
The match looked fairly even, but it tilted sharply towards England in the half-hour before stumps.
Pringle put one through a big gate via Wright's edge.
Cairns went to an easy catch by Hick at cover via a hard whack on silly-point Smith's boot.
It was reminiscent of Wayne Phillips's 1985 exit at Edgbaston, caught by Gower off Lamb's instep.
Of three successive men dismissed lbw, Patel and Morrison gave the umpires meaningful looks while Parore left with exemplary promptness: but it was Parore's dismissal that looked questionable, because of the ball's height.
Next morning, a banner claimed: ‘We were hard Dunne by.’
With a lead of 61 gained early on the third day, England were in a strong position to win.
The re-arrangement of the New Zealand slip field showed how shaky the home side is in a department which was even more vital than usual in this Test.
Su'a despatched Stewart and Hick within six deliveries, and Gooch was in even more trouble than most outside off against Morrison, then Watson.
Smith first showed the way to consolidate a winning position.
He concentrated on staying on the front foot, took few risks and made 35 from 45 deliveries with seven fours, then played Morrison on.
Lamb arrived, and before he had scored Patel dropped a hard slash straight at him at comfortable height.
The Test was heading England's way, but that accentuated its progress.
England's second South African expatriate emulated his predecessor with more sustained success.
It was a smashing exhibition, that looked more like the charge in a one-dayer than the eighth of 15 available sessions  in a Test.
Lamb rampaged to 50 with a six and a pull for four in the same Su'a over.
It took him only 33 balls.
The first half of the route to Gooch's century must be the rockiest he has travelled towards any of his 16 in Tests.
It was not easy to forecast during his first couple of hours that he would be Man of the Match which ultimately was well-deserved.
He played and missed umpteen times.
Though Gooch was the senior partner in length of stay, he let Smith and Lamb play the major parts.
On Reeve's arrival he did take charge.
His first 50 took 133 balls, the second 59.
During his innings Gooch regained the ability to flog boundaries from anything which strayed slightly, especially in length.
Watson, for years the worth New Zealand fieldsman, distinguished himself when others let themselves down.
He judged well the batch behind bowler Patel that removed Lamb.
And when Reeve tapped towards mid-off and ran, sailor's roll turned into effective hustle as Watson gathered and threw down the keeper's stumps with Gooch still well short.
At 263 for 5, England didn't need to worry.
Watson then had one for himself — Reeve lbw.
Parore dropped Lewis first ball, and again before stumps.
On the fourth morning, seven wickets (as many as on all of Saturday) fell in 42 minutes of play.
Hartland took a fine gully catch to dismiss Russell; Pringle ran one to Lewis's one-and-a-half followed by a long walk.
The England innings soon ended for 321.
Brave talk of Leeds ‘48 and Trent Bridge ‘73 notwithstanding, New Zealand were not going to hit 383 to win in the fourth innings on this pitch.
They still didn't want both openers out for ducks in the first two overs, nor Jones to follow for 5.
Derek Pringle's 41 was the highest score in England's first innings
Rutherford again made the best stand of the innings, for the fourth wicket, with the captain who wasn't keen on having him in the team.
This time they added 70, played attacking strokes about as freely as was sensible in the conditions, and dug out or skipped a fair few difficult balls.
Eventually Rutherford's bat protruded too far forward and enabled Stewart to take a smart catch at short leg.
Patel was impermanent from moment of arrival till he played a foolishly loose semi-drive straight back to Tufnell.
Captain Crowe looked likely to be the last man to leave the ship but DeFreitas scuttled him eight minutes after he reached a courageous fifty with yet another which left the bat.
Back home in Hamilton Su'a scored club centuries and had a big reputation as a hitter, which he justified to a wider audience by hitting 30 of his 36 not out in boundaries, once despatching Tufnell over midwicket into the stand.
Standing in for the injured Ian Smith, wicketkeeper Adam Parore took five catches in England's first innings.
But Smith returned for the final Test
The match lasted 35 minutes on the fifth morning.
Su'a received the third lbw of the match to which one could raise an eyebrow — this one was coming across him from a suspiciously sharp angle as DeFreitas bowled round the wicket and wide out.
New Zealand ended their period of 13 years without a home series defeat pathetically: Morrison stayed outside his crease concentrating on the outcome of an lbw appeal while a flick from Stewart knocked his bails off.
But there was no question that the win had gone to a substantially superior side.
QUOTE:THERE IS not much petrol left in the tank.
I still love playing, but at my pensionable age it takes longer to recover from each match .
Graham Gooch 
NEW ZEALAND v ENGLAND
THIRD TEST MATCH
Sad finish at Wellington
Centuries for Stewart, Wright, Jones and Lamb meant that the final Test of the series was drawn.
But these batting efforts were overshadowed in the dying minutes, when David Lawrence suffered an horrific injury.
BRIAN MURGATROYD was there
ALTHOUGH the third Test at the Basin Reserve, Wellington produced the most evenly contested clash of an enjoyable and well-mannered series; was played in front of good crowds; say a notable milestone achieved by Ian Botham; and contained several individual performances of high quality, there seems little doubt that it will always be remembered for the tragic injury to England fast bowler David Lawrence.
Following a wretched tour upset by injury, Lawrence finally achieved his dream of playing an overseas Test for his country a week after his 28th birthday.
His spirit was epitomised by the way he came charging in late on the final day, giving it everything he had, despite an unresponsive surface and the near-certainty that the match would finish in a draw.
As he delivered the first ball of his third over on that fateful sunny afternoon, his left knee split apart, fracturing in two.
He stumbled, and lay in agony, his cries of pain clearly audible around a now-hushed ground.
Players rushed to his aid, but there was little either they or physiotherapist Lawrie Brown could do.
A stretcher was brought out and Lawrence was taken by players and officials — now highly emotional — off the field of play and through a crowded area near the dressing-rooms, amid much jostling, into the sanctuary of the treatment-room.
From there, he was taken by ambulance to Wellington Hospital.
Play eventually restarted, after what seemed like an age, and meandered to an early finish, but the freak accident served to relegate other matters — the remaining overs, a protracted row involving the England players and team manager and a cameraman attempting to capture the stretcher scene on film, and even the imminence of both countries announcing their World Cup squads — to items of secondary importance.
Syd's health was the subject which chiefly occupied the thoughts of the majority.
David Lawrence, whose first overseas Test came to a tragic end when he broke his kneecap while bowling.
The popular Lawrence, ever-optimistic, hopes to be playing again in June
Thankfully, initial reports were encouraging.
The break was clean and horizontal, and while the whole of the coming season may be over for Lawrence before it has even begun, as Brown said: ‘If anyone can come back from such a horrific injury it is Syd.’
All seemed agreed that the nature of the injury and the pain suffered by the bowler made it one of the most horrific accidents in recent Test history.
And it raised the question of whether, if he plays again, Syd's body will allow him to bowl with the same rampaging style.
We must hope so.
Captain Graham Gooch holds the silverware as England take the bank of New Zealand series by two Tests to nil, with one drawn
Lawrence had been drafted into the lineup following a finger injury suffered by Chris Lewis, while Botham was called up at the 11th hour to win his 100th cap when Derek Pringle's sore back failed to respond to treatment.
They were England's only changes from the side which had won so handsomely at Christchurch and Auckland.
New Zealand, for the second time in the series, were without Willie Watson, with a recurrence of a thigh strain, and gave a debut to the burly Rod Latham.
Watson's absence gave the home side's attack a threadbare look, at least on paper and Gooch and Stewart looked set to capitalise on its relative inexperience and some profligate catching after the England captain won his first toss of the series.
By the kindest count, seven catches were grassed at Auckland, and six more chances were spilled on this opening day, with Gooch missed twice off Cairns before reaching double figures, after a 90-minute delay while the groundstaff mopped up the previous day's heavy rain.
And when Stewart was missed at Patel at square leg, pulling the unfortunate Su'a (who handled his short-straw  role of bowling into the wind with aplomb), a massive score seemed likely.
But it was Patel, with a Test bowling average of around 100 to reduce, who both applied the brakes and made England's top order look fallible.
In his first over, he produced the only ball to turn extravagantly throughout the whole match, to ‘gate’ a startled Gooch.
And although Hick hit him out of the attack briefly, producing a second cameo of the series which included an extraordinary one-handed straight six, Patel returned downwind to sneak one through before the Zimbabwean could reach a maiden Test half-century.
After tea, Patel had Smith dropped by Crowe at slip, got his man two balls later at short midwicket, and then completed his haul by removing Lamb after a bright and breezy hand.
At Wellington Ian Botham became the fourth Englishman, after Colin Cowdrey, David Gower and Geoff Boycott, to appear in 100 Test matches.
Durham's new signing celebrated by taking his record tally of wickets for England to 383
While all this was going on, Stewart remained impassive.
He showed great discipline, but was still dropped twice more, pulling at Su'a on both occasions.
And despite the fact that the innings lacked the urgency of his Christchurch century, it was a mature effort, full of square-drives, backfoot forces and pulls which brought him 12 fours.
But, as in the first Test, Morrison removed him on the stroke of stumps, this time with a yorker, to leave honours even at 239 for 5.
Day 2 produced the most attritional cricket of the series.
On a slow surface, both sets of bowlers bowled straight, and the batsmen were loath to take risks to break up their line.
But England's funereal approach handed New Zealand the initiative in the first part of the day, with Reeve's 167-minute 18 leading the retreat to the trenches.
Not even a subdued Botham — applauded all the way to the crease but playing his first innings for five months — could rally the troops, fading after a bright start which yielded two boundaries, and eventually mis-timing to mid-off.
More of the same dour defence followed when the home side took their turn soon after lunch, but in Wright and Jones, New Zealand had two past masters in the art of crease occupation.
They came together when Hartland was expertly held at third slip by Botham, leaving him just two behind Colin Cowdrey's 120 victims in the field.
After repelling the wiles of Tufnell, Wright and Jones ensured that three figures were raised by the close.
Robin Smith drives Patel during his important second-innings 76.
Close fielders Crowe (left) and Hartland look on
Following a quiet start on the third day, the pair produced the most assured batting of the match to date as they posted a New Zealand record stand for the second wicket.
Jones's patent-pending leaping back-foot force, notable by its absence earlier in the series, was there in all its glory this time, and Wright's unbreakable defence was interspersed with the odd hard-hit pull from Tufnell's bowling.
By mid-afternoon, with DeFreitas absent nursing a sore groin, and after Botham and Lawrence had shared a fruitless new-ball partnership, Gooch's men were looking right down the barrel.
Wright had made up for his 99 at Christchurch by pulling Lawrence joyously for successive boundaries to reach three figures, and Jones, having scored his first Test century against England, looked  hungry for more.
But back came England, through Tufnell and the hitherto unheralded Hick.
The Worcestershire man had barely 40 overs under his belt in six Tests before this one, but here he was wheeling away in a marathon spell stretching into the fourth day, and with Tufnell on the way to completing the most overs ever bowled by one man in a first-class innings in New Zealand, the Kiwi machine was forced to change down a gear or two.
Jack Russell watches approvingly as Martin Crowe is bowled by Phil Tufnell, one of only two wickets for the Middlesex man, who toiled through 71 overs
There was little turn, but great accuracy from the spin twins, and by capturing four wickets for 67 in the last session, England had done well.
But when the New Zealanders went in search of quick runs the following morning, they achieved their aims without too many alarms, thanks to bright knocks from all the lower order.
And when Crowe declared at lunch, England reappeared with the spectre of defeat hanging over them.
Indeed, they lost Gooch, Hick — cheaply again — and Stewart before they were in credit; but with Smith mixing careworn defence and carefree attack, once pulling Su'a for six while on one knee as the Samoan attempted some left-arm spin, and Lamb all bustle and energy, English fears were eased going into the last day.
Allan Lamb celebrates his 14th Test century.
He went on to make 142, his highest Test score, before perishing to a cheeky reverse sweep against the persistent Patel
Their only early alarm came when Lamb was ‘caught’ by Crowe at slip off Cairns, while the lead was only 53.
Crowe initially claimed the catch, low to his left, and umpire Dunne, who had his difficulties during the series, raised the finger after getting the nod from his partner, Aldridge.
But  Ian Smith behind the stumps was not convinced, Lamb stayed put, and saved the game.
So well did Smith and Lamb play during the early overs, talk began of a mid-afternoon declaration to test the Kiwis' mettle.
Three wickets for 5 in 32 balls quickly changed that thinking, however, Smith falling to a reflex catch by Su'a, one-handed and high to his left; Reeve exiting first ball, bowled round his legs; and Botham, after a hesitant stay, departing sweeping.
And by the time Lamb had bludgeoned England to safety (and himself to a Test-best score), ably supported by Russell, Gooch's closure was more in hope than a genuine expectation of victory.
There seemed little left in the match except the question of whether Wright would get the 36 runs he needed for 5000 in Tests, in what was rumoured to be his last appearance.
And when he failed, the assumption was of a quiet last few overs.
How wrong we were.
The stricken David Lawrence is carried back to the dressing-room.
Meanwhile team manager Micky Stewart (left) tries to stop a TV cameraman from filming the injured fast bowler.
Jack Russell (centre) also had words with the cameraman.
The England management later issued a statement expressing regret at the incident
Micky makes a point: TVNZ reporter Kerry-Anne Evans is asked not to film Lawrence's departure to hospital
New Zealand Notes from Terry Power
ENGLAND'S convincing wins in the Auckland one-day international and the first two Tests provided big shocks to the New Zealand cricket system.
We didn't expect the country we edged last year to look so much better than our team this summer.
As Martin Crowe said, after noting that the 50-overs match was New Zealand's first international since the third Test against Sri Lanka on the same ground over 10 months previously: ‘I think it was realistic to look at them as favourites, but I was surprised by the margin.’
The stark contrast between England's win this time and their loss in the deciding one-day match on the same ground last February made a big impact on Kiwis who saw both.
A good deal of the upbeat feel reported last month gave way to dismay and much questioning, which reached a crescendo over the selection of the second Test 12 with its five changes.
Among a growing minority there was a tendency to immoderate attacks on selectors and, increasingly, Martin Crowe's leadership.
But the only clearly better captain in the country is Crowe's elder brother Jeff, who is also a better slip than anyone currently in the national team, and this season's leading first-class run-getter with 970 at 64.67.
But he says he is unavailable for New Zealand, at least until the World Cup.
The Shell Series will be over by then, and Crowe has devoted himself to Auckland's cause.
Despite his personal success the team has not score a point in the last five matches, and are next to bottom.
The ‘Auckland look unbeatable’ hype seems sillier by the week.
CD still top
Central Districts were top of the Shell Trophy at last report, and are there again at time of writing.
But for most of the month, Canterbury led, and Northern Districts were ahead for 24 hours.
Canterbury beat CD twice in the first half of the competition, first by three wickets on a dubious pitch in the initial first-class match at Burnside Park, Christchurch.
The second CD-Canterbury match at New Plymouth saw a more emphatic Cantab victory by six wickets.
Nightwatchman Richard Petrie scored 100, and Chris Cairns wrecked the CD second innings, which went from 122 for 2 to 130 for 7, in gaining 7 for 34, his best first-class figures.
ND and CD couldn't even reach a first-innings decision at Hamilton.
The drainage at Trust Bank Park proved so bad that there was no play on a bright, breezy Saturday afternoon with no rain during play hours.
Immediately afterwards, during the first Test, Canterbury met ND in the first of two top-of-the-table clashes within a fortnight.
They were put on the same strip CD had used, and second time around it helped spinners almost from the outset.
ND were placed in a winning position by an admirably determined and skilful innings of 129 from wicketkeeper Bryan Young.
Canterbury's 22-year-old captain, Lee Germon, avoided the follow-on with nine wickets down, but there looked to be work looming for all three spinners ND had included.
But after 20 minutes on the third day, umpires Steve Woodward and Owen Paul took the players off.
By the time I could get out of the Press-box into the open air, the rain which had been the cause of the stoppage was barely perceptible.
Players stood signing autographs; the usual multiplicity of children's games in the outfield started up immediately.
Matches are played in conditions like these, and rather worse, all over the country.
The rain was briefly rather more solid in the early afternoon, but most of the time it was a minor sprinkle.
Yet the umpires allowed 256 minutes to be lost.
Umpire Woodward was also standing during delays most thought were unnecessary in the Napier Test between New Zealand and India in 1990, and at last year's Wellington v Sri Lankans match (‘We will not tolerate a repeat,’ said national chairman Peter McDermott and executive director Graham Dowling at that stage).
Woodward is one of NZ's umpires for the World Cup, where there are no reserve days until the semi-finals.
One hopes he will be rather keener to have play in marginal conditions if they arise during the next month.
Another extraordinary feature of the situation was that ND's executive officer, John Torkington, put over a PA announcement to the effect that there could be no play while any rain continued unless both captains agreed.
Neither the Laws nor the 1991–92 New Zealand first-class regulations say that, and of course it was strongly in the interests of his association's team that play resumed as soon as possible.
A suggestion that a decision on what comprises ‘unfit conditions’ should be influenced by how much rain was falling was answered by umpire Paul with: ‘That's academic.’
Germon said, ‘Obviously we'd have wanted to get back to continue if we'd been in (ND skipper) David White's shoes.’
When play finally resumed at 3.48 pm, too late to seek an outright decision, he reached 85 not out in an 81-run 10th wicket stand with debutant left-arm spinner Hamish Kember, who was stumped by Young for 1 from the first aggressive shot he tried.
Germon is another wicketkeeper who can bat more than passably, like Young, Tony Blain, Adam Parore and, of course, Ian Smith.
A good keeper ought to be able to become a better slip fieldsman than most of those NZ had there early in the international season.
It may be worth considering the use of one or more of the keeper-batsmen there — Blain had two Tests purely as a batsman in 1988, and Young displaced Smith for one-dayers in Australia last year through his batting ability.
Taking slip catches is absolutely vital if NZ are to improve their international situation.
Test batsman Mark Greatbatch plays W.G. Grace in a forthcoming New Zealand feature film The End of the Golden Weather .
The eagle-eyed will notice that Greatbatch is a left-hander whereas WG was not.
To put this right, Greatbatch's image is reversed in the film
Return match
The return Canterbury-ND march was effectively another one-innings match.
ND reached 385 through a record eighth-wicket stand of 152 between Pukekohe swing bowler Simon Doull (108, his first century) and Grant Bradburn, whose 72 was his best score of the season.
Canterbury were 178 for 6, then Mark Priest (103) and Germon (91) put on 205.
Three needed to take the lead: young fast bowler Royden Hayes, till then victimless, skittled Priest.
Germon and Shane Thomson are two of the gentlemen of New Zealand cricket, and one run later Germon took Thomson's word for it that he had caught him at extra cover, and walked.
Hayes next hit Roger Ford just above the glove as he tried to get out of the way, and was out lbw; 384 for 9.
Without addition, Bradburn was sure he had taken No. 11 Michael Owen at first slip off Hayes, but was not given the decision.
‘The umpires said they were both unsighted,’ ND manager Tom Thomson said afterwards.
‘We're a bit disappointed, but we're not sour on it.’
Hayes completed his spell by having Petrie lbw, but not before the 1990–91 New Zealand one-day representative had square-cut the boundary which meant his side were six championship points ahead, instead of ND being two in front.
Later in the day, CD regained the lead by beating Auckland at Wanganui by 74 runs — slow left-armer Stu Duff 164 not out, and Mark Douglas following Wright and Patel with the third 99 in a fortnight.
The consistently successful Jeff Crowe struck 68 and 88 for the losers.
Shell Trophy points: Central Districts 58 (from eight matches), Canterbury 56 (8), Northern Districts 50 (9), Otago 40 (8), Auckland 36 (9), Wellington 16 (8).
NEW ZEALAND OLD-TIMERS
It was 61 years ago the New Zealand, under the leadership of Tom Lowry, first played Tests in England.
CAREY CLEMENTS, a journalist with the Otago Daily Times in Dunedin, spoke to the two remaining survivors of that tour
DESPITE a first tour of England in 1927 and later four home Tests in 1929–30, the 1931 visit was an important one for New Zealand cricket.
Times were tough.
Things like the Great Depression and the big Napier earthquake which claimed 256 lives had the country in a gloomy, harsh grip.
But when it came to sport New Zealand has always been turned in.
The 1924 invincible All-Black rugby team came back as national from their undefeated tour of Britain, and people like Wimbledon tennis champion Anthony Wilding and world heavyweight boxing title contender Tom Heeney, and even a racehorse, Phar Lap, who achieved fame and fortune overseas, gave New Zealand sports followers something to look back on with pride and patriotism.
But what of cricket?
The game had been in the country for well over half-a-century, but only four provinces, Auckland, Wellington, Canterbury and Otago, had first-class status, with the Plunket Shield being the major stake at hand for the best team.
Despite some good results on the 1927 tour of England, the New Zealand Cricket Council were wary of the heavy financial losses made on that inaugural journey into the unknown.
If they could have, the NZCC would have cancelled the 1931 trip.
The only thing holding them back was the fact that the next available date to tour England was not until the mid-1930s.
After a limited liability company was floated to finance the tour, the New Zealand team set sail knowing they had to perform well and play attractive cricket for the sake of the nervous subscribers back home.
For Lindsay Weir, who had been given the nickname of ‘Dad’ since his Mt Albert Grammar schooldays, and for Jack Kerr it was their first trip away with the New Zealand team.
Weir was regarded as an effective right-hand batsman who could bowl useful medium-pacers for Auckland, and Kerr was considered an elegant opening batsman for Canterbury.
When I spoke to Weir, now a sprightly 83, he still remembered what he was going to be in for when he set sail for a country which had legendary names like Hobbs, Sutcliffe, Woolley, Hendren and many others floating around the various counties.
‘I think most of us in our first tour had the impression that English conditions would be different from those in New Zealand.
We thought the green wickets would provide more movement off the seam, which early in the tour was largely so, but as the conditions dried out the wickets became more like our own.’
Lindsay ‘Dad’ Weir (third from left) and Jack Kerr (far right), the two survivors of the 1931 tour of England, joined other distinguished New Zealand cricketers recently to celebrate the 80th birthday of former Test wicketkeeper Eric Tindill (centre).
The group (l-r) Is: Merv Wallace, Tom Pritchard, Weir, Tindill, Jack Cowie, Walter Hadlee, Kerr
In charge of that tour as captain and manager was Tom Lowry of Wellington.
‘He was an aggressive captain and forceful batsman,’ recalled Weir.
‘His knowledge of English conditions and players from his time at Cambridge and as a player for Somerset was a great asset.
He coped quite well as manager while still captaining the team.’
Tom Lowry, New Zealand's captain on their make-or-break tour of England in 1931
Jack Kerr, now 80, recalls those same fighting qualities from a man who had toured New Zealand in 1922 with Archie MacLaren's MCC side.
‘Tom was a fairly astute captain in many respects, but to me he was a typical fighting captain and was always prepared to try something if things were not going the way he thought.’
An example of Lowry's willingness to have a gamble came in the fourth tour match against MCC at Lord's.
MCC, following on from New Zealand's 302 for 9 dec, had three hours remaining when their opening batsmen stepped out.
‘I remember Tom throwing the ball to our legspinner Bill Merritt, who then bowled J.W. Hearne with a perfect wrong'un.
And that was done with the new ball.
I can sill see in my own mind the ball knocking down the middle stump, and as Hearne walked past Lowry he said, ‘This is quite unfair, Mr Lowry.’’
Merritt finished the MCC second innings off with figures of 7 for 28 off nine overs and gave his side a win by an innings and 122 runs, which showed the Kiwis could compete with the best in the land, and were hungry for greater success.
On that tour New Zealand had the great batting talent of Stewie Dempster a their disposal.
He was later named as one of Wisden 's five players of the year after the tour had ended.
‘Dempster was the outstanding player of the team,’ said Weir, ‘being equally at home with both pace and spin.
In an era which had great batsmen like Bradman, Hammond, Ponsford, Duleep and McCabe, Stewie would have ranked with the best.’
Another person picked by Wisden was Roger Blunt, one of the five players of the year after the 1927 tour.
‘He was a fine  allrounder who, once he had played himself in, was delightful strokemaker,’ Weir said.
Both Kerr and Weir said Blunt broke vital partnerships towards the end of a session, which helped to bring the pendulum back in New Zealand's favour.
Coming from a land which considered all players equal, the New Zealanders saw the class difference in English cricket between the players and the professionals.
‘Although we accepted it back in 1931, it would be a shock if it was seen today,’ said Kerr.
‘When we played MCC at Lord's they had 10 county captains, if I remember rightly, and one player, J.W. Hearne, came out of the players' gate, and the rest came out through the main entrance.
That I remember very distinctly.
That was the last time that really hit me because if I've got my facts correct, I think when we played England at Lord's they all came out through the same gate,’ Kerr said.
The Canterbury batsman also recalled some of the fun that went on behind the scenes of that tour.
‘Dad Weir used to smoke a pipe, and so when we were in Swansea we went along to one of those hairdresser and tobacconist shops, and there in the window was this great big pipe.
I don't know how Ian Cromb got it, but he got this great big blimmin' pipe and went along to Dad and said ‘How about a fill, Dad?’.
And Dad put his hand in his pocket and pulled out a tin of tobacco, and Cromb emptied the whole lot into his new pipe with Dad having a look of disbelief on his face,’ Kerr recounted.
The 1931 season was a wet one.
For Kerr and the rest of the team it was an especially frustrating time having to play on awkward, damp pitches.
‘I look sideways these days when I see the umpires waiting to go onto the ground and then looking at every blade of grass.
If they had done that in '31, we would not have played any cricket.
I was in the outfield mainly, and I think I fell over on every ground I played.’
Fielding standards
Although the New Zealand team had a top wicketkeeper in Ken James, who was compared to Bert Oldfield, in ability, the Kiwi fielding was never up to the standard of today's players.
Another difference between then and now included the way a player appealed.
‘Appealing was then done only when you thought it was out,’ said Kerr.
‘If you are comparing it to modern times it's quite different.
Nobody at fine leg appealed for lbw or for a catch, but now everybody does, and I don't know why this is.’
Kerr also recalled playing against a pioneer of ‘Bodyline’, Fred Root, at Worcester, and seeing both Hobbs and Sutcliffe score hundreds in the last first-class match of the tour for H.D.G. Leveson Gower's XI at Scarborough.
‘Despite not doing all that well personally, it was an enjoyable tour with a terrific bunch of chaps,’ Kerr said.
For Weir, who like Kerr had a modest tour, the biggest personal highlights came when he scored 37 and 40 in the first Test match.
‘Those two scores gave me greater pleasure than my hundreds against Glamorgan and Lancashire.
I remember sticking about when Jack Mills was out early for zero, and also collecting three first-innings wickets, including the two centurymakers, Ames and Allen.’
That Test was, perhaps more than any other match, the decider as to whether New Zealand cricket had a future.
New Zealand batted first after winning the toss and made 224 (Dempster 54).
England in reply were dismissed for 454, with Les Ames (137) and ‘Gubby’ Allen (122) putting on an eighth-wicket partnership of 246, which still stands as a Test record for that wicket.
In their second innings the Kiwis declared at 469 for 9, with Dempster and ‘Curly’ Page both scoring hundreds and Blunt making 96.
England had a target of 240 in 140 minutes, but could not meet it in the end, and as a result the Test was drawn.
The English authorities had to pencil in two more Tests, at The Oval and Old Trafford.
‘The experience gained meant that some continuity persisted, even thought the next tour in 1937 was rather late in coming,’ Weir said.
‘Looking back on it now, it was a tour not to be forgotten for those of us who went on it.
The team spirit was good, and it did a lot towards developing the future of New Zealand cricket.’
An Eminent Victorian
On March 24, 1892, Andrew Ernest Stoddart scored 134 in England's 499 at Adelaide and England went on to record their largest winning margin against Australia — an innings and 230 runs — until the Oval Test of 1938.
DEAN HAYES outlines Stoddart's long and varied career
A.E.
‘DREWY’ STODDART was a typical Victorian amateur sportsman, though far above average in performance.
He was a stockbroker, living in Hampstead, and such was his impressive appearance, an Australian lady columnist described him as having ‘quite a Piccadilly manner’.
When he joined Middlesex in 1885, ‘Stoddy’ was already a rugby player of note, playing three-quarter for Blackheath, and was capped 10 times by England.
At the age of 21, he joined Hampstead, where his impact on cricket was immediate — 906 runs in four innings, spread over 10 days — F.B. Wilson declaring him ‘one of the most tireless men who every lived’.
His name was immortalised in 1886 when he hit 485 in six hours 10 minutes, playing for Hampstead against Stoics, on Aug 4.
It was at that time the highest innings by anyone until A.E.J. Collins hit an unbeaten 628 in a junior house match at Clifton College in 1899.
Three days after his momentous innings, Stoddart hit 270 against Blackheath, and then, playing for Middlesex, score 98 against Gloucestershire, giving him 790 runs in five days.
He had prepared himself for the Stoics match in typical fashion the night before.
He went dancing, played some poker, and then, at dawn, he had a warm bath and took his friends to the swimming baths to freshen up.
After eating a full breakfast, he performed his awesome feat of batting before, in the evening, taking part in a doubles tennis match, visiting the theatre and going on to a supper party!
In 1887, he hit 151 for England against MCC at Lord's in the Centenary Match, he and Shrewsbury adding 266 for the first wicket.
It was said that Stoddart never played better than in 1890 when representing the South against the North — he scored 115 out of 169 — as Attewell, Barnes, Briggs, and Peel bowled against him.
He scored 50 while WG made 3!
The following season, he carried his bat for a brilliant 215 not out against Lancashire at Old Trafford.
It was the highest innings played in first-class cricket that summer.
In 1893, Drewy Stoddart became the first Middlesex batsman to score a century in each innings of a county match — carrying his bat for 195 not out (out of 327) and 124 against Nottinghamshire at Lord's.
Playing a full season, he scored 2072 runs at 42.28, including over 1000 for Middlesex.
When the county followed on 179 behind Surrey, he and T.C. O'Brien put on 228 for the first wicket to create a win by 79 runs.
It was also the season in which he captained England at Lord's, in the absence of W.G. Grace, and became the first captain in Test history to declare an innings closed.
He achieved many of his successes in Australia, where he played in 11 of his 16 Tests.
In the winning series of 1894–95, he had a Test average of 39.00 and scored an important 173 in the second Test at Melbourne.
It was the highest score by an England captain in a Test in Australia until 1975.
He returned to England a hero, and faced rounds of endless presentations and celebratory dinners.
He withdrew from the final Test of the 1896 series, having opened with W.G. Grace in the previous two, after newspaper allegations that he took payments for playing, though he was an amateur.
After a very successful tour of West Indies, he took his second team off to Australia, but on the eve of the first Test he received a cable telling him that his widowed mother had died.
He was so distressed and shocked that he didn't play in the first two Tests, batted himself at No. 8 in the third and fourth matches, and withdrew from the fifth.
Though he headed the Middlesex batting averages the following summer with 52, he announced that he was growing tired of first-class cricket and left it in favour of golf and club cricket.
In 1899, he appeared once for Middlesex in an emergency and made a duck, but in 1900, at the age of 37, he appeared in J.T. Hearne's benefit match against Somerset.
It was fitting that his last innings for Middlesex should bring him 221 — his highest first-class score.
He said the innings would be ‘a consolation for my old age’, but for this lonely and depressed middle-aged sportsman, old age never came.
In 1906, he married a widow he had met on his first Australian tour in 1887–88, and after becoming secretary to Neasden Golf Club, he took £300-a-year sinecure as secretary of Queen's Club, for his stockbroking activities had not flourished.
The following year, he made his last appearance for Hampstead and hit a century against Old Westminsters.
His weight increased as he spent his time at the club in conversation, and occasionally at Lord's for matches and dinner gatherings.
On April 3, 1915, Stoddart shot himself through the head — the saddest of ends for such a famous cricketer who had brought much brilliance to the game.
His full life story was told by David Frith in My Dear Victorious Stod , published by the author in 1970 and in an enlarged edition by Lutterworth in 1977.
QUICK QUIZ
What are the middle names of the following players?
(a)
Chris Cairns
(b)
Graeme Hick
(c)
David Lawrence
(d)
Danny Morrison
(e)
Adam Parore
(f)
Mark Ramprakash
(g)
Dermot Reeve
(h)
Robin Smith
(i)
Murphy Su'a
(j)
John Wright
Answers on page 55  
DOWN TO GRASS ROOTS
Is your club's ground ready for the 1992 season?
Advertisement manager COLIN ACKEHURST looks at the options
WITH THE new season now only a few weeks away, clubs will be assessing how they can best update or improve their facilities.
Of course, of all the facilities provided by the clubs by far the most important is the pitch itself, and artificial — or non-turf — pitches and practice areas are playing an increasingly vital role.
There are several reasons for this.
With the less-than-reliable weather we have been known to experience rom time to time during the course of a season — it never ceases to amaze me how we ever managed to invent a game like cricket in England — an artificial pitch can be extremely valuable in enabling play to take place when otherwise it might not have done.
It also provides a consistent surface, which is ideal for use by young players and, perhaps more importantly, cricket can be played where the resources are not available to maintain a grass cricket square.
Artificial pitches have been around for a long time, and this was particularly well illustrated in Holland, where they were rolling out their red shale-type material and putting coconut matting over it 40 years ago.
But methods of developing non-turf pitches that would be universally more acceptable were required, the basic premise being that the best surface on which to play the great game was, and always will be, well-maintained and -prepared natural turf.
The question was, how to go about reproducing grass's qualities of consistent pace and bounce, aligned to changeable playing characteristics?
Moisture and compaction are two fundamental ingredients in determining how a pitch will play.
Rain would therefore have to permeate rapidly through an artificial surface into the base, where most of it would quickly drain away.
A compacted stone base was the answer to bounce and drainage requirements, and a surface of special hard/porous mixture means that the pitch plays differently when wet or drying.
None of this would have been possible without the development of a woven artificial grass.
Tom Graveney inspects the new artificial pitch which 3D Cricket have installed at the historic Hambledon CC
CLUB SURFACES LTD () were early pioneers who started looking at ways of developing non-turf pitches back in 1976.
The resultant ‘Clubturf’, and with it the ‘Natural’ cricket pitch, started a quiet revolution which to date has seen about 2000 Clubturf installations at county clubs, public schools and village greens.
Perhaps the greatest need for non-turf pitches is in state schools, where maintenance of grass pitches is often prohibitively expensive.
This is well illustrated by Willesden High School in North London, which in recent times produced both Phillip DeFreitas and Chris Lewis, but which ceased to play cricket four years ago.
Thankfully, cricket is now being reintroduced at the school, thanks to a Clubturf match pitch and two practice nets.
The former Kent and England spinner Derek Underwood, director of cricket at Club Surfaces, had this to say: ‘Of course I enjoy seeing our pitches go in at the Etons and Tonbridges, but it is at grass-roots level within the state-schools sector that the wealth of untapped talent must not be lost to the game.’
3D CRICKET () have been highly successful with their artificial pitches and practice systems over the years.
Spearheaded by another ex-England man in Tom Graveney, they have a number of surfaces available for both indoor and outdoor use.
As well as supplying cricket clubs 3D have supplied pitches for a number of local authorities and many country grounds, while Lilleshall — where England went through their paces before flying off to New Zealand — have had practice pitches installed.
NOTTS SPORT () produce four synthetic cricket pitches: the ‘Envelope System’, the Notts base ‘D’ system (which can be laid onto a prepared sand, soil or hard/porous base); the ‘W’system (designed for use where a concrete or tarmac surface already exists), and the ‘NCA Junior Pitch’, which has been jointly developed with the National Cricket Association to provide young cricketers with the opportunity to develop their skills safely.
‘County Turf’ from the SLR CRICKET COMPANY () offers good value for money and also provides an excellent surface for youngsters to learn the game.
SPORTS SURFACES INTERNATIONAL () also provide artificial pitches in the ‘Mk II’, a proven match pitch, and ‘Uni-Turf’, and ideal surface for coaching.
Pitch-covers
WITH THE English weather being what it is, pitch-covers can be considered as almost essential to any club.
SLR produce a 25×12 ft cover with balloon wheels and galvanised   gutters: they can also make up ground covers to any size and will happily send samples on request.
The MORRANT GROUP (&tel :), which specialises in supplying clubs' requirements, will supply pitch-covers which are — like all their ground-equipment products — sourced from leading manufacturers.
STUART CANVAS PRODUCTS () are continuing with their well-known and proven three-sectioned unit, giving an overall coverage of 75×12 ft.
This year it also incorporates swivel wheels and an integral gutter system, designed to allow the addition of side-sheets and run-up covers for extra protection of the square.
Their flat wicket-covers are available to any size or specification.
Side-sheets for clubs' existing mobile systems are available, plus a complete recovering service.
3D CRICKET produce covers to suit all pockets.
The full ‘Test’ model, made from sturdy angle-iron frames, protects the length of the pitch in three sections.
The excess water is transferred to areas well away from the square by large-gauge hoses.
The ‘Playmore’ has proved an invaluable asset to many clubs, and takes the form of a ‘roll-out/peg-out’cover.
Also available in sheet form, it is offered at a sensible price.
PLUVIUS PITCH COVERS () also provide protective equipment: they can be seen at many of the county grounds, including Lord's.
Play in progress at Langtons CC in Leicestershire, the 225th club to install one of Notts Sports artificial pitches
Scoreboxes
SCOREBOXES vary greatly in size and complexity.
SLR have recently entered into a contract with MCC to electrify the main scoreboard at Lord's, and they are about to send electrical units to Karachi for the Board of Control for Cricket in Pakistan.
Their catalogue illustrates the many boxes and boards they have constructed, and they specialise in making boxes to clients' own specifications.
SLR will also supply indicator units and telegraph plates to anyone wishing to construct their own box, and they also have a complete repair service available.
3D CRICKET also provide scoreboxes, either permanent constructions or mobile units with wheels, and again their catalogue  illustrates what is available.
MORRANTS have a new free-standing scoreboard at a very competitive price.
Sightscreens
ANYONE who has tried to sight a ball coming out of a dark background as dusk falls will quickly agree that sightscreens are a very important part of any cricket ground.
In any event, more and more leagues these days are insisting on member clubs having sightscreens.
Of course many factors must be taken into consideration when purchasing a screen: manoeuvrability, winter storage and, sadly, their susceptibility to vandalism.
STUART CANVAS PRODUCTS produce traditional wooden sightscreens, designed to be taken down at the end of the season for service and storage.
3D CRICKET and MORRANTS also provide a range of sightscreens, while SLR produce a wooden screen which reduces in height when not in use to help prevent wind damage.
CRICKET IS…
A FUNNY GAME ‘WHEN we got a 12-horsepower roller I assumed we were getting a horse as well’
Other items
THERE ARE many other items available for clubs keen to improve their facilities.
Both 3D and MORRANTS have comprehensive catalogues available, including items such as nets (and cages), mobile nets and the revolutionary grass-germination sheet, as well as slip-catching cradles and line-marking machines.
3D also have a grounds and amenity department, which provides a wide range of specialist cricket seeds, loams and fertilisers.
GREENLINE PRODUCTS () are marketing ‘Portastumps’, which are one-piece, free-standing portable cricket stumps.
They are usable on any reasonably level surface and are ideal for coaching at clubs or schools, or just for fun at the beach or in the back garden.
E.A. COMBS () have a wide selection of clocks to suit all requirements.
They are weatherproofed and can be sited permanently outdoors if required.
A choice of styles is available with sizes up to 25 inches in diameter.
A new name on the cricket scene is 1ST TEST (), a new enterprise designed to service the ground-equipment needs of clubs and schools.
They have a comprehensive catalogue, which includes details of their cricket-care initiative, designed to keep clubs and schools informed of all the latest developments in coaching facilities and ground-care, as well as offering some of the latest innovative products.
Of necessity, the foregoing provides only brief details about the range of ground equipment available.
For further information on a company or its products, please call me on .
NEXT MONTH: a comprehensive survey of the latest developments in cricket clothing and equipment.
The Old Stager says…
Basil Banks eavesdrops on one of club cricket's self-styled experts
THE CAPTAIN had had what for ordinary mortals would have been a trying two days.
Putting our village team together for the Wednesday evening match, he discovered that the Unemployed Electrician wouldn't be back from one of his interminable job interviews and that the Butcher's Assistant — surprisingly, a delicate offspinner — was under orders to go courting.
‘Yes, honestly, that's what he said,’ laughed the Captain on Wednesday to the Accountant, as he slid a porcelain leg into his white trousers.
Punctuated by his own guffaws, he continued: ‘Said ‘No, sorry, Mr Meadows; come this Wednesday I got to be out courting strong like.’
I couldn't shift him.
But apparently he's all right for the weekend because Saturday is a courting-free day!’
By dint of special effort, our Captain had managed to save the honour of the team by recruiting the services of the Baptist Minister's Son, down from university, and securing the participation of Miss Mack's Solicitor.
Miss Mack had been housekeeper at The Hall for as many decades as most people could remember.
She projected a kind of agelessness, which had made her at the same time an object of attention from both the Young Women's Fitness Class and the Over-50s Club.
This was best summed up by Everett, the market gardener: ‘She were never a gel, but I knew her as a young woman and she were old then.’
Although immersed in church and women's group activities, nothing was known about her private circumstances except that she had a mysterious set of distant relations in Blairgowrie.
Plus the fact of her solicitor.
This gentleman visited Miss Mack every 18 months or so and put up at the Bell for the week of his stay.
Nobody knew what legal matters they had to sort out as they were spied from Martindale's Gate traversing the shrubbery paths of The Hall in deep conversation, and they were rarely seen in company in the village except on an occasional outing together to buy postage stamps.
There were those who said that, rather than Miss Mack's solicitor, he was the Fiancé Who Never Quite Made It Because Of Some Unexplained Difficulty — but this was pure speculation.
The Captain's mirth over the Butcher's Assistant's love-life and the reasons therefore reached the ears of the Old Stager as he settled down in his deckchair to relish a happy evening's criticism of his own team.
We were playing The Nortons, a side collated from the villages of Great and Little Norton, two hamlets whose relative size made it difficult for the outside observer to decide which was which.
The match was regarded by us as a little bit special, because their amalgamation of players between two places five miles apart seemed faintly dishonest.
It behoved us to win, to teach them a lesson.
Perhaps for this reason, the Old Stager was in particularly censorious mood as the team gathered desultorily around him.
‘I dunno why yer put up wi' it,’ he sternly admonished the Captain, who was trying to work out the batting order on the back of his chequebook.
‘Courting indeed!
Off with some flibberty-gibbet when we're facing The Nortons!
What's to stop yer doing all yer courting in the winter, when it's not a distraction?
That's what I done — except if there was an overseas tour to foller, when I needed my concentration.’
‘Did you every marry, sir?’ enquired the Accountant courageously.
‘Nearly…very nearly,’ responded the Old Stager, as if trying hard to remember.
‘It were 1938, I think — yes, o'course it was, because McCabe hit 232 at Nottingham — and I was getting sedooced away by this gel.
Lovely gel she was — when it suddenly looked like Surrey could win the Championship.’
The Old Stager had started forward, but let his chin drop despondently on his stick.
‘But they only came third,’ he said sadly.
The Accountant judged correctly that the history of his emotional entanglements with the opposite sex was over.
The Old Stager resumed his fierce aspect in addressing the Captain.
‘Mr Jardine would niver — and I can say niver — have tolerated the levitatious attitude you take to your wicketkeeper.’
He referred to the Unemployed Electrician, but it was his habit never to concede that anyone in the team had a personal name.
‘Mr Jardine, now, when 'e was Surrey captain…‘
‘Got to go and toss,’ said the Captain cheerily.
‘Carry on.’
The Old Stager surveyed his remaining audience.
‘Them as won't turn up plays light wi' the game,’ he observed.
‘It 'appens…
It 'appens.
People leaving the game when they got years before them.
B.A. Richards, for example.
What about C.L. Smith?
There you are.
Both Hampshire men.’
He leant on his stick reflectively.
‘Some counties jist don't 'ave it.
But take a Surrey man like Jack 'Obbs.
Well, 'e become top scorer o' centuries when 'e was 42 and went on to 197 of 'em before 'e retired at 51.
No courting or going for interviews for 'im.’
‘I suppose he didn't have to face the same fierce bowling that we get today — I mean, West Indies and all that?’ commented Mis Mack's Solicitor innocently.
He was lying on his back, resting his head in his clasped palms, because his borrowed boots were hurting, and therefore didn't see the look of explosive anger suffusing the Old Stager's face.
‘Fierce bowling!’ burst out the Old Stager.
‘Are you telling me that the likes of Rhodes, Parker, Tate, Hirst, Dennett wasn't in their different ways fierce?’
Miss Mack's Solicitor sat up abruptly.
‘No, no, not exactly.
I was only —’
‘I've won the toss,’ said the returning Captain, ‘and I've put them in.’
Miss Mack's Solicitor grimaced and felt his toe.
It wasn't a good match.
A patronising merchant banker playing for The Nortons, whom the Captain dearly wanted to dismiss for a duck, scored 112, and his team declared at 204 for 6.
Our wickets started tumbling the moment we went in.
The Old Stager summed up the problem for the benefit of the nine team members within earshot.
‘It's their guard.
They're all taking leg stump instead of middle.
It's fancy, that's what it is.
Making thesselves vulnerable.
I tell yer straight, if yer don't take middle, straightforward and honest, yer done for agin these kind of bowlers.’
He then expanded at some length on this theme.
‘It's funny you should say that,’ said Miss Mack's Solicitor, from a resumed recumbent position, rather dreading his appearance as No. 11 in boots too small for him, ‘because an uncle by marriage of mine took me once to tea with some cousin of his who had been a county cricketer and this county chap said middle and leg was best because it gave you room to cut.’
‘Dangerous and unworthy advice,’ said the Old Stager contemptuously.
‘Who was this so-called county know-all, d'yer know?’
‘Yes.
Chap by the name of Sandham.
Played for Surrey.
Andy Sandham.
D'you know him?’
Our team lost the game by 125 runs, but they reckoned overall it was the most enjoyable day's cricket they'd had in a long time.
Seen here at age 3, this proud son of Durham went on to captain England at cricket — and rugby football.
MICROCOSM
Tour scores and highlights
BENSON &HEDGES WORLD SERIES CUP
First final Melbourne, January 18
AUSTRALIA had a comfortable victory in the first match of the best-of-three finals series, defeating India by 88 runs at the MCG.
The Indians, who qualified for the finals after a last-gasp win over West Indies in the final qualifying match, were never on course to match Australia's 233 for 5, the feature of which was an innings of 73 from Dean Jones, recalled after surprisingly being omitted from the previous match.
Boon, continuing his prolific Test form, top-scored with 78.
On a good pitch and with a fast outfield, Indian should have made a better fist of their innings, but only Srikkanth (who fell to an outstanding catch by Peter Taylor at mid-off) passed 20 as Australia's allrounders ran through the order.
Three run-outs did not help the Indian cause.
Second final Sydney, January 20
AUSTRALIA clinched the World Series Cup, and obviated the need for a third finals match, with a 6-run victory at the SCG.
The home side was indebted to a fine fielding performance by Whitney, usually one of the lesser lights in this department: he took three good catches in the deep to add to a tight spell of bowling.
India, chasing 208 for 9, needed 13 from the NSW man's last over, but managed only six.
Shastri injured ligaments in the back of his knee while driving to make his ground: he missed the last two Tests.
Tendulkar, already dropped by Steve Waugh (who had earlier ‘caught’ him off a no-ball), had a let-off when Moody's throw from a square leg hit the stumps: the TV replay showed the teenager was still short of his ground when the wicket was broken.
Earlier, Australia's total was anchored by a typically solid innings of 78 from 138 balls by Marsh, with Border making 38 before becoming another run-out victim.
Mark Waugh's miserable international season continued with a duck, one of two stumpings for Pandit as left-arm spinner Raju took three wickets.
ENGLAND XI IN NEW ZEALAND
First One-Day International Auckland, January 11
ENGLAND began the serious business of their tour in fine style, overwhelming New Zealand's so-called ‘Young Guns’ in the first of the three-match Bank of New Zealand one-day series.
After choosing to bat, New Zealand dipped to 81 for 5 before Harris and Cairns, youthful allrounders both, steadied the ship with a stand of 84.
Cairns hit two fours and a six in his forthright 42, while Harris, like his partner the son of a former NZ Test player, stayed 73 balls, hitting a solitary four.
The pick of England's bowlers was eventual Man of the Match Reeve, who bowled his 10 overs in one spell and took 3 for 20, removing New Zealand's danger men, Crowe, Greatbatch and Jones.
Tufnell also sent down a miserly spell.
England never looked troubled.
Gooch and his makeshift opening partner Hick put on 64, then Gooch and Smith took the score past 100 before the captain fell to Harris's gentle floaters for 47.
Smith went on to 61, the winning runs coming with 16.1 overs to spare.
QUOTE: YOUNG GUNS?
Yesterday they (New Zealand) were no more than cannon-fodder.
Scyld Berry in the Independent on Sunday
Javed Miandad: passed 6000 one-day runs on Jan 19, and passed fit for the World Cup three weeks later
WIN A BBC VIDEO
BBC Enterprises have released an amended version of the John Arlott's Vintage Cricket videotape.
The programme is prefaced by tributes to Arlott from Richie Benaud and Ian Botham, but is otherwise unchanged from the original, as reviewed in WCM Oct 1988.
Ten copies of the video must be won in our easy-to-enter competition.
Just answer the three questions below, and send your entry (postcards preferred) to John Arlott Video Competition,Wisden Cricket Monthly .
1.
In which year did John Arlott retire from radio cricket commentary?
2.
To which island did he move on retirement?
3.
What was the title of his autobiography, published last year?
The closing date for entries is March 31, 1992.
Prizes will go to the first 10 all-correct entries opened after that date.
The Editor's decision is final: no correspondence will entered into.
OBITUARY
Dhruv Pandove
THE YOUNGEST Indian ever to score a first-class century, Dhruv Mahender Pandove, 18, was killed in a car accident in Delhi on Jan 31.
The Indian team observed two minutes' silence before the Perth Test.
An attractive left-hander tipped for Test honours, Pandove (then only 13) made 94 on debut for Punjab against Himachal Pradesh at Amritsar in Nov 1987, and the following season scored 137 against Jammu &Kashmir at Srinagar in only his third first-class match, when aged 14 years 294 days.
In that innings he batted for 292 minutes, facing 257 balls and hitting 14 fours.
He went on from that bright start, becoming the youngest to reach 1000 runs in the Ranji Trophy.
Judge Alvin Roberts Cornelius — Dec 21 in Lahore, aged 88.
Former Chief Justice of Pakistan; founder-member, Board of Control for Cricket in Pakistan (1948); BCCP vice-president 1948–53; honorary life member of MCC.
