WISDEN AUGUST 1992
EDITORIAL
Beauty and the Beast
CRICKET, which means so very much to so many, has again been grievously wounded.
The Test match at Old Trafford, which had been packed with stirring deeds, was plunged on the fourth evening into hideous disarray.
The cause, in simple terms, was indisciplined Pakistan fast bowling and petulant behaviour in the face of a proper umpiring reaction.
And all the smouldering volcanic lava of past England-Pakistan cricket argument and controversy was reignited in those few flashpoint moments, consuming the polite arms-length relations set up by those who had foreseen the dangers from the start of the tour.
With passions running high and reporters running down corridors in search of statements, the sequence of events and their meaning became confused.
The Pakistan camp were clearly peeved, and united in their conviction that they had been wronged, a conclusion based on a deep and enduring suspicion of their opponents' stance.
Had umpire Roy Palmer been harsh in warning Aqib Javed for intimidatory bowling?
Had he been unfeeling in handing back the bowler's sweater less than gently (but by no means callously) after an over full of backchat by the bowler and his captain?
Had the earlier turf-level ‘catch’ by Inzamam-ul-Haq off Gower been wrongly disallowed?
Had the umpires gone too far in referring wear marks on the ball to the match referee during the luncheon interval?
The Pakistanis seemed to find the answers to all these questions a vehement ‘yes’.
It has been said that Englishmen have a paranoid suspicion of Oriental cunning, but it was becoming more apparent with every passing day that Javed Miandad and his team were just as concerned about the probity of their hosts.
It was as if they expected, some time or other, for the Shakoor Rana affair (Faisalabad, 1987) to be deliberately avenged.
These waters run deep and murky.
In their overheated frustration this Monday evening at Old Trafford they let themselves down badly through ignorance of the laws of cricket.
They had been wrongfooted by the new ruling on bouncers, which places a limit of one per over per batsman (and over shoulder height).
Mr Palmer took action after Aqib bounced one to hit the helmet of No. 11 batsman Malcolm (who had just avoided decapitation by Wasim Akram).
Aqib continued to drop short, once no-balling by some distance, and seemed close to complete loss of personal control.
His captain, volatile as any ice-hockey player, was equally distracted, his aggressive posture conjuring up visions of the Perth nightmare when, unforgivably booted by Lillee, Miandad raised a retaliatory bat which, only by the grace of God, abandoned its journey towards Lillee's head.
What neither seemed to realise at Manchester was that the umpire was invoking Law 42, Unfair Play, which covers intimidation — without reference to deliveries above the shoulder.
It is an old law, much neglected.
Had umpires over the past 16 years — starting with that Saturday evening of shame when Edrich and Close were blitzed — shown the same resolution in observing the anti-intimidation law, cricket would now bear a healthier countenance, and the strictures contained in the 1991 ICC Code of Conduct would never have been necessary.
In other words, Mr ‘No-Nonsense’ Palmer came too late on the scene.
For his pains, he was treated disrespectfully by guest players and placed at the centre of the most distasteful charade ever seen on an English first-class cricket field.
Intikhab Alam, Pakistan's cricket manager, when asked, within an hour of the incident, why certain of his players had reacted in this way, replied that frustration had built up.
Yet, somewhat inconsistently, he rejected any comparison with the circumstances at Faisalabad nearly five years ago when the exasperated Mike Gatting and Shakoor Rana lost their cool.
He placed emphasis on the impersonal manner in which umpire Palmer had returned Aqib's sweater and hat to him at the end of that infamous over, and referred repeatedly to the lack of lift of the offending deliveries to tailender Malcolm.
Disappointingly, he declined to consider their length .
It all went a long way towards explaining why umpires the world over have been reluctant for so many years to restrain cricket's bouncer-happy fast bowlers.
The breach seems beyond repair.
Suspicion is a soul-destroying evil.
Trust, like respect, takes a long time to establish, and is easily destroyed.
There are those who wish to reconcile everybody concerned; but they are dreamers.
Pakistan's supporters, so many of them zealots, will not be shifted from their belief that their players can do no wrong, and that England's are, on the whole, unshiftable in their attitudes.
On this occasion, though, they should have no cause to doubt the judgment of the umpire.
As for the penalty handed down by ICC match referee Conrad Hunte, Aqib Javed was generously spared a match suspension, having to find only half his match fee of around £275, which is derisory in the contest of the player's income from match bonuses etc.
Javed Miandad's performance amazingly went off scot-free, in the interests of the continuation of the series in a peaceful fashion, though he was ‘reminded’ of his responsibilities.
Manager Intikhab earned a severe reprimand for to journalists that his players had been ‘insulted’ by umpire Palmer's handling of the sweater.
The total penalty, then, was scarcely worth the trouble and cost involved in Mr Hunte's consultations with senior ICC officials, conciliators all, it seems.
The Code was thought to be the answer to misbehaviour.
It has proved, at the first time of asking in Test cricket, to be nothing more than a wrist-slapper.
Loss of self-control in cricket is on a par with evasion of payment for a television licence.
Nothing, though, could have clouded out completely the romance of David Gower's successful return to the fold after 17 months in the wilderness.
WCM readers perhaps more than most will have cherished its long-time contributor's confident re-entry, all flowing drives and elegant poise, with the occasional nicks to remind us of his vulnerability.
Truly it was a match scripted along the lines of Beauty and the Beast .
As we were going to press, the ICC announced its decisions on a number of matters.
The English players who went on the disapproved tour of South Africa in 1989–90 — the ‘Gatting tour’— will have their Test ban lifted on Oct 1.
Zimbabwe have been given Test status.
The 1995 World Cup venue remained undecided.
Full comment in WCM next month.
Letters
Wisden Cricket Monthlywelcomes Readers' Letters on any cricket topic, contemporary, controversial, historical or humorous.
Please keep letters as brief as possible, and legible; we reserve the right to edit them.
Letters should be sent to: Letters Page, Wisden Cricket Monthly,
Rain insurance
RE YOUR Editorial Sponsor the Weather: would it be possible for the admission charge to be increased by, say, 10% for ‘insurance’?
If no play was possible or a prescribed period was lost this premium payment would entitle the holder to get his money back.
This charge would be optional, left to the customer to cover himself or not.
I appreciate that such a scheme would take some working out, but to me there seems a real possibility of its working.
But please waste no time.
I am 82, and would like to see this argument settled before I pitch stumps on the Green Field.
Real cricket
WHATEVER happened to the days when cricketers dressed in white, sported smart caps, and cursed catches in the deep that came out of the sun?
Unfortunately ‘pyjama cricket’ seems to have descended from the heights of the World Cup to the village green.
Since the joys of Sky TV brought us Botham and Lamb in sunglasses, deep midwickets all over Kent have donned Ray Bans and proclaimed their allegiance to the New York Yankees.
Their lack of dress sense is matched by their behaviour, every ball being accompanied by an appeal.
Real-ale drinkers were forced to band together to protect their heritage.
Will we eventually be forced to found a Campaign for Real Cricket?
Big Brother BBC
IN WCM July 1991, Steven Lynch commented on the BBC's maddening policy of interrupting live cricket with hourly visits not only to the national newsroom but also to the weatherman and the local newsdesk.
This exasperating weekday practice prevents us seeing at least 10 minutes of each of the first two sessions of paly.
The article did conclude with the (then) good news that the BBC were looking to phase out these interruptions, possible the third Test (of last summer).
This, of course, never happened and our irritation was maintained throughout the 1991 season.
Time is a great healer, and the long winter reduced my anger level so that when the first one-day international of 1992 came around, I was happy and full of optimistic expectation.
However, within a few overs of the start, we were off to the newsroom, and cries of disbelief were audible from living-rooms all around the country.
Needless to say, when the local newscaster finally ended our agony and allowed us to return to the cricket, we discovered that the England captain had been dismissed.
The BBC had missed the first international wicket of the season, in preference to a weather report and some local tittle-tattle.
The you think about it the more ridiculous the situation seems.
Everybody who is watching that particular channel at that particular time has tuned in to watch the cricket.
However, it seems that the BBC in its infinite wisdom wishes to force otherwise happy cricket-watchers to endure these unnecessary interruptions.
It is almost as if Big Brother begrudges us our pleasures and has decided to make us realise there are other things going on in the world other than cricket.
Unless someone has a better solution, can I ask the many thousands of WCM readers who are as infuriated as I am to write and complain to the BBC's Head Programme Scheduler.
Perhaps when his desk collapsed through sheer weight of mail he finally will realise that we simply want to be left for 60 minutes an hour in our blinkered little world of leather and willow.
Favoured Hick
SO MANY have praised Graeme Hick that there must be more to him than has been revealed.
Is he more than just a basher of indifferent bowling, of which there is currently plenty?
Here is a curious case of a foreigner already being hailed as an England batting hero long before he was qualified and thrust into the side as soon as he appeared to be.
And there he has obstinately been retained, despite a long run of failure unprecedented in my experience among specialist batsmen.
Moreover, he has occupied one of the more vital positions in the order.
Vividly remembering Bradman as Australia's No. 3 and contrasting his success with Hick's disappointments, some would rate it as the most important.
Hick at No. 3 is encouragement to the bowlers and deflation for his fellow-batsmen: hence the pressure put on the middle order in the past two years.
Worthy replacements for batsmen nearing the end are hard to find.
Thought will have to be given now to players discouraged previously, including Ramprakash, who has had a raw deal while Hick has been favoured, and the hapless Fairbrother, for whom critics always seek reasons for non-selection.
Neighbours
IN EXTRACTS from my forthcoming book,A Cuckoo in the Bodyline Nest , published in the May and June issues of WCM , I wrote that I had been born in Marathon Avenue, Darling Point, Sydney, next door to Gubby Allen.
Since then I have become aware of E.W. Swanton's biography,Gubby Allen — Man of Cricket .
It was a shock to read that Gubby attributed his birthplace as being a house built by his father in Victoria Road, Bellevue Hill, another suburb of Sydney.
I am at a loss to explain this contradiction, as Gubby and I both accepted and talked about our next-door-neighbour relationship in later life.
Perhaps some other Allens lived next door in Marathon Avenue or perhaps I was born in Victoria Road.
Who knows, and does it really matter 90 years later?
Early Humpage
WITH REFERENCE to Robert Brooke's letter (WCM June) regarding Geoff Humpage removing his pads to bowl at an early stage of a first-class match, on Saturday, July 17, 1982 at Headingley he again removed his pads, and bowled the 12th over of the game.
Phil Oliver took over as wicketkeeper and Yorkshire declared at 365 for 8 after 103.3 overs, Geoffrey Boycott scoring 152 not out.
This is the only occasion when I personally remember seeing a wicketkeeper coming on to bowl and it may be the earliest such occasion in a first-class game.
Humpage's figures were 10–3–27–0.
Extroverts
FOLLOWING Greg de Wit's team of gentlemen,(WCM July) here is a team who are rather more extrovert in their behaviour.
Geoff Boycott, Brian Close, Javed Miandad, Ian Chappell, Ian Botham, Moin Khan, Phil Tufnell, Roy Gilchrist, Jeff Thomson, Fred Trueman, Dennis Lillee.
Try walking into that dressing-room after they had just lost by an innings.
Disabled
HAVING recently seen cricket being played by disabled persons in New Zealand, I am establishing a cricket association for the disabled in Somerset.
Such an association will lead to organised cricket being played In Somerset.
Similar associations have been set up in other counties, and already national competitions are staged.
Help with this enterprise would be appreciated.
Anyone willing to assist can contact my colleague  .
NEWS REGISTER
IAN BOTHAM and David Gower were both appointed OBE (for services to cricket) in the Queen's Birthday Honours List published on June 13.
Former West Indies captain Clive Lloyd was appointed CBE for services to cricket and for public service in Lancashire.
A BEM was awarded to Ben Jessop for services to cricket in Yorkshire.
Former West Indies captain Viv Richards has turned down a lucrative offer to play Currie Cup cricket for South Africa's Western Province.
Richards, 40, said: ‘I was flattered to receive the offer, but morally I could not accept.
They still have their problems out there.’
Richards's former Test team-mate Malcolm Marshall, however, has agreed to play in South Africa: the 34-year-old fast bowler will play for Natal.
Fast bowlers Salim Jaffer (strained thigh) and Tanvir Mehdi returned home to Pakistan midway through the current tour.
Former England fast bowler Mike Hendrick, 43, is Nottinghamshire's new cricket manager.
He replaces John Birch, who quit soon after the start of the season.
Hendrick, who played for Notts for four years after 13 seasons with Derbyshire from 1969, took 87 wickets in his 30 Test appearances.
Middlesex batsman Ian Hutchinson, 27, has retired from first class cricket.
He scored 1435 runs in his career, with five centuries, the highest 201 not out against Oxford University in 1989.
Wicketkeeper Bobby Parks made his 689th dismissal for Hampshire on June 20, breaking the county record set by Neil McCorkell between 1932 and 1951.
Cornhill Insurance have agreed to extend their contract to sponsor Test cricket in England for another two years to 1994 at a cost of £3.2 million.
August 29 marks the 150th anniversary of the birth of Nottinghamshire bowler Alfred Shaw, who took over 2000 first-class wickets at 12 apiece, and delivered the first ball in Test cricket, at Melbourne in 1877.
He died in 1907, aged 64.
Former Somerset batsman Peter Roebuck, who retired last year, made his debut for Devon, in the Minor Counties competition, in June.
He scored 137 for his new county against Herefordshire on June 30.
John Crawley will captain Cambridge University again in 1993, while Oxford will be led by Jason Gallian, a 21-year-old from Sydney whose parents were born in Lancashire.
Playing for Lancashire II against Somerset II at Crosby, Crawley scored 217 not out and Gallian 106 in their team's total of 411 for 1 dec.
Nasser Hussain (above) was banned for two matches (one Championship match and a Sunday League game) after a dressing-room incident with team-mate Mark Ilott during Essex's match against Kent
Former Test fast bowlers Sir Richard Hadlee and Michael Holding have been made honorary life members of MCC, as have the club's former secretary Jack Bailey, Laurance Hancock (secretary of Staffordshire for 53 years until 1987) and Glamorgan stalwart Don Shepherd, who took 2174 wickets for the Welsh county but never won a Test cap.
A set of Wills cigarette-cards, Cricketer Series 1901 (50), sold for £460 (plus 10% premium) at Phillips' West Two auction sale on June 10.
In another lot, five Taddy County Cricketers and one Wills 1896 Cricketers made £110.
The Ashes urn is to make one of its rare trips away from Lord's during November, when cricket's most famous trophy will be on display at London's Victoria &Albert Museum.
Former England spinner Nick Cook clashed with Wasim Akram when the Pakistani all-rounder tried to leave the field during a last-wicket partnership in the tourists' match against Northants.
Umpire Peter Wright upheld batsman Cook's objection that if Akram was fit to bowl (he had just taken five wickets) then he should be able to field.
A Hambledon CC account book dating from the late 1700s has been accepted by the government as payment in lieu of inheritance tax.
The historic book from the famous Hampshire club is currently in the Hampshire County Council Museum.
Jonathan Edrich, 22, only son of former Surrey and England batsman John Edrich, was killed in a car accident near the Zimbabwe/South Africa border on June 19, two days before his father's 55th birthday.
His car was hit head-on by another vehicle which swerved to avoid a cow that had strayed onto the bush road.
Jonathan's body way brought back to England for burial.
He had settled in Cape Town, where he was in the computer business.
Nottinghamshire club player Bryn Derbyshire was given a three-month suspended sentence with £300 costs, and had to pay £400 compensation to umpire Joseph Purser after causing ‘bodily harm by wanton furious driving’ by reversing his car at the umpire after a match in which he had been given out lbw.
Purser, 59, had injured an elbow as he leapt clear of the car.
Royal portrait painter Andrew Festing has been commissioned by MCC to produce a group picture of several great players, including Trevor Bailey, Alec Bedser, Sir Colin Cowdrey, Godfrey Evans and Peter May, all of whom were photographed by Festing during the recent Lord's Test.
Meanwhile former West Indies captain Sir Garfield Sobers is to be the subject of a solo painting.
New Zealand will play three Tests and three one-day internationals on their tour of Sri Lanka later this year.
They also hope to tour Zimbabwe.
Bill Brown, who carried his bat for 206 not out through Australia's innings in the 1938 Lord's Test, celebrates his 80th birthday on July 31.
Five other Australian Test players are older: Harry ‘Bull’ Alexander (87), Bill O'Reilly (86), Keith Rigg (86), Leo O'Brien (85) and Sir Donald Bradman (84 on Aug 27).
WCM has featured interviews with Brown (April '87), Rigg (Dec '89) and O'Brien (Aug '81).
Hampshire were criticised by police after asking applicants for Benson &Hedges Cup final tickets to send blank cheques through the post.
Essex demanded an investigation by Southend Council after their Rapid Cricketline 2nd XI Championship match against Hampshire at Leigh-on-Sea had to be abandoned after only five overs as the pitch was dangerous.
Some 2nd XI batsmen found the going easier elsewhere: Aftab Habib made 203 not out in Middlesex II's 403 for 4 dec against Worcestershire at Harrow, Jamie Hall scored 188 for Sussex II v Notts, and Kent's David Fulton made 187 against Leicestershire.
Somerset's Dutch fast bowler Andre van Troost took 6 for 16, including a hat-trick, against Durham II at Eppleton.
Steve Goldsmith made 202 not out (24 fours, 10 sixes) as Derbyshire II ran up 324 for 1 in 41 overs to defeat Lancashire (323 for 4 in 53 overs) in the Bain Clarkson Trophy limited-overs match at Checkley.
Clive Lloyd: CBE
Wasim Akram has ended speculation about his future in county cricket by signing a new four-year contract with Lancashire.
The next women's World Cup will be held in England in 1993, with the final being held at Lord's on Aug 1.
Australia have won the last four tournaments.
Scientists at the University of East Anglia have discovered the cause of ‘watermark disease’, which had threatened to destroy English willow trees.
Former England captain Tony Greig, now resident in Sydney, has reached an agreement with creditors which has ended moved to declare him bankrupt.
Oxford won the ladies' University match, defeating Cambridge by five wickets at St John's College, Oxford.
Somerset's Dutch allrounder Roland Lefebvre (above) is considering suing Bradleigh Donelan for loss of earnings, claiming that the Sussex offspinner broke his arm during a fracas on MCC's pre-season tour of the Leeward Islands
Durham University (308; Simon Ecclestone 93, Jeremy Snape 56) won the Commercial Union UAU title for the third successive year, defeating the University of Kent (215) in the final at Finchley on June 23.
The future of the Lawrence Challenge Trophy, awarded to the scorer of the season's fastest century, was assured when the company which has taken over Walter Lawrence &Co. returned the trophy to the Lawrence family.
Equipment manufacturers Gunn &Moore have become the official clothing and footwear sponsor of the Yorkshire Academy of Cricket at Headingley.
The one-day Eton v Harrow match at Lord's on June 24 ended in a draw.
Harry Foster, whose 102 not out was the first century for Harrow in this fixture since 1978, had an unbroken fourth-wicket stand of 196 with James Renshaw (80 not out) as Harrow scored 209 for 3 dec.
Eton replied with 137 for 7 (Matthew Hawkins 5 for 35).
Brewers Fullers have expanded their sponsorship of the Surrey County League to include a new 19-club second division from 1993.
Chinthurst's first six wickets in their Under-10 school match against Durston House fell to hat-tricks, by Ben Duncan and Archie Orr-Ewing.
Matthew Fleming scored 63 for Kent against Nottinghamshire at Maidstone on June 30 in borrowed kit, having left his at Gateshead after the previous day's match with Durham.
Next day, his own kit restored, he was out first ball.
Guyanese batsman Sudesh Dhaniram hit 134 from 83 balls, with 13 fours and eight sixes, for Glamorgan (242 for 7) against a World XI (244 for 7) in a floodlit match at Swansea on July 1.
Yorkshire cricket-lover and historian Tony Woodhouse suffered broken legs when hit by a swerving car recently, and is expected to spend the rest of the summer in hospital.
Imran Khan's Cancer Hospital Appeal has received £20,000 from Tilda Rice, the world's leading producers of Basmati rice.
The company sponsored a floodlit charity match between India and Pakistan at Crystal Palace on July 28.
Peter May gave the address, Alec Bedser and Micky Stewart gave readings, and Surrey secretary David Seward played the organ at the memorial service for former Surrey captain Stuart Surridge, held at Southwark Cathedral on June 16.
Actor George Baker (‘Inspector Wexford’) will captain one of the teams in a celebrity charity match at Hamble, Southampton on Aug 9, in aid of Netley Waterside House, a local Winged Fellowship holiday centre for severely physically disabled people.
Ian Botham: OBE
Former Test fast bowler Peter Pollock has replaced Peter van der Merwe as convenor of South Africa's selection panel.
Much criticism had been directed at van der Merwe, who captained South Africa on their last tour of England in 1965, after the omission of Clive Rice and Jimmy Cook from the team for the World Cup and the Test in West Indies.
David ‘Syd’ Lawrence, who recently returned to bowling in the nets after his horrific knee injury in New Zealand, has been awarded a benefit by Gloucestershire in 1993.
Worcestershire have awarded a joint benefit next year to Damian D'Oliveira and Martin Weston.
Tony Tillbrook hit 309 not out (33 fours, 21 sixes) as his club St Thomas ran up 362 for 1 against Trinibis at Waltham Abbey.
Mark Fallon scored 200, with 19 sixes, for Thornham in their Bass Lancashire &Cheshire League Hough Shield semi-final: his second hundred took only 29 balls.
A cricket memorabilia auction in aid of David Hughes's benefit will take place at Old Trafford on Aug 27 (7 pm).
Simon Walker, playing for Honley in their Huddersfield League Division 2 match at Meltham on June 13, hit 40 (six sixes and a four) from a James Moulson over that included a no-ball.
On June 27, playing for Marlow Park against Amersham Hill, Nigel Bruce struck 38 (five sixes and two fours) off a John Greenacombe over which again included a no-ball.
Earlier, on May 23, David Conlon struck six sixes in an over for Huyton against Liverpool rivals Sefton.
Former Glamorgan offspinner Phil North hit 34 in an over on his way to his maiden century for Newport in their Western League match against Brislington: he later took 6 for 60.
A sense of proportion
DONALD WOODS with memories of Greig senior, ‘Bordah’ and the White House Oval Office
IT'S NOT easy, in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington, to explain the importance of The Oval cricket ground in Kennington, yet such was my lot when in 1978, shortly after my family and I had left South Africa following certain differences of opinion with our government, President Jimmy Carter kindly invited my in and asked why we had chosen Britain and not America as our country of refuge.
The reply involved my being of British descent, five generations back; our country's closer historical ties with Britain; and, er, frankly, sir, a question of sport.
In choosing a place of exile one had, if possible, to opt for proximity to places like The Oval, Lord's and Twickenham.
The President was amused, conceding that not much cricket or rugby was played in the United States, but as a sports fan himself he understood — especially as a Southerner, aware of the significance of sport in the Deep South, and of the fact that I came from an ever Deeper South than he did…
After living in Surrey since then we haven't regretted the choice, because a number of things make Surrey special.
Apart from its rich cricket history, featuring such giants as Hobbs, Fender, Bedser, Laker and May, the country has the same heraldic colour, chocolate brown, as that of my beloved ‘Bordah’.
Now ‘Bordah’, though so pronounced refers to Border, one of South Africa's smallest sports provinces, where I come from, on the south-eastern coast, covering the area of the Cape Province's border with Natal.
Though small in size and numbers, Border has from time to time been good enough to thump the New Zealand All-Blacks and the British Lions at rugby, and to produce such cricketers as Peter Kirsten, Hylton Ackerman, Ken McEwan and the brothers Greig.
That is why when Ian Greig became captain of Surrey I knew the county would flourish.
All it needed was a touch of the spirit of ‘Bordah’!
I remember watching Ian's first match for Border as a Queen's College schoolboy.
He was one of several players to make their debut for the province while still at school.
Such prodigies were invariably pupils of the three most prominent schools of the area — Queen's, Dale and Selborne — whose monumental inter-school rivalries were temporarily suspended when their products did service for the province.
Hylton Ackerman, of Dale College, had taken a century off Mike Smith's England team for Border at the age of 16, and Chris Wilkins, of Selborne College and later of Derbyshire, had taken the shine off England's new-ball attack with 62 runs in 55 minutes.
Tony and Ian Greig, in turn, soon served notice that they were headed for higher arenas.
Donald Woods (right, with hair still dyed black as part of his escape disguise) meets US president Jimmy Carter (left) and vice-president Walter Mondale in the White House Oval Office, soon after Wood's flight from South Africa early in 1978
Their father was the inimitable Sandy Greig, then a colleague on my newspaper group and a wonderful companion in the Press-box whether at cricket or rugby.
An outspoken individualist, Sandy never left anyone in doubt about his views, and when as a newspaper editor I came under governmental pressure from time to time, Sandy was usually the first to phone his support with disdainful disregard of the fact that the telephones were tapped by the state security police.
To his proud Scots blood such matters were a provocation rather than a threat.
I last saw Sandy in Sydney shortly before his death in 1990, and his pride in his sons was higher than ever.
He rejoiced in Surrey's resurgence under Ian's captaincy and spoke nostalgically of the old ‘Bordah’ days.
We also spoke of the encouraging future for South African cricket following recent changes in that long-isolated country, and of the good work being done by Ali Bacher and Steve Tshwete in uniting South African cricket at last, enabling former boycotters like myself to testify that the time had at last come to re-admit South African cricket to the international arena.
I told Sandy my favourite South African cricket story, which I now pass on.
It is almost comparable with Bill Edrich's account of Plum Warner's wartime letter which mentioned, in passing, that an incendiary bomb had landed on Lord's.
Warner had added with casual precision which would have made the Gestapo rage in frustration if they had intercepted it: ‘The bomb landed at deep mid-on, bowling from the Nursery end.’
My story concerns the last England cricket tour of South Africa in 1964–65, when during the first morning of the Durban Test the pitch was so utterly dead that Peter Pollock, at full pace, could hardly get the ball bail-high and England's batsmen were obviously headed for a huge total.
But even this sad circumstance was overshadowed for me by political events of the week.
Prime Minister Vorster had threatened to take action against English-language newspapers which refused to tone down their criticism of his government, and these included my paper, the Daily Dispatch , and the Herald of Port Elizabeth.
In the lunch interval of the Test I made my way to the bar, where I saw the editor of the Herald , Mac Pollock, father of Springboks Peter and Graeme, and decided to discuss Vorster's threat with him.
‘Well, Mac,’ I said.
‘It looks as though we're in for a tough time!’
‘Damn right,’ he nodded glumly.
‘But what else can you expect if bloody groundsmen prepare bloody wickets like this one?’
It reminded me again, as did Plum Warner's letter to Edrich, and the story of Drake on Plymouth Hoe, that an important part of our Anglo-Saxon heritage is a sense of proportion.
COUNTRY CRICKET
Neil Hallam
DERBYSHIRE DURHAM LANCASHIRE LEICESTERSHIRE NOTTINGHAMSHIRE YORKSHIRE
‘Hendo’ takes charge
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE'S earnest captain Tim Robinson doesn't strike me as a student of W.C. Fields, but recent events at Trent Bridge suggest he may not be unacquainted with his philosophy.
It was, after all, the great comic who advised: ‘If at first you don't succeed, try, try again — then quit.
No use being a damned fool about it.’
That seemed to sum up Robinson's attitude when, within weeks of becoming ‘Lord High Everything’ in the playing administration, he gladly handed over many of his responsibilities to a new team manager, Mike Hendrick.
Robinson admitted to feeling the pressures of combining captaincy with team management in a busy benefit season, and evidence of tension was available in Chris Cairn's dissenting gestures during a drawn match against Lancashire.
The New Zealand allrounder demonstrated clear distaste for his maiden century as Robinson delayed a declaration until Lancashire needed a highly improbable 300 from 44 overs.
Cairns, convinced an earlier declaration could have given Notts a chance of victory, at one stage squatted in mid-pitch with his head in his hands and was only directed back to the middle after setting off for the pavilion.
His century was greeted with an angry scythe of the bat in the direction of the Notts dressing-room, but he later apologised to his skipper for being ‘a bit naive’.
Cairns had taken 6 for 70 in the Lancashire first innings, and after watching him add 5 for 75 against Kent Robinson commented: ‘He is still a youngster but he is setting in well and showing what an excellent prospect he is.’
Cairns added: ‘I've learned so much in the last few weeks and coping with failure and disappointment is one of them.’
Phil Robinson: from Yorkshire to Leicestershire — via Cumberland
There are not many harsher disappointments in county cricket than finding yourself on the outside looking in, as was the case with another Robinson — Phil — at the start of this season following his acrimonious departure from Yorkshire.
By the time his original classification as a ‘contested registration’ was rescinded there were no vacancies for the hard-hitter from Keighley, and he was compelled to settle for league cricket and Minor Counties appearances for Cumberland.
New Leicestershire's offer of a two-year contract, starting in 1993, has been accepted and, in the meantime, he has made a prolific return with them in the one-day competitions.
His Sunday League 104 on his debut against Lancashire was followed by a match-awardwinning 74 against Norfolk in the NatWest Trophy, and then by a top-scoring 59 in his next Sunday match against Derbyshire.
‘It's been a fairytale start for Phil, and all the more enjoyable for him after what he has been through,’ says Leicestershire chief executive Mike Turner.
‘He's missed county cricket a lot and he's determined to make the most of his opportunities with us.
We can only use him in one-day games this season because of his commitments with Cumberland, but his qualities are obvious and he is the aggressive type of batsman spectators love to watch.’
Yet another Robinson, Mark of Yorkshire, has also emerged successfully from trying times this season.
Last summer, after joining them from Northants, the Hull-born seamer and world-record-holding non-batsman had a dispiriting time which left him with only 23 Britannic Assurance Championship wickets at a cost of almost 49 runs apiece.
With best figures of 3 for 43 it looked like a case of unfulfilled potential; but Robinson has been a different proposition this season, and claimed a new career-best of 5 for 48 — and a match return of 9 for 68 — in Yorkshire's emphatic win over Essex.
‘I'm bowling a bit quicker, but they main difference is that I feel more confident and settled this time,’ he explained.
‘It's inevitable that you take time to adjust, and with moving to my home county there was extra pressure to do well.
Perhaps I tried too hard when I would have been better off relaxing.’
With Craig McDermott unable to join the county and Paul Jarvis's constitution again proving tender, skipper Martyn Moxon admits that Robinson's penetration has been a valuable factor in Yorkshire's progress this season.
‘He's run in with more self-belief,’ he explained, ‘and that has given him an extra bit of nip to beat the bat.
But our improvement this season has been down to a team effort, not to any particular individual.
Everybody is contributing and the atmosphere in the side is as good as I've known it.’
The atmosphere in Lancashire has carried a whiff of gunpowder since the furore over ‘derogatory statements’ from certain players in a new book,Wasim and Waqar: Imran's Inheritors .
Defeat in the quarterfinals of the Benson &Hedges Cup and modest form in the two leagues thickened the cloud over Old Trafford, but failed to depress David Hughes, assistant manager in day-to-day charge of the first team.
‘We have a crisis every year in Lancashire,’ he claimed, ‘because expectation is so high that the slightest wobble seems a disaster.
Nobody is pretending that we are having a great time, but it is important to recognise the factors which have affected us in what is a transitional period for the club.
Graeme Fowler, Gehan Mendis and the skipper Neil Fairbrother have all been ruled out with injuries, but there has been a plus side with the way young lads like Nick Speak, Graham Lloyd, Steve Titchard and Peter Martin have responded.
They are all great prospects, not just for Lancashire but for England, and I do not see the point in getting depressed when there is such a wealth of promise for the future making its presence felt in the club.’
Hughes cites Speak as a model for those yet to get their chance in the game, insisting: ‘The rewards he is getting now are richly deserved.
He is the perfect example of what guts, honesty and tenacity get you.
The depth of our batting meant he had to wait longer than some, but he is a fiercely committed Lancastrian and he has been  prepared to stay put and fight for a place instead of looking elsewhere for a regular spot.’
Batsman Stewart Hutton wasn't sure he wanted to play county cricket at all when the offer came to give up his steady job with ICI and join Durham's great new adventure this summer.
‘It just seemed too much of a gamble,’ he explained, and in fact the 22-year-old left-hander turned them down once before temptation overcame him.
His decision was rewarded by a place in the Championship side, and with 43 and 40 on his debut against Essex, 78 off Sussex and then 76 against Kent, he soon confirmed the high potential recognised by director of cricket Geoff Cook.
Last summer Hutton scored a record 1561 runs in the North Yorks &South Durham League, as well as 700 in cup matches, and when Durham took him on their tour of Zimbabwe last February he made 143 against their national ‘B’ side in Harare.
‘He doesn't give his wicket away,’ says Cook, ‘and that is a great basis for an opener.
It's a big step up for him, but we believe he has the talent, courage and temperament to develop into a top-class player.’
Hutton took a drop in salary to join Durham, and he wondered what he had let himself in for when, after a battering from Franklyn Stephenson, he had to leave the field to be sick.
‘It's a tough education for me,’ admitted Hutton.
‘But I would always have regretted it if I had turned down the chance to find out whether I could make it at this level.’
Derbyshire made no secret of their doubts about the ability of West Indian fast bowler Ian Bishop to make it back to the top in county cricket this season after 18 months plagues by career-threatening back problems.
There was no doubt that Derbyshire would have preferred to re-register Mohammad Azharuddin this summer, to give the Trinidadian further time to recuperate, but Bishop insisted on returning to fulfil his contract and has fully justified his claim of full fitness with bowling of the highest calibre.
Mid-season found him second in the national averages, and following match figures of 7 for 61 against Warwickshire, team-mate John Morris wondered whether Bishop could ever have bowled with more controlled hostility than in his first spell in the first innings.
Certainly South African Allan Donald, another claimant to the title of ‘world's fastest bowler’, did not come well out of comparisons on that occasion, but Derbyshire captain Kim Barnett believes Bishop still needs careful handling.
‘Seeing him steaming in and bowling so well now makes it easy to forget how long he was out of the game,’ he cautions.
‘It is always tempting to bowl your genuine quicks as often and as long as possible, but that would be counter-productive.
Ian has made a better recovery than we dared hope, but it is still important that we do not take his fitness for granted.
If he is handled correctly and not overworked he should be one of the world's fastest and best bowlers for another six or seven years.’
Durham opener Stewart Hutton, 22: ‘talent, courage and temperament’
A Minor problem
JACK BANNISTER on the iniquities of the NatWest Trophy draw
LORD'S GIVETH, and Lord's taketh away.
The total annihilation of the 14 Minor Counties teams in this year's first round of the NatWest Bank Trophy highlights the need for a long-overdue reform of the system.
The narrowest run margin was 68 runs, and no first-class side batting second lost more than two wickets.
What the Test &County Cricket Board must decide is whether they want the Minors in or not.
The current seeding method, which prevents any two Minor sides playing each other, negates the major appeal of a knock-out competition like the FA Cup…namely that the vagaries of the draw, allied to a bit of luck, suddenly throw a minnow into the big pool of the last eight.
Yet the 18 counties fight shy of the risk, but what are they frightened of?
The argument is that the overall financial pool will suffer if a couple of first-round matches involve the big first-class guns, while perhaps four Minor sides play each other, with the two winners also drawn against each other .
But anyone who was at Beaconsfield, this year, or at St Albans in recent years, will argue differently.
Those grounds are only two among several that can increase their existing ground capacity with temporary seating sufficiently to match the current capacities of Worcester, Taunton, Chelmsford and Southampton, to name only four.
In fact, how many county headquarters can accommodate a crowd of 10,000 or more?
The blinkered caution of the counties has removed from the NatWest competition that romantic element which makes the FA Cup the glamorous competition it is.
Just imagine the uproar if the Football Association decreed that, from the first round proper onwards, no two non-league sides could be drawn against each other?
Are the first-class clubs afraid of defeat?
They shouldn't be, because the Minors have won precisely eight out of 244 matches in which they have participated since 1964 — and that includes two victories by Durham, and the celebrated bowling shoot-out at Bishop's Stortford last year.
An alternative suggestion is to maintain the current separation of the first- and second-class sides, but to guarantee a home first-round draw to the minnows.
That is equally patronising, and the county clubs won't have that anyway, because of the fear of playing on substandard pitches on club grounds.
The realistic thing to do is to throw them all into one hat, and let the odd quirk of the draw do what the public, the sponsors and, I suspect, the players want most — a Minor side through to the last eight, and then get a home draw.
Under the present seeding system, it needs an unlikely double miracle for that to happen, but an open draw would restore some hope to the minnows, hope that is currently made all but non-existent by legislation.
It seems that the idea is to get rid of the 14 Minor County sides as quickly as possible, but the time has come to make cricket's oldest limited-overs competition into a proper knockout contest, instead of a half-baked one as at present.
For Lord's to giveth each year is fine.
For them to taketh away with the same greedy hand is no longer tolerable.
Like the FA Cup, the prestigious NatWest Trophy is a glory competition.
Give everyone an equal chance to taste that glory.
All smiles at Middlesex
Rob Steen
ESSEX KENT MIDDLESEX NORTHAMPTONSHIRE SURREY SUSSEX
DISCOUNTING the scowl that greeted the outcome of his declaration at Ilford, Mike Gatting has been in better humour lately than at any time in my experience.
Jovial, even.
The fact that his form has been positively Bradmanesque may have something to do with this, but one suspects it has more to do with the ‘Get Out of Jail Free’ card he appears to be clutching.
There was a time, not so very long ago, when Gatting regarded the Press with about as much affection as Salieri bestowed upon Mozart.
In his case, though, there were one or two decent excuses.
After Cap'n Cock-Up and Rothley Court, who could blame him?
Being England captain has a habit of refreshing the paranoias other jobs cannot reach.
Happily, and not unexpectedly, a couple of years amid the off-Broadway climes of the county stage seem to have had a mellowing effect.
The Falstaffian affability in evidence since April has hinted at more than mere satisfaction, however, namely, a nudge and a wink about his imminent reinstatement by the ICC.
The barbarism of Boipatong may ultimately move the goalposts, and perhaps rightly so, but there can be no doubt that the selectors will welcome back their Pirate King with guilt-free zeal.
Should Gatting and his crew receive their paroles one's sympathy for refuseniks like Rob Bailey can only heighten.
An accomplished 165 may have helped set up Northamptonshire's comprehensive thwacking of Glamorgan, but the vice-captain's overall form had not been all he would have wished, a reflection, perhaps, of a disenchanted soul.
David Capel: back to form after a subdued season in 1991
Had Curtly Ambrose, supported by umpire Barker, not ejected him at Bridgetown three winters ago, who knows?
As things stand, sadly, Bailey, one of only 13 homegrown batsmen to begin the summer brandishing a career average in excess of 40, has not so much tripped between two stools as toppled into a black hole.
Happily, he is phlegmatic enough to accept his lot; the sight of the Britannic Assurance Championship pennant fluttering over the Wantage Road pavilion come September would be ample consolation.
Much the same might be said of David Capel, another member of that 1990 Caribbean party to have fallen on hard times.
The death of his daughter clearly disrupted the concentration last season, but the hundred he took off Surrey, his first for two years, came hard on the heels of a critical four-wicket haul against Glamorgan, furnishing evidence of a redoubtable performer waving rather than drowning.
‘Capes’ deems the present aggregation of talent at Northampton as the best-balanced in his 11 years there.
That said, it is not immediately apparent what, apart from the regular presence of Paul Taylor and the return of Ambrose, has changed in the past 12 months.
A clean bill of health has certainly helped, while the catches, crucially, have been sticking.
Above all, that habitual inferiority complex has been masked by an up'n'at'em approach embodied by the unsinkable Allan Lamb.
Emotions towards the skipper must be mixed: his runs are obviously needed, but not so many that he presents an unanswerable case for a Test recall.
One man doing precisely that is Carl Hooper.
Unfairly, cast as one of the scapegoats for the islands' World Cup failure, he readily concedes that his disappointment at being ditched for the inaugural meeting between West Indies and South Africa was acute.
In the meantime, his arrival at Kent has been a vital catalyst in their Benson &Hedges run and an unqualified success all round.
As predicted, his offbreaks have proved as persuasive in the shorter game as his sublime strokeplay has been in the longer one.
Now comfortably ensconced in Barham with his fiancée, Diane, a Brummie belle whom he met on his first tour here four years ago, he says he is enjoying himself, even if those impenetrable Lee van Cleef eyes and inscrutable countenance give precious little away.
Quietly self-assured and extremely easygoing, he has settled quickly.
‘The lads have made me feel very welcome, which is important.
Even though I am used to playing at a higher level I still feel under pressure when I entered county cricket, so I needed the guys to rally round.’
If an undistinguished Test record — three centuries, 1409 runs at 28.18 and 15 wickets at 83.13 — scarcely flatters him, the admirable patience of the Caribbean selectors surely will be rewarded.
Anyone possessing the gall to launch three blows into orbit and over the fence in the opening 20  minutes of the day, as Hooper did at The Oval last August when West Indies were following on, is no mere mortal.
‘I used to let the critics get to me but over the past year or so I have learned to relax and not worry.
You can't please these people,’ he reasons matter-of-factly.
The towering, effortless blow that cleared the St Lawrence lime certainly pleased the Canterbury archivists, and it is a foolish man who bets against him delighting the rest of the world for many years to come.
The future, unfortunately appears considerably less bright for the hapless Keith Medlycott.
Can it really be only two years since he was taking 4 for 36 for England against the Windward Islands?
Supplanted by Neil Kendrick and currently slumming it with Sutton CC and Surrey 2nd XI, his removal from the spotlight has been swift and cruel.
A knee operation has exacerbated the problems he experienced with his action on last year's England ‘A’ tour of Sri Lanka, yet complaints, characteristically, are few.
To his credit, ‘Medders’ resisted the temptation to seek a fresh start in a new town.
‘I don't believe in running from a fight,’ he explained to the sympathetic News of the World correspondent who contrasted his descent with Alec Stewart's ascent.
‘My time will come.
I know I've fallen a few rungs on the ladder, but at least I've been there and done it.’
That cheery, indefatigable demeanour may be only skin deep, but a firm grasp of reality bodes well for his capacity to withstand the slings and arrows.
The heart bleeds for Medlycott nonetheless.
With Ricky Ellcock forced to retire, Angus Fraser battling injury and waiting 111 overs for his first Championship wicket of 1992, and Capel and Bailer apparently consigned to the scrapheap, that Caribbean cruise of 1990 is beginning to resemble the Titanic's maiden voyage.
For a while it looked as if pity would be in order for Nadeem Shahid, and for that your correspondent must shoulder some of the blame.
It is no exaggeration to suggest that a player of his undoubted skills would command a regular place at any other county outside Essex, yet fate dealt him an inordinately bum hand last season, limited opportunities, loss of form and a broken index finger combining to dent his confidence.
It also seemed as if somebody up there had decided to have a laugh at the expense of an arguably premature rave by yours truly.
Nadeem Shahid put a disappointing 1991 season behind him with a career-best innings of 132 for Essex against Kent at Chelmsford
It therefore afforded a fair degree of personal relief, not to say pleasure, to see Shahid follow a career-best 132 against Kent with an equally estimable against Glamorgan, even if Nick Knight, with whom he has been competing since schooldays, has continued to get the nod when the side is at full strength.
Better still, the legspin that once occupied as prominent a place in his armoury as that stinging blade is gradually emerging from hibernation.
Luring Gatting down the track at Ilford and shivering timber constituted something of a coup, as does Graham Gooch's belief that Shahid will one day succeed ‘Charlie’ Childs as the second Chelmsford twirler.
As Shahid himself admits, the sight of Ian Salisbury wheeling away so productively at Lord's might have been a factor in this sudden show of faith.
‘The great thing is that I'm not feeling any pressure with my bowling any more.
I just go out and enjoy it.
I've always done plenty of bowling in the nets, but it's nice to know that people still rate you.’
His contract has a year left to run, but even if first-choice status remains elusive until then, his sights will not be trained on a target outside the shire boundaries.
‘I'm an Essex boy through and through,’ his insists.
‘I'm patient and I'm determined to fight for a regular place.’
It seems, once again, that Sussex are the last in the queue, yet not the least indelible of the summer's memories will be Franklyn Stephenson's contribution to that win over Durham at Horsham.
Although the way had been paved by an extraordinary cameo from Alan Wells that yielded 65 from 37 balls without the slightest hint of a slog, it was Stephenson the Bat who set the seal on a riveting charge, a remarkable overhead smash more suited to Boris Becker completing the job in unforgettable fashion.
Prior to this, Stephenson the Ball had twice threatened to castrate Stewart Hutton during the course of one particularly sadistic spell.
Worcestershire were next to discover that the demon remains intact, 7 for 29 bringing Sussex consecutive Championship victories for the first time since August 1990.
This old dog still has some barking to do.
BOY WITH A FUTURE
THE ONLY known surviving image of a fast-bowling legend as a boy: as a man he has at least 307 reasons to remember a glittering Test career.
Answer next month.
Last month: C.G. Macartney
Glamorgan opener Steve James: career-best 152 not out against Lancashire
Worcester's worries
David Foot
GLAMORGAN GLOUCESTERSHIRE HAMPSHIRE SOMERSET WARWICKSHIRE WORCESTERSHIRE
INCORRIGIBLE, if discreet, old gossips like myself like to sit under the boundary trees at Worcester, and listen.
Eavesdropping is, of course, a revealing rather than reliable occupation.
But the questions being asked, between the cathedral chimes, are not necessarily misplaced.
Is Tim Curtis the only county batsman capable of getting his head down?
Where's the Worcestershire middle order?
Is there a realistic fitness future from Graham Dilley?
And, perhaps most crucial of all, what are they going to do about their next overseas player?
Let's take the last query first.
There was Graeme Hick and then Tom Moody, both batsmen.
It is time, as skipper Curtis admits, to adjust the balance of the side and probably look for another bowler.
The thinking in this direction has already started.
And the reputation of Worcester's ‘green, green grass’— though less marked in recent season — could be an appealing temptation to someone like Aqib Javed if, as expected, he decides to return to this country for a second spell of county cricket.
He came virtually as an unknown to join Hampshire for a season, as temporary replacement for Malcolm Marshall.
In the past 12 months he has improved immensely to become one of the best in the world and to confirm Imran's earlier forecasts.
If he chooses to come back, his market value will have soared.
He has doubtless talked to Wasim Akram and knows how attractive the inducements can be.
If, for any reason, South African Richard Snell decides to go back to his studies or doesn't ask for a renewed contract with Somerset, they could also be eyeing Aqib.
Add at least three more counties.
But back to Worcestershire, where Moody got two early Championship hundreds in a summer so far restricted for him by shin and ankle-ligament problems: where the worries over Dilley's Achilles tendon and knee won't go away; where Hick's form remains enigmatic; where left-hander Adam Seymour, the Millfield boy who switched from Essex — at appeared an astute and logical career move for him — has so far failed to make an impact on the banks of the Severn.
David ‘Syd’ Lawrence (above right, with England colleague and rival Devon Malcolm) is on the comeback trail after his serious knee injury
It is significant that Phil Weston, with his imposing England Under-19 cv, has turned up as an opener alongside Curtis.
This could be a rationale for the future.
His namesake, Martin, who made his debut in 1979 (the local joke is that he should acquire a dog-collar like secretary Rev. Mike Vockins, as Sunday is now his normal working day), is to get a joint benefit with Damian D'Oliveira next year.
There is to be a 1993 benefit, too, for Syd Lawrence.
The saga of his single-minded remedial schedule, following the serious kneecap injury in New Zealand, has been well documented.
He made his debut for Gloucestershire in 1981 and has taken more than 400 first-class wickets.
It has probably never entered his entered that his Test career could be over.
His willpower is quite inspirational.
‘I'll be back,’ he tells you as he sweats away on the treadmill or the mountain bike.
That doesn't mean just Gloucestershire.
I got a letter the other day from one of Syd's admirers.
‘The perfect solution for him is to do the same as Tom Goddard.
He started as a fast bowler and turned into a wonderful offspinner…
’ I won't put that to Syd just yet.
Knowing him, he is already keeping a few options open: polishing up his cover-drives and even experimenting, after watching Mushtaq, with legspinners and googlies.
Courtney Walsh is currently engaged on his benefit year.
As these notes are written, he is unwell.
But his form, in an often disappointing side with a fragile back-up, has at times been exceptional and kept him top of the national averages.
The overall batting, as skipper Tony Wright quickly acknowledges, has been far too scratchy.
One exception has been Dean Hodgson, a neat and conscientious opener who has been picking up where he left off the season before last.
The county's recruitment has been a disappointment in many ways.
Injury has also cruelly affected the progress of tall seamer Jason de la Pena at a time when he looked likely to stake his first-team claim.
Half-a-dozen younger players could be on the fringe before long.
One thinks of Matt Windows, whose father Tony played for Gloucestershire in the 1960s, and James Averis, an 18-year-old allrounder signed on a summer contract.
His father, well yes, is my sports editor on The Guardian .
Could it be yet another frustrating season for Warwickshire?
Not for Roger Twose, who has lost weight and gained stature after a successful winter in New Zealand — where his parents live — playing for Central Districts.
He pipped Richard Harden, Tom O'Gorman and Ricky Bartlett as CD's overseas player.
Back here, his chance at Edgbaston, where last season he was selected for only a couple of first-class fixtures, came because Dermot Reeve was injured.
He stayed in on merit after that.
Trevor Penney, the 24-year-old Zimbabwean who has completed his four-year qualification to play here, is now intent on trying to earn an extended run.
He got a hundred against Cambridge but has already discovered that sequels come hard.
Penney has been around enough, however, to demonstrate that he is a brilliant fielder and, as such, a most valuable one-day asset.
He's a scratch golfer, too, and plays everything from hockey to squash with much skill.
Meanwhile, Bob Woolmer has been easing in bowler Dougie Brown at Sunday League level.
The Scot has a briskish pace and doesn't need a particularly long run, as he proved the other week against Hampshire.
He accounted for Robin Smith, David Gower and Malcolm Marshall, the kind of trio whose dismissals must be good for any young bowler's morale.
Graeme Welch, 20, a Young England allrounder, is being tipped as one to watch.
As almost everyone in Wales seems to agree, this is a somewhat anticlimactic season for Glamorgan.
They have at times appears up to three short of a well-balanced team.
Mark Frost has gone back as a bowler, though of course he could come again.
The essentially one-day match contract for Chris Cowdrey is seen as rather ‘something or nothing’ in the words of a few Sophia punters.
The future of Viv Richards is uncertain.
Daren Foster, coming to the end of his present contract, and Steve Bastien are in effect competing for one place.
And one detects some shaking of heads over the committee's decision not to keep Mark Davies.
The Neath-born slow left-arm bowler is doing a sound job for Gloucestershire; but Glamorgan have been left without a bowler of that kind, though ex-Kent spinner Mark Dobson came on a trial period.
The most positive step has been Steve Barwick's final conversion to offcutters, very much in the style of his mentor Don Shepherd.
He had tried experimentally and not without success in the past, but was needed more often to revert to orthodox seam.
He turned in a performance to cherish against Surrey in the NatWest at Swansea, and the locals are still attempting to work out and why he didn't pocket the match award.
Barwick's intention is to stick with cutters.
That could give him an extended, and perhaps productive, life as a county cricketer.
Glamorgan, for their part, will need to recruit another new-ball man.
Sudesh Dhaniram may not quite fill that role but, in the spirit of this month's column, is possibly the name for the future.
He has been playing in the local Welsh leagues, has represented West Indies ‘B’ and is being keenly monitored by the county.
The season hasn't been kind to Somerset's Ricky Bartlett.
He lost his first-team place and then broke a finger when fielding for the 2nd XI.
Competition is going to be quite intense in the closing weeks of the season as Bob Cottam takes a look at one or two other players.
Bartlett's recall may be elusive, while the popular Roland Lefebvre is left pondering sadly on what might have been if he had not suffered that pre-season arm injury in a misplaced prank involving Sussex's Brad Donelan.
Ironically, the Somerset bowling hasn't quite lived up to the predictions.
Andy Caddick (‘He'll get a few 0 for 70s, that will be the real test of temperament,’ Cottam had said) maybe hasn't sustained the outstanding promise he showed at 2nd XI level last summer.
The coach found Caddick ‘technically adrift’ during a match at Lord's, and extra work was put in to rectify the faults.
It isn't known whether the South African Richard Snell will be back for a second year.
He has taken longer than expected to show some of the skills and pace expected.
In addition, the medium-paced Ken MacLeay is retiring.
Just as well that Neil Mallender is having an impressive season and that the towering Dutchman (yes, another!)
Andre van Troost is growing in technique and control, close to making his bid for a permanent place.
Captain controversial: Mark Nicholas ran into trouble with the Pakistan tourists at Southampton.
Another chapter for the memoirs…
Hampshire think they may lose up to a quarter of their membership when Dean Park goes after this season.
Some of the local faithful don't rule out a return —‘when three-day matches come back and there is a more fruitful relationship between the county and the owner of the ground’.
I don't share that optimism: the break, tacitly threatened over recent years, has been made.
Local magistrate Ron Turner, who arrives with his sandwich-box and has probably not missed a match since he first saw Hampshire at Dean Park in the 1930s, remembers Len Hutton's double-century and the various Championships decided there.
Remembers, too, phoning John Arlott's match reports to The Guardian .
‘I'd wait by the commentary-box and he'd always offer me a glass of wine, though I hardly ever touched the stuff.
It was a great honour dictating his copy.
The only trouble was that he never seemed to bother too much with punctuation — he apparently left that to me!’
This season I've seen Hampshire go to the top of the table and then stumble off again.
Their debacle against Essex, when the last eight wickets went down in the final 20 overs to Mark Ilott and John Childs, reflected a temperamental flaw that has repeatedly dogged the county.
And, yes, I saw the incident at Southampton, where Mark Nicholas was eventually given out to a disputed close catch and then brought back to the crease.
We wrote columns about it at the time and no two people appear to agree.
The language, I understand, was singularly ripe, not the kind Nicholas heard at Bradfield.
As a captain with literary leanings, he'll no doubt be saving his version for the eventual book of memoirs.
Hope he can spell ‘asterisk’…
LARGEST AND LONGEST
Rob Steen talks to Pakistan's first great batsman,
HANIF MOHAMMAD
IF THERE is now a certain swagger about the men — and boys — who wave the Pakistani flag, grit and jutting chins were once the order of the day.
No-one gritted or jutted better than Hanif Mohammad.
Time was when pace bowlers in Dacca and Hyderabad were about at thick on the ground as breweries; when those renowned speed merchants Asif Iqbal and Majid Khan propelled the new ball at Headingley; when the aim, above all, was to limit damage, not inflict it.
Nobody understood this better, nor did more to achieve fulfilment, than Hanif.
Hanif Mohammad: a first-class innings of 499 (run out) and a Test knock of 337 in 970 minutes
As a member of one of the founding families of the post-Partition Muslim state in Jinnah, he embodied the pride of a new people.
Mushtaq, one of his four cricketing brothers, remembers ‘a reserved young man, very selective with friends.
Cricket was his best friend.’
Hanif's Test debut, at 17, was Pakistan's too.
Only twice in their first 57 appearances did they take the stage without him.
Captain 11 times, he repaid them with 3915 runs, 12 centuries, an average of 43.98, and an adhesiveness more commonly found in tubes of Araldite.
This, though, is not why the game treasures the softly-spoken, bespectacled grandfather who served me tea in an Oxford Street flat the other week.
Hanif was responsible for both the largest and the longest individual innings in first-class history.
One, an innings of 499: the other, a knock which went on for the little matter of 970 minutes.
If the weight of figures — not to mention that of a young nation's hopes and dreams — threatened to submerge this crisp-cutting, inordinately patient, technically impeccable batsman, there was precious little to submerge.
At 5′ 6″ and 9 ¼ stone, Hanif was the slightest of all postwar Test leaders, beating Hassett by a hair's breadth.
If, at 57, he looks frailer than ever, a recent major intestinal operation is to blame.
He certainly keeps busy, editing a cricket magazine and running around as a sports manager for Pakistan International Airlines.
On the eve of the Lord's Test, though, he was relaxing, hoping son Shoaib would be recalled before he returned to Lahore, pausing every so often to throw a plastic ball at his bat-wielding, knee-high grandson.
The dynasty goes on, and on.
Wazir, Mushtaq and Sadiq wore the green cap too, while the injury-riddled Raees, in Hanif's estimation the most gifted of Mrs Mohammad's five boys, did so as 12th man.
Old Ma Grace had nothing on the lass from Junagadh.
First the 499 (compiled, cynics please note, at 48 runs an hour).
Bahawalpur, Hanif insists, were no pushovers.
Reigning Quaid-e-Azam champions, as it happens.
Yet the sense of having missed a once-on-a-lifetime boat remains acute.
The recollections are vivid.
If those boys in Karachi had found an 8 to hook on the scoreboard those 33 long winters ago, instead of rummaging fruitlessly about on all fours, the runs he sought on a misfield from the penultimate ball of the day would never have been attempted.
‘If I'd known my score was 4998 not 496 I might not have runs at all.’
But for that, the first entry in the Wisden records section would almost certainly have read 500.
Too perfect, and far too boring.
God intended it, he attests.
Barbados had witnessed a rather different Hanif a year earlier as he took out a 16-hour 10-minute lease on the crease and sculpted a monumental 337 against Worrell and Co.
‘My best shot,’ he remarks wryly, ‘was my concentration.’
Opening up shop after Pakistan had followed on 473 behind, he was still behind the counter at tea on the final day, ‘praying for success’ as he steered his side towards 657 for 8 dec, the highest Test total ever made under such circumstances.
Barring the nightly message of encouragement captain Kardar stuck to his bathroom mirror, there were no instructions from the skipper.
No need.
‘That last morning Eric Atkinson had bowled at me during practice.
That surprised everyone, because it wasn't felt appropriate to practise with the opposition when the match was still in the balance.
‘I've bowled to him for two days and I can't get him,’ he explained, ‘so I just want to loosen up.’
‘It was his brother, Dennis, who got me, right after it was announced I'd beaten Hammond's 336.
The pitch was never easy, and this ball pitched outside off, popped up, took the top of the blade and, I don't know how, but Alexander caught it.
He was standing up and he jumped so high.
By then I knew the match was saved, so I was happy, not disappointed.
But afterwards I felt…so few runs needed to beat Hutton.’
Garfield Sobers did the trick two matches later.
‘In the first hour we lost Mahmood Hussain with a hamstring injury and Nasim-ul-Ghani with a broken thumb, leaving us with three bowlers.
But Sobers is still my favourite cricketer.
He had everything.
He saw the ball a few seconds earlier than other batsmen.’
The Rock of Pakistan contented himself with keeping watch for that bit longer.
The key to progress?
RALPH DELLOR examines a fast-bowling study at Alsager College
SPECTATORS AT cricket grounds around the country were frequently perplexed last season.
Their puzzlement was not caused by the timing of declarations, the captain's decision not to bowl the left-arm spinner on a turning pitch, or by the fact that England started to win Test matches.
The cause of their mystification was the appearance of a strange-looking object positioned in the bowling crease just prior to the start of play, a star-shaped construction made up of black metal tubes radiating from a central point and festooned with little white balls at regular intervals along each arm.
‘That thing something to do with Sky then?’ was a frequently heard remark.
What appeared to be a grounded satellite was, in fact, part of the equipment being used by the Sports Science Unit from Alsager College in Cheshire.
Under the direction of the project assistant Nigel Stockill, the team is looking into the complex biomechanics of one of cricket's most compelling activities — fast bowling.
Curtly Ambrose: in the second and third figures the front knee tends towards hyper-extension
The structure in the bowling crease was used to co-ordinate two cameras which filmed bowlers from side-on and from directly behind the arm.
On cine-film at 200 frames per second there was little tolerance for imprecise recording, hence the need to get the angles and focus exact before the commencement of play.
Actual filming began once the bowler started his run-up, and continued until he had completed his followthrough.
The material was then taken back to the laboratory, where the real work was undertaken and is still going on.
The pictures from both cameras are projected onto a computer-sensitive screen and a painstaking frame-by-frame analysis takes place.
By detailing the position of each joint and other critical points on the body with a cursor, an exact scientific model of each action is produced as a stick figure by the computer.
Measurements can then be taken to establish exactly where pace is generated, where there are deficiencies in the action, and where excessive stress could result in injury.
Lancashire's Pakistani pace bowler Wasim Akram, for example had been found to generate some 15 to 20 mph from his wrist action alone.
In one frame his wrist is cocked back.
In the next, only two-hundredths of a second later, it has gone through the release.
AT the same time, he delivers the ball with his front (right) foot pointing straight down the pitch while the other foot trails back towards his bowling mark.
Merely to stand in such a position will give you some idea of the strain such a position exerts on the groin and accounts for the number of injuries Wasim has incurred in that region.
Wasim Akram: note the groin-wrenching stride in the second figure
Similarly, the Alsager team has discovered that some of the quickest bowlers, like Allan Donald of Warwickshire and South Africa, tend towards a hyper-extended knee as the front foot hits the ground.
In layman's terms, this means that the knee joint is slightly bent in a direction in which it is not intended to bend.
Imagine the stress that occurs when some 13½ stone is taken up on that joint at speed.
The pressure exerted on that front foot when it is brought down in the bowling action is something like 10 times the bodyweight.
It is not often that Britain can claim a first in the field of sports science, but this research is breaking new ground.
A library of side-on film has existed in Australia for quite some time, but this study is pioneering the development of the 3D image.
However, in a game which is notoriously tardy at accepting scientific method and new technology, the widespread application of findings by the Alsager team could be some time in coming.
This research, though, is not merely for academic purposes.
It is designed to benefit those who coach the game.
The material as already been viewed by county coaches, England manager Micky Stewart, and a number of NCA coaches.
They now have the opportunity to study the actions of top bowlers and relate the findings to youngsters who come under their care.
With so many fast bowlers now suffering serious injury at some stage in their careers, coaches might be able to make an early identification of potential problems and eradicate them from the action.
If a fundamental change in action proves impossible, it should at least be feasible to build up that part of the physique at greatest risk.
The most dramatic finding would be the discovery of characteristics common to the actions of all great fast bowlers, even though their actions appear to be totally individual.
But then coaches would be faces with an interesting dilemma.
What should a coach do if he encounters a boy who bowls with an action reminiscent of Mike Procter?
If he tries to change him into a Lillie or Hadlee, the boy might lose his greatest asset — to bowl successfully at pace.
Or could further research prove that the most efficient way to bowl quickly is with a Procteresque action?
That would result in a quick re-write of every know coaching manual.
David Lawrence: the bowling arm is never totally straight throughout the delivery
WHEN SPIN WAS KING
GEORGE TRIBE, Northants' long-ago Australian spinner with seemingly magic powers, is tracked down by Mark Browning
THE INFLUX of Australians into the English domestic cricket scene continues unabated, the difference between today and yesteryear being that in the late 1940s and early 1950s players made the 12,000 mile northern journey to take up contracts with league and county sides after falling out of favour with State and national selectors.
A series of excellent cricketers established top-notch reputations in this country, Bruce Dooland, Jack Walsh, Jock Livingston, Ken Grieves, and Bill Alley among them.
None made a greater impact during that period, however, than left-arm wrist-spinner George Tribe.
After three Test appearances during the 1946–47 Ashes series, Tribe played in the Lancashire leagues from 1947 to 1951 and for Northamptonshire between 1951 and 1959.
The Victorian was an integral part of a Northants revival which took them from 13th in the Championship table in 1951 to second place, behind the all-conquering Surrey combination, in 1957.
Dennis Brookes's team that year had a real Commonwealth feel to it.
There were three Australians, including Tribe, a New Zealander and a South African.
In fact, only one regular player had been born within the county boundaries.
Now aged 71, George Tribe enjoys an enviable lifestyle, spending summer in his home town, Melbourne, but taking his winters in the warmer confines of the Queensland Gold Coast.
He is still a keen follower of cricket and has an active interest in North Melbourne Cricket Club, with whom he has an association stretching back over 50 years.
Tribe looks back on his time in England with a sense of practicality, interlaced with many fond memories, some of which he hopes to rekindle if his plans for a visit next year come to fruition.
George Tribe bowls to Bill Edrich at Sydney during the 1946–47 Ashes series.
Tribe's three appearances in that rubber constituted his entire Test career
‘It was a lot of hard work being a county professional,’ he says.
‘I hardly missed a game in eight years, and, to be honest, on one or two occasions it got boring.
The travelling too was very difficult, all over the country by car or coach.
There wasn't much of a home life in that time.
When I gave it away I believe I was still playing well enough to continue for a few more years, but I had had enough, and it was time to consider the family.
‘The people involved were wonderful though.
I made a lot of very good friends.
There were few players who were not complete gentlemen.
They all abided by the umpire's decision, whichever way it went.
‘Walking’ was an unwritten law.
‘And although all the travelling was tiresome, I played on some lovely grounds and got to visit many interesting places.
All cricketers love to go to England.
It is the home of the game and I was lucky enough to be able to mix cricket with my engineering work.
I received a good deal from Northants, including a testimonial after just five years.
‘Some of the characters were special, too.
Alex Skelding was a great fellow.
He had thick glasses and his hearing was not too good towards the end of his umpiring days.
They said that he awarded his decisions according to the spontaneity of an appeal.
It may seem strange but because of the attitudes then, that never caused any trouble.
‘One of my strongest memories is of my last match at Lord's.
In our first innings I had a last-wicket partnership with Mal Dilley.
We put on a few and I knew I was finishing, so I thought I would try to go out with a bang by breaking the pavilion window in the Long Room.
Fred Titmus bowled the right sort of ball and I smashed it in the direction of the pavilion.
It came right off the middle and sailed over the fence, but it landed short of the window, hit a railing and bounced away.
It was a great shot, funnily enough, but I was disappointed because I failed in my attempt to create history in my last match at Lord's!’
George Tribe (left) meets up with old Northants team-mate Frank Tyson during a recent visit to England.
Both are now normally resident in Victoria, Tribe spending some of the Australian winter on Queensland's Gold Coast
Tribe picked up some astonishing returns during his stint with Northants.
In 1955 he took 175 wickets, which is still a club record.
Against Yorkshire that year he had match figures of 15 for 75 and three years later claimed an even more remarkable 15 for 31 against the same side.
It was the era of ‘natural’ pitches.
Quality bowlers, and some more moderately proficient, regularly reaped a generous reward.
‘Pitches were uncovered than and we played on quite a few tracks that were damp,’ Tribe says.
‘I was able to get plenty of turn on those.
In England, though, you play under all sorts of conditions.
For example, Northampton was a bit slow.
The Oval was a good cricket wicket despite the stories that it was being prepared for Laker and Lock.
I always enjoyed it there.
We had some tight contests in front of big crowds.
‘Usually, south of the Trent it was better for batting.
The pitch at Northampton, where I got that 15 for 31, was not damp.
It had been a wet summer, but this one, in early July, was quite dry and firm.
‘I seemed to have plenty of success when playing Yorkshire.
They didn't use their feet much and didn't handle my style of bowling very well.
One after another they would keep making mistakes.
But the pitch was wet when I picked up a swag against them at Bradford.
It had a notorious reputation once the rain got on it.
‘I found most English players were creasebound anyway.
It was the same in the 1946–47 Test series.
Denis Compton was the exception.
He was totally unpredicatable and unorthodox, a genius.
I got him a couple of times but he was one of the best I ever bowled to.
‘Len Hutton, of course, was a fine technician.
Generally, though, I did not concern myself with a batsman's standing.
The next one in was always the one to worry about, not the player walking back to the dressing-room.’
Tribe had encountered both these  champions during his brief Test career.
He had a lean time, claiming only two wickets altogether in Brisbane and the two Sydney Tests.
Yet he views that season as the highlight of his career.
‘It was a great time,’ Tribe says.
‘Everyone was so excited about the resumption of Test cricket after the war.
It was all people talked about everywhere.
And it was about the only thing they had to talk about, too.
The world was not the global village we are used to today.
With petrol rationing and all the post-war hardships cricket was the main summer interest.
‘Those days Australia were so strong that once you were out of the team it was extremely difficult to get back in.
In the Tests I played I dropped three caught-and-bowleds and Don Tallon missed a chance behind as well.
My figures could easily have been much better.
‘I found Bradman to be a marvellous captain.
Tactically he was superb and he knew how to handle his bowlers.
He told me, before I first went to England in 1947, to make sure I came back for the next Australian season so that I would be eligible for selection for the '48 tour.
I tried to return but couldn't because of continuing transport restrictions.
I turned out for North Melbourne in 1948–49, but for some reason was not selected for Victoria.
That was the last time I played in Australia.’
Years later, 1948 tourist Doug Ring, speaking at a dinner, thanked George Tribe for not making it back for that crucial pre-tour season.
Legspinner Ring believed he owed his place to Tribe's absence.
Two Commonwealth tours of India and Pakistan in 1949–50 and 1950–51 were his only further forays of significance into international company.
He had a fine time on the subcontinent, taking a total of 175 wickets over the two visits.
However, the side's leading bowler flatly refutes the story attributed to him that he physically coerced an umpire into granting an lbw decision during a match involving the Maharajah of Patiala.
‘In fact exactly the opposite occurred,’ Tribe explains.
‘We were trying to keep the Maharajah in for a while.
Then he edged a ball into his pad and someone made a stifled appeal.
To our surprise the umpire fired him out straight away.
He certainly did not need any encouragement.’
Large hands
At 5′ 7″, Tribe was hardly a size to threaten anyone.
He is blessed, though, with large hands which assisted him with the amount of spin he could impart on a cricket ball.
‘The size of my hands probably did help me to give the ball a real tweak and to develop variety in my bowling,’ Tribe says.
‘But it was not all-important.
Sonny Ramadhin could turn it.
He had small hands, but his wrist was flexible, so that was his advantage.
‘It is more difficult for spinners to grip the ball today because it does not get scuffed like it used to.
There were no such things as sprinkler systems then to get the outfields green and lush.
Water was scarce.
You had to be careful with it, so the outfields were rougher and dryer.
Now, the ball seems to retain its shine and the fast bowlers can use it for lengthier periods.’
Tribe's grip on an Australian football was not bad either.
He could get enough purchase to be selected for 68 first-grade VFL matches with Footscray around the war years.
He was, in fact, one of five first-grade Australian footballers in the Victorian post-war cricket team.
In addition to all the wickets, Tribe passed 1000 runs seven times for Northants.
He was recognised as a Wisden Cricketer of the Year in 1955.
There was a sprinkling of centuries too.
Yet, he is not sure all his countrymen benefit similarly from committing themselves to becoming fulltime professionals in the northern summer: ‘There is a danger if fast bowlers go over when they are too young,’ Tribe says.
‘A couple have broken down with back injuries and never fully reestablished themselves.
It can be tough in England.
The young fellows are left alone to play cricket six days a week.
There may be better ways to prepare our up-and-coming fast bowlers.
‘But there is a great deal to be learnt and a number of players like Border, the Waugh brothers, Greg Chappell and Tom Moody really gained a great deal from playing county cricket.’
Cricket is taken too seriously
Say distinguished former county cricketer and rugby international PETER CRANMER, in conversation with David Bennett
PETER CRANMER, who captained England at rugby and Warwickshire at cricket, is showing the same courage and cheerfulness to ill-health as he displayed during his distinguished sporting career.
The second-youngest England rugby captain, Cranmer served Warwickshire CCC for over 50 years as player and committeeman.
Earlier this year he had both legs amputated, and is now a resident of a nursing-home in Peacehaven, near Brighton.
Cranmer, who will be 78 on September 10, is mentally alert and avidly follows the fortunes of his beloved Warwickshire through the newspapers.
Appropriately we discussed his halcyon days on the eve of the Edgbaston Test when Sussex were playing Warwickshire in a Championship match at Hove.
The two counties also happened to be playing a 2nd XI match at Stratford, where Cranmer made both his first and last appearance as a Warwickshire 2nd XI player.
No Blue
He failed to win a cricket Blue at Oxford.
But the university authorities agreed to rearrange an examination to allow him to play in a Varsity rugby match at Twickenham.
However, his preference for cricket over his academic studies resulted in his leaving Oxford early.
In 1934 he made his Warwickshire debut, and quickly caught the eye as a hard-hitting middle-order batsman.
Off the fifth ball he received in first-class cricket Cranmer carted Reg Sinfield for six at Gloucester.
A maiden century against Northants at Edgbaston and his county cap soon followed.
On the rugby field (he gained 16 England caps) he was a centre for Moseley before moving to Richmond.
Pre-war employment by a Birmingham stockbroker (George Stephens, a former Warwickshire cricket captain) allowed Cranmer to maintain his amateur status.
Warwickshire were not, as he admits, among the strongest counties at the beginning of his career.
According to the 1939 Wisden the county were criticised for ‘dull and uninteresting cricket’.
In 1938 Cranmer was asked to take over the captaincy from Bob Wyatt.
Even now he says he was surprised by the appointment, which caused him to make himself unavailable for the British Lions' tour of South Africa.
‘I had no regrets about missing the tour,’ Cranmer explains, ‘as both the centres were injured in the first two matches.
That was the only time when the two sports clashed, although I did once play in the final of the Twickenham Sevens on a Saturday and a Freshman's cricket trial two days later.
‘I certainly didn't expect the Warwickshire captaincy, as Bob was a very good skipper as well as being a very nice chap.
He was never told why he lost his captaincy and I can only think that the committee felt that a more adventurous approach was needed.
‘Bob was very helpful when he played under men and gave me a lot of helpful advice, especially after Middlesex had scored 120 for 0 against use before lunch on my first day in charge!’
As he did on his two appearances as England's rugby captain, Cranmer led from the front.
His bold declarations and willingness to attempt a task, however, great, said Wisden , did much to change the state of affairs at Edgbaston.
So, too, did his vigorous hitting, which also turned the course of many a game, while his energy in the field was a great example.
Peter Cranmer: captained England at rugby wad Warwickshire at cricket
Cranmer's cheerful nature made him one of the most popular captains on the county circuit.
His unselfish approach was illustrated by his declaration in Warwickshire's second innings when he was two short of a century against Sussex at Hove in 1938.
Undoubtedly Cranmer will be best remembered for his part in Prince Obolensky's historic try against the 1936 All Blacks at Twickenham: ‘I'll never forget that break which started from a line-out.
But looking at some still pictures of it I reckon I made a mistake early on which could have denied ‘Obbo’ of scoring a more orthodox try.
I was going towards the North Stand and got as far as the All-Blacks' 10-yard line.
Looking to my right there seemed to be a black jersey intervening.
‘However, after looking at the still pictures I realised that Gerrard and Obolensky were in excellent positions for the pass to the right.
So, technically, I made a mistake in passing inside to my left to Candler.
‘Oddly enough the selectors only told me shortly before the match that they wanted me to play left centre so that‘Obbo’ could get some of the ball,’Cranmer reminisced.
In the cricket world Cranmer regards his part in reviving Warwickshire cricket after the Second World War as his greatest achievement.
He captain the county for two more seasons as an amateur before concentrating on his job with the then chairman of Warwickshire's selection committee Alec Hastilow's paint-manufacturing company.
‘Virtually anyone who had some flannels was in contention for a first-team place as Eric Hollies, Tom Dollery, Ken Taylor, Bill Fantham and myself were the only prewar survivors.
In fact I still remember ‘Tiger Smith’ coming into our dressing-room while I was giving a pre-season captain's talk and asking him who the hell he was.
We became great mates after that.
Most of our players came from the leagues and clubs.
Everyone was delighted to play again and all matches attracted big crowds.’
No rugby
Cranmer played no rugby after the war, and apart from a handful of matches during his two months in India he played no cricket during the hostilities.
The war curtailed his career and helps explain his somewhat modest career record of 5595 runs and 22 wickets with his occasional medium-pacers.
Perhaps Cranmer's most exciting inning was his 90-minute century against the South Africans at Edgbaston in 1947.
Modestly he described the attack was ‘second-string’, even though it included Ossie Dawson and Tufty Mann.
He also pointed out that Dudley Nourse dropped him twice; but his knock helped calm the nerves of a youthful Peter West, who was making his debut as a radio commentator.
Cranmer continued to play infrequently for three years after giving up the captaincy, and deeply regrets the passing of the amateur in today's game.
‘We amateurs had a lot of fun with the pros.
They accepted us as long as we looked after their money and invested it.
‘The main difference between cricket and rugby now is that they're both more competitive, which means they're taken too seriously.
I'd certainly like to have played one-day cricket, as I always got on with it.
‘Cup rugby would also have appealed to me, but I'm not so sure that I would have been so enthusiastic about playing in a league,’ Cranmer says.
After retiring, he became a radio commentator on cricket and rugby and also wrote about both sports for Sunday newspapers.
As a commentator he achieved an  international double by being behind the microphone for two Test matches and one rugby international.
In the late 1960s he came out of retirement to skipper Warwickshire 2nd XI.
Cranmer finally hung up his boots in the early 1970s, when his journalistic work and broadcasting also ended.
A stroke in 1976 started his health problems, and five years ago he moved to Sussex.
Despite being restricted to a wheelchair he retains his cheerfulness and was always at Hove when Sussex played Warwickshire.
Parties for the Warwickshire team at Cranmer's Saltdean bungalow on one of the evenings after the close of play became a tradition.
That there was no such party this year was not through lack of determination on Cranmer's part.
But during our conversation even he was forced to concede that besides being unable to entertain he would also have to follow events at Hove and Edgbaston over the next few days through newspapers and television.
The Old Stager says…
Basil Banks eavesdrops on one of club cricket's self-styled experts
‘Oh, bad luck!’ called out the Captain, as the Smallholder was caught and bowled.
It had been one of our opener's better days, and he had manoeuvred his way to a total of 10 runs.
His departure left us on the not very charismatic score of 69 for 6.
The Dene Willoughby players looked cock-a-hoop.
‘No bad luck abaht it,’ observed the Old Stager tartly.
‘It was bahnd to 'appen, playing forward defensively to balls well up.
'E makes isself vulnerable.
Yer should tear 'im orf a strip,’ he admonished the Captain.
‘No, no — I think that would only destroy his confidence,’ replied the Captain.
‘Confidence!
What confidence, fer Gawd's sake? 'E ain't got the confidence iver to 'it a ball further than silly point.
I seen 'im look very confident at the non-striker's end, I grant yer, but that 'asn't won too many matches as I knows of.
Yer should give 'im a good talking to, if yer want my opinion.’
The Captain fairly obviously didn't want it, but restricted himself to a wry grin.
The Smallholder arrived back among his companions and slowly divested himself of his pads.
‘Oi were a bit rahsh there,’ he announced after a minute.
‘Yer made yerself vulnerable,’ said the Old Stager irritably.
‘Oi were a little on the rahsh soide,’ continued the Smallholder, ignoring his critic.
‘That's what comes o' 'avin' built a ninnin's ahnd reachin' double figures.
If you're not careful, you can get a bit woild.’
‘Yer wasn't rash.
yer just didn't get yer left arm forrard.
‘That's what yer left arm's for,’ as Andy Sandham used to say.’
‘Me left harm!’ responded the Smallholder deliberately.
‘Oi'd be pleased if you leave moy left harm hout o' it.
‘Ooever said Bill Lawry didn't use 'is left harm proper?’
As the logic of this last sally passed everybody by, the subject was dropped.
As usual, it was the Old Stager who broke the ensuring silence.
‘I must say it again,’ he expostulated, addressing the Captain.
‘Yer too lenient with iverybody.
Too indulgient by far.
I tell yer straight.
Yer let people cry of games for no good reason, 'cept that somebody close to 'em says they can't, and yer tolerate bad behaviour.’
The Old Stager was on to a theme which he had clearly been bottling up all season.
‘Why, I distinc'ly 'eard one of o' yer men swear after an umpire's decision.’
‘A moment's hot-headedness,’ suggested the Captain.
‘That's not good enough,’ persisted the Old Stager hotly.
‘I can't stand bloody swearing.
It demeanours the game.’
‘I think we work as a team pretty well,’ put in the Computer Programmer.
‘One rotten apple can soon make a basket o' maggots, lad,’ said the Old Stager crisply.
‘Jist you remember what 'appened ter Bobby Peel.’
‘Is that the 'unting geyser what woke everybody up?’ asked the Van Boy innocently?
‘Nah!’ exploded the Old Stager, who never failed to rise to the Van Boy's bait.
‘Bobby Peel was one o' the greatest bowlers England iver produced.
Not a Surrey man, but by Gawd 'e was wily.’
‘What happened to him then?’ asked the Computer Programmer.
‘I'll tell yer.
Played for Yorkshire, 'e did.
Reg'lar as clockwork.
Then turned up one morning drunk as a lord.
And Lord 'Awke, the captain — well, 'e was a lord as wasn't drunk as a…anyways, 'e turns round and says, ‘Peel, yer orft.’
And 'e niver played another day's cricket for England for Yorkshire.
No indulgience there, yer see.
And jist look 'ow orften Yorkshire won the Championship arter that.’
‘And you saw all this happen?’ enquired the Baptist Minister's Son.
‘Nah, lad.
It were in the 1890s.
Me dad told me all abaht it.’
The thought of the Old Stager having a father kept everyone silent for a moment.
‘Yer niver knew me dad, did yer?’
With a certain degree of mental thankfulness, the players indicated their deprivation in this respect.
‘No, well, if 'e was still alive, 'e'd be 119 next month.’
‘Remarkable!’ the Computer Programmer heard himself say.
‘But 'e died in 1937.’
‘Coronation year, wasn't it — of George the Sixth?’ asked the Captain respectfully.
‘I don't rightly know abaht that.
But it was jist arter Andy Sandham scored 'is last double-century.
‘What did 'e get, son?’ 'e says with 'is dying breath.
‘239, dad,’ I says, reverend-like. 'E smiles and I folds 'is 'ands acrorst 'is stomich.’
‘He went peacefully, then.’
‘If yer call 239 peacefully.
Agin Glamorgan, it was.’
There were those present who later swore that the Old Stager wiped a glistening something from the corner of one eye.
But if so, he soon recovered.
‘Me dad told me that story abaht Bobby Peel as a lesson.
And I niver let either o' 'em down — me dad or Andy Sandham — from that day to this…
Mr Jardine was another 'oo insisted on the 'ighest standards.’
‘A Surrey man, o' course,’ commented the Van Boy.
‘E was, as it 'appens, boy.
Captain o' Surrey and England.
Won the Ashes back, as yer know.
No messin' abaht with 'im.
‘E'd tell 'em straight if be'aviour wasn't to 'is liking…nah, it's sad, innit, that so many 'ave lorst the art 'o being constructively critical withaht being disliked.’
DEAR DIARY
JONATHAN RICE explores cricket in some unconventional places.
Here are his personal diary entries from a hectic week
JUNE 14: Today I was selected to play for Heartaches CC (prop: T. Rice) against the might of J.P.
Getty's XI, at Mr Getty's magnificent new ground at Wormsley.
The day was hot, the organisation excellent, the cricket generally of high quality, and the showers of the pavilion worked.
The Heartaches fielded three slow left-arm bowlers (Messrs Rice, T., Rice J. and Edmonds P.H.), and of course, Mr Edmonds was the last of the trio to get a bowl.
I was not quite sure about the pitch.
There seemed to be quite a lot of turn from the end where Philippe was bowling but at my end there seemed to be no life at all.
Just can't understand it.
Anyway, we won despite my failing to add to my vast 1992 tally of wickets.
I also failed to complete my 1000 runs for the season as I clocked up yet another ‘did not bat’ when only 968 runs short.
This did, however, enable me to test Mr Getty's hospitality to the full during the latter part of the day, and I can confirm it is as fulsome as previous Press reports have indicated.
Phil Edmonds encounters some resistance as he prepares for his first-class comeback
JUNE 15: Today I was elected to play for Goodwin Sands CC.
The day was hot, the organisation (by the Goodwin Sands Potholing Club) excellent, and the cricket of generally abysmal quality.
The pitch was not, it must be admitted, of as high a standard as Wormsley.
It was entirely grassless and a little soft underfoot, and it sloped rather badly down towards the sea by the midwicket boundary.
The facilities were excellent however.
It is certainly the only time I have played at a ground with a hovercraft as a pavilion.
It was also unusual to have the batsman complain about seals swimming behind the bowler's arm, but at least this allowed us to stop for drinks even more often than we had done the day before.
By the time we reboarded the pavilion, after barely an hour's play, in deference to the rising tide, we had probably soaked up more liquid than the pitch.
JUNE 16: Today I visited the Department of Trade and Industry, where I had the opportunity to pick up a copy of The Personal Protective Equipment Directive (Directive 89/686/EEC), which as a every single-market fan will know, cam into force on July 1, 1992.
The cover of the directive features a cricketer in full protective kit, so I knew at once I had better find out what it was all about.
It made remarkable reading.
Did you know that your EC-approved pads must be ‘as light as possible without prejudicing design strength and efficiency’(sub-section 1.3.2), or that your box ‘must be so designed and manufactured as to facilitate correct positioning on the user and to remain in place for the foreseeable period of use, bearing in mind ambient factors, movements to be made and postures to be adopted.
For this purpose it must be possible to optimise ppe adaptation to user morphology by all appropriate means.’
What is more, information on the product included in the packaging ‘must be precise and comprehensible,(and) must be provided at least in the official language(s) of the Member States of destination.’
Across the 30 pages of the booklet are details of ‘ppe for use in a very dangerous situation’(e.g. facing Waqar Younis), ‘ppe which may be caught up during use’(which requires the equipment to have an ‘appropriate resistance threshold above which a constituent part will break and eliminate the danger’.
Is an arm or a nose a constituent part?), and ‘ppe for use in explosive atmospheres’(sub-section 2.6) such as the TCCB AGM.
No wonder Denmark signalled its dissatisfaction with Maastricht and all it stands for if a batsman needs 10,000 words of multi-lingual explanation before he is allowed to take guard.
JUNE 18: Today I went to Lord's for the Test match.
The main topic of conversation was not which England players are playing their last Test, but which is the most useless advertisement around the ground, now that Durox Supablocs of blessed memory seem to have faded back into the mists of uncertainty from whence they came.
After much discussion, it was deemed that ‘Relocate Your Business In Newport Gwent’ was about as wasted a message as it was possible to buy.
By June 21, we had changed our minds.
If most of the England team were to relocate their business in Newport Gwent, we might win the next Test at Old Trafford, Lancs.
Alex Stewart is the honourable exception.
After years as a good county player, he is suddenly timing the ball and shaping his shots with the elegance and effectiveness of a Graveney or a Gower.
Long may it last.
JUNE 19: Today the weather was not quite as good, but there was an interesting morning's play.
Salisbury looks good enough to stay for a while, although he briefly gives Sussex once again two players with three initials who have each played for England only once, the other being A.C.S. Pigott.
Last season there were also two one-cap players at Sussex, by P.W.G. Parker has now moved to Durham (who incidentally now regularly field a Smith, a Brown and a Jones in the same side: truly a classless county).
JUNE 20: Today I was selected to play for the village.
It was very windy and one of the new sightscreens had blown over, destroying an ornamental cherry tree.
Now we know that gale-force winds in the Channel can topple sightscreens, we must put them upwind of the pavilion this winter, and build a new pavilion out of the insurance claim when they crash through the roof.
A quiet draw: but a good tea.
JUNE 21: Today England lost the second Test match.
Spent the afternoon watching youngest son's team holding out for a draw while rushing to and from the car to get the latest score from Lord's.
Son batted at least as well as Miandad and Mujtaba, and lasted longer than Malcolm or Ramiz, but it has to be admitted that with a fifth day available, his team would have lost as surely as England did.
Got home in time to watch the last couple of overs on the television, but then discovered that the highlights were not on TV until 1am.
And so to bed.
QUICK QUIZ
WHO HAS recorded the best innings bowling analysis in Tests at the following grounds?
(a)
Brisbane
(b)
Edgbaston
(c)
Headingley
(d)
Lord's
(e)
Melbourne
(f)
Old Trafford
(g)
Perth
(h)
The Oval
(i)
Sydney
(j)
Trent Bridge
Cricket and the Olympics
PHILIP BARKER looks at the on-off connections
WHEN King Juan Carlos declares the Olympic Games open in Barcelona on July 25 they will be the biggest sporting festival the world has ever seen, with over 160 countries meeting in 25 sports.
There will be demonstrations in roller hockey and pelota basque, but there's no place for cricket.
As the Olympic movement races towards the centenary of its formation at the Sorbonne in 1894 it's hard to believe cricket was once an Olympic sport.
Baron Pierre de Coubertin, French nobleman and founder of the Modern Olympics, was a great admirer of the British way of doing things, especially in sport.
He visited English public schools like Rugby, learning about the Victorian values of Muscular Christianity, which he wanted to see embodied in his Olympic Games.
Although there is no direct evidence that the Baron saw cricket on his visits, he must have been well aware of its traditions of Play Up and Play the Game.
Handbill for the 1900 Olympic match
One of de Coubertin's first steps in reviving the Games was the foundation of the International Olympic Committee.
The IOC owed much to other exclusive sporting clubs like MCC.
Admission was by invitation only, members including princes and dukes.
The first Olympic Games of the Modern Era were held in Athens in 1896, and the official report details special committees for Athletic Games (Lawn Tennis and Cricket etc).
There weren't sufficient entries to make a tournament viable in Athens, but cricket was on the programme four years later.
The Olympics then were a far cry from the slick, superbly marketed spectacle of today.
In fact the sporting contests were no more a part of a Grand Exposition and World's Fair.
The word Olympic was never used, and the contests dragged on throughout the summer and autumn.
There were also competitions in golf, football, rugby and angling.
Internecine warfare between the various sports governing bodies in France blighted the organisation of the vents, and de Coubertin himself was far from happy.
The grandiose scale of events projected by the pre-event publicity was a far cry from reality.
The Olympic Cricket Tournament was a case in point, originally meant to include Belgium and Holland.
Neither was able to raise a team.
As a result the Dutch had to wait until another Olympic year (1964) for their finest hour, victory over Bobby Simpson's Australians.
Although Australia remain one of the few countries to have taken part in every Summer Olympiad (Greece, Switzerland and Great Britain are the others), they did not bring a cricket team to Paris.
It was left to England and, of all countries, France to enter.
The French team was a scratch combination which included players from the Albion Cricket Club, a sporting club for expatriates living in Paris which still flourishes two years after its centenary.
The SAC had won the Football Championship of France, but its cricketers had names like Robinson, Browning, Jordan and McEvoy.
The latter two were on a nine-man organising committee along with Philip Tomalin, who, as cricket chairman of the French Sports Federation and captain of the SAC, had a major role in setting up the game.
The England team had a few players who were later to play first-class cricket, and were brought together by one W.S. Donne, who, if he didn't enjoy great success on the Olympic playing field, achieved eminence in Rugby Union, elected president of the RFU in 1923–24.
Most of them came fro Blundell's School and Castle Cary CC in Somerset, and they were styled the Devon &Somerset County Wanderers.
There were no Test cricketers in the England team although 1900 was a relatively quiet year, with only a fledgling West indian team as tourists to these shores.
On the mid-August weekend, when the Olympic match took place, Hirst and Rhodes took seven wickets between them at Taunton as Yorkshire took a firm grip on their match with Somerset.
Perhaps it was as well for the peace of mind of the Somerset-based players in the Olympic team that details of the County Championship would have been hard to come by in Paris.
W.G. Grace was taking part in a match for London County against Warwickshire, opening the batting with W.L. Murdoch and playing in a fashion which reminded contemporary reporters of his heyday, and C.B. Fry was scoring a century for Sussex.
He could have become an Olympic long-jump champion, as he'd once broken the world record.
M. Denny, one of the organising committee, had arranged for the Olympic cricket match to be played at the Velodrome de Vincennes, still in use today.
The banked cycling track formed one of cricket's more unusual boundaries.
Not that there were too many of those in the match.
The weekly magazine La Vie Au Grand Air had become the official publication of the 1900 Games.
It noted: ‘Cricket is not widely known in France,’ and talked of ‘this sport which appears monotonous and without colour to the uninitiated’.
The magazine also described the pitch as ‘dans très bon état’.
The ‘England’ team had travelled across the Channel the day before.
The match itself was 12-a-side, the decision to make it so taken late in the day.
The extra name was written by hand on the scorecard, which cost 10 centimes but didn't disclaim responsibility for the last wicket to fall!
That scorecard and a poster were brought back to England by team member John Symes, who kept a diary of the match.
He scored 15 and 1, but he was clearly a man with an eye for posterity.
Australian Test batsman Brian Booth represented his country at hockey in the 1956 Olympic Games at Melbourne
The English team batted first and mustered 117, thanks mainly to C.B.K. Beachcroft, the Exeter opening batsman who made 23, and F.W. Cuming, who top-scored  with 38.
When the French batted they could muster only 78 in the first innings.
The second day, a Monday, saw the English team set a target of 185 to win, which was quite beyond the Frenchmen, who crashed to 26 all out.
La Vie Au Grand Air at least understood the goings-on enough to describe runs as courses and wickets as guichets .
The official report of the Games described the scores only in terms of points .
But it was not a match for the batteurs .
Anderson top-scored in the second innings with 8.
Montague Toller, a regular with Devon who had played for Somerset in 1897, took 7 for 10, and the other four wickets were taken by Bowlesland at a cost of 15.
The score of the match was reported in Cricket: A Weekly Record and in the local newspapers.
Blundell's School magazine later observed: ‘Parisian cricket is not of the Comic Opera kind one would expect…we dreamt of French demon bowlers with pro-Boer tendencies hurling at us on bumpy wickets.’
(Britain was still engaged in the war in South Africa.)
‘We found the French temperament is too excitable to enjoy the game and no Frenchman can be persuaded to play more than once.’
England captain J.W.H.T. Douglas: 1908 Olympic middleweight boxing champion
Essex offspinner David Acfield wielded the sabre at the 1968 and 1972 games
The fact that most of the players in the Olympic match were from England seems to have borne this out, and our Blundellian correspondent sadly reflects: ‘A cricketer in France is a stranger in a strange land looked upon with mingled awe and contempt by the average Frenchman.’
The 1900 Olympics were not ratified by the IOC until 1912 (ironically the year of the ill-fated Triangular Tournament, first-class cricket's first attempt at an international tournament).
Many of the players in the Olympic cricket match weren't even aware that they'd taken part in the Olympic Games at all.
They certainly didn't get medals.
The prizes advertised in 1900 had been objets d'art.
The Olympic cricket match was the only time the sport has actually been played at the Olympics, but an England Test captain.
J.W.H.T. Douglas, became the first Test cricketer to win an Olympic title when he took the middleweight crown, beating the Australian R.L. ‘Snowy’ Baker, in 1908, three years before captaining England on their tour of Australia.
Alistair MacCorquodale reached an Olympic track final in 1948.
He played for Middlesex in the 1950s, but in the heyday of Compton and Edrich he was forging an international reputation a few miles away from Lords, at Wembley.
There was no disgrace in finishing fourth in the Olympic 100m final, won that year by Harrison Dillard.
Over half-a-century after Douglas, David Acfield, also of Essex, took part in another combat sport at the Mexico Olympics.
He was a member of the sable team and was also selected for the tragic Munich Games.
With South Africa back in the international fold, maybe Jonty Rhodes will find he can take the Centenary Olympics by storm in his other sport, hockey.
Olympic hockey has often been linked with cricket, hardly surprising as both Lord's and The Oval staged pre-Olympic hockey matches in the days prior to artificial turf.
Hockey didn't become part of the Olympics until the London Games of 1908, but then Reg Pridmore, who played county cricket for Warwickshire, top-scored for the English team which won gold.
Pridmore did not survive the Great War.
After the First World War Great Britain again struck hockey gold, their side including C.T.A. Wilkinson, who was captain of Surrey when Percy Fender made his debut.
By 1932 India were the touring team to England.
Across the Atlantic, the Indian hockey team was in its pomp, winning the hockey tournament at the Los Angeles Olympics, and dominated hockey for the best part of the next 40 years.
The hockey class of '32 were no mean cricketers, taking on and beating the Santa Monica Cricket Club in a picnic game after the Olympics.
In 1956 Brian Booth wore the green-and-gold at the Melbourne Olympics.
Later to play 29 Test matches for Australia in the mid-1960s.
Booth had his Test exploits as consolation for missing out on an Olympic medal in hockey.
Dr Ric Charlesworth also missed out on a medal at his farewell Olympics as Australia finished fourth in Seoul four years ago.
He had claimed a silver at the Montreal Olympics in 1976 and later that winter helped Western Australia add to their tally of Sheffield Shield triumphs.
Charlesworth hit a fighting half-century against MCC in the run-up to the Centenary Test in 1977.
Scorecard from the 1900 Olympic final
It's appropriate to end this review of cricketing Olympians with Australia, for the Australians staged the only Olympics to be held on a first-class cricket ground.
The 1956 Olympics at the MCG were opened by a president of MCC, Prince Philip, and were dominated by the likes of Kuts, Cuthbert, Devitt and Fraser.
But there were many Australians and Englishmen for whom the Olympic year of 1956 meant Laker.
Now the Australians are bidding for the Olympics in the year 2000, the plan being to hoist the Olympic rings at the SCG.
What price seeing some cricket at the Olympics?
The IOC rules require the game to be played in 50 countries and three continents to qualify for Olympic status.
The last ICC Trophy had only 17 teams, and the shift is in any case away from team sports.
But wouldn't it be great to see an Olympic comeback for cricket, if only to honour those Olympians of long ago, the Devon &Somerset County Wanderers?
A question of age
RALPH DELLOR'S Minor County round-up
THE CRIES were heard again at Edgbaston during the first Test.
‘He must be more than 17,’ they all said of Pakistan's latest teenage prodigy, Ata-ur-Rehman.
He might look 17 going on 23 but, even if he turns out to be nearly as old as he appears, it will not render the three wickets he took on his debut as void.
Ask Messrs Stewart, Ramprakash and Lamb.
Were, I wonder, those same cries heard in the West Country back in 1969 when a 13-year-old made his Minor Counties debut for Somerset IIs?
Peter Roebuck might not have looked 13 in 1969, but then he could well be taken for less than his 36 years now.
Certainly there appears to be an eternal youth about his batting, a fact to which the Herefordshire bowlers will bear witness following his innings of 137 against them in the Western Division of the Minor Counties Championship.
After retiring from first-class cricket at the end of last season, the former Somerset captain has re-emerged in Minor Counties cricket with Devon.
He made his debut in the Holt Cup quarter-final against Wiltshire.
Devon won by 73 runs, and Roebuck contributed a mere 6 towards that margin of victory before being run out.
He was in the side which beat Norfolk by just one run in the semi-final to go through to the Lord's final on Aug 26.
The other semi-final was a much more straightforward affair, with Staffordshire demolishing Buckinghamshire by 148 runs at Walsall.
The final will be a repeat of last year, although Devon will be hoping it does not bear an exact comparison.
Staffordshire won by four wickets with a ball to spare.
Staffordshire were also the Minor County champions in 1991, but after three matches in 1992 they were still awaiting their first win.
Herefordshire were the team to catch in the Eastern Division by winning their first two matches — just.
They beat Buckinghamshire, by one run and Northumberland by 93 runs, but off the very last ball.
The early leaders in the Western Division won their first three matches, and not all Devon's success belonged to Roebuck.
Nick Gaywood and Nick Folland each had a century and a half-century to his credit in those early matches.
AT 29 and 28 respectively, they are experienced Minor County players.
Not so another member of the Devon side which beat Cheshire by five wickets.
The exotically-named, Birmingham-born Exeter schoolboy Orlando Le Fleming was only 15 years 338 days old when he bowled his seamers with some effect.
He took two wickets in each innings and did well enough to merit further matches.
The problem is availability, for he is also a talented musician and had to miss a match to fulfil an earlier musical commitment.
He comes from a musical family and might be faced with a difficult decision before he is much older.
Cheshire have traditionally be one of the stronger counties in the Western Division, but they suffered two defeats in their opening three matches.
Not only did Devon beat them, they also lost to Wales.
The significance of that result was that it was only Wales's third win in five seasons in the competition.
Their first was in 1989 when Cheshire again obliged.
The Welsh hero on this occasion was their left-arm spinner Tony Smith.
He finished top of the Minor Counties bowling averages in 1991, and bowled Wales to victory at Neston with figures of 6 for 22 from 12 overs.
Wales have yet to qualify for the first round of the NatWest Trophy, but looking at the results from this year's competition, perhaps they were well out of it.
No Minor County came close to upsetting first-class opposition, so we are left congratulating Graham Morris of Northumberland, Graeme Calway of Dorset, Giles Toogood from Shropshire and Nick Adams of Cambridgeshire for their Man of the Match awards.
Perhaps the lack of team success comes down to the fact that only three Minor Counties had home ties.
Perhaps, when the draw is made next season, the first-class counties will not be as lucky.
A NOTABLE DOUBLE
David Hopps pays tribute to Yorkshire's long-serving spin bowler and former captain PHIL CARRICK
WATCHING Phil Carrick wheel away against Leicestershire at Abbeydale Park in early July in search of the one wicket he required to take 1000 in first-class cricket for Yorkshire was heartwarming proof that there is stability in the thorn-ridden land of the White Rose.
For sheer bloodyminded determination since his debut 23 seasons ago, it deserved to be widely applauded.
Carrick's 1000 Yorkshire wickets were expected to be supplemented well before the end of the summer by 10,000 Yorkshire runs, a double achieved only by five other men in the county's history: Haigh, Hirst, Illingworth, Wainwright and the incomparable Wilfred Rhodes (3597 wickets, 31,098 runs).
It will be an achievement to confirm Carrick's standing in Yorkshire cricket, everlasting statistical proof not only of his ability but of the indestructible qualities which have been needed to survive a period tragically disrupted by internal conflict.
‘I would like to think my record will suggest to people I could play a bit,’ said Carrick.
‘I might not have been as good as other Yorkshire left-arm spinners like Hedley Verity or Wilfred Rhodes, but perhaps my name can be mentioned alongside them.
That will be something my kids and grandkids can enjoy.’
Carrick deserves that much, for there is not more daunting tradition to follow than that of the Yorkshire left-arm spinner.
The line has been unbroken since Edmund Peate, last of the Victorian lob bowlers, made his debut in 1879.
There followed Bobby Peel, Rhodes, Roy Kilner, Verity, Johnny Wardle and Don Wilson.
Wilson, more respectfully treated at Lord's, where he recently stood down as MCC coach, than in his native county, offered Carrick wise counsel when the youngster replaced him in the Yorkshire side.
‘He warned me that I'd never get much credit — that people would be dismissive of my part in the great tradition,’ said Carrick.
So it proved.
When he dropped short outside off stump there would be mutterings that Wilfred was never cut in his entire career; if he failed to bowl Yorkshire to victory on a wearing pitch, grumblings would be heard that Wardle would have had them out by tea.
But Carrick has now gained an age where young lads metaphorically doff their caps and older spectators offer grudging respect.
Those committeemen who once viewed him obselete, and urged his sacking, have been afflicted by a creeping reverence.
Those who ridiculed his expanding waistline now view it with tender understanding.
His 40th birthday on July 16 — an age achieved only by Nottinghamshire duo Derek Randall and Eddie Hemmings among current county stock — emphasised his position as Yorkshire's canny, realistic elder statesman.
Carrick is not unaware of the shift in attitude.
‘Some people have wanted to sack me almost as long as I remember,’ he said.
‘But I do feel I'm viewed with more respect these days.
It might be partly because I didn't kick up a fuss when I lost the captaincy.
I just got on with it.’
Phil Carrick: approaching a career double of 10,000 runs and 1000 wickets for Yorkshire
Martyn Moxon, Yorkshire's present incumbent, is grateful for Carrick's supportive stance as he succeeds in creating an atmosphere in which young talent can flourish.
Carrick himself was not so fortunate.
He followed David Bairstow, a man entirely composed of red-blood corpuscles, who entered his declining years kicking and screaming with resentment.
Carrick's captaincy received mixed reviews.
Yorkshire's winning of the BCup in 1987 was achieved with performances of consistent excellence which represent one of the county's most vigorous periods in the last 20 years.
In the Championship, though, he was perceived as too negative.
He would captain with a frown of thunder, the worry lines etched deep as a rift valleys, his arms locked defiantly across his chest.
Today, he likes to act the playful old pro, occasionally engaging in slightly self-conscious silent comedy to amuse the crowd (generally an old man's limp); rarely completing a spell without a quip to the umpire; finding as much enjoyment in the game as at any time in his career.
‘I do enjoy my cricket more than ever,’ he accepts.
‘I now know where I'm at.
I can handle success and failure better than when I was young.
There is little worse than being a captain of a Yorkshire side not doing well.
It's no surprise I had a frown on my face.’
Captaincy did advance his own game.
He was free to bowl much as he pleased, to the fields he preferred, and in the manner he believed in.
Carrick's spin-bowling philosophy is unapologetically unromantic.
Bowl tightly, apply the pressure and force the errors.
‘Spin bowling is about pressure,’ he argues.
‘Forget all this romantic stuff about tossing it up, batsmen careering down the pitch to slog it up in the air, and even slipping in the occasional chinaman.
That's a load of bullshit.
You have to bowl line and length, often just relying on natural variation, and wear a batsman down.’
Never has Carrick been more lost for words than when he was approached in the Headingley committee-room after close of play by Reg Kirk, a former Yorkshire chairman.
‘I saw it,’ whispered Kirk, who had been raised on Wardle's tomfoolery.
‘I saw you bowl the chinaman.’
‘But Mr Chairman,’ protested Carrick, ‘I've never bowled a chinaman in my life.’
‘Don't worry, Phillip,’ said Kirk, tapping his nose in a gesture of strict confidence, ‘your secret is safe with me.’
This season, Vic Marks, in The Observer , even suggested that Carrick might be a wise short-term investment in the England side while Phil Tufnell recovered from his appendix operation.
Carrick has long stopped hoping, calculating that age and immobility caused by a few excess pounds count against him.
Instead, outside Tufnell and Emburey, he forms with Jeremy Batty the best spin partnership in county cricket.
They go together like pie and chips.
‘I think that I haven't played a Test for England because I've carried too much weight for a long time,’ Carrick said.
‘It's my own fault — there were times when there was no real leadership in the county and it was easy to let things slip.’
Phil Carrick has never let Yorkshire down but, in reflecting what might have been, he has the right to wonder if Yorkshire have always best served him.
A Lord's classic
ENGLAND v PAKISTAN
SECOND TEST
CORNHILL INSURANCE SERIES
DAVID FRITH at a four-day Test match which ranks among the most captivating ever seen at ‘Headquarters’
SEVENTEEN WICKETS fell at Lord's on this sensational Sunday.
Such was the day-long tension that, when it was all over, people were moving towards the exits with zombie tread, eyes glazed, and the traffic snarl-ups, symbolic of the outside world, were barely noticed.
There had been 6½ hours of fiercely-contested cricket on this fourth and final day, and yet it had seemed twice that much, so packed with incident had it been and so explosive in its continuous nature.
At times 25,000-plus onlookers were struck dumb by tension and anticipation, a hiccup resounding like a roar.
The bright sunlight precluded any need of umbrellas, but had there been one, its handle would inevitably have been chewed through, as happened in the immortal 1882 Ashes match at The Oval.
From the oscillations and uncertainties of this second Cornhill Test match, Pakistan stole a lead in the series in the final hour when the world's more-feared pair of bowlers, Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis, did their stuff as batsmen.
They came together at 95 for 8, with 43 still needed and England looking, a near-certainty.
Lewis, Malcolm and Salisbury had bowled heroically.
Just a little bit more was needed from them to seal an amazing victory.
But their strength was ebbing away, and neither DeFreitas nor Botham could contribute, both on the field but carrying injuries.
In the ultimate hour of crisis Pakistan's two fast bowlers wielded firm, brave bats, and took the prize.
Their joint contribution would have warranted a commemorative book, had not one by chance bearing their names already been recently released.
It was a match to rank with the Lord's classics of 1953 and 1963.
Three times England were in command, and three times they were forced to relinquish their grasp.
It was, in a sense, poor reward for the selectors' enterprise in choosing Devon Malcolm for his extra pace, despite his unspectacular form this summer, and Ian Salisbury, the 22-year-old Northampton-born Sussex legspinner.
They took five wickets each, and must have convinced all concerned that — as the Pakistanis have shown — attacking bowling runs rings round the boring containment of seamers.
The winning run: Man of the Match Wasim Akram creams Ian Salisbury through the covers for four, and Pakistan have won an enthralling match by two wickets
The exuberant Salisbury (only the second ‘cathedral’ to play for England, the Hon.
C.J. Coventry being the other, in 1888–89!) rotates an arm as perpendicular as a spire, and has anything but a stony facade.
Boyish, flaxen-haired, fresh-faced, with a spring in his step, he could have slipped out of an old singing/dancing Cliff Richard film.
His control was the equal of Mushtaq Ahmed's and his variations were finely applied.
Already with many marathon spells behind him as well as experience of tight limited-overs situations, he stood up well to the fierce challenge to his temperament in the closing stages, slumping only as Akram drove the winning hit through the covers.
A high-scoring match seemed a certainty when England went to lunch on the opening day with 108 on the board without loss.
Gooch was 57, Stewart 38, and the new-ball attack had been weathered with comparative ease.
Intikhab Alam gave the Pakistanis a ‘pep talk’ during the interval, pointing out that the pitch was taking spin already and that they should aim to bat only once, and massively at that.
Obligingly, four England wickets were captured in the second session, and the rest before close of play, to put the tourists into line with their cricket manager's plan.
A mixture of demanding bowling and lax batsmanship saw the four important wickets fall post-lunch.
Gooch, having exceeded the mighty Hammond's Test aggregate, edged into his stumps; Hick messed up an attempted pull against Waqar; Smith was held brilliantly by the substitute fielder at third slip (Latif also happens to be the deputy wicketkeeper); and on the stroke of tea Stewart, having batted imperiously for four hours, fell disappointingly to a catch at cover off slow left-armer Mujtaba.
In the midst of all this  came three consecutive balls unlikely to be forgotten as Waqar, steaming in like Larwood, was crashed through the covers by Smith, then beat his man all ends up, before being driven again with Rocky-power to the rope.
Those who love their cricket history were forced to concede that this kind of combat could not be surpassed for entertainment.
Waqar reloaded his gun for an after-tea burst of swinging yorkers, his renowned speciality, which spelt doom for Botham, Lewis and Lamb in successive overs, and added DeFreitas, caught at slip, to seal a spell of 4 for 17 in 40 balls.
Mushtaq took the last two wickets to finish England off for 255, the 10 having fallen for 132 in 45 overs.
Pakistan were 31 without loss by the close, Ramiz Raja (20) having spent little time on the field so far because of a stomach upset, and that evening Waqar Younis, asked what was the secret behind his late swing, replied, with a grin: ‘I'm not telling you that!’
He then confessed that it was all ‘natural’.
No longer did his back trouble him, and yes, he felt he could bowl at least 20% faster, as ‘Inti’ had suggested.
The English Pressmen in the room shuddered on behalf of Gooch and Co.
Waqar Younis's uppish drive eludes bowler Devon Malcolm in the closing stages of the exciting Lord's Test.
Younis and Wasim Akram added 46 for the ninth wicket, taking Pakistan to victory from the depths of 95 for 8
Only the pre-lunch session was possible on the second day, drizzle intensifying to heavy rain which even penetrated the Press-box roof just as Cornhill Insurance were announcing their two-year extension of sponsorship.
Pakistan had secured their position at 123 for the loss of Ramiz, who was bowled by a giant breakdown down the slope from DeFreitas.
Aamir Sohail had reached his first Test fifty with some bold strokeplay, and Malcolm had amused with a double misfield at mid-off.
Salisbury had had his first bowl, though not from the usual legspinner's end.
With the wind stiff from the Nursery, he had operated — very tidily — from the pavilion end, against the slope, and almost took an early wicket.
Bowling around the wicket, he fooled Sohail with a topspinner which, if anything, had a tinge of wrong'un about it.
The left-hander edged it, but Russell had moved to leg and Botham was too wide at slip — his position if not his shape.
Saturday was sunny and bright, and any claim that the match would be settled by tomorrow evening would have been dismissed with a scornful cackle.
Even by lunch a draw seemed a reasonable long-term option.
Pakistan were 209 for 3, only 46 behind, having lost Sohail to a straightforward catch behind off DeFreitas and Javed Miandad to a falling earth-tremor of a catch by Botham at slip when he edged a bouncing legbreak from Salisbury, a distinguished maiden Test wicket.
Asif Mujtaba had made his first Test half-century and seemed quite settled, while England will have felt apprehensive about Salim Malik after he was spared at 22 by Gooch at slip, low and to his left, off Lewis.
The batsman drove the last ball of the over for four, and the bowler kicked the ground in exasperation.
A quaint pre-war tradition at Lord's was ‘the monarch's wicket’.
King George V, having inspected both teams along the red carpet, at least once had the satisfaction of seeing an important Australian wicket fall straight after the interval.
HRH Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, now rather overdid the Royal prerogative by triggering a Pakistan collapse.
Five wickets toppled for 65 in the lunch-to-tea period, the first three to a fiery Malcolm, who steamed in from the Nursery end and seemed to think he was Waqar.
It was his first bowl of the day, and in his third over his extra pace defeated Mujtaba's attempt to pull through midwicket; Smith held a standard catch.
Inzamam-ul-Haq ducked into his first ball and took it around the shoulder, and while a helmet was being fetched, he tried to pull the next and merely splice it up for a return catch to Malcolm, who later disclosed that, being some way short of the top 100 fielders in the land, he could only murmur, ‘Oh, my Lord, who's going to take that catch?’
He did, immaculately.
Malik mispunched Malcolm over mid-on, and Lamb's little legs couldn't carry him fast enough to get underneath the chance.
The sunglasses were not to be blamed.
Akram then edged just short of slip, and clearly a stiff examination was being set out there by Malcolm, to whom the first comeback wicket had been ‘like a  drink of water to a thirsty man’.
He now got Malik, caught off a too-free cover-drive, giving him 3 for 4 in 13 balls.
Sussex legspinner Ian Salisbury captures a distinguished first Test wicket as Pakistan captain Javed Miandad is caught at slip by the diving Ian Botham, who late equalled Colin Cowdrey's England record of 120 catches
Akram's hour at the crease saw him punish Salisbury, take his side into the lead, survive at catch to Malcolm's outstretched hand at deep mid-off, and finally go, bamboozled, when Salisbury put a googly, from wide of the crease, around the wicket, between the batsman's legs and into the stumps: 263 for 7.
DeFreitas and Malcolm finished Pakistan off with the new ball, Botham bagging his 120th catch and spoiling his chance to go ahead of Cowdrey when Waqar (0) edged Lewis.
Hick missed Aqib too, but these were aberrations of little account, for when Malcolm plucked out Waqar's middle stump England were only 38 behind on first innings.
A few hours earlier a Pakistan lead of hundreds seemed probable.
By close of play, England, 52 for the loss of Gooch, were 14 ahead.
The captain had survived some hot stuff from Akram, who went for the ribs, only to fall to Aqib, who used the slope well.
Salisbury, an eager nightwatchman, held out against some torrid deliveries midst some frantic appealing, and all seemed well set for a gripping fourth and fifth day.
Only the fourth was necessary, as it happened.
Waqar Younis (later to play a big part with the bat) flings one down on his way to first-innings figures of 5 for 91.
Looking on is his Surrey team-mate Alec Stewart, who became the first Englishman to carry his bat at Lord's Test during the second innings
On what turned out to be the final day, Salisbury, having relished an hour in the heat of battle, was lbw, yorked, by a big Akram inswinger, and thereafter a wicket  fell every 18 minutes; 17 in all; some through the caprice of the pitch, some through frailty, most because of devastatingly purposeful bowling.
Aamir Sohail cannot keep this spinning delivery from Ian Salisbury out of his stumps, and Pakistan slump to 68 for 6, chasing 138.
But England's hopes of a famous victory were premature
Mushtaq, bowling with the breeze behind him, dispatched Hick with a perfect legbreak and then hit Smith's stumps as he tried to glance, a round-the-legs dismissal almost to rank in shuddering significance for England with Peter May's notorious ‘b Benaud 0’ at Manchester in 1961.
When Mushtaq added Lamb's wicket, lbw to a straightish one which hardly left the ground, much of the heart had been taken from England's line-up, and the lead was a mere 99, five down.
Once again an immense amount of credit had been earned by Alec Stewart.
Cool and straight-batted, he had survived a couple of early shaves as Waqar and Akram almost found his stumps off the inside edge, and at 58, right after lunch.
Malik dived bout failed to hold an edge off Waqar.
Like Hutton in bygone times, Stewart seemed galvanised by the disasters occurring at the other end, but was never either intimidated into strokelessness or tempted into a reckless rescue bid, for such an endeavour against this bowling would have been futile.
The last five England wickets were blown away by the twin tornado, Waqar and Akram.
Botham, half-forward and playing across, was lbw.
Lewis, having been missed by a diving Moin after edging Akram, was yorked comprehensively at the other end.
Then the irresistible left-armer grabbed — for once the tabloids' second-favourite verb is surely the best — three wickets in four balls to end England's innings for 175, the last eight wickets having tumbled for 67, Inzamam's low-left slip catch to dismiss DeFreitas being outstanding.
Stewart walked off with the look of one who was the sole survivor of a particularly nasty plane crash.
He had carried his bat through the innings, the first to do so for England at Lord's, thus winning another campaign medal of note.
For just over four hours he had resisted while a famous collapse took place, his longest-lasting partner being the unlikely Salisbury.
The inadequacy of the rest will have been cause for serious concern in the England camp.
And yet the matter was quickly screened out as Pakistan set out to secure the piffling 138 needed for their second Test victory at Lord's.
Pakistan's start was not quite as grim as India's at Headingley in 1952, when the first four batsmen were out before a run had been registered, nor did it quite compare with Australia's second innings at Brisbane in 1950, when Bedser and Bailey send back the first three without a run on the board.
But here at Lord's in 1992, Pakistan's first three were shot out for ducks, the scoreboard showing 18 for 3 after Chris Lewis had found the bat's fatal edge three times while Sohail bravely carved and thumped 16 runs.
The left-hander just avoided a caught-and-bowled to Malcolm's left hand, but when Gooch brought Salisbury on, this time at the Nursery end, and pitching into the legside rough, he spun one right across Salim Malik to have him caught at gully.
It was 41 for 4 at tea, nine wickets having fallen for 69 in a session which none who experienced it will ever forget.
According to the usual precepts of cricket's scriptwriting, Pakistan would now recover their poise, the match would be won without further wickets falling, and everybody would be left wondering what all the hubbub and expectancy had been about.
But no.
Although Pakistan inched forward in the eight overs following the welcome tea-break, England were pulling the strings.
Sohail, on 29, was let off by Botham at gully, shoulder-high off Lewis.
That would have made it 45 for 5.
The same batsman seemed to have been run out by bowler Lewis when 30.
At 37 he survived a fluky chance, pad and bat, to Russell off Salisbury.
England needed some luck.
They got it when Inzamam was short of speed returning for a second run, and Malcolm's throw from third man was slickly relayed by Russell to the bowler's end.
When, next over, Sohail missed his salvation kick as a huge turner from Salisbury bounced off his waist towards the stumps, Pakistan, 68 for 6 and still 70 short, seemed doomed.
Salisbury and Malcolm, the contrasting pair of bowlers on whom England had so creditably gambled, kept at it, and took another wicket apiece.
Moin departed reluctantly after a snap catch by Smith at silly mid-off, and Mushtaq, who seemed to be standing in a hole, was caught by Hick, a competent slip catch.
It was now 95 for 8, Waqar joining Akram, 43 needed, England now favourites.
Graeme Hick disappointed again with the bat, scoring 13 and 11.
Here he mishooks Younis to Miandad in the first innings
With the DeFreitas and Botham injuries a severe handicap, England had only the three mainline bowlers to deploy, and debate will rage forever about Gooch's switch of Lewis for Salisbury as soon as Waqar came in.
Lewis was tired, and Waqar off-glided him for two and straight-drove him to the pavilion boundary.
In Lewis's next over Akram unleashed a booming off-drive for four, taking the total to 113.
Eight overs remained, and it was universally known that the bails would be lifted even if the match was still undecided: an extra pressure on everyone, and another silly regulation among cricket's banana-skins, this one installed pre-tour by the visiting team.
Only on the first day could an extra half-hour be utilised if a result was imminent.
Malcolm bounced one at Waqar, who spliced it some distance; but midwicket was deep.
English groans from the terraces, Pakistani shrieks.
Salisbury returned at the pavilion end: a stern test of nerve, even with immortality beckoning should success by his.
Akram swept him for four between the two fielders in front of the grandstand.
With 10 needed off the last three overs of the day, Waqar worked Salisbury to mid-wicket for three.
More breathless hush.
Then two byes low past the off stump, horror or horrors.
Akram calmed Waqar.
Waqar calmed Akram.
A single off the hip; a pull for one more run; a vain swish; gasps; a hook for a single, Lamb the fielder.
Scores leave.
Salisbury to bowl.
Nonsense speculated about Test cricket's third tie.
Salisbury pitches up gamely.
Akram pounces on it, creaming it to the Tavern rope.
Pandemonium.
Young bowler's head slumps at last.
But he need have no self-recrimination, for he played an attractive role in one of cricket's classics.
No lack of conviction from Pakistan's fielders and bowler Mushtaq Ahmed as Allan Lamb succumbs lbw to a ball which kept low
ENGLAND v PAKISTAN
THIRD TEST
CORNHILL INSURANCE SERIES
Manchester misery
The Old Trafford Test of England's uncompromising series against Pakistan suffered a disturbance on the penultimate evening which will long be remembered, to the detriment of some outstanding personal performances.
DAVID FRITH reports:
Camera coverage by PATRICK EAGAR
IT WAS one of those Test matches from which memories of some fine individual deeds will forever be overshadowed by some onfield behaviour which was as childish as it was explosive.
This in turn was followed by some misguided remarks from Pakistan's cricket manager, a full-scale enquiry by ICC match referee Conrad Hunte, and the eventual announcement of mild penalties against the offenders.
The chain of unsavoury incidents in important matches was thus extended, deepening the sadness and resentment felt by cricket-lovers everywhere.
There seems little doubt that suspicion and resentment had been festering in Pakistani minds since long before this series began.
The flashpoint came when Aqib Javed, a 19-year-old fast bowler who had earned much admiration during this series and the preceding World Cup, let fly a series of short-pitched balls at England's No. 11, Devon Malcolm, a non-batsman if ever there was one.
The bowler took none too kindly to the official warning from umpire Roy Palmer, and imagined that his sweater was returned to him at the end of the over in an insulting manner.
The good old television recording once again came in useful as a reminder of the true reality when it clearly showed a presentable handover of the garment.
The services of Mr C.C. Hunte, policeman/peacemaker and deviser of penalties, former West Indies opening batsman, and career worker for mankind, were immediately called upon.
He deliberated for almost 24 hours before announcing a half-match-fee fine against Aqib and reprimands for his captain, Javed Miandad, and the outspoken Intikhab Alam (who promptly broke the Code's embargo b reiterating his accusations).
For the record, the eight balls of Aqib's fateful over resulted in the following: 1.
Munton edged a single.
2.
Through to wicketkeeper. 3.
Bouncer to Malcolm (who had survived a first-ball, no-ball bouncer from Wasim Akram at the other end).
4.
Malcolm hit legside four.
5.
Malcolm evaded chest-high ball.
6.
Malcolm hit on helmet as he ducked another short ball; umpire Palmer warned Aqib with hand gesture; bowler and captain remonstrated, apparently with the new shoulder-height regulation in mind rather than Law 42, which covers intimidation.
7.
Aqib warned after bowling a gross no-ball which was also short of a length, wide of the stumps.
8.
Another short ball.
Umpire Palmer called ‘over’, having exchanged glances with square-leg umpire David Shepherd, and struggled to extricate Aqib's sweater from the loop of his umpire's coat.
He handed it and his sunhat back to the fuming bowler, who felt the gesture was not made with due courtesy.
He threw the sweater to the ground as he walked away, and aimed a kick at it.
Miandad was still shouting and waving his arms about when a Pakistan supporter ran onto the ground and was repelled by two stewards.
A slow yorker from Aqib in his next over bowled Malcolm, ending the day's play.
ICC match referee Conrad Hunte goes into ‘court’, to hear testimony of the ‘Aqib Affair’ from, among others, umpire Roy Palmer (left)
Mr Hunte conferred subsequently with other ICC officials, principally Sir Colin Cowdrey, the chairman, and drew up penalties which were widely considered as being too mild.
He had felt the need, though, to take into account the super-sensitive relations between these two teams, and if the biggest surprise was that he had addressed gentle caution to the English management as well, they having been innocent, faraway onlookers during the shenanigans, it was because he recognised that they too nursed feelings of exasperation and he imagined that they might soon have burst uncontrollably into flames.
And if it be thought that Mr Hunte retains a soft spot for Pakistan ever since he and Garry Sobers had a stand of 446 against them at Sabina Park 34 years ago, we have  ascertained that he made clear to the 1992 management that any further offence would be met with punishment noticeably more severe.
This will go some way towards relieving the anxiety of those who felt that the fine and reprimands were far too limp.
As for the 40% match-fee fine placed upon Pakistan for their slow over rate, this is little more than half of technically should have been applied, but Mr Hunte made certain allowances.
It is these allowances which should be studied by the ICC, for it is here that the suspicion of undue leniency remains strongest.
The match itself?
Yes, there were 300 or so other overs bowled on the four days of play permitted by the weather, with nine innings passing 50, and even the extras in England's innings passing the half-century.
The romantic touch came with David Gower's return after a selectorial banishment of 17 months.
Mike Atherton, too, came quietly back, and Tim Munton got his first Test cap, DeFreitas's groin injury forcing him to withdraw from the squad.
Lamb and Botham had to swallow the very bitter pill of being dropped.
From the purely cricket point of view, Pakistan will remember Aamir Sohail's double-century.
And they will not be alone.
It was a most impressive performance by the 25-year-old Lahore left-hander in only his third Test appearance, all his 205 runs made on the first day before an understandable concentration lapse.
But for the nastiness on the fourth evening, Sohail's achievement would have crowned the 50th England-Pakistan Test encounter.
Perhaps, in time, it will be seen to have done so.
The fateful over: England No. 11 Devon Malcolm ducks into a short-pitched delivery from Aqib Javed.
Despite a warning from umpire Palmer, the next ball was another short one
An eventful match for the recalled David Gower say him become England's most-capped player and, with this boundary off Aqib, England's highest runscorer, surpassing Geoff Boycott's old record
There was a great measure of bounce in  Peter Marron's pitch, and it lasted most of the match.
So hard was the surface that Malcolm's boot-sprigs failed to cope as he unleashed a bouncer, and he finished flat on the ground, which was where the retreating batsman was supposed to be.
When the poplar-tall Munton came on, his first ball was driven for four by Sohail who, 11 overs later, topped a hook off Lewis to reach 52 and take the total to 104 in only the 21st over.
Ramiz Raja, undersung though exceptionally gifted that he is, showed benefit from his recent Rtrip home to Pakistan, but at 54 he was given out, at first, it was thought, lbw, but in fact from what umpire Palmer considered a thin edge to the wicketkeeper.
At lunch Pakistan were 131 for 1 off 27 overs.
It wasn't quite Trumper and Duff, but apprehension was writ on many English brows.
Captain Graham Gooch was England's best-rewarded bowler at Old Trafford.
His five wickets included Test-best figures of 3 for 39, and the wicket of former Essex team-mate Salim Malik in each innings
England's bowling simply presented little threat.
Lewis bowled a few inswingers, and Malcolm sometimes got a sizzling short one on line, but with care there seemed no reason why Pakistan should not build a formidable score.
That they went just past the half-thousand was mainly due to Sohail, but the neat little Asif Mujtaba beavered away for 57, and at tea the score stood at 252 for 2, Sohail having gone to his century, the first ever for Pakistan in a Manchester Test, with an ondriven three from his 127th ball.
He overcame problems now with his concentration and survived an edge which went catchably past a frozen Russell, with Hick at slip completing the waxwork tableau, Munton the unlucky bowler.
After tea, Miandad began settling the score with Salisbury, the young legspinner who had dismissed him at Lord's.
Revenge was emphatic.
Only the second ball of the over was not hit for four.
Yet another partnership prospered beyond 100, the third in succession, and Sohail eventually cut Salisbury to the pavilion boundary to reach 203 after 5½ hours in the middle.
It was his 32nd four.
Sohail was bowled soon afterwards, a straightish ball from Lewis, now bowling round the wicket, wrecking his stumps.
Only 10 batsmen had scored more Test runs in a day (Bradman and Hammond four times each), which places Sohail in rare company.
It was his first double-century in any form of cricket, and he told a congratulatory gathering of Pressmen later that he was playing only because of the magical treatment on his injured knee administered by 76-year-old Dr Mohammad Aslam.
Behind every major achievement…
He also said he didn't believe unduly in the one-day game, even though that is where he made his name.
The Pakistan team lines up ‘like some firing-squad’ after the umpires decided that a ‘catch’offered by Gower to Inzamam (left) off Waqar Younis had not carried to the fielder at second slip
Pakistan finished at 388 for 3, but were unable to continue until the Saturday, the  second day being washed out and landing the TCCB with the second enormous refund of the series, this time estimated at anything up to £250,000.
It extended Old Trafford's unwanted record of full Test days lost to 28.
(Sydney is next with 21.)
Moisture from the inflated covers might have gingered up the pitch somewhat for the third day, and with the ball still quite new, England's bowlers were clearly interested in a breakthrough.
Miandad extended his 59 to 88 before edging Munton to slip, giving the affable Warwickshire man his first Test wicket in a spell of 10 overs during which he took 1 for 22, real Angus Fraser stuff.
Moin, nightwatchman, was beaten for pace on the pull-shot, but no declaration came at lunch (480 for 5), nor after a rain interruption during which 12 overs were lost, it being believed that the runs were best scored in the first innings, and England would probably have been offered the light soon after their innings commenced.
Javed Miandad throws the ball to umpire David Shepherd as discussion continues following the warning to Aqib Javed for intimidatory bowling
Salim Malik had played on when former Essex team-mate Gooch slipped in an inswinger, and when Malcolm bowled a second bouncer in an over to Inzamam-ul-Haq, umpire Palmer no-balled him.
The batsman failed to survive the over though, Gooch managing to hold onto a slip catch.
Waqar Younis thus joined Wasim Akram, the victorious Lord's pair together again.
England, defeated by these two then, now saw Akram go for a duck, a nifty piece of stumping by Russell from a curving, cutting ball from his captain.
Malcolm was still bouncing them merrily, but it took Gooch, with his third wicket, Mushtaq slogging, to persuade a declaration at 505 for 9.
Soon after England began their reply there was a bad-light hold-up — probably unnecessary if they had all been wearing Bolle ‘lifter’ lenses — and upon resumption, Gooch and Stewart had to brace themselves against a torrid onslaught from Waqar, menace in every step of his run-up, and Akram, who bounded in and flung down something resembling Ivanisevic's curving left-handed tennis serve, if only 30mph or so less swift.
Had the besweatered Pakistanis held their catches there is no knowing to what depths of despair England might have sunk that evening.
There was a lot of short-pitched bowling, with a vast array of slips and gullies, but Gooch (8) survived a low catch to Inzamam off Akram, and Stewart (14) was put down by the same fielder at full stretch off the same bowler when 14.
Amends were made when the same combination sent Stewart back soon afterwards, and poor Atherton's comeback lasted three balls only as he touched one which went across him.
England might have seen ghostly, ghastly visions of Bruce Reid's capacity for mass destruction.
Another break for bad light gave the fast men a breather.
Then Gooch, calmly facing the thunderous music as ever, took a hurtful blow in the arm and then survived an easy catch to Malik at slip after cutting a ball from Aqib.
The rest day came with England, 72 for 2, still 433 behind.
Monday brought another very sparse attendance, though the noise level was punishing, thanks to the non-stop chanting of the Pakistan supporters by the scoreboard.
Smith's early demise opened the door for the much-anticipated return of David Gower, who had flown down for the Wimbledon men's final in something other than a Tiger Moth the day before.
Aqib predictably bounced him, and the first over he  faced encapsulated all that Gower has ever stood for: an edge (somehow made to seem unregretted) and an exquisite cover-drive; beaten again, and a controlled turn to leg for two.
A top-edge off an Akram no-ball followed, and then a vital slab of good fortune as Malik put him down at slip, a high nick when he was 15.
At 10 minutes to midday, Gower square-drove Aqib to the Wilson's Stand to reach 34 and ascend the pedestal as England's highest Test runscorer.
It had taken him only half-an-hour to reach the heralded target figure, and it was poetic justice that Graham Gooch was his partner at the time.
Rumours that the previous record-holder, Geoffrey Boycott, had his back to the play at the key moment remain unverified.
The Yorkshireman was later both humorous and generous, perhaps in a slightly grudging sort of way, in acknowledging his former team-mate's achievement.
The bright sunlight had straightened the ball's flight-path, and as Gower fed on the short balls and what he converted into half-volleys, there were fleeting thoughts of a century before lunch, such was his willingness to go after runs.
At 53 he edged Waqar low to Inzamam at slip, and the Pakistanis were not easily persuaded that neither umpire could consider it a clean catch.
They lined up like some firing-squad as Messrs Shepherd and Palmer did their best to explain the situation, but only television slo-mo replays would have convinced the sternest of the doubters.
They should not have disputed the decision as they did, and any suggestion that this was an early ingredient in the Pakistanis' exasperation deserves little sympathy.
Sohail the hero: the batting highlight of the match was the brisk 205 from the 25-year-old opener from Lahore, Aamir Sohail, who became the first left-hander to hit a Test double-century for Pakistan
Gower stroked the next ball, after the unseemly delay, through point for four with a kind of moral fervour, but Gooch fell before the interval, given out by umpire Shepherd, who felt the legside lifter had touched the captain's glove.
His 78 was a very worthy contribution.
Waqar had tome to come close to removing Hick's head and they shaved his wicket with a rapid breakback, but Gower was still flowing when lunch came, England 195 for 4 and still some way from safety.
It was during this interval that referee Hunter, deputising for Clyde Walcott (in London for the ICC gathering), examined the ball for signs of scruffing.
Gower's 200th Test innings, ended soon after the resumption.
An edged cut to his 85th ball saw him go for 73, and England now faced serious trouble at 200 for 5.
Hicks's first 10 runs came in singles, all the colour drained from his game, and he was only 22 when Aqib removed his middle stump.
With Akram fielding at slip with his World Cup cap on, peak facing backwards, Aqib scampered in again and forced a shaky reaction from Russell, who was caught by Sohail, off the glove, at second slip: 256 for 7, still 249 in arrears.
Lewis and Salisbury now buckled down and saved England.
Midst a lot of no-balls, which helped no end, they picked their way though the furious gunfire, finding the odd boundary, encouraging each other, and finally seeing off the follow-on a ball before tea.
Lewis reached his third Test fifty before edging a flowery drive, and Salisbury recovered from an excruciating blow on the box from Waqar to bang him through the covers and generally give the impression that he might soon be worth a sport higher than No. 9 in the order.
He joyously reached his own half-century but immediately became Akram's fifth wicket.
The left-armer denied himself a sixth by wasting a cowardly bouncer on Malcolm.
And then came the explosion of passions.
Talk that night was less of the glory of Gower than of the intricacies of the Aqib Affair.
The fifth day could only have been absorbing if Miandad had set England a target, and on this tablet of clay or loam or whatever it was, that would have been madness.
Not even a token declaration was considered, though the Pakistan captain missed a chance here to save some money on the sickly over rate.
Stewart slipped on the wicketkeeping gloves when Russell took a day's sick leave with a stomach upset, and the final three sessions were played out in the usual no-prospects eeriness, which was heightened by the horrors of the evening before.
Sohail experienced the oddity of dismissal for only 1 to go with his first-innings 205, a loose drive bringing his downfall, but Ramiz and Mujtaba soon arrested the situation, putting on 142 before Lewis had a double reward as tea approached.
Mujtaba should have been caught at slip by Gooch when only 17, Munton the suffering bowler, and the skipper, now into double figures with international catching errors this year, surely about to relaunch as a mid-off.
He did at least take two more wickets himself, emerging as a five-wicket demon in the match, the standard of England's slip catching being restored at the hands of Hick and Atherton.
Salisbury again toiled in vain, but Munton commanded respect and Lewis bowled better than of late, and England's self-respect was retrieved to some extent.
There were a few diplomatic handshakes as the players left the field at the end, but it seemed a relief that an extra week lay between this Test match and the next, and it could only be hoped that work would continue behind the scenes to impress upon these cricketers, especially the more excitable ones, that the game does not deserve to be abused.
Those who love it have every right to say to the offenders: ‘Go elsewhere if you can't control yourselves.’
All Over in a Day
On August 9, 1892, Lancashire defeated Somerset by eight wickets in a single day's play
Dean Hayes reconstructs this bizarre match of 100 years ago
LANCASHIRE were hoping to gain revenge for their defeat at Taunton some weeks earlier, when Somerset beat the red-rose county by six wickets.
Heavy rain had prevented an; y play on the first day at Old Trafford, and though high scores were not expected when play got under way on the second day, few people could reasonably have expected that the contest would be over and done with in one day.
Somerset won the toss and batted, but within 1¾ hours they were bowled out for 88 — this after 60 had been made for the loss of only one wicket.
Top-scorer was H.T. Hewett, one of the finest left-hand batsmen in England who scored 35 in an opening stand of 41.
Johnny Briggs (1696 wickets for Lancashire) took 7 for 62.
At one time Lancashire's reply seemed very likely to even less than that as Albert Ward, Sugg, Smith and Briggs were all back in the pavilion with only 21 on the board.
But MacLaren, who watched the ball very carefully, Kemble and Yates came to the assistance of their county to give the home side a 28-run lead on first innings.
Johnny Briggs: 12 wickets — and a duck
In their second innings, Somerset were put out for 58, with only Lionel Palairet reaching double figures and 10 of their total being byes.
The Oxford captain was his side's most consistent batsman, scoring 22 in each innings and carry his bat through the second.
The old Repton boy exhibited a beautiful defence and was the only batsman to cope with Briggs and Mold (who had match figures of 8 for 40).
Hewett, who gave a very difficult chance to Briggs, who ran from cover point, fell to a wonderful catch at mid-on by Mold, who held the ball at the second attempt.
Somerset's last wicket fell at 6.15pm, and in the ordinary course of events play would have been suspended for the day.
But when asked to finish the match, Somerset captain Hewett agreed, and so at 6.30 pm Lancashire started on their journey to get 31 for victory.
The Somerset captain would have been quite within his rights to have declined to play after 6.30 in the chance that it might rain hard enough on the third day to prevent any play.
In fact, Somerset's next match wasn't until Thursday of that week at Sheffield, so Hewett's action was all the more sporting.
In obtaining their target, Lancashire lost two wickets to the fast bowling of Hedley, who had match figures of 6 for 34 and was Somerset's best bowler.
It was certainly a bowler's day in favourable conditions, 32 wickets falling for 294 runs.
It was a good victory for Lancashire, and as a result the two counties changed places in the County Championship.
It was the third time in recent years that a county match had been completed inside an August day at Old Trafford.
On Aug 2, 1888, Surrey beat Lancashire by an innings and 25 runs, while on August 29, 1889, Lancashire inflicted an innings defeat upon Leicestershire with 69 runs to spare.
Remembering Percy George
Terry Wright's centenary feature on one of the greatest entertainers
PERCY GEORGE HERBERT FENDER was born 100 years ago on August 22.
In a long career, he played for Sussex (1910–13), Surrey (1910–35) and England (13 times during the 1920s).
In all first-class cricket, he scored 19,034 runs at 26.65 including 21 centuries, and took 1894 wickets at 25.05.
He did the double six times and also held 599 catches.
At Test level, he scarcely made the grade, averaging 19 with the bat and 40 with the ball.
Why, it might reasonably be asked, does someone who on paper was merely a competent county allrounder justify a centenary tribute?
The answer is that his remarkable methods as batsman, bowler and captain made him one of the great sporting entertainers.
With his receding, crinkly black hair, beaky nose, toothbrush moustache and protruding teeth, Fender came gift-wrapped for cartoonists.
He loved publicity.
When Tom Webster drew him wearing a knee-length sweater, he ensured that, thereafter, all his sweaters were oversized.
He continued to wear glasses even when he found them unnecessary simply because they had become part of his image.
Percy Fender: cartoonist's delight
As captain of Surrey for a dozen seasons, Fender was expert at making bricks without straw or, to be more precise, winning matches without bowlers on perfect Oval pitches.
He was a shrewd analyst of players' strengths and weaknesses and a master of the unexpected bowling change or field placing.
Like Lord Nelson (who generally operated on wetter and bumpier pitches), Fender anticipated modern theories of participative management by involving his team in decisions and keeping them fully briefed on his plans.
Furthermore, as Robertson-Glasgow wrote, ‘one puff of victory sighted on the horizon and he rode straight for it.’
There was general agreement that, although he never led Surrey to the title, their placings of second, third, fourth, third and second between 1921 and 1925 were little short of miraculous given the glorious lopsidedness of the team — brilliant batting (led by Hobbs) totally unmatched by workaday bowling.
Fender's own batting was wristy and risky.
A tall and lean right-hander, he favoured the pull and a sliced drive-cum-cut which deposited the ball anywhere between extra cover and third man.
Often disdaining to wear a left-hand glove, he tore into the bowling to such effect that he scored around 62 runs per hour, a rate beaten by no ‘proper’ batsman in cricket history except Jessop.
He could destroy attacks and turn matches around in half-an-hour or so of batting fury.
Against Kent at The Oval in 1922, he scored 137 in 90 minutes and hit a fast-medium widish half-volley from G.J. Bryan over extra cover for six.
It reached the South Metropolitan Gas Company, having cleared a wall 132 years from the wicket.
At Lord's, he once square-cut Jack Durston into the grandstand just under Father Time.
He also scored the fastest uncontrived century in first-class cricket, in a whirlwind 35 minutes at Northampton in 1920.
As he later explained, he deliberately dallied over the last few runs in order to let his partner, Peach, reach his double-century.
P.G.H Fender 1892–1985
Remarkably, Fender was not naturally right-handed, and scored his first boyhood century as a left-hander.
He later put his ambidexterity to good use in a Test match in 1921, by playing a forerunner of the reverse sweep to defeat Armstrong's leg-theory attack.
Fender the bowler began as a medium-pacer, switched to legspin and googlies, but constantly instilled variety into the Surrey attack and the lives of fascinated spectators by bowling slow full-tosses, deliberate long-hops, offbreaks and anything else that occurred to his fertile brain, all the while varying the width of his delivery point and the height of his arm.
Most good judges believed that Fender's true metier was as a legspinner; but his low boredom threshold meant that sometimes variety became an end in itself.
As the best tactician and motivator in the country, Fender should have captained England.
His failure to do so has been attributed to his association with the (to some) dubious professions of wine merchant and journalist, to his supposed Jewishness, his lack of a university education, or even to anti-Surrey bias.
The probably truth is that, like snuff, he regularly got up aristocratic noses.
When Lord Hawke in 1925 made his famous remark about the undesirability of a professional ever captaining England, Fender responded in the socialist Daily Herald by calling his lordship's comments ‘a gratuitous insult’ to professional cricketers.
With Lord Harris, he frazzled his goose even more thoroughly by running the creaky old aristocrat out in a charity match and taking the field at Lord's by the same gate as his professionals.
Harris peremptorily summoned him to the committee-room after this latter incident and told him: ‘We do not want that sort of thing at Lord's, Fender.’
Further disputes over pitch-covering and residential qualifications were the final nails in the coffin of Fender's captaincy aspirations.
Fender's life outside cricket was bursting with unusual achievements.
A few examples may give a flavour.
Fender is surely, for instance, the only modern cricketer to have fought (and won) a sword duel.
He wrote song lyrics used in sketches by light entertainers such as Jack Hulbert.
He refereed international bridge matches; and was goalkeeper for the Casuals when they won the AFA Cup final in 1913.
He advertised his own brand of cigarettes and sold his own brand of whisky.
For 54 years he directed his own wine firm and, at around 80 years of age, launched the London Wine Exchange.
He served on the London County Council and was a Deputy Lieutenant of the County of London.
And, in an idle moment, he invented a method for lining women's hat-boxes!
Surely, a full life even for someone who lived to the advance age of 92.
Now, 100 years after his birth, we should celebrate the sunshine days of one who gave so much gladness to so many.
THE QUIZ
Compiled by Derek Lodge
THESE questions, about men who have played an innings of 300 or more, are moderately easy, and the reader might like to tackle them without a reference book, at least to begin with.
1.
Who was the oldest man to score 300?
2.
And the youngest, in England?
3.
Who scored 300 runs before tea, on the first day of a match?
4.
What is the highest score to be made on a side's second innings?
5.
Who was the first English professional to score 300?
6.
And the last, before the amateur/professional distinction was abolished?
7.
When was the first score of 300 made by a West Indian?
8.
And the first on the Indian sub-continent?
9.
Which was the first score of 300 made by a man on the losing side?
10.
Who has made the highest aggregate number of runs in a career which has not included a score of 300?
11.
Who is pictured (right), and where did he score his triple-century?
WISDEN CROSSWORD
Compiled by David Peck
ACROSS
1.
Almost rather not back the latterday England batsman (8)
7.
Sundry old Worcestershire men, some short ones (6)
8.
See 3 down 
9.
Breaks attacks (5)
10.
Cricket's long-time in shade now in shade in some instances (5)
11.
I had Brennan as an Old England man (5)
13.
Filmed sequences of what keeper does (5)
16.
Went for someone's favoured hand (4)
17.
Fifty ahead…500 ahead…that's capital!(6)
18.
Super!
He got right in to being that successful South Africa skipper (8)
DOWN
2.
Ed Dunworth carved a good solo score (3, 7)
3.
&8 ac .
Ground to go to on a date or otherwise (5, 4)
4.
Middleton opener (4)
5.
Wrong end of the country for the old Middlesex man (5)
6.
Fly-fisher almost reached the water where Durham play (10)
12.
Sounds like the diet which kept the Notts long-server going (5)
14.
A good start with fresh correspondent (5)
15.
Other than gold for Glamorgan (4)
Obituary
Len Darling
LEN DARLING, one of only five survivors among the Australians who withstood the deadly Bodyline attack of 1932–33, dies in Adelaide in June, after a short illness.
He was 82.
A left-hand middle-order batsman, he played in 12 Tests, touring England (1934) and South Africa (1935–36), and registering his top score, 85, in the final Test of the 1932–33 series, at Sydney.
He had made his Test debut in the previous match, at Brisbane, scoring 17 and 39 (top score, run-out), and was considered by contemporary observers to have survived the campaign with less aversion to bouncers than any of his team-mates apart from McCabe.
Len Darling: Bodyline batsman
Darling's batting was always positive as well as selfless.
Born in South Yarra on Aug 14, 1909, he shone as a colt, without creating a stream of huge scores, and was first chosen for Victoria in 1926–27, when only 17.
Intermittent appearances followed.
A 96 helped salvage a draw at Sydney after Bradman's 340 not out had taken NSW to 713 for 6, and a 60 against Queensland and 87 against the strong 1928–29 MCC bowling raised his prospects.
Two years later he made 83 for Victoria against the West Indians, and in the following season, 1931–32, his unbeaten 111 against NSW at Melbourne, which saw his side to an amazing victory when their target was 434, persuaded the Test selectors to make him 12th man for the final Test.
Another Shield century followed, and in his first State match next season he made 185 at Brisbane, putting on a record 301 for the fourth wicket with fellow left-hander Leo O'Brien.
At Adelaide came 150 in 3½ hours (a record 281 for the third wicket with Keith Rigg), then 128 at home against Queensland.
Australia, battered by Larwood and Voce, were ready to call Darling up for the fourth Test.
His success at Brisbane and in the fifth Test, followed by a century for Victoria against the Englishmen, sealed his reputation.
His career-highest came next season, 188 in five hours against Queensland at Brisbane, followed by a couple of nineties, and he was on the ship to England for the 1934 tour.
Darling played no great part in Australia's regaining of the Ashes.
His four Test appearances returned him only 77 runs at 12.83, with 37 at Old Trafford his best effort.
In the Lord's debacle (Verity 15 for 104) he was found wanting, like most of his team-mates, by movement of the ball on an off-stump line.
There were brighter moments, though, with 98 at Cambridge, 100 at Oxford, 96 against Hampshire, 79 at Taunton, and 117 against Sussex at Hove, where he and Kippax (250) had a stand of 215 which had Tate holding his brow.
Darling finished the tour with 1022 runs at 34.07, but in that strong batting line-up this gave him no better than eighth place.
Three Shield centuries, all made briskly, in the 1934–35 season ensured him of a place on Vic Richardson's Australian tour of South Africa the following season, and he contributed steadily with two sixties and smart fielding as Australia, with their mighty spin attack, forged to a 4–0 victory.
Darling's 711 tour runs (47.40) included centuries against Rhodesia and Transvaal, and he was McCabe's partner during that batsman's sensational innings at Johannesburg when the South Africans appealed against the light in self-defence.
The 1936–37 season back home was Darling's last, but it embraced three fine achievements at the MCG: centuries in the South Australia and Queensland matches, and a recall for the third Test match, in which Australia began their fightback after losses in the first two Tests.
Here, he scored 20 in a tense hour before being caught high at mid-off by Allen off Verity.
By contrast, in the second innings, when Australia's tailenders had been sent in early on a wet pitch, Darling found himself going in No. 9 with 511 on the board and his side 635 ahead.
Allen bowled him — played on — first ball.
Darling's mark had been made on his final Test, however, with three catches in England's first innings, two of them at short leg quite startling.
Three weeks later his last first-class innings brought him 62 for Victoria at Sydney, and then marriage took him to Adelaide, where he spent the rest of his days.
Leonard Stuart Darling played in 100 first-class matches and scored 5780 runs at 42.50, with 16 centuries.
He held 59 catches and took 32 wickets at 47.00 with unremarkable medium-pace.
In Tests he scored 474 runs at 27.88.
An athletically-built 5′ 9″, he had played club cricket for South Melbourne, working for the latter club as an office clerk.
Ken Fiddling
KEN FIDDLING, who died in June at the age of 74, gave Northamptonshire quiet and efficient service behind the stumps from 1947, when he headed south from his native Yorkshire, until injury put an end to his career six years later.
Born at Hebden Bridge on Oct 13, 1917, Fiddling played league cricket fro Todmorden as a teenager before graduating to the Yorkshire Colts side.
In 1938 he made his first-class debut for Yorkshire against Scotland, and appeared intermittently for the county during the two seasons either side of the Second World War.
However, 1946 saw him competing for the gloves with Paul Gibb and the veteran Arthur Wood.
It was reported at the time that Yorkshire secretary J.H. Nash considered Fiddling inconsistent, although capable of brilliance.
Fortunately, Northants' post-war rebuilding programme gave the 29-year-old keeper a chance of regular Championship cricket, and he immediately created a favourable impression at the County Ground.
In his chairman's report for the 1947 season, Rawlins Hawtin recorded the comment made to him, during the match with Surrey at Peterborough, by Herbert Strudwick, who ‘volunteered his opinion that Fiddling was the best wicketkeeper in England’.
His hands were not particularly robust, but he missed very few matches until June 1952, when appendicitis ruled him out for the rest of the summer.
Thus was Fiddling denied the opportunity to keep in the fixture against the touring Indians, made famous by the celebrated arrival on the scene of Frank Tyson.
It also dealt a blow to his testimonial, which nevertheless realised more than £2000.
The following May brought more misfortune in the painful form of a stress-fractured foot.
The highly promising Keith Andrew from Lancashire would be qualified to take over in 1954, and it was not a surprise when Northants decided to terminate Fiddling's engagement before the season was out.
He subsequently returned to a job in the clothing trade.
In 160 first-class matches — 142 of them for Northants — he claimed 226 catches and 76 stumpings, 59 of those dismissals  coming in his best year, 1951.
As a talented batsman his successes were principally defensive ones, most notably a career best 68 against Surrey at The Oval in 1947, when he shared a ninth-wicket stand of 111 with Bill Barron to drag Northants out of trouble.
Paying tribute to his fellow Yorkshireman and regular Northants colleague, Dennis Brookes described Den Fiddling as ‘an efficient county wicketkeeper and a good team man’.
Peter Rochford
SOMETIMES outstanding talent in cricket surfaces far too briefly.
Personality flaws stifle it — and we are left to wonder what might have been.
Almost everyone seemed to agree that Peter Rochford was a fine wicketkeeper.
The technique was innate, the reflexes sharp.
In the 1950s, when Gloucestershire were never short of off-spinners, he ‘took’ them with unwavering skill.
They used to say Bomber Wells was hardest of all to read and gather.
Rochford did it with an almost perfunctory efficiency.
He came down from his native Yorkshire — Halifax in his case — along with fast bowler Frank McHugh in 1952 to join Gloucestershire.
Andy Wilson came before him, Bobby Etheridge and Barrie Meyer after him, more or less.
The tragedy was that Rochford played no more than 80 matches for his county.
Alan Gibson used to put him into his alltime Gloucestershire XI: he wasn't alone in that kind of praise.
Peter had 118 catches, completed without fuss, and 34 stumpings.
By 1957 he'd gone.
The departure was abrupt, without explanation.
His disciplinary record was apt to be suspect.
He failed to turn up at all for one match, though discretion prevailed and that misdemeanour never got into the papers.
George Emmett, a little man with a reputation as a martinet (he wold make the young pros shudder), was captain during Rochford's last three years.
Peter was clearly a good deal less intimidated than some of his fledgling contemporaries.
Once he dared to knock on Emmett's door late at night and asked to borrow his dress suit.
‘You're about the same size as me, skip…
’ The reception was one of haughty brimstone; the door was closed on him.
Rochford could be an amusing companion.
But he failed to sort himself out.
He always liked a drink.
And despite his conventional, always neat, lounge-suited appearance — even in his later, difficult years — he didn't like too many rules or restrictions.
Though he didn't realise it at the time, cricket was his life and consuming interest.
He missed it immediately he left Gloucestershire.
From 1975–77 he was a first-class umpire.
After that…a void, as he confided in bar-corner moments.
He never fell out of love with the game, only with fate itself.
His home was in Stroud.
He watched Jack Russell grow up, admired the blossoming of an exceptional local-boy talent.
‘Peter was always giving me encouragement,’ Russell recalls.
Other county keepers, like Wilson, have been quick and genuine in their tributes.
But the sad fact is that Peter Rochford latterly lived alone.
His marriages had not survived.
On June 18, he collapsed and died in the arms of a fellow customer in one of the Stroud pubs where he went for company to chat quietly about cricket (never in an egotistical way) and for a drink to help him forget.
He was terminally ill with throat cancer.
In vain he hoped to carve out an alternative career as a journalist and cricket writer.
He did, in fact, cover matches for several national papers, wrote the odd article for WCM , and carried out other, more mundane, journalistic work for local papers.
He was at his best in features he had published on great Gloucestershire players like Charlie Barnett and Reg Sinfield.
Apart from perceptive observations, he had a nice literary touch and wasn't averse to a Shakespearean allusion.
He would turn up at the Gloucester and Cheltenham festivals, eager to discuss writing projects and agonising over a contracting market.
Peter Rochford deserved more scope.
But perhaps he'd left it too late.
Too many things, some self-induced, had gone wrong.
His death came at the age of 63.
There was a compelling charm about hi, and his teammates still talk about him nearly 40 years later.
William James Dines —
June 16, aged 75.
RHB, OB: Essex (20 matches, 1947–49); 431 runs (18.73), HS 69 not out v Sussex (Brentwood) 1947; 15 wkts (65.33).
Shane William Julien —
Jan 25, in Barbados, aged 36.
Powerful batsman for Windward Islands and subsequently Leewards, having played once in one-day match for Barbados.
Ed.
Lodge School.
Barbados and Trent College, Nottingham (for whom he had a very successful 1974 season with bat and ball).
Fine outfielder.
Had fishing interests in Grenada and Barbados.
Took his own life.
Gerald E. Udal —
Jan 29 in Norwich, aged 72.
Well-known club cricketer in Surrey/Middx: 10 for 36 for Kingston v Surbiton Town, 1961.
Brother of G.F. (Middx/Leics), great-uncle of Shaun Udal (Hants).
Martha Wilson Woolley —
May 10, in Chester, Nova Scotia, aged 92.
Widow of Frank Woolley (d 1978), whom she married in 1971, when he was 84.
Chicago-born, she was the first woman graduate of London School of Economics; widely travelled, she lived ‘a romantic life’, and nursed Woolley lovingly in his final years.
Early Memoirs of Frank Woolley , a slim book issued in 1976, was her inspiration.
BOOK REVIEWS
All reviews by David Frith
Living and dying for cricket
ENGLAND EXPECTS:
A Biography of Ken Barrington by Mark Peel; forward by John Major
(Kingswood; 255pp; £14.99)
HARDENED Test cricketers seldom openly weep at the loss of a colleague, but many did when Kenny Barrington died, during that dreadful tour of West Indies in 1981.
As coach and confidant, a father figure, he won the respect and often the love of the generation of cricketers with whom he worked, just as, in his own playing days, he was revered by Surrey and England supporters for his ceaseless conscientiousness at the crease.
That dedication sprang from ambition, of course, and also from the insecurity of a man whose background was unpretentious and God-fearing.
He was neat, conservative, superstitious.
He was endowed, alas, with a fragile nervous system, so that the strain of it all caused a build-up of neurosis that triggered one heart attack to end his playing career and another dozen years later that ended his life.
Ray Illingworth was surely not exaggerating when he said that Barrington ‘laid down his life for cricket’.
How he could ever have bowled legspin so successfully with his fraught temperament is a marvel in itself.
But then anxiety is an imponderable menace.
The early runs were made aggressively, but initial failure in Tests forced a resolve to tighten defence and give nothing away.
His final Test average of 58.67 (6806 runs) was considerably higher than his first-class average.
But what a price he paid.
He took a physical battering, particularly from the West Indian fast bowlers, and because he was convinced that he threw he had a phobia about Charlie Griffith.
He thus became a marked man.
Walter Robins told him it was because he antagonised the fasties by doffing his cap after evading a bouncer (Randall used to infuriate Lillee in this way); Barrington, though, was only being his naturally jolly self.
He scarcely knew how to take the mick.
The image of him sobbing at night as he nursed his physical and psychological wounds is heart-rending.
The 1961–62 tour of India was the making of him.
The crowds loved his clowning, and he confirmed his ability to sweat it out for hour after hour.
Two years later his 256 at Old Trafford was one of the longest innings ever mounted against Australia.
Elsewhere, his fierce determination not to get out led to a suspicion of selfishness, and, in 1965, to his being dropped for the funereal pace of his Edgbaston century against New Zealand.
He was badly stung at the time, but later, being the reasonable chap he was, he saw it as reasonable.
One of his greatest knocks was the 143 at Port-of-Spain in 1968 — this after he had reached breaking-point in 1966, only to come back with century after century in the 1967 Tests — but he still found touring the Caribbean a fairly distasteful affair, as revealed in his letter to his wife: ‘We're being taken for the biggest ride…the umpiring, the crowd and Charlie…it is downright cheating…
I must be bloody mad to come out here.’
He was a very loving, caring husband, and it was a blessing that, as his active cricket ended, after 15 years of marriage the Barringtons had a son.
Had Ken not been beset by peculiarly worrying tours as England manager/coach, that small family might have been spared such early grief.
The final few pages are painful reading.
Had the man who wrote the foreword been at No. 10 in those days he would doubtless have seen to it that this cricketer who displayed such honourable patriotism and high personal standards was given some decoration or other.
Too late now.
WASIM AND WAQAR:
Imran's Inheritors by John Crace; foreword by Imran Khan
(Boxtree; 287pp; £15.99)
PAKISTAN'S twin-spearhead of Wasim Akram and Waqar Younis have restored belief in fast, skilful,full-length (well, much of it) bowling, though just how long they will last, with their fearful injuries to legs, backs and groins, is uncertain.
Given ongoing fitness, how long might either remain in county cricket for that matter?
Waqar, who was almost lost to Surrey after administrative dithering, has been advised by Imran to quit daily cricket and play in the leagues instead.
But, somewhat surprisingly, ‘Wicky’ is being paid by Surrey while on tour with Pakistan this summer.
So loyalty must be reciprocated, as it always deserves to be.
Wasim, though has been reprimanded by Lancashire for comments attributed to him in this book.
So has team-mate Gehan Mendis, with worse still for Graeme Fowler, who was fined about £2000 for being so critical of the club, even though some of his offending remarks did not even make it into print.
Wasim seems to be moaning throughout, even about his own features:(‘I look at my nose, and I think, God, what happened to it?’).
He dislikes aspects of life with Lancashire, especially the dictate that at certain times he should wear tie and blazer; he rightly resents missing out on a sponsored car when the county toured Australia; he recalls verbal run-ins with opponents, including Viv Richards, and believes the Australians' tough attitude is simply ‘rude’; and he thinks that many English players are terrified long before they go out to bat’.
Critical also of the World Cup organisation, and referring to the umpiring in West Indies as ‘disgraceful’, this agonising cricketer, who came from nowhere at 18, spotted by Javed Miandad, seems greatly perturbed still at the £1000 fine extracted from him for swearing within the hearing of umpire Plews after he had banned him for bowling bouncers against Warwickshire.
This angry and often lonely young man believes the one-bouncer rule was introduced expressly for Hick's benefit.
And he thought Imran ‘unapproachable’ during the World Cup.
Might he perhaps been happier staying in Lahore to help in his father's spare-parts business?
Of Waqar Younis there is less to be said.
Mystery surrounds his age.
His back problems are as old as his Test career (3½ years).
He is a quick learner, claims innocence on the ball-scuffing charges, took 29 New Zealand wickets in three Tests, and claimed 60% of his 113 wickets last summer either bowled or lbw.
He paid £200 for hand-crafted boots from Northampton, and even became an EastEnder by residence.
Like Akram, he is one of cricket's marvels.
Not so much has been known about them, which alone justifies the book.
The claim that Akram's action resembles Alan Davidson's is a bit far-fetched.
Punctuation and spelling are untidy.
But the study of Pakistan's cricket structure — its nepotism and corruption — and inbuilt attitudes (umpire Constant's costly decision at Headingley in 1982 lives in infamy in Pakistani minds)— is timely, as is the reminder that Pakistan's cricket Press has no real voice, a shortcoming felt deeply by the players.
DURHAM: BIRTH OF A FIRST-CLASS COUNTY by Ralph Dellor (Bloomsbury; 191pp; £14.99
ONLY octogenarians would remember the last election of a new county to the first-class brotherhood.
Durham's arrival in 1992 has come so smoothly that the wonder is that the gap following Glamorgan's 1921 elevation was so long.
But beneath that successful entry last spring lay many months of feasibility studies and fund-raising, planning and persuasion.
The North-Easterners, fuelled by enthusiasm close to fanaticism, found their finance, players, admin staff, and facilities, and an exciting tale it is in the recounting.
On April 14, Sri Lanka-born Queenslander Michael Jeh ran in and bowled to John Glendenen. and Durham were launched as a first-class entity.
Middlesbrough-born Glendenen went on to score the first century, having become only the second Durham player to make a double-century when he hit 200 not out against Victoria last September in a three-day match unluckily denied first-class status.
A brief history of Durham cricket is here, with acknowledgement to Brian Hunt's 1982 publication: the Minor County triumphs over almost half a century — nine times champions, unbeaten in 65 matches over six years from August 1976 — the matches against Test touring teams, the rare victories over first-class counties in the one-day competitions, the local heroes and the Durham University products, a guide to   the grounds and the players, both imported and homegrown.
The ages of the locally-developed bowlers in a recent match against Bucks suggest unusual precocity: 16, 17, 18, 24 and 25.
The finest two batsmen to spring from Durham were probably A.E.
Stoddart and Colin Milburn, and they both are saluted, of only perfunctorily.
What impresses above all is the ‘tribal identity’ which clearly inspires the entire cricket movement in the area.
In the entire cricket movement in the area.
In due course the rest of the land could learn to beware the Dunelmians!
MAD JACK:
An Autobiography by Don Wilson with Stephen Thorpe; foreword by
Peter O'Toole; preface by Fred Trueman (Kingswood; 208pp;
£14.99)
‘I LEFT the place having helped to transport it from a snotty-nosed, public-school-type club to a place where people from all levels of society came to enjoy cricket.’
Thus Don Wilson gives his view of the legacy he believes he left when his 13 years as MCC coach at Lord's came to an end in 1990.
He unloads details of his clashes with the committee(s), and tells a surprising tale or two about the earlier MCC secretary Jack Bailey.
‘Wils’ deplores what he sees as the over-commercialisation of Lord's, and feels resentment at the criticism that allegedly came his way whenever he helped foreign players.
Among other things he gets off his chest are opinions about contemporaries: Bob Appleyard could be ‘quite nasty and overbearing’, Ray Illingworth was ‘selfish’ but often helpful, John Edrich was ‘a little stirrer off the field’, Geoff Arnold ‘moaned incessantly’on tour, and Geoff Boycott was the ‘most selfish, egotistical individual I have ever met’.
At times, Wilson doesn't even spare himself: in the late 1970s, living in London, the wiry Yorkshireman, ‘developed quite a firm relationship with the bottle’ and became ‘distanced and depressive’.
And yet the book has many a laughter-line.
The high-jinks of the victorious Yorkshire sides are lively in the telling, and there are laughs aplenty in his recollections of the 1963–64 MCC tour of India, during which he played five of his six Tests.
Years coaching black kids in South Africa, his marital ups and downs, his worship for the suspicious Wardle, his boyhood experiences as a film extra which gave him a life-long love of being ‘on stage’, all this satisfactorily answers the question ‘Why a book from this chap?’
His beliefs concerning coaching methods are worth studying, and he adds his voice to those condemning the modern fixation on fitness at the expense of honing cricket skills.
This ‘gorgeous gargoyle’(thespian O'Toole's) description) might have played more Tests had Underwood not been around, but he has still made a wide impression on the game, made more lasting by this unexpected offering.
A TALE OF TWO CAPTAINS:
England v West Indies 1991 by Bill Frindall; foreword by Ted
Dexter; lim. edn of 350 signed by Gooch, Dexter, Frindall,
Richards (Boundary Books, Southlands, Sandy Lane, Goostrey,
Cheshire CW4 8NT; 154pp; £38 + £2 p)
SO GRIPPING is this summer's Test series that last year's battle royal is undeservedly threatened with being forgotten too soon.
A gratified chairman of the England Committee registers his pleasure at the result and for the facts that good sportsmanship prevailed and England fielded some young players successfully.
The five matches, two won by England and two by West Indies, are recorded in words and scorecharts by Bill Frindall, with stroke-charts for the centuries made, and in Patrick Eagar's matchless pictures.
Beneath a large pyramid of facts lie the great deeds of Robin Smith, DeFreitas, Tufnell, Richardson, Hooper, Richards, Ambrose, Marshall, and, perhaps most memorably, Gooch, who magnificent 154 not out at Headingley showed England the way.
And perhaps the most riveting of the statistics is the West Indians' 197 no-balls.
It is a production of deservedly high quality.
THE COMPLETE BOOK OF MODERN FIELDING PRACTICES by Chris Stone; preface by Graham Gooch (Hale; 201pp; £14.95)
ONE CAN but wish the publishers of all good luck in getting their money back on this book, for, much as all cricketers should not only strive to become good fielders but enjoy the process of improving their game, how many will lash out nigh on £15 for a manual to help them do so?
Perhaps a government subsidy, sourced from entertainment tax, should have been applied in the interests of mass circulation.
It is a kind of companion to Alan Oakman's Games for Cricket Training (1980), with 105 manoeuvres, scripted and with diagrams, aimed at giving fun with serious purpose.
Coaches will find the ideas stimulating, and all cricketers will find food for thought in the link chapters: should second and third slips watch bat or ball?
And Stuart Leary believed in following the ball from the bowler's hand even when fielding at short leg.
Every conceivable exercise seems to be here, apart from diving full-length to catch lemons hurled the length of a swimming-pool.
The danger of cracking heads with Bairstow flying in from the other side is as good a reason as any for its omission.
SIX MORE DAYS OF GRACE by G. Derek West (Darf; 214pp; £9.95 pb)
UNDER not the most comfortable of titles, this follow-up to Twelve Days of Grace (reviewed WCM Oct '89) serves up studies of six further contemporaries of W.G. Grace, all models of far-sweeping research.
Tom Emmett's story is laced with thick Yorkshire dialect; Ted Barratt, another left-arm bowler, prolific but unlucky, is rescued from the deepest obscurity of them all; the colourful George Ulyett is seen as ‘a sort of Victorian Ian Botham’, and was involved in the scandal over match-rigging on the 1881–82 tour of Australia (to say nothing of a gatecrashing at 10 Downing Street); the weird William Scotton lurks here too; and the elegant but equally tragic Willie Bates; and the outrageous Bobby Peel, the longest-lived of them all, by a long way, and the fourth Yorkie in the collection.
Indeed, the author actually obtained his autograph some 60 years ago.
But, like the once-proud reputations of these cricketers, it is now lost.
SOMEONE WHO WAS by Brian Johnston (Methuen; 288pp; £14.99)
SOMEONE who was…?
Fill in any from a number of entries: an errant Etonian, a curious coffee merchant, a giggling, gallant Grenadier, a would-be vaudevillean, a fervent family man, a cake connoisseur, purveyor of smutty jokes, wireless waffler, acquaintance of the great and the multitude, retailer of unashamed repetition.
Most of the material will seem familiar, and there are not too many long words.
Two of the chapters concern cricket exclusively.
None would quibble with the subtitle:Reflections on a life of happiness and fun .
OTHER TITLES RECEIVED
SPORTING SPITE!:
Rebels and Rebellion in World Sport by Evening Standard
Sportswriters (Ward Lock/Evening Standard; 144pp; £8.99 pb + £2 p)—
Collection of essays spotlighting and deploring the brutality, cheating, drug-taking and cynicism which have swamped international sport.
John Thicknesse's 13 pages trace cricket's sad decline, laying the blame not only at the feet of grasping humourless players but weak umpires too.
Gatting's Faisalabad outburst is interpreted with a certain amount of knowing understanding, but Lillee, the Chappells, Lloyd, Holding, Croft, Richards, Greig and Miandad join him and many others in a category which should be cringeing when thinking back on some of its unsavoury behaviour.
Among other contributions, Neil Allen looks pityingly at athletics and boxing, and the stink is just as pronounced in soccer.
Michael Herd examines the influence of the media on sport, exposing the tabloid papers for what they are, and identifying money as a recurring culprit.
WHAT IS A GOOGLY? by Robert Eastaway; foreword by Ted Dexter (Robson; 144pp; £6.99 pb)—
Guide for beginners (or foreigners) to esoteric terms and customs of cricket, written with a smile and much enhanced by Mark Stevens' pleasant drawings.
HAMPSHIRE HANDBOOK 1992 ed.
Tony Mitchener:(Hants CCC; 208pp; £5 + 75p p)—
NatWest success is the keynote; farewells to Peter Sainsbury and Chris Smith — and three pages on John Arlott; extensive records section and full details of '91 season.
THE WEST INDIAN TOUR OF ENGLAND 1906 by Gerry Wolstenholme (from the author, signed, numbered edn of 500; 40pp; £3.75+50p p)—
Dainty booklet recapping the first tour by a West Indies team to embrace first matches.
A struggle at first, it later brought victories over Yorkshire and Northants, with performances by S.G. Smith (later of Northants), who did the double in all matches, Lebrun Constantine, father of Learie, and George Challenor, with Percy Goodman and A.E.
Harragin topping the first-class batting and R.C. Ollivierre the bowling.
The team's ‘war-cry’ is given as: ‘We have come to learn, sah!’
Significant little piece of cricket history.
VIMTO BOLTON &DISTRICT CRICKET ASSOCIATION ANNUAL
HANDBOOK 1992 ed.
John Cleworth &David Kaye (from the latter,
232pp; £1.50+50p p)—
104th edition of Lancashire's oldest cricket league's yearbook, with complete digest of clubs and competitions.
VIDEO REVIEWS
BOTHAM HITS BACK!
(Amity/The Label; 65 mins; £10.99)
YES:another Botham video.
But they're far from being identical.
Here, in the comfort of his own armchair and by the side of his own lake, he chuckles about the highlights of his career.
so embedded now in English cricket folklore: the lost teeth at Taunton in '74 when Andy Roberts bounced him (‘my first big break’), his dark months of Test captaincy, Headingley '81, when he decided to have some fun and whacked 149 not out (‘soon the depression lifted’), Hollywood (‘nice little diversion’), the accusations of misbehaviour off the field (‘ridiculous’, ‘farcical’, ‘part of the learning process’), thoughts on the World Cup (‘Pakistan were lucky to get to the final’), the Somerset break-up.
TCCB, known in the past to have administered punishment for long-past ‘sins’, or at least for the disreputable later exposure of them, will have to decide whether Beefy's tale of being ‘extremely inebriated’ in Perth five years ago, when he forgot his bat and had to go back for it before smashing 48 off Western Australia, is an indictable offence.
Equally interesting is his recollection of wanting Gooch as his vice-captain in the Caribbean in '81 after Willis was repatriated: Lord's insisted on Miller: the situation at selection meetings, when Miller had to leave the room while his inclusion or otherwise was discussed, was, ‘farcical’.
As for MCC members (‘those so-and-sos’), he vowed never to raise his bat to them again after they averted their collective gaze from him after his ‘pair’ against Australia in '81.
Alec Bedser's comment soon afterwards — that Botham would have been sacked had he not resigned — is recalled with contempt.
The quality of the film clips is, on the whole, poor, even to the Heinz and Shredded Wheat ads dropped in as chapter-breaks.
The interviewer is Peter Hayter, an owlish Friar Tuck figure who seems to be troubled by itching much of the time and who uses ‘I mean’ as frequently as commas.
He happened to work for the same paper which stitched Botham up some eight years ago.
‘Both’, though, is a study survivor.
As he affirms early on, ‘People only remember the winners.’
SURREY COUNTY CRICKET CLUB:
The Official History produced by Michael Burns (Dolphin Video, 124 mins; £15.99 + £2.50 p)
MIKE BURNS has followed his beguiling Yorkshire history with one on Surrey, equally beautifully filmed, with a fine array of early stills, some rare archive footage, some of it pre-1914, and 20 or so interviews with players.
One of them, Stuart Surridge, did not live to see the production, which is dedicated to him; but he gave it a memorable quote when he reflected on his Surrey players of the 1950s, with whom he won five consecutive County Championships: they were a great side, he recalled: ‘All they wanted was a kick up the arse!’
The background music is tasteful, the footage of Hobbs, in particular, delectable, and such utterances as heard from Tom Barling, now 85, touchingly in contrast to those of many latterday professionals.
‘It was a wonderful life,’ he says, with a postscript entirely free of bitterness: ‘We weren't very well paid!’
Gover and Fender are seen bowling, Jardine and Sandham batting.
Bedser and Laker are well depicted, and the unrest of the 1970s is touched upon.
Special focus is put on the 1974 Bsuccess and the NatWest finals of '82 and '91, which brought tears of joy and anguish respectively.
The Guildford Week is pleasantly filmed, and yet somehow the loveliest shot of all is The Oval in pristine snow.
UNFAIR DISMISSAL
Justin Hunt in the fast-becoming-barren land of the cricket fanzines
HANDS UP those cricket fans who have heard of Johnny Miller ?
Only a few of you — just as I suspected!
Johnny Miller is one of a handful of cricket fanzines struggling to find a readership on the fringe of the mainstream of cricket consciousness.
There are others:Cricketer's Anorak ,The Name of the Rose and the now deceased Sticky Wicket .
Why have they failed to spectacularly to penetrate the mainstream?
The cruel would say they are all a load of balls and the more open-minded that they have not had a fair trial (in cricket terms: a decent net).
A few months ago I visited the Mecca of soccer fanzines — SportsPages in Charing Cross Road, London.
Astonished by the booming turnover, I asked if there were any cricket versions.
There are, and the shop sells them in the summer.
After more enquiries, a devout soccer fan gave me a selection to read.
Before I go on, some of you may not have the foggiest what a fanzine is.
They are nothing less than soapboxes for critical sporting fans.
In the football world, they have been very successful.
When Saturday Comes , a national soccer fanzine, is currently selling in all major newsagents and has a circulation of about 40,000.
So why hasn't cricket — our glorious national pastime — managed to give birth to a popular cricket fanzine?
After all, the great Compton demonstrated the two games were inter-related.
‘Lack of passion,’ a football pal informed me.
‘You cricketers have no passion for your game.’
Not true, I countered, referring him to the World Cup carnival in Oz.
Who could deny the passions stirred by that spectacle, let alone the emotions generated over the only way to view the tournament from the UK?
A number of cricket fanzines have been banned from county-ground shops for being ‘anti-cricket’ and for not ‘upholding the traditions of the game’.
I was surprised spectators hadn't been given the opportunity to assess their merits.
The most well-known,Sticky Wicket , which won backing from the publisher of the lavatorial Viz , did manage the nation-wide plunge but was flushed away after 12 issues.
Asserting their rights as customers in a free market, cricket fans gave the magazine ‘out’ by refusing to pay for it.
As for the current batch of fanzines, they are undeniably a mixed bag.
But unless some county-ground shops alter their stance this season, the majority of cricket-lovers may never get the opportunity to receive a delivery from Johnny Miller and Co.
If county shops put fanzines in, then we spectators can decide whether or not to slog them out of the ground after a couple of deliveries.
At present though, it seems Johnny Miller and company are victims of unfair dismissal.
LORD'S COMPETITION
RICHARD STACE from Taunton in Somerset is the winner of our Lord's competition from the June issue.
He correctly calculated the number of official Test caps won by the pictured ‘mystery trio’— Rod Marsh, Dennis Lillee and Clive Lloyd — as 276 (96, 70 and 110 caps respectively).
His postcard was drawn from a bulging bagful of entries — nearly all of them correct — after the closing date.
Mr Stace wins a VIP day out at Lord's for the one-day international against Pakistan on Aug 22, with seats and full hospitality courtesy of Keith Prowse Hospitality.
Warwickshire allrounder Roger Twose: spell of 6 for 11 against Middlesex
After an indifferent start to the season Surrey's David Ward bounced back with a NatWest century against Glamorgan, then went on to record the fastest first-class hundred of the season (70 balls) against Northants
Essex left-hander Nick Knight continued his consistent run with 81 not out against Cumberland in the NatWest
John Crawley: 70 against the Pakistanis, then a century to lead Cambridge to victory in the Varsity match
