ANOTHER WORLD
The question must again be asked, "What exactly are licensed dealers?" 
In his book Inside The Over-The-Counter Market, Tom Wilmot, chairman of the best-known licensed dealer Harvard Securities, offers the following definition: "Effectively companies other than stockbrokers or jobbers which are licensed…to carry on the business of dealing in securities." 
The author is for the purposes of this book broadening the definition to include all the cowboys in and out of the City of London, selling shares, futures, and occasionally other financial instruments.
Licensed dealers certainly advertise more widely, and seem more responsive to the small client than most stockbrokers.
Why should you buy or sell shares and other financial instruments through them?
Most clients are compelled against their better nature by the voice of the devil on the end of the telephone.
What is their dealer offering?
Many licensed dealers have specialised in pushing shares in small companies.
These are high-risk investments, a fact often not made clear on the telephone, not always on the contract note.
The market in question is the over-the-counter (OTC) market.
In the United Kingdom, as opposed to the United States, this remains a comparatively unregulated line of business, conducted through hectic but meticulously planned sales campaigns.
Commission-paid salesmen sit or stand at their telephones calling punters and reading aloud their sales pitch: a sheet of paper on which is scrawled details of their investment proposition.
Dealers at one licensed dealer would occasionally write ad hoc sales pitches, photocopy them, and hand them round to colleagues.
These would be used without being properly vetted and were likely to contain inaccuracies.
In the rough and tumble atmosphere of the dealing room, nobody seemed to care.
After all, even the official sales pitches were often too uninformative, or too ill-spelt and ungrammatical to be of much use.
Facts were also likely to be outdated.
The last year's figures cited might appertain to the year before that, and expansion prospects mooted may already have fallen through.
Sales campaigns in licensed dealers are vigorous, sometimes hysterical.
Dealing managers and team leaders shout at, cajole and  entice their dealers into selling large quantities of stock.
It is not uncommon for a client on the telephone to hear swearing in the background.
The bustle enhances the impression of good business.
All this has a snowball effect on the day's turnover and on the individual dealers' commissions.
Moral standards go by the board in an atmosphere that seems generated purely for the above purposes.
Dealing through licensed dealers can cost less than through stockbrokers, but usually costs more.
Furthermore, your money is at risk, particularly when there is a thin market in shares, or where your shares are held under a nominee name for the convenience of your licensed dealer.
Punters get desperate when the firm they are dealing with is about to go bust.
Clients of licensed dealer Prior Harwin, for instance, welched on deals they had agreed on the telephone when the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) stopped the firm from trading at the end of 1986.
Tony Prior, Prior Harwin's chairman, then proposed a scheme to save both the company and investors' funds.
Unsecured creditors should agree to accept a down payment of around 35p in the pound for money due to them, and to take the balance in redeemable convertible preference shares in Prior Harwin, to be paid off in four years' time.
The company was, however wound up, and it was revealed that a larger number of stocks in its listings had rarely changed hands.
Indeed, one property developer Bexbuild Developments, had been listed by Prior Harwin a year after its market-making agreement with the licensed dealer had been terminated.
The business of selling shares at licensed dealers is often a gimmick which loses investors their hard-earned money.
It could be argued that anyone who is idiot enough to send a cheque for thousands of pounds to a salesman of shares in unquoted companies he has never heard of deserves to lose it all.
This is the way the young sharedealers feel as they put out the bait and hook in the mugs.
The author is not just saying this for sensation.
He has seen it happen.
Some sharedealing and futures dealing firms that are no longer in existence paid commission of over half all monies received from clients.
The dealers thus earned thousands of pounds from one deal.
Many cooperated with an uneasy feeling that the clients would never see their money again.
As one top sharedealer put it, "You're here to make yourselves money, not your clients." 
Yes, some dealers have an inkling which shares are dodgy.
They misrepresent the prospects to clients.
Afterwards, they blame the directors: "We were led to believe it was a good stock" they excuse themselves.
Who can prove they are lying?
The directors have their own more sophisticated excuses.
If they don't wriggle free of blame, they don't in any case care.
They have made so much money out of these operations anyway, they can afford to retire.
Here are the big time smooth operators.
With all the press warnings, Jo Punter ought to know to avoid unquoted stocks, to avoid disreputable shares and futures dealing companies.
Once he has read this book, he will be put off careless speculation for life.
The hardest hit clients are frequently punters on the commodities and futures markets.
Many are crazed gamblers who cannot bring themselves to walk away with winnings.
Again and again they must plunge until they have lost all.
They will allow themselves to be stripped of savings by bucket shop practitioners who are not, strictly speaking, licensed dealers, but who operate on the same principles.
Futures punters know they are playing with fire which is why some ask not to be rung at home, and the name of the commodities firm is never to be given to anyone who answers the office phone.
 "If my wife found out I'm playing with our capital, she would divorce me," admitted one client.
The futures market is faster moving than the stock market.
With a very small stake, vast losses and gains can be made.
This is thanks to gearing.
The investor buys a futures contract for around 10% of its value.
He assumes whatever gain or loss the entire futures contract makes.
The time at which a futures contract gets sold is vitally significant.
The investor if he is going to make money this way, must have a broker who is committed to showing him a profit, as well as earning his commission off him.
How many brokers are to be trusted?
Certainly the hard sell futures salesmen have, in the past at least, been in the game purely for their own commissions.
They tended to be raw kids with a self imposed need to get rich quick.
They often wanted big money for private purposes, for example setting up a property company or buying a Ferrari.
They were buccaneers, not careerists, and did not belong to the City proper.
Some survive even now.
Licensed dealers proper are at their busiest when trading in government privatisations, perhaps the safest territory for the inexperienced private client.
Their often heavily advertised, commission-free dealing proves irresistible.
Most firms will even trade before clients have received their allotment letters.
Stockbrokers have refused to do this except for established private clients or institutions.
Licensed dealers trade on a scale that is only limited by their own  resources.
On the British Telecom privatisation issue for instance, Harvard Securities had planned to start dealing at 9.00 a.m. on the earliest allowable morning.
The phones started ringing at 8.55 a.m.
Within five minutes, they had received over one hundred enquiries.
After three hours, two thousand inquiries had been made.
Harvard had dealt in 2 million shares by early afternoon, and the main problem became that of finding sellers to match buying orders from account traders, i.e. investors who were buying then selling the shares quickly in the hope of making an instant profit.
Harvard allowed no big orders over 25,000 shares, while it was willing to take up to 1 million shares on its books from sellers.
Some of Harvard's clients reneged on their agreements to sell when the price climbed, making ridiculous claims, like that the dog had chewed up the allotment letter, or that somebody had sold as a practical joke.
Harvard responded by installing tapes to record all telephone conversations.
Clients as well as dealers are supposed to be protected by this, if the licensed dealer proves able to "find" the relevant tape.
Some sellers of British Gas shares, prior to delivery of allotment letters, who had responded to press advertisements of the share-dealer Walter L Jacob &Co Ltd which has now been wound up, were told to send Jacob a cheque for half the proceeds.
Salesmen claimed this would be refunded as soon as the seller's allotment letter arrived.
The initiative as a whole was criticised both by clients and the national press.
Other sellers through this firm were encouraged to invest the proceeds in an unknown Las Vegas company, Electronic Speciality Products Inc.
Sadly Walter L Jacob &Co Ltd, described in this context by The Observer as perhaps the"closest the UK has to an American-style boiler room operation! has not been the only licensed dealer to recruit clients in this way.
Tony Levens, former investment editor of The Sunday Times, offers sellers of government privatisations through licensed dealers generally the following warning: "It may not be long before one of their sales people is on the phone to you with a very persuasive line, badgering you to buy high risk shares of a very doubtful quality" 
Also, licensed dealers send out often scrappily written investment newsletters, and sales promotion letters alike.
Newsletters are often issued on free trial to potential clients.
Their recommendations may offer an idea of what stocks have the benefit of being promoted by the licensed dealer in question.
The editorial matter can be biased to presenting a favourable buying climate for speculative stocks.
Typically Market Maker the Harvard Securities newsletter, at a time when unemployment figures had  reached the 3 1\2 million level, presented this rosy view of the City: "The prospect of stronger cashflow has meant the reintroduction of brandy and cigars after lunch; Beluga caviar is creeping back onto the menu; pension fund managers…are starting to hail taxis again, and the other afternoon in Throgmorton Street I actually heard a Blue Button whistling" 
National newspapers and financial magazines present a more detached view.
Most attack licensed dealers mercilessly; hitting them when they are down, they sow the seeds of their destruction.
Barbara Conway, the former Daily Telegraph journalist, who was until recently publicity officer of the new watchdog over the financial services industry, The Securities and Investment Board (SIB), has criticised the practices of Harvard Securities over a period of years in her reporting based on private investors' comments.
Following A-Day, Harvard Securities were unable to find authorisation.
This giant amongst licensed dealers was struggling as never before.
No longer were its hard sell tactics acceptable.
Part of the problem for clients is knowing what is really done with their money.
Clients of McDonald Wheeler Fund Management, wound up by the Department of Trade and Industry, had believed they were putting their money into low risk projects.
It turned out that they had instead invested in an airline which never took off, a college that had no students, and a luxury yacht.
It would have been of little comfort to investors to learn that Chairman John Wheeler had, according to former business colleagues, been living a luxury lifestyle, spending almost £70,000 on refitting his yacht, and thousands of pounds renovating his six-bedroom house.
He drove a chocolate-brown Rolls Royce.
What a far cry this must have been from his younger days in the priesthood.
The cost report from the Official Receiver read, as one investor put it, like a "financial horror comic" .
Many blamed Financial Intermediaries Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association (FIMBRA), the overseeing regulatory body, for this fiasco.
John Grant, who ran FIMBRA, admitted: "In the light of the Wheeler affair we've obviously got to review the whole system" It seems, however that FIMBRA was financed sufficiently to check out just one in five firms under its surveillance in any given year.
This was no compensation for the 2,000 odd investors who had lost several million pounds in this.
Amongst these was a retired headmaster who had his £70,000 life-savings in McDonald Wheeler and who you'd think would have known better.
Oonagh McDonald, the shadow treasury backbencher at the time, said: "Nobody should invest through FIMBRA until a compensation scheme is set up" This has thankfully now come about.
Unfortunately, just missing the introduction of formal compensation was the enormous Barlow Clowes collapse in 1988, in which investors lost tens of millions of pounds.
They had thought their money had been safe in gilts (government backed securities).
It transpired that it had been syphoned off into private businesses.
Who would compensate the investors here?
As the DTI had failed to act when it had known of irregularities within the firm, did not the Government have a moral obligation towards the dupes?
Of course, if it should offer compensation in this case, the Government would open up a Pandora's box of claims from other similar cases.
Also early in 1988 licensed dealers such as Eyas Securities and Afcor Investments were closed down.
Futures firms such as Stox and DPR Futures, who used hard sales techniques in the mould of LHW, which did survive the onset of the Financial Services Act (1986), also bit the dust for various reasons.
Frightened DPR account executives, knowing their firm's appalling reputation, were asking themselves: "Will we ever work in the City again?" 
Photographers hung around their offices at the Corn Exchange Buildings in the City of London.
Executives told them to "fuck off" and got on with dreaming how DPR might one day set up "Down Under" , where various bucket shops operated.
It seemed like the end of an era for licensed dealers.
Others had been out of business for a while now.
A few embittered investors would still remember defunct sharedealers such as: Buckingham Corporate, City Investment Centres and Ravendale Securities, Investors Discount Brokerage, Rayner Securities, Financial Management Services, Greenwood International, Hamilton Hogg, Strand House Securities, Sheridan Securities, London &Norwich Investment Services, Anderson Kimble…the list is growing all the time.
In fact some City professionals are saying that the licensed dealer should be a protected species, or it will shortly become extinct.
Even when certain licensed dealers have survived, the firms in which they were making markets have gone bust.
Thousands of embittered clients of various licensed dealers, and of the bucket shops on the Continent on whom were foisted speculative shares bear testimony to this.
The question that haunts unlucky punters is,"How much did their sharedealer know about impending catastrophe?
Could he not have issued a warning?"
Funnily enough, many licensed dealers seem very keen to sell shares in companies which subsequently go bust.
For instance, clients trying to sell back shares in Towerbell Records through Harvard Securities shortly before Towerbell went under were urged to buy more.
One client even received a letter from Harvard Securities saying  of Towerbell: "I expect the price to rise to higher levels and will advise further" .
Harvard Securities were paid to make a market in Towerbell Records, but as Tom Wilmot has pointed out, the dealer who sent that letter would not have known of the pending disaster since dealers were forbidden access to the firm's corporate finance department by the so-called "Chinese walls" However Wilmot has sometimes blamed his dealers for breaching dealing regulations.
 "Chinese walls" too, apparently, prevented Harvard dealers from advising clients to sell out of Hilton Mining Shares, shortly before the share price virtually collapsed.
Most dealers, however anticipated something of the kind might happen once they were forbidden to sell clients out of the stock.
 "If any clients want to sell out, let me have a word with them," said director John Harris.
Following this manoeuvre some clients changed their minds.
What could he have said to them?
When bad news was finally announced, dealers were instructed to conceal it from their clients for as long as possible.
Although shareholders in Hilton Mining afterwards contemplated legal action because the prospectus had not revealed that Allan Hilton, the chairman, had been a director of Hilton (Products) which went into voluntary liquidation, their real grievance was against Harvard's selling techniques.
After the Towerbell Records fiasco, Tom Wilmot said: "The OTC market is very very risky, as demonstrated by Towerbell.
Of every ten new over-the-counter companies, at least two go bust"
It is the client who bears the brunt of this risk.
One punter refers to a typically fateful day: 1 August 1988 - "…the day I returned from a holiday abroad, Harvard telephoned me out of the blue (8th April 1986), and a chap who sounded like an enthusiastic young cockney told me how wonderful Towerbell was and that it was going places with top stars in tow!" 
My diary of 8th September that year notes: Towerbell shares have flopped!"
Such risks have rarely been emphasised by telephone salesmen at Harvard and elsewhere, except through the compulsory wealth warnings stamped on all Harvard's contract notes.
The announcements on licensed dealing firms themselves prove often to be delayed and evasive.
Rumours may circulate which present a licensed dealer in a too optimistic light.
For instance, many firms have been perpetually on the brink of buying up a broker but brokers are often quick to deny it.
For example, the stockbroker AJ Bekhor refuted any suggestion that it might be merging with Harvard Securities.
Even the innocent bystander suspects that such claims contain more of wishful thinking than of substance, but he rarely realises how hard licensed dealers are.
They will always be, superficially at least, a different animal from stockbrokers, and are proving unable to survive the implementation of The Financial Services Act (1986).
These beleaguered firms are still seen as what a national newspaper journalist has called the "barrow boys" of the share industry, whereas stockbrokers are seen as more respectable.
There are of course exceptions to the rules, and some of them well-known at that.
Dealers are sometimes told to sell stocks as a medium-term hold (i.e. wait six months for something to happen).
In practice, under threat of dismissal or of heavy fines, or even of just not making so much money as they might, many dealers succumb to the temptation of exaggerating short-term prospects.
Directors know this is going on and turn a blind eye.
They know that it bumps up sales figures.
Inexperienced investors have often been known to put several thousand pounds into a little known company, on the strength of a five minute telephone conversation.
Due to the large spread (i.e. difference between buying and selling prices), it usually takes a substantial rise to enable investors to sell out at a profit.
Dealers at one licensed dealer would habitually sell a stock whose price would rise for a couple of weeks or so although not enough to cover the spread — before reverting.
Clients were getting all excited about nothing.
Sometimes clients are advised to buy stocks, uncannily as it seems, just before the price drops.
On occasions, they are advised to sell just before the price rises.
Clients are often best advised to do the opposite to what their dealer recommends.
It was common for disasters about to strike stocks to be revealed as late as possible.
Legendary at one licensed dealer was the announcement pending"on a company whose shares it was selling.
A director would instruct dealers to tell their clients that an announcement was pending"in order to persuade them to buy more or to hold on to stock they wished to sell.
Dealers would repeat this parrot fashion in the same optimistic note that the director had used on them.
The more experienced dealers guessed it might paradoxically refer to a disaster on the horizon, but kept their thoughts from clients.
Clients often discovered disasters affecting share prices of stocks too late.
The Corporate Finance Department of the licensed dealer pushing the stock, could arguably have alerted the dealing room earlier but it never did.
Psychologically investors' money would be locked in, often until it had dwindled overall to less than half its original worth.
Clients were ALWAYS complaining.
The few successes on the UK OTC market are always quoted  as if to make up for the failures.
Their role is to thus quieten the critics.
It is all part and parcel of the selling technique.
What a pity it is that clients trust their dealers.
But if a firm is the only market-maker in a stock, where else can they go for specific information about the stock?
It is rarely productive to approach the company in which shares are owned.
Clients frequently threaten licensed dealers with exposure to the Press, and this has proved a relatively efficacious way of getting bona fide complaints heeded.
But not all clients complain.
It takes all sorts to make a clientele.
The typical punter is a lot more naive than licensed dealers let on.
Comparatively few sophisticated clients will touch licensed dealers with a bargepole.
What all clients have in common is a gnawing desire to make a quick profit, and a likely fatal gambling instinct.
They pledge every deal to be their last one.
But once they have committed themselves to an investment or two, the potential of a larger portfolio appeals, and they plunge beyond the point of easy return.
What sort of people are their dealers?
The traditional dealer is spivvy and smart, but ill-educated.
He is typically a former street trader or motorcycle messenger who wants to make a quick easy fortune.
Dick Whittington has nothing on him.
He may well run a car repair business or sell cheap jewellery on the side, in which case his dealing will lack single-mindedness.
One particularly spivvy dealer during an official Harvard Securities party urinated all over the floor.
Why didn't he just vomit in public like some of his colleagues?
The answer is that he was wreaking a horrible revenge for having had his box of leads confiscated that morning, on suspicion that he was attending a job interview.
After the party, he was sacked.
The other dealers then had a tough time explaining his absence to his erstwhile clients, but one or two told the truth.
Generally, the streetwise dealers work in a separate camp from the more educated types, and never the twain shall meet.
Self-evidently, each faction attracts its own sort of clients.
Herein lies the secret of a successful licensed dealers longevity: dealing relationships that span every class of society.
The educated dealers may, if they are lucky, later worm their way into stockbroking, and take their clients with them.
In contrast, the streetwise dealers require quicker money, and may end up in a bucket shop on the Continent.
Most streetwise dealers will not make their home telephone numbers available to clients.
They are constantly changing their numbers, or going ex-directory to stave off threatening calls.
Some dealers in either social camp will risk account-trading for themselves, often in tens of thousands of pounds, as a result of an   Harvard Securities PLC, 95 Southwark Street, London SE1 which has taken people off the streets and turned them into high earning dealers, sometimes within weeks.
inside tip.
Not all will pay up their debts, however.
One trainee dealer at Harvard Securities lost £20,000 from account-trading in several stocks.
He then absconded to America without paying.
He left no address.
The dealer who had introduced him to his broker became understandably embittered.
Another trick is for the dealer to buy his stock through a friend, particularly when he has special knowledge that the price will go up, as did one dealer on Helical Bar a well known property company in the UK whose share price then sky-rocketed from its post crash low.
However the dealers who bought and sold for themselves in opportune moments while trading in new issues on behalf of clients have sometimes been found out and reprimanded, but not usually sacked, if they were good dealers.
Licensed dealers can be slow to deliver share certificates.
One of the author's former clients is still awaiting certificates for American stocks he bought through the crashed Sheridan Securities over two years ago, a familiar story to clients of many licensed dealers (and many clients deal through several).
Without share certificates, a client can only sell his stocks (even if listed) through the dealer he bought them from, at that dealer's price, which may well not be competitive.
If the shares are held under a nominee name, the client will not get certificates at all.
This means he may lose all his money if the sharedealer crashes.
Settlement on time, with the right monies, is another area in which licensed dealers let down the clients, but retain the advantage of having the use of the clients' money.
They guess at only the tip of the iceberg of what is going on in these firms.
Clients' funds, against all regulations, are often mixed with company funds.
Otherwise they are syphoned off into mysterious Liechtenstein trusts, or are invested in companies whose identities are kept secret.
Where does it all end?
Clients of licensed dealers find a major problem in selling back their OTC stock.
Until recently at Harvard Securities, dealers were penalised for taking back OTC stock if takebacks exceeded 10% of their total business.
The dealers then resorted to extraordinary preventive measures, such as keeping sellers indefinitely "on hold" until they rang off, or simply cutting them off immediately.
If a seller had been ringing for fifteen or twenty minutes before the phone was even answered, he would naturally resent this ultimate insult.
One Harvard client is on record as saying: "I still hold 10000 shares in the Harvard quoted company BURAD Holdings, and, since I have lost all confidence in the dealing room at Harvard, I am still puzzling  over how to dispose of the shares without an inordinate amount of emotional effort." 
A more skilful dealer manages to hold his clients in stocks through sales technique.
One dealer of the author's acquaintance addressed sellers in this manner: "Sell?
You must be out of your mind.
You should be picking up more!"
Indeed, most successful dealers deter sellers by bluffing, saying what the client wants to hear like the Catholic priest who preaches only of heaven.
Investors are so willing to believe in recovery around the corner that they will clutch at false hopes almost indefinitely.
The inexperienced, particularly, cannot face selling out at a loss.
The highest earning dealers only take back OTC stock if their client needs the funds to pay for another stock; or if it is a stock that the directors want back, so allowing the dealers to retrieve in their names, and thus to evade a cut in their own commissions.
Excessive dealing to generate commission, known as churning, is commonplace.
Top earning dealers sometimes coax their clients into massive account trades.
The clients are taken in and out of the stock, then sometimes settle back in it before the account is over.
It is a gamble that generates huge commission for the dealer and usually even bigger losses for the client.
Some dealers don't mind wiping out a client in this way if they have earned enough commission from the deal.
Dealers have usually been paid a higher commission for selling OTC than Stock Exchange listed, USM or Third Market stocks, so the more trusting clients may get sold a disproportionate quantity of OTC stock.
Several top OTC dealers at one stage virtually ceased selling any stock but the riskiest and least promising.
For their pains, they were paid more than almost any other dealers.
Technically, Harvard dealers should not have been selling stock to clients who had not dealt three times with the company, unless they had sent out written information about the stock.
This rule was, however often broken.
This poses no problem with experienced investors who understand what they are letting themselves in for.
It is always the small naive investor who fusses, complains of breach in regulations, and cancels.
Cancellations cost the dealers in fines, and can generate unwelcome publicity for the licensed dealer concerned.
The less scrupulous small investor will sometimes delay payment for his stock, then pay for it only if its price has gone up.
He will, however only get away with this once.
The rules against cold-calling have been widely publicised.
Clients often make false claims of cold-calling; sometimes so they might avoid paying for the shares they bought.
If they have filled in a card, declaring willing for a dealer to  approach them with urgent share recommendations, they are not being cold-called if subsequently telephoned.
A good dealer works hard.
Greed has sometimes led him to trade for two licensed dealers at once.
One top dealer used to take the odd afternoon off, and secretly work for another licensed dealer nearby, taking his commission payments there cash in hand.
It is not uncommon for one licensed dealer to send a spy to work in another.
Secret agents of this ilk are at work all the time.
How are dealers best supervised?
A dealer was sacked from one firm because he had leaked disloyal comments to the Press, and the tape was played back to him as evidence.
At Harvard Securities, dealers were able to avoid having their telephone conversations recorded by dialling 9 on the brown internal phones and using that external line unrecorded.
A huge camera eyed the Harvard dealers from a corner of the ceiling, and its beady eye of a lens would swivel unexpectedly.
As he watched his dealers from above, in the comfort of his own office, Tom Wilmot, the chairman, has been known to reprimand his staff via a loudspeaker.
Once he ordered one of the directors to leave a female employee alone.
The only dealers who remain in their jobs are those who can sustain alertness during their long working hours.
They must achieve social acceptability as well as regular business.
According to one training officer successful dealers tend to be "all rogues" .
Bribery is rife in jockeying for good positions on the dealing floor of some firms.
One dealer offered cocaine to his training manager which secured him some decent leads.
Girls have got on through sleeping with a director, although usually they gain little more than temporary advantage.
Even the good dealers rarely stay long.
How can a dealer spend his last few weeks in his present firm most productively?
It is at this point that he starts selling his clients out of as much stock as possible, so as to release their capital for the investment propositions he will offer them in his next post.
He must work unobtrusively, to prevent suspicion of his pending departure.
 "Borrowing" leads or bargain books, so as to copy out clients' names and addresses at home, is another last minute activity considered profitable.
The dealer can take these details with him, so he can approach other clients, as well as his own, from his new firm.
The most effective modus operandi is to raid the dealing room in pairs, early in the morning or evening while nobody is around.
One will keep guard, while the other rifles through drawers.
The spoils are stuffed into briefcases, smuggled out under the noses of security guards, and deposited somewhere like the left luggage at Waterloo Station (a dumping ground that has actually been used).
One Harvard dealer on his way to London &Norwich Investment Services Ltd left a carrier bag of leads at a nearby sweetshop, giving £10 to the silvery haired owner for hiding them behind the counter.
He complied, his only concern being that it wasn't drugs.
Sometimes, of course, bags are searched, but the removal of company property from the premises of licensed dealers is rarely punished by anything more than instant dismissal, acceptable enough at the time to the culprits, as it coincides with their own plans.
Work references from a licensed dealer are of dubious value, and rarely even asked for.
Another good time for one dealer to pinch leads from another was during the presentation of a visiting company chairman.
Whilst dealers were firing difficult questions at the representative of an CTC traded company on the floor of one licensed dealer a couple of light fingered dealers were at work, helping themselves to their colleagues leads.
The devil likewise found work for idle hands while the entire staff of Harvard Securities were gathered to gawp at Leslie Grantham, alias "Dirty Den" the pub owner in the TV soap opera Eastenders, who was accepting a large cheque on behalf of the Spastics Society.
Snapshots have captured him there forever hugging giggling females of Harvard's administration department, while the other girls waved autograph books at him.
During the presentation, two briefcases were crammed full with used dealing books containing clients' names and addresses, and with leads that had been left carelessly lying around on desks.
Another objective for dealers in their last few weeks is to rake in all commissions due to them, and to avoid doing much work as further monies may not be paid.
Dealers have talked their companies' financial administrators into giving them an advance, then have left.
A good excuse, is the need to pay decorators in your flat; more than one dealer has used this one successfully.
This is also, obviously, a good time to take a holiday.
Dealers are always relieved to see their monthly cheques, and, even more, to have them cleared.
Some licensed dealers would stop their employees' cheques quite frequently.
In other cases, issuing of cheques is sometimes delayed, or money due is retained in part, often on cosmetic excuses such as fines for overtrading etc.
There may be promises that it will be paid back in three months, in direct proportion to clearance of outstanding client debts.
Once, a dealer at Harvard Securities admitted to a director that he had been paid twice, and the director sniggered.
Word got about.
One or two dealers thought that the dealer in question had spoken too hastily.
Harvard Securities recalled the duplicate pay cheque, as well as truncating the value of the next one.
Dealers who threaten to take their old firm to court sometimes get money due, as well as their P45 tax forms.
Alas though, not always.
The number of former employees who have seriously contemplated legal action against a licensed dealer (or shareshop) is only matched by the number of clients in the same predicament.
Indeed, action groups have been formed and petitions signed.
When good dealers move to another firm, this gives rise to extreme bitterness on either side.
Solicitors establish rights, and money is at stake.
It is too much like a divorce.
In November 1986, eight top dealers left Harvard Securities to start a new dealing floor that was, at the time, connected with the Tudorbury Group.
Neil Miller Harvard's dealing director told his band of merry men: "It'll never last.
They've got no real backing."
His confidence proved, however misplaced.
The Tudorbury Group was a Successful insurance fund that had some £100 million under management, and was headed by a founder member of Abbey Life, Clive Holmes.
Major shareholders in Tudorbury included Royal Insurance, and Abbey Life.
The securities dealing floor has lasted, albeit with much controversy.
By mid 1988, many of its staff, and two of its directors, were ex-Harvard.
Harvard Securities organised a surprise raid on the premises of Tudorbury's new sharedealing floor shortly after its inception.
They obtained an Anton Pillar Order (a legally authorised raid) to recover their documents.
Dealers' homes were raided at 5.00 a. m. one morning, and a number of Harvard's leads were discovered.
For three months, Tudorbury's dealers were prevented from ringing clients with whom they had dealt before, but to whom Harvard Securities laid full claim.
Agreement was Subsequently reached out of court.
Tudorbury Securities was determined to offer a service in the interest of the clients.
As one of their pioneers put it: "Salesmen at licensed dealers get stick from clients who lose money.
They can live with it for a few months, but not longer which is why they have such a high turnover of staff.
Here at Tudorbury, we will try to treat clients decently, get them good listed stocks at competitive prices."
Tudorburys policy, had initially, and through the 1987 Bull Market, worked comparatively well; but by 1988, in the depressed market conditions, it had degenerated.
Another Harvard dealer moved to Sheppards, a Stock Exchange member firm, where he was telephoned and abused by a Harvard Securities director.
The dealer left Sheppards of his own accord and against his manager' wishes, when he was offered a more lucrative Position elsewhere.
It was promptly announced to Harvard dealers that the rebel had been sacked from Sheppards.
Afterwards, a Harvard director maintained: "Whatever anyone says, he was sacked from Sheppards." 
When a group of top dealers walked out of Harvard Securities in May 1987 following ex-Harvard director Neil Miller to start up a new broking firm Kingsley Paige, Harvard chairman, Tom Wilmot, hired a private detective to trail Neil Miller.
Early one morning, Miller noticed a car following his own Mercedes.
He drew up next to it by a red traffic light.
In the front seat sat a mystery man whose features were covered with an outspread newspaper.
It was Tom Wilmot, Miller's previous boss.
In the driver's seat was a hired private detective.
Neil Miller grinned uneasily.
 "Let's go and have a coffee Tom," he suggested.
Intense negotiation followed, then shortly afterwards legal threats from Harvard, culminating in a bizarre series of scurrilous allegations and counter-allegations.
Kingsley Paige dealers were saying to their old clients: "Everything you've read, heard, or suspected about Harvard, I can assure you is only half the story.
My advice to you is to sell your OTC stock immediately, while you still can.
Send written instructions to Harvard by registered post, and they'll have to heed them."
Harvard dealers were meanwhile telling their clients: "Think twice about dealing with a new firm like Kingsley Paige.
They're offering obscure American stocks; you may never see your money again."
Dealers do not always move to UK companies.
One dealer left Harvard to work for a Continental outfit called European Equity Research.
He afterwards kept telephoning other Harvard dealers, pointing out that he could say what he wanted on the phone in his new place of employment as the calls were unrecorded.
Furthermore, working hours were short, the dress informal, the commission exceptional, all income tax-free, and the weather beautiful.
Why didn't they join him?
What he did not tell them was that European Equity Research was pushing shares in a little American advertising agency, "Pilgrim Venture" .
The Securities &Exchange Committee (SEC) declared that "Pilgrim has never engaged in any revenue-producing business." 
Furthermore three of the company's directors, who had never met, had been paid for use of their names.
The SEC was proposing to take legal action against several Florida citizens over their alleged involvement with Pilgrim Venture.
In the UK as well as abroad, vendettas between dealers are rife.
These sometimes take the form of physical violence, but are more frequently verbal.
A director of one licensed dealer rang up a former employee working for a stockbrokers, addressing him as follows: "You took our clients with you, you little shit.
The dealers have got to earn their livings too.
You ran away from us like a silly little schoolboy, without saying where you were going.
I was an East End boy myself; I was brought up the hard way.
I'll get even with you for this, you see if I don't "The dealer replied: " Is that a threat?"
The director said: "You can take it any way you like." 
Another dealer owed a few hundred pounds by the director of a firm he had just left, drove one night with some friends to his house, where they flung bricks through every window.
He proceeded to ring that director on a regular basis from the continental sharedealer where he worked, saying: "If you want your wife and children to keep their faces looking the same, you'd better pay your little debt." 
Other dealers felt little sympathy for this director.
Generally speaking, as fast as one licensed dealer goes into liquidation, another starts up.
Like it or not, licensed dealers, in one form or another, seem here to stay.
So they are extending their repertoire of services to include unit trusts, PEPs plans and insurance schemes.
Top dealers are inviting big clients into their offices, buttering them up with expense account lunches, putting them into new ways of investment, just as a good stockbroker might.
On a memo to Tudorbury Securities' dealing room, the dealing manager wrote: "Remember every day in every way, our clients' boots are getting fuller and fuller." 
The methodology and implications of this have not, to the author's knowledge, been revealed.
Herein lies the purposes of this book.
HIRE 'EM AND FIRE 'EM
The newspapers and media have invented the concept of the whizzkid and highflier the young hard-nosed businessman.
In fact dealing in shares or futures is essentially a flair.
Either you've got it or you haven't.
Suitability for the profession is deep-rooted and genetic.
For the instinctive smooth operator for whom attention-seeking, money and excitement are more important than morals, security and doing something worthwhile, it is an easy job.
In fact it is the easiest way of earning big money he could possibly find.
It has been said that working in advertising will give you the most possible fun you can have with your clothes on, and the same might be said of sharedealing.
 "Good" dealers will derive motivation from the frowns of the establishment, the black looks of the wary and the total disinterest of 90% of the population.
They will make themselves seen and heard like fireworks on a dark night, and their services will always find takers.
The route to becoming a Harvard dealer was not always straightforward.
Some just gained experience in a more menial capacity.
Harvard Securities at its peak employed runners to act as go-betweens for dealers and market-makers.
These were called Blue Buttons, just like the Stock Exchange juniors.
Mostly teenagers, they were led to believe that if they worked hard they would become clerks or even dealers.
One Blue Button was originally scheduled for each dealing table.
There were ten tables, so there should have been ten runners, but only three started.
Boy, were they overworked.
Neil Miller dealing director told all dealers to make frequent use of them, primarily for getting quotes on listed or USM stock from the market-makers' room adjacent, in which dealers were now forbidden to foray, but also for fetching new dealing books, notebooks, cups of coffee, etc.
The runners' tasks proved humdrum alright, and to start with, the poor bastards were never allowed to pause for breath.
The dealers, under intense pressure to achieve sales targets, took their frustrations out on the youths.
 "Richard" they would scream, or simply "Thingummy" if they did not know his name, or still more commonly, "Blue Button" or "Button" .
The first of Harvard's Blue  Buttons would be sweating and purple by lunchtime, like spent athletes.
Inevitably they settled in time into a more leisurely role.
Whenever they passed into the market-making room they would linger to gossip and exchange banter with clerks and market-makers.
Thus deliveries of quotes started getting held up, slowing the pace of the entire dealing room.
Dealers' rebukes got progressively more irascible.
"Hurry up, Button, you cretin!
 "You fucking moron," was commonly shouted out.
This level of abuse had a snowballing effect.
The runners found themselves unfairly rebuked for the market-makers' errors, and for their whimsical misquotes or bid-only quotes that could ruin a deal.
Dissatisfaction amongst the Blue Buttons reared its ugly head.
They started to lament their poor salaries and their dubious prospects.
They were alarmed by the high turnover of dealers.
Was it worth aiming for this position?
One of the runners rushed into work on Saturdays to help out with the vast backlog of administrative chores on the understanding this might help his promotion prospects.
He was too trusting, like a willing dog.
Another runner threw up his hands and walked out in the middle of one afternoon.
He made no excuses or explanations and indeed these would have been unnecessary.
He had been made to work ridiculously hard, and had suffered a constant stream of abuse when he failed to come up to scratch.
The dealing-room rocked with laughter upon news of his flight.
Another runner more intelligent than most, mingled exclusively with the dealers.
This was a wise move.
He was only 18 years old, but was making quite a market on the side in watches and jewellery that he would jokingly claim "had fallen off the back of a lorry" .
He seemed very streetwise for a kid who had just left school.
He belonged there alright.
His title "Button" stuck even when Harvard shifted him into an administrative role; he was obviously too intelligent to remain a runner.
The turnover of runners was too high.
A solution was found.
The two dealers who achieved the least impressive sales figures by the end of the week would temporarily be made into runners.
They would don the new red blazers, standard uniform for runners that was cheap-looking and suspiciously school-like.
There developed a scrabble amongst dealers to avoid going to the bottom of the heap.
These blazers were originally presented as a new uniform for all dealers.
This proved a highly successful practical joke.
One girl from Harvard's administration department insisted that one gullible dealer tried on an undersized blazer.
While she measured him up for size, her fingers trailed the tape measure precariously into his crotch.
This  measurement was for his new uniform, she assured him, while his colleagues wolf-whistled and clapped.
Recruitment advertisements on behalf of one licensed dealer or another used to appear every few weeks in London or the national press.
The style of advertisement was both low key, and up-market.
There was no attempt to jump on the bandwagon of the more flamboyant recruitment advertisements for commission paid saleswork, for example: "I'm Martin.
I'm only 23.
I earn a 5 figure salary and have three houses.
If you've got the ambition, we will show you how.
If you're young, enthusiastic, need to go places fast, and only live once, ring me on…"
. In licensed dealing, all the flamboyance was saved for the job.
Advertisements for Harvard dealers pointed out demurely that remuneration was no obstacle for the right person.
Generally, it may be suggested that a financial background is useful.
A training manager of London &Norwich Investment Services Ltd quipped that his firm might advertise in these terms: "Apply to Mr RazorReady, Grab, Fuck It and Run Ltd, Box no…" 
Nobody who sounded reasonable over the telephone was refused an interview at Harvard, and at the better established dealers.
The recruitment managers were used to handling all sorts.
Young hopefuls in dead-end jobs with a burning desire to make a quick buck were seen, along with unworldly yet ambitious and arrogant graduates.
Many looked incongruously stiff in the casual-looking dealing room where they were interviewed.
They soon relaxed though, and were encouraged to talk about their present jobs and their lives.
The recruitment managers searched for a curious combination, success in career or studies to date, coupled with frustration at its limited demands and prospects.
Usually anyone who obviously wanted it was given a chance to try his/her hand at dealing — unless he appeared too pompous.
If he had a dubious work record, or had been in any kind of trouble, it often didn't matter.
The training offered to potential dealers was generally informal the opportunity to learn on the job, not by instruction.
Team spirit rarely mattered much since dealers were paid commission on their own business and preferred to develop their own methods of achieving this.
Various sales training techniques have been used which would seem extraordinary and perverse to clients — if only they knew.
The sales trainer of one licensed dealer introduced his aspiring trainees to a concept designed to inspire them, and to dispel the monotony of their task.
This was telephone bingo.
Mid morning he would yell out to the trainees during lulls in activity: "Everyone off the phone" When all had complied, he  instructed them each to write on a piece of paper ten numbers out of the 40 that corresponded with the internal telephone lines.
The trainer would then shout out a random number, for example, six.
All dealers who had written six on their paper would scream "Yeah" and would flick down the No. 6 switch on their phones, lighting up the panel.
The person who got all his numbers called out would shout "Bingo" .
The dealers, thus hyped up, would be in the mood for selling: "Come on you wankers.
Get on the phone and start shifting stock"the trainer would shout.
 "Get fucking working, you two arms and a heartbeat," he'd admonish a slacker.
Then to everyone again: "Let's see a bargain, you fucking one arm hangers." 
Clients who rang in during telephone bingo would be kept hanging on indefinitely.
Once, a female dealer screamed "Bingo" into a receiver, and a client got an earful of it.
He said quietly: "I say, is that…?" 
If a senior manager should come onto the trainee dealing floor, telephone bingo would instantly stop.
Still more frequently, this training officer would urge his dealers to ring the sex lines in New York, Los Angeles and Amsterdam.
Once they had gotten through he would stride over panting, and would grab the receivers out of their hands.
He would listen in, showing more powers of concentration than he ever did at work.
His girlfriend, a dealer too, would give him a bored hard look, if she happened to be around.
 "Fucking marvellous," he would say.
"You guys listen to this stuff.
Try it out on your clients."
Some dealers, all sitting together, would be listening to these lines for hours on end.
 "Stop wanking and get on the fucking phones," the training officer would yell.
One of the most spectacular training methods at one licensed dealer was the floor contest.
It was seen as an honour to partake in this.
Three of the hardest selling dealers were elected, usually by vote.
Dealers would put down the phones, crowding in a circle round the contestants.
They were like schoolboys urging on a fight.
The purpose of it all was so they could watch how the real whizz-kids did it.
Each contestant took a fixed number of dross leads from a box.
The dealing manager would tell them what stock they would be selling.
It was usually something most found pretty uninspiring to sell.
All three would raise their telephone receivers at once.
As they pitched one client after another, the dealers surrounding them would  cheer, shouting"Go.
Go.
Go… ", calling out to individual contestants by their nicknames: " Come on, Ripper!"
 "Get 'em to mortgage their homes, Dupey"  "Rip 'em up, Churney." 
Every dealer in the building helped with the encouragement.
The hapless clients contacted would often buy, believing they were in contact with a hectic dealing room, thinking that they were presented with the investment opportunity of the decade.
One by one, the contestants would drop out of the marathon.
The last one standing would be cheered on until he too dropped.
Then the three would take the next lots of dross leads.
They would get on the phones again, selling a different stock.
The other dealers would shout,"Rev it up.
Go.
Go.
Go…"and the clients would again assume the shares were selling like hot cakes.
This spontaneous buzz was more plausible than, for instance, the tape recordings contemporaneously played in the background at DPR Futures to give clients an impression of a busy dealing room.
Famous at one licensed dealer was the traditional "one down, nine to shit" routine.
This was initiated, so legend has it, when the lavatories were out of order.
It may, for all the author knows, be practised in some firms even now.
This is how it worked.
The dealers — and not all trainees at that stood at their desks, hands poised on their phones, knees bent.
The posture was purposely uncomfortable, and had to be sustained only briefly.
The training manager would be standing with a privileged uprightness at the head of the table.
He would start beating his fists frenziedly on the desk top.
"One…
Two…
Three…
Go…"he would murmur.
The other dealers would join in.
Suddenly the entire dealing room used to explode into a harsh crescendo of directed shouting.
The dealers become here as one.
"Ten…
Nine.
Eight…
Seven…
Six…
Five…
Four…
Three…
Two.
One…
Shit…"
The final "shit" was pronounced like the pop of a bullet from a rifle.
The dealers would drop into their seats with a collective thump.
Picking up their phones, they would thrust themselves on the punters, ramming stock, which was often of little value, down their throats.
Their enthusiasm started wearing thin after half an hour or so, but would nonetheless have generated an incredible upturn in business.
All this is evidence that aggression more than market knowledge can sell shares.
Hard sell specialists like Harvard have capitalised on this fact.
Firms like Tudorbury Securities with a comparatively soft sell approach, consisted largely of dealers who have reacted against their original Harvard training.
Other aggressive sales training techniques lingered in some firms.
To have one's hand fixed by an elastic band to the telephone receiver  was the norm as it encouraged continuity of business — if it wasn't used too frequently.
Another technique consisted of the salesman standing on the table as he called a client.
This meant that he was literally talking down to him, which worked wonders for his confidence.
While this was going on at one firm, the table split and the trainee dealer slipped and sprained his ankle.
He was made out to be a hero, and became a fully fledged dealer that day.
In fact, he dropped out later.
Not being a born salesman, the pace of the dealing room proper proved too hectic and too competitive for his taste.
His failure cannot have pleased the training officer, who was paid a bonus for every dealer who kept his place on the dealing floor.
But training officers have learnt to be philosophical about such mishaps: "Some stay, some don't," they say.
Dealers who weren't going to make it left, often of their own accord, before getting sacked.
They would start coming in late and drifting off early.
Their excuses were plausible: "I'm feeling ill" or "An electrician's round at my flat," etc.
Why have so many trainee dealers failed…
Slothfulness has always been rife amongst trainees, many of whom it has to be said would feel qualms about putting clients into shares they hear through the grapevine are dubious.
Many clients have suffered losses from poor recommendations in the past, for which they blamed the trainee dealer, who rang them up.
"I've dealt with your firm for several years.
I've lost on every single share I've invested in,"was a typical moan.
The record card for such a client was scribbled over with the comment of dealers: "He's about to buy a house; has no funds; he'll see how the shares he already has do; he's going in for Rolls Royce, so has no money; he's still waiting for share certificates — once these have arrived he will think about further investment." 
Then perhaps, "Try again next year" , or "WOT (waste of time) or, more vehement," WOBT"(waste of bloody time).
Every so often, at one licensed dealer, a box was passed round the established dealers, and a collection was made of unwanted leads.
This was fodder for the trainees, and they rarely got much else.
These leads, rejected not without reason, proved almost impossible to crack, although the odd few good ones would always emerge like gold nuggets in the granite.
The justification for this practice was that the dealer who could do business with such clients would thrive in the dealing room proper where he stood a chance of getting reasonable leads.
The real reason for the practice was a genuine shortage of new leads.
Despite this, many dealers earned staggering incomes by generating incredible turnovers.
All that dealers needed was the ability to persist after the phone had been slammed down on them.
It could be argued that sharedealers were privileged.
After all, many sales environments forced trainees to find their own leads.
At Harvard Securities, leads were distributed on a meritocratic basis, more to those who would get Proportionately more business out of them.
Grubbing for business on dud leads was, at least, after a fashion dealing.
Harvard trainees, while waiting for dealing licences to be sent from the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), were given the job of establishing initial contact with persons whose names were Perfectly properly provided by Dun and Bradstreet, the American business information service, which was not dealing at all.
They would phone people all over the UK, and read to them verbatim from a script worded as follows: "Hello.
My name is John Smith.
I work with Harvard Securities.
We are sending you a free subscription to our newsletter on stocks and shares for three months.
Is that OK?"
At this stage, the Prospect would be anxious to establish that he was under no obligation.
Once reassured, he often consented to receive the newsletter, perhaps to get his caller off the line.
After all he had nothing to lose.
It was just one more item of junk mail, and he wasn't paying for it.
It might even interest him.
The prospect would receive, with an impressive newsletter, a little white card which he was asked to fill in and send back.
He was asked to put on it his daytime phone number, and to tick a little box which indicated that he was willing to receive phone calls from dealers with urgent share recommendations.
Beneath this box was another which he had to tick in order to receive the next three months' editions of the newsletter.
Once he had returned the white card, a client's name, address and phone number were Processed into a lead, which would then be given out to a dealer.
This system would be duplicated ad infinitum over the following months.
If one dealer failed to open a client, other dealers would attempt to do so"sometimes unknown to the first dealer, from duplicate lead cards.
All the trainees dealing with leads obtained from Dun and Bradstreet put their initials down on the white cards they sent out.
The idea was that when the cards had been returned, each dealer would get the leads he had generated.
Harvard trainees worked cheerfully on this understanding, whereas otherwise they would have slackened.
Sadly, they had not grasped the situation.
Distribution of leads was left in the hands of management, and they were allotted primarily on favouritism, next on sales figures.
Within months, some clients had in excess of 25 dealers contacting them from the same firm; many were also being contacted from other  licensed dealers.
It was clear that some clients would let their whole lives revolve around daily contact with their dealers.
Middle-aged, semi-retired businessmen in provinces such as Manchester or Leicester seemed particularly susceptible to this.
Why did share-dealing prove such a drawn-out business?
It could take a Harvard client up to half an hour to get through to his dealer on the telephone.
If he was complaining about overdue money or share certificates, the dealer would probably refer him, or else promise to ring him back later.
Thus a query and its settlement could easily drag on for hours.
When he was pressured, the dealer might ring his client two or three times in the morning alone, selling shares and maybe taking some back to pay for it, a churning of stock that Harvard tacitly condoned.
Familiarity bred business so it seemed, as established dealers with a limited clientele continued to deal with the same few people day after day, generating sometimes fantastic commissions for themselves, as well as token fines for the overtrading habits that ironically were tacitly encouraged.
Here was a treadmill on which trainees got launched, often too quickly.
They were forced to start generating business, perhaps before they had learnt how to do it properly, and more importantly from their selfish point of view, before they had built a broad clientele.
Desperation and greed kept them going, so against the odds, they would achieve the prerequisite £4,000 or so worth of business a day, as well as somehow retaining much of their clientele, and in some mysterious way expanding it.
To do all this, dealers needed to take an aggressive approach with clients, to wear them down.
The training officer of one licensed dealer always recommended to his trainees the cheeky approach: "Call your clients by their Christian names.
They love it,"he maintained.
"Be a bit cocky.
They won't even realise that you're plucking them of their savings.
They'll go down laughing."
He once gave a demonstration to the trainees, picking on a virgin client whom a good trainee had been unable to open up.
This was an Indian businessman, living in the industrial North, who for the purpose of this book shall be called Derek Patel.
The training officer lifted the phone, and the buzz in the room subsided in a split second.
All trainees gazed admiringly at the man who was paid to teach them.
"Hallo, is that Derek Patel?
One of my dealers has told you about these…shares.
Isn't that right, Derek?
They're a fantastic chain of opticians.
You're not interested?
Why is that?(shocked) You can't afford it?
But this is the way you could really make some money.
Wouldn't you like to make a quick buck, Derek?
What's your house like?(giggles from trainees) Do you need a new carpet?(more giggles.)
You'd better have a go on these, I think.
Give"em a few months, and you should see the share price double.
How many?
I think we should go in for 10,000 of these ones…"
He put down the receiver.
"Never let anyone say I can't deal.
Mind you, Indians don't always pay, so don't blame me if he cancels."
The trainees then tried to follow suit.
The training officer distracted them with sneers at their tameness.
He would give them the benefit of his theories that letting their hair down at pop concerts and football matches would be a therapeutic and profitable use of their leisure time.
He yelled sporadically at them: "Get on the fucking phone.
Pitch them for 5,000 or 10,000 shares at a time.
Don't let them go."
He would put the better dealers on a table together.
He wrote up the names of all trainees on the white board, and at the end of the day, he wrote up the sales scores of each one.
It was as if marks for the day's work were being displayed in the school classroom, and they had a similar effect of inspiring competition.
The marks of one day were shown against those of the next, and so on.
Later in the week, the training officer put asterisks against the names of trainees who'd achieved less than £2,000 worth of business through the whole week.
 "The bottom three will be fired," he warned.
The good trainees were thus encouraged.
The useless ones were soon weeded out.
This training officer assumed responsibility for the sackings.
The friendly manner in which he enacted these fooled nobody.
At five O'clock in the afternoon, he would take aside some hapless individual.
 "You're shit at this job, aren't you?" he'd say.
 "Is there any point staying?" 
The individual concerned would pick up his P45 tax form from the accounts department and slink off.
Everybody else would realise what had happened the next day, or the day after that.
Almost imperceptibly, 30 new recruits would dwindle to 20, 15, 10…the final departures coinciding with promotion of the best onto the dealing floor proper.
Meanwhile, new trainees would drift in.
The training officer would issue them due warnings at interview: "This is a cut-throat business.
If you sell, you'll make your fortune.
If you don't sell, you'll be out.
I make no bones about it."
He would always teach trainees: "If a client asks you a question you don't understand, say —" Hold on a minute sir, a call has just come through to me from the States"— put him on hold then, and ask me.
I'll tell you what to say to him.
Get back to him then.
Say: "What was it you are asking?" 
The client will repeat the question.
Then answer it, as if spontaneously.
He demonstrated this technique successfully on clients in front of the trainees.
It came into general use.
The dealers themselves started working variations on the theme.
If one of their number was being kept on the phone by some whingeing client who had no intention of investing further, a colleague would rescue him, shouting: "Smith (or whatever the dealer was called), Hong Kong, Line.
Occasionally Harvard dealers would have colleagues shout out that only a limited line of stock was left.
One dealer was telling a client that only 10,000 shares in a little known company remained on his books.
 "Take them." 
A colleague in the background shouted out: "5,000." 
The client bought quickly, under the impression that the shares were almost gone.
Actually, nothing could have been further from the truth.
A script was issued to trainees at one licensed dealer.
It advised as follows: "Listen to the client going apeshit about his experience of our investment recommendations, and agree with him…
Then say this one should recover his losses, and that he owes it to himself to let us at least do that for him.
He can give us this one last chance…"
This was recognised to be a masterpiece.
 "So many clients have so much money to burn," explained a manager of another dealing firm, as he handed round condoms to some six trainee dealers on his floor, "blow them up big" He said.
They complied, but he blew his up harder until it outswelled the rest.
 "These are your clients' portfolios" he explained.
"The harder you push, the bigger they will get.
One day they will burst.
You should aim to keep your client just below breaking point.
Deal him and deal him, twice a day if you can.
Once you let up, you will give him time to think, and he'll realise how much money you've lost him.
Then…"
He picked a pin off his desk and applied it.
The condom collapsed.
The best trainees and established dealers had little beyond brief academic demands made on them in the early days.
There was the little British Institute of Dealers in Securities (BIDS) exam for which trainees attended evening classes.
These would culminate in the sitting of a multiple choice paper.
Always during this period the same paper was used, although a rumour that it would change at the next sitting was constantly promulgated by dealers who had once cheated, to discourage others from doing likewise.
The syllabus for this exam covered basic facts such as The Stock Exchange Account System, stamp duties, commissions payable by clients, how gearing works, etc.
It seemed necessary to be able to do simple calculations.
The story was that trainees had to pass the exam on the third attempt at the latest, or leave.
The pass mark was 75%.
Few turned up regularly for the lectures.
Most trainee dealers  were not the types to tolerate even a petty little examination like that.
Many trainees cheated for this exam, passing round a copy of the question paper beforehand.
There was even a black market made in this paper.
Consequently, most people who wanted to, passed, sometimes with very high marks indeed.
In practice, a number of dealers had not succeeded in passing the little BIDS exam, and obviously hadn't bothered to cheat their way through it either.
They kept their jobs on the strength of the good business they did.
Dealers at Harvard Securities who gained high marks in the BIDS exam received a visit from Tom Wilmot in person.
He would toss a coin on the desk before them.
If they guessed on which side it fell, he handed over £100 cash.
If they got it wrong, it was only £50.
It was not until towards the end of 1986 that the Stock Exchange Registered Representatives' and Traders' Exam was introduced.
The better dealers, quite logically, fared best with this new thorn in the flesh, a qualification planned to be compulsory for giving investment advice under the Financial Services Act (1986).
Here at last was an obstacle to the streetwise, although perhaps not an insurmountable one.
The exam is sat within the walls of the Stock Exchange building.
Cameras are focussed on candidates, supervisors hover, and the taking of papers inside or outside the room is not permitted.
The means of studying for this course are various.
One route is to buy the Henley Distance Learning course from the Stock Exchange.
The training officer of one licensed dealer issued photocopied versions of the text to all dealers.
Those who then sat the exam were instructed to put on their application forms that they had studied the course privately, so the fact that they had studied from but not paid for the Henley course would not be traced.
This training officer was teaching the course internally even before he had passed the examination himself, as did later one of the directors of his firm.
Both probably adhered more to the essential facts than did the lecturers on the City University evening course which the author attended.
Many lecturers here seemed unnecessarily thorough, too much in love with their subject.
They were rewarded with frequently half-empty lecture halls, giggling, murmuring audiences that threw paper darts, etc.
The rowdier element worked for licensed dealers, as opposed to stockbrokers.
One lecturer expressed his opinion that the new third tier market would wipe out the OTC.
An OTC dealer loyally argued against him with a vigour that is rarely seen in a university environment.
"You  speak of the OTC market as if it doesn't exist.
Let me assure you it's alive and kicking,"he said, reeling off an impressive string of figures.
The lecturer shook his head, smiling faintly.
That dealer is now a stockbroker.
How he misses the good old days when he would punt out OTC stock, even though the punters had invested so often in vain.
Many Harvard dealers have failed the registered Representatives' and Traders' exam.
In keeping with their true natures, some look out for a dealer who has passed it, and beg him to sit it again, for them.
 "Do it in the provinces this time," they urge.
 "You'll never get recognised" They offer several thousands of pounds.
If the dealers who have passed it decline, they say: "Don't say never.
Think about it.".
Mysteriously some dealers who had appeared beaten by the exam, turn up in Stock Exchange member firms with a pass under their belt.
 "How did they get it?" the author wonders.
Some dealers gain exemptions — sometimes dubiously — on the grounds that they have traded in the market for at least two years prior to a cut-off date.
Life is no bed of roses for the new dealer, least of all if female and of a gullible disposition.
Here is the sad story of the initiation of a new dealer at Eyas Securities who for the purposes of this book shall be called Sandra.
Sandra was a dealer lacking in professional experience, who had a highly strung temperament.
Being easily provoked, she was the sort of person who automatically attracted ridicule.
Licensed dealers are the last places on earth to serve as sanctuaries from such treatment.
The other dealers at Eyas Securities slipped a faked client card into her box which bore the name Sir W Induppe (i.e. "wind up" ).
There followed the address of a well known gentlemen's club in Victoria.
A £250000 portfolio was recorded.
His bank was listed as Coutts, in the Strand.
However, the telephone number would put her, unwittingly through to the administration manager downstairs.
The dealers hinted to Sandra that she might do a massive deal with Sir Willie.
Excited, she rang the given number.
The voice on the other end of the line sounded charming.
She liked the sound of Sir Willie.
She sweet-talked him down the line, worming her way into his heart, and talking money.
The pounds, shillings and pence were dancing before her very eyes.
Egged on by her colleagues, she pitched Sir Willie on half a million shares in OTC traded Crane Holdings, at 28p.
She knew that the commission accruing to dealers was 4p a share, and she was calculating her own gain even before she closed the sale.
Sir Willie seemed as excited as she was, and firmly sold to boot.
He said that he would be visiting the Eyas offices within the hour to settle for these shares in person.
When she had put down the phone, Sandra leapt out of her seat.
She tore across the dealing room, then up three flights of stairs, screaming that she had closed Sir Willie, and that she had made several thousand pounds in that one day.
Back on the dealing floor, Sandra rang her boyfriend.
 "Our financial problems are over," she said.
She started to pace the dealing room like a lioness in a cage.
 "I'm not wearing a proper enough business suit to meet Sir Willie in," she moaned.
 "Go home and change," ordered the dealing manager.
Without hesitation, she scurried from the building.
She was back within three quarters of an hour in a suit that was, as one dealer pointed out, hardly more business-like than the previous one.
She practised what she'd say to Sir Willie on the other dealers.
They all assured her that he was probably a multi-millionaire.
The great man's arrival was announced via the receptionist downstairs.
Sir Willie strolled onto the administration floor where Sandra, and a consortium of dealers, had gathered to meet him.
He was clad in a long dark coat with a fur collar, and a scarf.
His gloved hands fingered an old leather briefcase.
She gazed into his dark sun glasses.
He was puffing a fat cigar, the smoke concealing his facial features.
Sandra was feeling nervous.
Would he back out at the last moment?
All the other dealers were gawking at Sir Willie, gasping at the sight of him in all his glory.
She tried to put him at ease: "Why don't you take your coat off?" she said.
Sir Willie shook his head: "I never take my coat off.
It would destroy my standing in the community."
Pulling out a cheque book, he added solemnly: "I sincerely hope these Crane Holdings will not fall in value…" 
Upon hearing this comment, a dealer in the background shouted out: "Crane Holdings have just this minute dropped back 1Op a share.
They're now only 18p.
Sir Willie started.
Easing his cheque book back into his coat pocket, he demanded: "What's this I hear?" 
 "A temporary easing of the price," choked Sandra.
"The value of these Crane Holdings, now they're only 18p, will probably double.
You'd better settle for them quickly while they're still at this low price."
She almost begged him to write out the cheque.
Meanwhile Sir Willie was slowly dropping off his disguise.
Bit by bit, hat, scarf, and gloves, dropped to the floor.
Then his coat came off.
The Eyas Securities administration manager stood beaming before her, and said something in Sir Willie's accent.
Everybody roared with  laughter.
Even then she didn't catch on.
A dealer kindly explained.
Sandra prostrated herself.
Sobbing and screaming, she thrashed about like a woman possessed.
Getting on her knees, she explained her deplorable financial condition to the manager.
She had mortgage commitments, huge expenses.
She demanded a cash advance.
When the manager refused it, she got up and ran back upstairs to the dealing floor.
They all found her on the telephone to her boyfriend again.
She was whining to him about how Eyas Securities had played this awful trick on her, how embarrassing it all was.
He tried to calm her, but she slammed the phone down on him.
She turned to the dealers and complained this time about her heart condition.
All this stress could have caused an aneurysm.
Her grumbling and the dealers' laughing were sustained all the day.
Even the directors had known of the trick.
This was Sandra's first day there.
Sir Willie Induppe had travelled to various dealing firms, including: Buckingham Securities, Tudorbury Securities, Fox Milton &Co, Instant Rate, and Equity Share (now UK &General).
The author understands that this venerable client is about to be introduced into a Stock Exchange member firm.
Beware of Sir Willie lurking.
Sir Willie's success is due only to the dealers' greed.
They will do and say as much as they dare, to get the client's money.
Their level of professional knowledge might be negligible.
Once a brash young dealer arrived on the dealing floor of Tudorbury Securities.
His goal was to make himself a fortune.
He kept pestering the others about what is known as "account trading" (where one can buy and sell the same stock within a two week period, hoping that the stock price will have risen).
 "How do you do it?" he would ask.
One morning, the other dealers said to him: "We've got a stock that will make you rich in a day.
It's called Node Check."
They punched up "Node Check" on the SEAQ (Stock Exchange Automated Quotations) screen.
This was basically a mock quote used to check that the system was functioning.
It had a price indication, number of market markers, etc.
Everything to indicate a real stock quote.
The new dealer assumed it was a genuine stock.
 "I'll get you 10,000 of these on the account through my stockbroker" said one of the dealers.
 "You should make a bomb!" 
When the transaction had been completed, the new dealer paced the room all day, dreaming of the profits to come.
Every half hour or so, the other dealers would re-check a quotation on "Node Check" , only to confirm the price was rising rapidly.
That evening, the screen revealed that Node Check was up by 20 points.
 "You're brilliant," said one dealer.
"You got in just in time.
I'm sorry I missed this one!"
The new dealer thought he had hit the jackpot.
To celebrate his fortune to come, he invited the other dealers for a drink that night at the local pub.
In the pub, beer glass in hand, he waxed lyrical about how he would spend his earnings.
A flashy car first.
Then a new flat.
The other dealers chipped in with suggestions.
They treated him like one of them, complimenting him on his astuteness, until he began to genuinely believe that it was he who had selected Node Check, that he was an expert on account trading before he'd learned anything about the stock market in general.
And he, just a teenager.
Little did he know that the experienced dealers were about to teach him a lesson.
The next morning, this young dealer arrived at Tudorbury half an hour early.
He rushed over to the SEAQ screen.
The opening price for "Node Check" had already been set by the dealing manager, who had arrived a little earlier.
It showed a 50 point drop.
 "I'm ruined," muttered the young dealer.
He started pacing the dealing floor.
As the others arrived, he told them: "Node Check dropped right back" They laughed in his face.
"What an idiot you are!
Haven't you caught on yet?"
When the trick was explained to him, he spluttered with indignation.
Filthy language rose to his lips.
The dealing manager was still laughing: "Before you get on the market, you should know something about it yourself.
I hope this teaches you a lesson.
You don't want to get in debt.
It doesn't reflect well on Tudorbury…
A dealer at Harvard Securities was subject to frequent telephone calls from one elusive Mr Bottomley, who wanted to buy a stake in For Eyes, but who insisted he couldn't be contacted on the phone.
He always seemed to be ringing from a callbox, on grounds that the walls in his office had ears.
Once a woman who called herself Mr Bottomley's secretary, rang "on his behalf." 
The tiresome twosome asked about shares in For Eyes: their PE ratio, dividend yield, and a host of other conversation-stoppers that all left the trainee dealer tongue-tied and credulous.
Naturally he was eager to do business, and so turned to his training officer for assistance.
On one of these calls, the training officer answered the phone, making his voice sound posh and polite, like that of the trainee in question.
He recognised Mr Bottomley's voice immediately.
He and his "secretary" were two senior dealers in the adjacent building, taking the mickey.
He warned them not to waste his trainee's time.
With time-wasters amongst his trainees, he was somewhat sharper.
If somebody came back from lunch late without having informed him, he really berated the offender.
"No one messes me about, do you hear?
If you're late without getting permission beforehand just once more, you're sacked."
A training officer of one firm would write out his own sales pitches for the trainees.
He was hot neither on spelling nor on grammar, but his style was flamboyant and persuasive.
So were his oral extravaganzas.
"
Everybody's going to the…winebars, sir.
The mark up on drinks is high, and they're doing high class food now as well.
People like to be seen there…
Everybody's booking up boating holidays, Sir…
You haven't heard of…?
You must be the only one who hasn't, Sir."
His pitches contained little, perhaps too little in the way of technical information, such as profit figures, PE ratios, etc.
If a client asked one of the trainees about the balance sheet, etc, the ignoramus would turn to his training officer: What's the PE ratio of…?"he might ask.
 "How the fuck should I know?" the training officer would reply.
He accompanied his trainees on lunchtime booze-ups in the local pub where he regaled them with stories of his hectic social life.
Every night, he seemed to go out to posh nightclubs, to restaurants and to major pop concerts.
He boasted of the various women he would "fuck" .
At the root of his lifestyle was pots of money, treated almost entirely as disposable income, given that he still lived with his parents.
The trainees aspired to his means and his ways.
Harvard dealers only rarely visited clients.
Once, the Harvard training officer allowed a dealer to visit a wealthy businessman who had expressed an interest in picking up Hard Rock Cafe shares,(as he had contacts there) but only if they could meet up.
Neil Miller, the dealing manager, was critical of this manoeuvre, saying of the dealer: "He could be doing four or five deals back in the office.
He'd better pull off a biggie."
The training officer coached the dealer in what to say: "Tell him you've worked in the City for some time.
The Hard Rock Cafe shares should go up to £1.60 in about four to six months.
They're now 90p.
While you're about it, get him in for some For Eyes."
 "If he starts asking about figures, or asking questions you don't understand, tell him: " Listen — I earn my living by making people money.
Don't worry about all that.
Just do what I say!"
When he says, "What makes you so sure about these shares?" you must reply, "I can't divulge my sources." 
The dealer managed to sell 10,000 shares in Hard Rock Cafe which were in fact to rise in value as he intimated.
Back at Harvard, he was warmly congratulated.
He had been a share salesman for just a week and a half, and the deal put £200 in his pocket.
Clients of one firm who were pushed into the shares of a restaurant  company were pulled out of them once the price started to rise.
The dealing manager yelled at his dealers: "We need…shares back on our books for an American buyer.
If you don't fucking get the clients out, I'll ring them up and do it myself!"
This way when the price was around quite low, dealers churned clients out of stock saying: "It's reached a peak, we think." 
The price shot up immediately afterwards."
The discrepancy between the facts and what one licensed dealer told its dealers to pass onto clients was sometimes revealed when a company's executives addressed the dealing floor.
The representatives of a printing company told dealers of one firm that their shares were a five year hold.
Shortly before, the dealing director had pressed a trainee dealer to offload 5,000 of these shares on a client, for a three to six month hold.
If the dealer failed to do this, commissions he had already earned for selling shares in another company would have been withdrawn.
In panic the dealer had offloaded the stuff on to a willing client.
Three to six months later, the client had lost half his money.
His dealer had by then left the firm.
It is only the inexperienced dealers, who know nothing about the stock market and who are desperate for money that can be manipulated this way.
Trainees at Harvard Securities were not in practice made to send out details on stocks to clients they were pitching who hadn't dealt three times, as all dealers were supposed to.
After all, Harvard's own information sheets (Section 9s) and the more formal "Extel" (information) cards were often not available.
Supplies were low, and had often run out.
Cold-calling, at one licensed dealer, when the salesmen got desperate, was just not tolerated, it was actively encouraged.
If clients complained, dealers would pretend they had sent something out.
It was often a case of deal and be damned.
This is exactly what everybody did.
The training officer, who endorsed all this had picked up his standards from his dealing director, who was later to claim of him: "He was like a lost lamb when he started.
I taught him everything."
Another training officer at this firm was a married man, less extravagant and more self-disciplined than his counterpart, although lacking his flair.
He was good at getting people to come to work on time and to work hard.
He kept excellent written records, but his guidance on salesmanship was of less use than his colleague's.
Harvard trainees were sometimes penalised for underperformance with a dose of debt collecting.
This was much detested.
Clients too could be rude, and no commission was paid to debt collectors for  the money they raked in.
The unfortunates were sent over to the other building from which they would ring clients who owed money, and would demand of them immediate payment.
The trainees were often not tactful enough.
 "I'm not paying," a typical debtor might retort.
"I never agreed to buy these shares at that price.
You must be the fifth person I've explained it to this month.
Please don't bother me again…"
Other supposed debtors would claim they had sent in their cheques.
People were often not contactable at the given telephone numbers.
Nor indeed were telephone numbers always available.
Dealers, debt collecting in pairs, were often so frustrated with the task that they did other things instead.
They rang the various commercial recorded lines which hinted they were offering sexual innuendo, which proved only to be glamour girls talking about dieting or holiday-making.
Another favourite pastime was to chat up the girls from Directory Enquiries while they were getting phone numbers.
Some called this"Dial-a-swelling!
Most satisfyingly, of course, debt collectors made an enormous number of personal calls, sometimes international ones.
Trainee dealers put on debt collecting for more than a day or two at a stretch would often walk out of Harvard from sheer boredom and frustration.
Everybody seemed to find this amusing.
Likewise, dealing in public issues such as Rolls Royce hardly proved inspiring for dealers at one firm.
Anyone who opted to work full-time on British Gas for instance, was busy six days a week, thirteen hours a day at one stage.
Eventual payment was promised at the rate of 5Op per deal, but this proved pie in the sky.
Profits were divided amongst those who had helped out, and payment turned out to be at a substantially smaller rate.
Naive trainees were often thus coaxed into doing hard, boring work for little remuneration.
Some felt deceived, and so justified in pressuring their clients in turn.
Dealers who put the client first were bound to fail.
They were trying to be advisers and salesmen at once.
These roles naturally conflicted.
The general attitude was that dealers were paid to sell specified stock, and only that stock — not to discuss the market generally.
Trainee dealers at some firms quickly developed a personal interest in stocks and shares, based on the new found possibilities of making quick money for themselves.
Their methods of forecasting the way prices would go proved ad hoc and unconventional, unhampered by hard examination of figures and ratios, such as accountants might undertake.
Dealers used their clients as guinea-pigs for their untried techniques.
One trainee of the author's acquaintance believed she could predict the movement of both specific shares and the market as a  whole by the tapping of her fingers.
She was widely regarded as a crank.
Her colleagues, however, used methods which proved no more reliable, such as charting graphs for daily price movements and basing future patterns purely on the past.
They applied such chartists' techniques after a simplified fashion, and were surprised, not sorry", when they tested them out on clients and got them wrong.
Clients often suffered from their trainee dealers' recommendations and advice, not dreaming how ignorant they were.
Dealers would bluff even more audaciously than clients.
The relationship between dealer and client would often become a fantasy world, based on speculation presented as logic.
Dealers were always out to make money on the side.
A pyramid venture was started recently at one licensed dealer, every participant contributing £100, and bringing in more people.
The rules of this game became progressively more complicated, but the outcome was predictable: sizeable losses for the unwary majority, and substantial gains for the smart few.
Less often admittedly, trainee and fully-fledged dealers at this firm indulged in games not for money.
There was a popular guessing game called, "Let's spot who's going to be sacked next" .
This often took place in the pub and involved thinking aloud.
There was a ghastly self-fulfilling prophecy about such sessions.
Sometimes, the training officer joined in.
In this way, he gained a lot of insight into the psychological make-up of different sheep in his flock.
Knowledge of the stock market was limited for most dealers.
Academic basics can be drummed into a reasonably receptive dealer through the BIDS or Stock Exchange courses, but the practical market know-how that was most needed could be grasped only over a period.
As soon as most dealers actually knew anything, they would get disgusted with what they had been doing, and wanted out.
There was initiated at Harvard a practice of dealers taking turns first thing in the morning, to deliver a little speech to the rest of the dealing room about the latest financial news.
To prepare themselves for this, Neil Miller, the dealing director, told dealers to read a quality newspaper preferably the Financial Times, but the Daily Mail at a pinch.
He asked dealers at random to deliver the goods, and berated anyone who was obviously unprepared, particularly if he belonged to the streetwise contingent whose daily newspaper tended to be the Daily Mirror or The Sun.
 "Those papers are alright to read when you're sitting on the toilet, but not for the financial news," he once shouted.
At most firms, getting up to date with financial news was, like anything else, taken more seriously by the trainees than the dealers proper.
From time to time, shares which one licensed dealer was pushing  got a wee mention in the national press.
Sadly, this mention was not always favourable.
Financial journalists knew how to turn on the sarcasm.
 "It's been tipped in the Press," the dealing manager of this firm would announce in a matter-of-fact tone of voice, as he paced the dealing room heavily, like a schoolmaster in his classroom: "Ring all your clients and make" em double up.
The share price should go through the roof."
Dealers would scream down the blower: "Did you see The Sunday Times last week Sir?" knowing that he would probably have missed the relevant bit, just as they had.
After the weekend tip, we've had a flurry of buying.
Get in now while the price is still going up.
The dealing manager would be hovering breathing down the dealers' necks like Big Brother, nodding approvingly if they sounded convincing, or else shouting: "You need to be more fucking aggressive" (so the client could hear him in the background).
The client was almost invariably cajoled into further so-called investment.
He would rarely bother to check the exact wording of the so-called share tip.
Dealers thus learned to regard every mention of a share in the newspapers as a tip.
They frequently did not read what was written.
It was no source of information, only an instrument for their smooth talking.
They later took all the techniques they had learned at their dealer into stockbrokers and other financial services outfits, where it was often too late to unlearn them.
Their formative training had been in a class of its own.
The clients themselves have been known to become dealers.
Such clients would be young, and living in London.
They would become so hooked on their daily interaction with their licensed dealer that they would ring up and ask for job interviews, often with the connivance of their own dealers.
They might well get taken on.
The author knows of a client who did this after he had lost a frightful lot of money.
 "If you can't beat" em, join "em," he had said.
Indeed he proved far more successful a dealer than he had a client, despite the poverty of his company's share recommendations, and by proxy his own.
He had the gift of the gab, which one training officer described as the main prerequisite.
Others have described this particular quality as being a "good bullshitter," or a "smooth operator." 
There was one legendary example of client recruitment at Harvard.
One top Harvard dealer was taking a taxi ride into the City, and he fell into conversation with the driver.
 "I'm looking for something better paid," the driver said.
 "Come and work for us," the Harvard whizzkid rejoindered.
 "I'll get you an interview." 
The cabbie was taken on, did brilliantly, and was made a team leader, eventually taking brief responsibility for running the dealing floor.
All this is history.
When dealers leave, they sometimes become clients of their old firm.
At first, they may intend this as a joke, sometimes giving a false name.
Often though they proceed to deal seriously enough, as blindly hooked as punters, and no less destined for disillusionment.
The author has come to an overall conclusion that, perhaps, clients and dealers are very much the same sort of people.
Unlike the trainees, established dealers pick up market gossip with a lightning instinct.
When Tom Wilmot at Harvard told dealers around the time of Big Bang: "You should all understand thoroughly what's going on.
You're living through history.
This is something you'll be able to tell your grandchildren about,"the trainees were thrilled, the established professionals not greatly interested.
Disillusionment with the way they are treated by their firms has led many trainees, along with more experienced dealers to look for new jobs.
After commissions were cut at Harvard, a vast number of Harvard dealers joined the search.
All chased the same vacancies.
City employment.
agencies have been inundated with job hunting dealers who often confide: "We're earning thirty or forty thousand a year, but we're working for a bucket shop.
I'm looking for an opening with a stockbroker…"
Many, perhaps most City employment agencies, rate employees of Harvard and of other licensed dealers cheaply, on the grounds that they are not sought after by many recruitment managers of Stock Exchange member firms.
Share salesmen are regarded as on a level with hard sell futures salesmen.
One ex-Harvard dealer who was recruited by a stockbroker found his new colleagues surprised that, with his Harvard background, he should be there, although doubtless his sales ability impressed them.
Salesmen from Harvard and other licensed dealers who have been interviewed for jobs at companies such as Barclays de Zoete Wedd, Greenwell Montague, and Kitcat &Aitken have sometimes felt an obligation to explain their present work position.
Dealers have felt a need to deprecate their own firms' values, to disassociate themselves from them.
Getting a job at another licensed dealer was somewhat easier.
Few could at this stage afford to be as choosy as Fox Milton &Co Ltd when they sacked a new dealer on the grounds that he was dealing with his old Chartwell clients, so enraging Chartwell Securities."
We wouldn't want him to play the same trick on us, stealing our clients so he can deal them elsewhere,"said Fox Milton director Philip Raisey.
But theft of clients is the norm in the industry, and is rarely the reason for anyone being sacked.
On Wednesdays, firms advertising vacancies in the Financial Times have been inundated with phone calls from licensed dealers.
Harvard salesmen would make inquiries at lunchtimes from the public telephone boxes just outside the building, despite the risk of getting spotted there.
More adventurous dealers have been known to go to New York.
In this strange, go-ahead land, where the British accent is appreciated as much as enthusiasm for a sales career quite mediocre dealers have landed choice jobs.
The training managers, dealing managers, compliance officers, and most of all directors of licensed dealers are seen as more tainted by prevalent sharp practice than the salesmen, due to their greater organisation and decision-making responsibilities.
These men are barred from Stock Exchange member firms.
They are too egotistic and their work methods are too eccentric for transference.
When they quit licensed dealers or are shunted out at around the age of thirty upwards, just when they start to crave job security, they are forced into a hostile world.
They will be constantly trying to get back into licensed dealers, or else will settle for a different sort of trickery.
The smartest managers set up their own firms.
Thus one bright spark, ex-Harvard Corporate Finance, set up Gibraltar-based European Equity Research on a budget of £3000.
His team started with a plank resting on two wooden packing cases, for a desk.
Three portable telephones were available for contacting clients.
He and his dealers made good money before selling out.
He left, not alone, for Bailey McMahon.
Of course some managers drop out, giving reasons of personal ethics.
Here is what one manager wrote to his directors: After some soul searching, I resign immediately as dealing director of Afcor…
I personally abhor high pressure sales tactics adopted by Afcor.
I like to sleep at night, and applying "scorched earth" tactics in selling OTC stocks to some unsuspecting people makes me cringe.
By October 1987 a year after Big Bang, the inflated City salaries were slipping.
Although a few analysts remained bullish about the market, most had serious reservations.
Licensed dealers as well as stockbrokers were feeling the pinch of sudden market setbacks, and not altogether satisfactory trade figures.
One recruitment manager put it like this: A year ago we were buying teams…now we're filling holes."
What with their incapacity to move onto proper City jobs, even  occasionally to jobs in their own industry, it is no wonder that employees of many licensed dealers, temperamental at the best of times, were often driven to drink.
Dealers crowded out exclusive wine bars as well as the pubs.
They would drink side by side with City workers, but would never quite bridge the communication gap.
There was an invisible, somehow natural, barrier.
It was of no health benefit for dealers to have delivered fresh orange juice and cordon bleu sandwiches midday if they drank themselves blind on champagne, quality wines and designer beers in the evenings.
Dealers threatened with the sack would agree to sell knowingly atrocious investments, or to perform other morally dubious tasks in an effort to make themselves indispensable.
The training officer of one firm was temporarily made dealing manager.
He kept the room's business on the move by constantly shouting: "Anyone who doesn't work is going to be sacked.
And that includes the team leaders."
He tried to wriggle out of his responsibilities however, but his boss said: "If you want to keep your job, this is what you must do." 
The training officer of one licensed dealer taught the Stock Exchange Licensed Representatives' and Traders' Examination in the evenings to dealers who had to be pushed into attending his classes, like unwilling schoolboys.
They vented their frustrations on him, and he would protest: "I'm only doing my job." 
Dealers at this firm suffered the indignity of getting illegally fined for coming in late in the mornings, even if it was only five minutes after the starting time of 8.30 a. m…
Their dealing manager would sack anybody who refused to pay up.
In those days, dealers were seen running madly from the nearest underground station at 8.20 a.m., or else clambering into taxis.
Even then, they didn't always make it on time.
A few dealers accepted the fines as a matter of course, especially as accumulated funds got spent on drinks for everybody in the local pub on Friday night.
More resented them.
Once a very average 19 year old dealer was asked for £5 cash.
He said, "I don't think so." 
"Why not?
What's so special about you?"said the dealing manager.
 "The trains were bad this morning," the dealer retorted.
"Give me your box of leads.
And fuck off,"said the dealing manager.
The dealer didn't budge.
 "I'll give you the cash later this morning when I get change." 
A team leader who had arrived two minutes late one morning, refused to pay his fiver.
 "This is illegal," he said.
He declined to hand over the cash, no matter what was threatened, and he was too good a salesman to be sacked, so the dealing manager yelled over to the  accounts clerk: "Deduct £50 from his month's wages." 
 "You know you're doing wrong," said the team leader who was like a bear with a sore head for the rest of the morning.
He was a powerfully built man, who had aroused resentment at the firm because he had constantly called the administration staff morons!
However he did too much business to get sacked.
Shortly afterwards he left the licensed dealer which then tried unsuccessfully to get him sacked from the stockbroker he had persuaded to give him a job.
If dealers were discovered looking for jobs from other licensed dealers, they would usually get fired on the spot.
Sometimes, another dealer tipped off a director as to the identities of miscreants, so as to curry favour for which he might reap a tangible reward like extra leads.
Poor dealers were sometimes kept on by firms by being shifted into administrative positions, e.g. a dealer at one licensed dealer was made manager in charge of Personal Equity Plans (PEPs).
This shift in position marked a decline in status as well as income, but was preferable perhaps to being sacked.
This man was the firm's intellectual.
He had an extraordinarily leisurely manner and unlike most dealers had a genuine knowledge of the stock market.
After being virtually the first dealer at his firm to pass the Registered Representatives' and Traders' examination, he was applauded by his colleagues only to be shunted off the sales desk into the back office.
Once a top dealer rushed to his new desk, tapping him on the shoulder: "I've got a client on the line," he said.
"Hell buy ten grand's worth of…(an electronics company), if I tell him the latest profit figures.
What the hell are they?"
The intellectual raised his eyebrows.
He tapped new tobacco into the bowl of his pipe.
 "Why should I help you stuff another client, just so you can make yourself rich?" 
He then looked the dealer up and down.
 "You're earning £60,000 a year and you can't even buy yourself a decent suit." 
This ex-dealer was shunted next through various clerical jobs, ending up as a training officer.
His predecessor in the position commented: "He's been dragged all over the company.
What a way to fucking humiliate someone.
What next?
The dustbin?"
Other poor dealers were kept on in dealing jobs, because they were good at answering telephone inquiries, or at dealing on government privatisations.
At this stage, Neil Miller was saying to all Harvard dealers: "Some of you lot think you're better than what you are, just because you're earning big money here.
If you leave after only a few months'  experience here, believe me, you will find it hard to get a good job elsewhere.
After a couple of years experience at Harvard, maybe you'll be worth something!
Consultants in the specialist employment agencies, however argued otherwise.
One Harvard dealer had registered with an employment agency which stupidly sent his curriculum vitae to Harvard.
Neil Miller sacked the dealer on the spot.
The dealer contemplated suing the recruitment agency until he found a better job.
For several months hence, Harvard dealers were reluctant to use employment agencies.
Harvard Securities had always had a high staff turnover.
Harvard dealers who had left knew better than to say where to, since the walk out of its top dealers to London &Norwich Investment Services Ltd in May 1987.
It was alleged that at one licensed dealer directors traced dealers who had left them, whether of their own accord or not, via their bank accounts.
More than one ex-dealer has claimed that their old firm would still have an employee's banking details, and would ring the bank to check whether the ex-dealer was currently receiving a direct debit, and if so, from what firm.
If it was from another sharedealing outfit, the old firm would know where to find him.
A network of ex-dealers discovered what they were up to.
From then on, many changed banks, with the sole purpose of giving their previous firm a run for its money.
Directors of licensed dealers rarely have secure jobs.
Some would read significance into an incident in which the best educated director of one licensed dealer suddenly became history.
One Friday afternoon, after a heavy lunch, the director in question telephoned a co-director.
 "I'm quitting the company," he announced.
It was the third time he had proposed this.
On the two previous occasions he had retracted his resignation.
This time, as if aware of that, he added: "And I'm never coming back." 
 "Are you sure?" asked his colleague.
 "Yes, this is it," the director reassured him.
At 5.30 p.m. the resigning director appeared on the dealing floor.
No dealers believed he was quitting.
Nor would they have wished it.
That evening, a consortium of dealers led the slightly worse for wear director to a riverside wine bar in an attempt to convince him that it was worth staying with the company.
At this stage the director revealed news of a letter he had submitted that afternoon to his colleague, verifying that he was serious about resigning.
Nonetheless, the dealers who were gathered with him at the wine bar succeeded in changing his mind.
On the morning of the next Monday, he was found gracing the licensed dealer's premises.
At 11.30 a.m. his fellow director summoned him, and reminded him of his resignation.
The poor man frantically tried to bargain for his reinstatement, admitting that he had been not altogether sober and apologising for making a resignation he did not want.
His pleas were to no avail.
His colleague insisted that he leave the premises.
For the next six months or so, this former director was often seen by dealers in various winebars.
He reminisced how loyal he had been to his firm and how cruel he felt was his reward.
Early in 1987, a memo was circulated to all Harvard staff assuring them that Harvard would still be in business that time the following year and that appeal options would be taken up, should the Stock Exchange turn down their application for membership.
In order to fall in with Stock Exchange requirements, Harvard introduced a wretched task for dealers, viz. the filling in of client profile cards.
A dealer was supposed to ring all his clients and ask them questions as to age, tax position, investment objectives, etc.
If a client refused to answer the dealer wasn't blamed provided he time-stamped the client profile card, and recorded appropriate comments.
Dealers were expected to get these cards filled in at the same time as fulfilling their quotas of business, but nobody had time.
Threats were levelled that if cards weren't filled in by deadlines, good leads would be taken from dealers.
These threats were not idle, although they were usually only directed at those who didn't do much business.
At one licensed dealer that used client profile cards, the dealers scribbled fake answers on their cards, time-stamping them at any old time, despite weak threats from their dealing director that he would be checking on the tapes to see that everything was being done properly.
Trainees, or inexperienced dealers alone took the task seriously, and had the most burdensome time of it.
Later Stock Exchange officials paid a visit of inspection to the firm.
All desks had been tidied, and leads without client profile cards attached were locked or hidden away.
Top dealers with plummy accents who had passed the registered Representatives' and Traders' examination were primed to speak with the inspectors.
Few were surprised that the whole exercise did not win over the Stock Exchange.
The firm reacted to their failure to get membership by hard selling in its most ruthless way.
The licensed dealer showed itself in its true colours, as one of the roughest, toughest sales teams in or around the City.
A dealer will occasionally work against the system, making his clients money against the odds.
One top dealer and team leader invited his four team members out to a wine bar one evening.
Here at a private table before a crackling log fire, he passed round the claret and addressed his minions as follows: "You'll find pressure on you here to sell these bloody OTC.
It's the way to ruin your clients.
You might make quick money, but you won't survive as a sharedealer.
Do what I do.
Sell some OTC, and a lot of main market stocks.
I'll make sure you don't get sacked for it."
His team members proved intolerant of what they termed "his hypocrisy" for he sold a fair quantity of OTC stocks himself, in accordance with their dealing director's instructions: "The stock must go, just get it off my books." 
Another of his team resorted to all the tricks of the trade: discretionary dealing, roll-on account trades, etc.
He even off-loaded tens of thousands of pounds worth of stock on to a client committed to a mental asylum (for which he was sacked).
All three were hard selling in accordance with instructions, and were happy with the big money they were making.
Subsequently, two members of this team complained about their leader to a director: "He's slowing us down," they moaned.
 "We must go to work on another table." 
While they shifted their things, the fourth member of the team stayed in his old place, cackling with laughter.
He alone stood by his team leader.
However the cry was raised all over the floor: "They've removed their team leader" Some thirty young dealers applauded the courage of these two.
The team leader and his fourth dealer went on to be stockbrokers.
The remaining two graduated to FIMBRA authorised share-pushers.
Even at this early stage in their careers, fundamental distinctions in approach were emerging.
But this firm was a training ground for these diverse types.
What direction they moved in next was up to them.
Harvard dealers know more than their counterparts at newer bucket shops, and so have more choice of career direction.
Trainees at the hard sell futures firms, for instance, have been encouraged to learn still less about the markets.
They learn little more than how to sell, and to sell wide.
New recruits of one futures selling bucket shop were made to listen to a tape recording of a "model" sales presentation.
They were not told that the client on that occasion had cancelled the deal.
The few who discovered this later naturally felt that this part of their training was not helpful.
One new salesman at DPR Futures proved so ineffectual and lethargic that his colleagues found it comical to teach him wide  techniques.
However he went extra wide, and ended up getting in more business than any of them.
This aroused their resentment, and consequently their respect.
Successful salesmen in bucket shops scorn weak or moralising colleagues, just as they do all the clients.
Nonetheless, although jealous as wildcats, they respect their own kind.
The professional exams for futures dealers are hogwash as far as the directors of some firms are concerned.
They are only suffered in such places in order to appear respectable in the eyes of the Association of Futures Brokers and Dealers (AFBD).
Very few Account Executives (AEs) at DPR Futures knew anything beyond the most basic facts about futures.
This was compensated for by their self-laudatory claims such as: "We have our own team of analysts, and a good research department, etc." 
The DPR directors had worked at LHW and set up DPR along the same principles.
They had even initially used somewhat similar stationery, although with an altered logo.
DPR salesmen followed a traditional training course lasting a week.
The programme, subject to minor fluctuation, was as follows: DAY 1 Technical training and homework assignments.
Prospective AEs are given a gigantic calculator.
This is a free perk and endears some to DPR.
A few will leave during the day.
News may later leak out that they were spies.
DAY 2 Further technical training and homework assignments.
The history of DPR is told.
Any prospective AEs who imagine that their starting at DPR is a serious career move are asked to leave.
DAY 3 An explanation of options.
Trainees are told that they are salesmen and not investment advisers or analysts.
One or two top senior Account Executives (SAEs) boast to the AEs about how much they are earning, making them all feel they are onto something really good.
They also talk about the perks of the job, such as Porsches.
DAY 4 Review for an exam on the following day.
Also, the signing of work contracts.
Meeting with other DPR directors.
A few more trainees will meanwhile have departed.
DAY 5 The Day of Reckoning, in the form of a three hour written exam.
This takes place in the morning.
Predictably, several trainees have not shown up.
After lunch, AEs are given a sales motivational talk, then are whisked onto the dealing floor.
They are given a desk, a box, and a telephone.
They are assigned to a team and introduced (if that's the word) to their team leader.
Stacks of old recycled client coupons are shoved their way, and the sales manager screams in their ears: "Rock, roll and rev it up." 
This is their signal to hit the clients.
If they slacken, they are told to "bull up" so loudly that their eardrums quiver.
They are standing for the rest of the afternoon.
Many are discouraged.
Some are unable to work.
They feel thrust  from DPR's list straight into hellfire.
This seems to them more like a building site than a City office.
By this stage a few will have decided that this is not for them.
They proceed not to turn up on Monday, the next working day.
A FORTNIGHT LATER: The exam results are posted up.
Trainees who have passed are told: "Well done" and are considered professionals.
But here in this field, still more than in sharedealing, they must have a flair for bludgeoning money out of punters if they are to survive.
Trainees who flunked the examination must be seen to be rebuked.
They get summoned into the conference room.
Here their superiors criticise them for failing after they have been given such brilliant training.
Next they deliver this ultimatum: "Unless you get at least X clients in and on the market over the next week, you're history." 
So long as they can sell, AEs will never have to pass the exam.
Some of those who failed choose at this stage nonetheless to drop out.
This seems ironic as they will usually have boasted that they were the top sales people at their previous firms.
Nobody who leaves a firm like DPR actually gives notice.
There is an art in quitting a bucket shop.
One sort of fades away.
Some AEs cheat on the internal exam, and the author knows of one SAE working at DPR whose girlfriend, an AE there, obtained the question papers for him in advance.
No wonder he then passed with very high marks.
Early on, a deceptive, but strangely effective form of sales training would take place at DPR.
The trainees would tackle what appeared to be virgin client coupons.
They were unwittingly put through to an SAE in the dealing room next door.
The SAE would pretend to be a client, with money to burn.
The AE would pitch him, convinced that this was the real thing.
The more ignorant the AE was, the easier he found it to be enthusiastic.
Afterwards, the SAE would disclose his identity, then pick holes in the AE's sales techniques.
One SAE applauded an AE who had come out with this line about futures: "This stuff is granny bonds, it's so simple." 
The burn-out rate of DPR's AEs was tremendous.
Even the good ones might remain for only a matter of months.
The smart trainees started secretly copying down client details from their second week, to take with them should they suddenly leave or be sacked.
The DPR sales manager once introduced a game some might find offensive, to a dealing force, amongst which were three women.
 "We're playing a game today," he shouted, "called Cunts off the Chairs." 
 "You may ask me why" Cunts off the Chairs"?
For the women, this is because you have cunts.
For the men, it's because you are cunts."
All AE's immediately turned to stare at one of their number a poker-faced young man, who described any client who wouldn't buy from him as a "cunt" even scribbling comments to that effect on the client record cards.
This prime focus of attention had not even the grace to blush.
The game was played like this.
No AE was permitted to sit down until he had given the manager a form for a bike (so a courier could collect the client's cheque), or for a TT (telegraphic transfer from the -client's bank to DPR's), or for Red Star (British Rail delivery: this was a comparatively slow method of payment.
The client's cheque would take a few hours to arrive).
One AE almost immediately handed in a form for a telegraphic transfer and within 15 minutes the client's funds were being transferred to the company's bank.
The AE then sat down triumphantly.
The game was sustained until mid-afternoon.
By this stage, enough business had been generated, and everybody was allowed to sit down.
The salesman who brings insufficient business into DPR usually gets sacked.
This fate might be waived if he is considered a good influence on the other dealers.
One such person was an African who started working at DPR.
His skin was so dark that he caused another black AE at DPR to comment: "I'm from Jamaica, but I've never seen anyone that black." 
This new AE was not, however self-conscious about his colour and he socialised easily with his new colleagues.
Because clients might not have accepted his African name, he worked under the pseudonym of Peter Mackenzie.
At about the time he started, DPR was working to get its AEs more "revved up" .
Peter Mackenzie proved unusually bullish and his deep voice would reverberate throughout the dealing floor with the force of a thousand rapids: "Hallo, sir.
Peter Mackenzie here.
Deller Page and Rycott in the City of London.
I want you to come into the market.
We are going short on cocoa.
Cocoa prices are falling.
You stand to make a lot of money.
The minimum investment is £1,500 sterling.
You can get onto the market by cheque, or do a telegraphic transfer from your bank to ours, or I can send round a bike…
At this stage, the prospective client might reply: "I'm skint!" 
Peter Mackenzie tried not to take "No" for an answer: "Might I suggest selling your shares?
We have brokers here who will sell them at best.
We take the capital and put you directly on the market.
How very clever.
It's very smart…"
Usually failing to close, Peter Mackenzie would gently hang up.
Seconds later he was on the phone again, bulling into the next prospect.
He never sat down throughout the day.
He was even known  occasionally to sprint on the spot.
His colleagues perpetually shouted at him: "Can't you lower your voice?
We can't make ourselves heard,"but he only laughed.
Here was an example of an AE who was perfectly "revved" up This is why he was never sacked, even though his bullishness didn't make for enough sales.
He just was not able to bring in business the way DPR would have liked him to do.
Making an excuse of illness in the family, he quit DPR, and returned to his hometown in Nigeria.
Two AEs of DPR, while travelling one night on the London tube, openly discussed the "Rock, roll and rev it up" tactics used in their dealing room, in front of a carriage full of commuters.
One person (allegedly a DPR client) was appalled at what he overheard, and later complained to the DPR'S directors.
The AEs who had so offended were instantly sacked.
The directors determined that no AEs should be allowed to so transgress again, which led to a clause in the work contract forbidding employees at any stage to divulge trade secrets to the outside world.
Despite their high staff turnover DPR had little to fear from former employees.
Most would find their next jobs in similar bucket shops.
Blabbermouths are finished in the fringe City if they are stupid enough to get noticed for it.
So are those who too obviously con their employers.
C…an ex-sharedealer of Harvard Securities, was living in a barn on a friend's farm in Kent, eking out a gipsy-like living by renovating rusty old cars.
He one morning received an unexpected phone call from a former colleague, now selling futures at DPR: "Repairing cars won't pay your bills, C…" she said.
"It's only two weeks until the Financial Services Act comes into operation (27th February 1988).
Afterwards you stand no hope of getting back into the City.
Get a haircut.
Dust your suit.
And take the first train out of Kent.
I've arranged an interview for you here at DPR.
Remember this is your last chance…"
C…landed the job.
He then set about accumulating client records for use should he leave.
His imminent departure was discovered and he was ignominiously sacked.
He retained contact with another salesman still employed at DPR, whom for the purpose of this book we shall call Peter which is not his real name.
Peter was a poor salesman, but he hadn't been at DPR quite long enough yet to get sacked.
He was an unconventional boy in his late twenties, with a fresh, youthful face.
His hair naturally curled to his shoulders.
He made no bones about displaying his artistic temperament.
Indeed, he was both an amateur painter and a musician in a rock band that met at weekends.
His dress was not normal for the City.
He wore no suit, but trousers, waistcoat and Paisley tie fashion for the psychedelic movement of the 1960s.
It was amazing that he got away with it.
When asked a question, instead of making the standard business response, he would say: "Yeah, man" or use 1970s phrases such as: "That's hip" or "That's groovy!" 
He seemed to be a hippy in his blood.
Once C…rang Peter at DPR and put to him this "business proposition" : "You're an artist.
I'll help you set up an art and printing business.
I can get you access to office space in Mayfair.
In return, you must get me as many DPR client coupons as you can.
Stuff your briefcase.
Stuff your pockets.
Stuff anything, but get them out."
Peter could not resist this.
To set up an art and printing business had always been his pipe-dream.
While he was getting it started, he decided he would try to hang onto his job at DPR.
His side of the bargain, removing the client coupons, seemed no sweat.
He started staying late in the office, until 10.00 pm. or later pretending that he was contacting clients.
What Peter did not realise was that he had aroused the directors' suspicion.
All telephone conversations were taped, but his were now being especially replayed.
On C…'s instructions, Peter's next step was to attempt a break-in to DPR's computer system, i.e. the leadbank.
This proved unsuccessful.
C…pressed him though to get more client coupons.
He was now working for another futures broker and wanted these both for his own business, and to put into a mailing list he would sell.
The DPR directors next discovered that Peter was stashing client coupons in the hollow behind a loose wooden panel in the men's loo.
It was C…who had informed Peter of this hiding place.
The directors laid a trap.
One night they secretly told all employees, except Peter to leave early.
By 7.30 p.m.
Peter was there alone.
Normally the others would remain for another hour or so.
Nonetheless, Peter in his eagerness didn't realise he had been set up.
He made a beeline for the secret panel.
The directors watched him remove the coupons and put them in his briefcase.
Here was the evidence they needed.
Unsuspecting still, Peter left his briefcase on the premises as usual.
After he had left, they promptly searched it, retrieving a closely packed leadbank.
The next morning Peter was sacked and escorted from the premises without being given a reason.
DPR's directors had evidence of C…'s involvement too.
They rang his new employers, stating that they would file charges
for stealing leads unless they sacked him.
Minutes later he was out of the building.
One week several AEs were sacked from DPR for their inability to convey the concept of financial futures.
Simultaneously, three other dealers left of their own accord, disillusioned with the lack of fresh client coupons.
An ex-DPR salesman had started at Stox, a new futures broker.
He rang up ex-DPR dealers and said: "Come over to Stox.
There's not the same pressure on the dealing floor as at DPR, but you'll still make loads of money.
They have fresh virgin coupons, not like those burnt out ones at DPR!"
 "Who's running the show?" one asked.
 "An ex-DPR pro," said their former colleague.
And they decided to join him.
In its short life, Stox was staffed by very young salesmen, sometimes teenagers.
Green and overeager they were distinctly optimistic to their clients over the telephone.
Some of the ex-DPR AEs couldn't take this "kindergarten" seriously.
When Stox went under it became a laughing stock.
The firm had around £600,000 in the clients' managed accounts.
 "This would have been a much larger sum if the salesmen had been any good." 
argued one AE.
Following the implementation of the new Financial Services Act, licensed dealers dragged their nets to pull in a few of the old-style hard sell merchants.
It was a last throw, before the whole game became too hot.
Tudorbury Securities agreed in principle to pay two ex-London &Norwich dealers £5,000 each up front to join them, such was their desire for hot-shot salesmen.
One dealer, desperate to work at one licensed dealer was kept at bay because his arrival might have attracted press publicity.
However, a female dealer struck a bargain with him.
She would get him the job, if he gave her money and clients.
He agreed, and she set to work.
She pestered the appropriate officer, several times a day over a period of three weeks.
He was almost cracking when she said: "I can't do any business unless he comes.
I need him to motivate me."
 "I'll get him in." said her boss, "provided that you sleep with me!" .
 "Fuck off." 
she said.
But the dealer was offered the job.
Once he was there, she tried to exact his help in smuggling client records out of the firm to her home.
Unbeknown to the firm, she was about to leave.
Once at her new work place she complained bitterly of how her style had been cramped.
She felt watched in her every deal.
No cold-calling.
No churning.
No recommendations of stocks without a reason for it.
In early June 1988, she was asked by a director how she had known to put so many clients into a particular Irish stock, just before the price soared on takeover bids.
She explained that a client of hers had recommended the stock.
She couldn't quite tear herself free of the licensed dealing community.
Her former colleagues accused her of bad-mouthing them.
She felt pressured and persuaded her clients to sell out of stocks they'd picked up from various licensed dealers.
The way of life sharedealers aspired to was epitomised in the lifestyle of a Sultan whom a few Tudorbury staff once had the privilege of meeting.
RAI Hamilton, Tudorbury Securities' chief executive, took some of his dealers, together with a bombshell receptionist, to the prestigious club/restaurant Tramp in Jermyn Street.
He ordered dinner for the group.
One dealer asked for a hamburger.
It cost around £7, the most expensive fast food he'd ever had.
The party met up with a Sultan and his daughter.
These proved colourful characters.
The Sultan was very chatty.
 "What do you do for a living?" a dealer asked the Sultan.
He puffed out his chest: "I spend money." 
This is the ultimate way of life to which sharedealers aspire.
One Harvard dealer an American boy, was fortunate enough to get close to this quickly By putting a wealthy client into some circumspect account trades, and so actually making him a lot of money, the dealer earned the client's gratitude.
The client set him up in his own office, with a Stock Exchange Automated Quotations (SEAQ) screen and access to all the financial press.
The dealer was employed to make money in stocks and shares for that client.
In return he was extremely well paid, and could use all the facilities for his own sharedealings.
Someone who put £50,000 into his licensed dealer's portfolio, and who let it be churned around ad infinitum, was likely to be testing what the firm would do with it.
How much more money might he have had at his disposal?
Another dealer had instilled such confidence into some twenty punters to such an extent that they were dealing £5,000 a time on a long-term regular basis.
He was managing to make them money.
He achieved this only by disobeying his firm's orders that he should sell certain stocks at certain times, and by slipping in bargains here and there that were actually in the client's interest.
He later took these clients with him to Sheppards (Stockbrokers) where they dealt with him on a much larger level.
This went to show that the full potential of a client was measurable only outside the licensed dealing fraternity.
One teamleader would occasionally keep his dealers behind after normal working hours.
He would have them sell some peculiar stock, saying: "They've given us this to get rid of, as we're the top team.
Let's prove them right."
It was only after they had offloaded the stock that the dealers would find out their teamleader had bought up large quantities of it himself.
Before the dealers could say Jack Robinson let alone sell their clients out their teamleader would have offloaded his own stock, making a handsome profit for himself.
 "I knew you wouldn't let me down," he would say, to his team.
He was under the impression the dealers didn't know what he was doing.
If one of this teamleader's clients said that another dealer had been trying to sell him stock, he would bellow: "What's his name?" 
Upon extracting the dealer's name from the client, he would tear over to the culprit, who had usually been working quite innocently off a duplicate lead card.
The teamleader would seize his collar yelling: "You speak to that client again and I'll beat your fucking head in, now give me the lead!" 
He would tear up the lead card, and would storm back to his desk.
He was the dealing room bully, and dealers quaked in their boots at the thought of being put in his team.
He kept a "leadbank" for his team.
Every dealer put his throwaway leads in it, only their leader occasionally forced them to contribute dealable ones.
He would remove those for his own use, substituting his own dross leads.
Dealers came and went from his team almost weekly.
One temporary recruit, a tall lean young black boy, sat whispering into the telephone all day.
He never sold his day's OTC quota, and so his leader would shout: "You'll soon be back on the fucking training floor." 
The black dealer eventually escaped to a stockbroker.
From his comfortable desk there, he would look up from his Financial Times, and say: "They're all monkeys at…, just doing what they're told.
It's pathetic.
So what if they're earning more than me?"
Two young Harvard dealers who were sacked still owed two months' rent.
Because they had squandered all their cash, they each had bank overdrafts of around £1,500.
In their last wage packets, Harvard did not pay the £2,000 or so each that they were expecting.
The firm drastically reduced the sum totals on grounds of bad debts, fines, etc.
Their landlord visited them at the flat to recover back rent.
The doors were bolted from inside.
The two dealers escaped through a back window, after dropping their belongings down from the fire-escape.
Both dealers took the night train to a Northern province, the home town of one of them.
They started a new job together selling holidays.
They tried to use the methods they had learned at Harvard until these were vetoed by their new boss.
They kept ringing up their former colleagues, making out they were selling the new Royal Life Unit Trust, that they had risen above OTC dodginess.
But their posing served only to disguise their dissatisfaction, as sharedealing had got into their blood.
They started ringing up London recruitment agencies, such as Cambridge Appointments, asking if there were any sharedealing jobs around.
The bug had bitten hard.
The former securities dealers did not, however read the financial press and were unaware of the shake-up engendered by the Financial Services Act (1986).
They could not now find their way forward.
Dealers would try to get other dealers sacked from rival firms, even if they had worked with them once.
It was nothing personal.
One dealer urged a client not to pay for losses on roll-on account trades his Harvard dealer had put him into: "Harvard'll never take you to court," he said.
"They're still trying to get TSA membership.
Just stick to your argument that the dealer said you'd make a certain profit.
That way you should get the dealer sacked, and yourself in the clear."
Share salesmen who were sacked from one firm were sometimes made welcome at another sometimes not.
Most licensed dealers could not resist kicking a man when he's down.
Dealers, sometimes surreptitiously encouraged by their firms, would go to great lengths to extract information from employees of rival firms.
In May 1988, Tudorbury dealers had the bright idea of fixing a football game with Harvard Securities.
The match with Tom's boys' was scheduled for lunchtime in St James's Park.
The Tudorbury lads saw here an opportunity to get information, and maybe even new dealers.
Doubtless for those reasons Harvard banned the match at the last minute.
Bucket shops with more to hide are often more cautious when it comes to recruitment.
They want only their own kind.
Of course, not all dealers are that way inclined.
Many prove to be misfits, too honest for their job, or not enough on the ball to cope with its demands.
This is why the dropout rate amongst would-be dealers is so phenomenal.
Irish share-pushers Bailey McMahon, Dublin, in April 1988, refused to send out its newsletter or written details on stock sold to prospective salesmen.
The material did not bear scrutiny.
Any potential recruit knew the score.
Either he took the first plane to Dublin, or he rejected them out of hand.
Likewise he knew to take with a pinch of salt the recruiting officer's: "We will get TSA membership.
We've applied and foresee no problems."
Anyone who joins a bucket shop swiftly enough grasps what's going on, even if he's been lied to.
He becomes a rebel, a pirate, a leper.
If he was this way inclined anyway, he will take to his new life like a duck to water.
The pressure can take its toll.
One boy at Tudorbury Securities, who was finding the selling hard going, put his head in his hands, muttering: "Jesus…" 
A successful dealer sitting opposite him looked up: "Yes" , he said.
This was the most encouragement the boy got there, and it proved not enough to pep up his dismal sales figures.
Selling in bear markets to clients who have some inkling of it can be hell.
So also is the underhand competitiveness of licensed dealers which makes individuals' possessions, jobs and their very persons unsafe.
An eminent stockbroker once observed that licensed dealers live and work in hell.
If that is so, it is at least a hell of their own making, in which they can be gloriously themselves.
Secrets of the Two-Minute Sale
Investments that appear to be too good to be true often are.
To increase the public's awareness of this is a major purpose of this book.
The investor has been most likely to make his contact with a licensed dealer by selling shares from the government privatisations at an apparently favourable price.
This proved a major source of clients for these firms.
Few clients knew the probable losses they were letting themselves in for, were they to continue trading.
Indeed the government privatisations have saved many licensed dealers from going bust for lack of business.
There are severe limits to the numbers of client lists that can be purchased.
Furthermore, the process of converting names into dealing clients was time-consuming and costly, although it would have been far less economical still if the Department of Trade's regulations had been properly adhered to.
Dealers regarded the punters' concern to make a profit on, say, £500 worth of Rolls Royce shares with a contempt peculiar to the City whizz-kids they aspired to become.
There was indeed method in their madness.
Small clients handled roughly from what sounded like a hectic dealing room got turned on by the apparent professionalism of it all, and often allowed themselves to be persuaded into buying almost worthless over the counter (OTC) shares.
The dealer would try to persuade the new client to reinvest not just the £500 he got from selling his Rolls Royce shares, for instance, but as much money in addition as he could be persuaded to part with, regardless of how far this was in his interest.
The dealer's first task was to get the client to agree to sell his Rolls Royce shares.
His best way of doing this was somehow to lead the client into suggesting it himself.
Then in case of recriminations afterwards, the client's own words would be safely recorded on tape.
 "It's us or them," one dealer kept saying, and this represented his firm's attitude.
The client would usually be looking secretly for guidance, and would be likely not just to sell out of his Rolls Royce shares, but to reinvest his original £500 with any profit, plus say £1,000 further capital in the stock proposed.
A skilful dealer may get considerably  more money than that out of the punter by implying, sometimes even saying directly, that this OTC stock was a better buy even than Rolls Royce.
The returns might be as quick and much higher he would suggest.
The dealer would also imply that the client should come out of the new Rolls Royce issue immediately.
His line would be something like this: "You made money on the Rolls Royce, sir.
With a little help, you can make a lot more money through share-dealing.
I'm sure you'll agree it's a matter of going into the right stock at the right time.
It's a good idea of yours to come out of the Rolls Royce while the going's good.
Analysts are saying that the price will be static for a while, or might even go down.
I'll put you down for 5,000 of this new one at 50p each, or could you manage 10,000?"
"I'd better just have £1,000 worth initially.
If this does well, we'll look to doing some more business,"the client might reply.
A few days later the dealer would ring and persuade his client to invest in another stock, on the grounds that for making money a portfolio of several shares was needed.
He would never expressly suggest that one or two might go down, but would rather point to an accumulation of profits as deriving from several shares and not just one.
He would work on the client by suggesting what he wanted to hear and the client would be entranced.
The hardest sell of all was perhaps when the dealer said: "You will do well on this.
You can be assured of making a good profit!"
Then he would qualify these certainties at the end, once the client had agreed to buy with something like: "of course, you'll appreciate that, as with any shares, I can make no absolute guarantees, but this is the best opportunity I've seen for a while." 
The dealer would usually get away with this, if tapes were checked, but clients were unlikely to complain, as they would recall the dealer's insistence that lie could make no guarantees.
Indeed, most clients would have shown their appreciation, at the time of sale, of the dealer's fairness in pointing out that he could make no guarantees.
No clients wanted to appear ignorant about the market to their dealers.
Behind their backs, the dealer would call his clients "suckers" , saying: "There's one born every minute" and, "They just haven't got a chance!" 
This was his job satisfaction.
Clients who rang one licensed dealer and asked, for example, whether they should sell British Airways shares, assumed they would receive an unbiased opinion.
It may be that from a stockbroker they would have done, although there is room for argument.
It was possible, however that from a licensed dealer they would be getting nothing of the kind.
For a start, most dealers were young and ignorant characters who  before drifting into their present positions might have been on the dole, or at University, or in menial office jobs, at which time they probably didn't even know what stocks and shares were.
It is a sad and generally unrealised truth that the client who had been investing for upwards of nine months, probably knew considerably more than a new dealer.
Even an experienced dealer would offer only limited advice.
The bulk of his information would doubtless come from the newspapers, the same source his clients used.
One slight distinction must, however be outlined.
The client, even if financially unsophisticated, would probably read The Daily Telegraph or The Times; failing that, the Independent or the Guardian.
Not so the dealer who would be more likely to take a middle-of-the-road tabloid newspaper such as the Daily Mail or the Daily Express, as a source of more concentrated financial news, with a lay-out less taxing on his brain cells.
Some dealers read no papers except the least sophisticated tabloids like The Sun.
These, at least until recently, hardly kept them up to date at all with stock market developments.
Thus the dealers were forced to bluff the more, which amazingly, made them into more effective salesmen.
Of course, some clients too would read the Daily Mail and the Daily Express, in which case they would be as loathe as dealers to reveal the fact for similar snob reasons.
This could cause problems, when, for example, a client read something nasty about Harvard in the Daily Mail, but did not feel able to mention it.
For example, one client told his dealer: "I happened to see an item in my secretary's Daily Mail." 
The dealer, of course, would not mention unfavourable articles in any press unless he got asked.
The Daily Telegraph has printed numerous articles criticising the cold-calling techniques of licensed dealers, and their poor stock performances.
The newspaper has a security-conscious approach antithetical to that of licensed dealers.
The Daily Mail has entered into the OTC market's spirit of enterprise, but has qualified this with constant awful warnings about licensed dealers and their stocks.
The newspaper seems to specialise in witty opening lines.
For example, here are the first lines of an article warning against OTC-traded Bio-Isolates: "Watch out, watch out…
The Bio bug's about: There are bugs that creep, bugs that crawl, sometimes bugs that hide in your bed.
And there's a special kind of stock market bug — the biotechnology bug.
He works on your wallet."
Dealers were constantly pestered by journalists of national newspapers.
They found this exciting.
The most professional approach was to be polite but say nothing.
This demanded an   articulateness beyond the abilities of most dealers.
The Daily Mail printed an article headed, "Slam down the phone on Eyas" , querying the management of OTC-traded Crane Holdings and the credibility of this licensed dealer's directors.
A further warning article followed shortly in the same paper.
Eyas Securities got on the defensive: "The article was misleading and the Daily Mail has apologised," an Eyas dealer claimed to a potential client.
Generally dealing managers have had to bargain with journalists to keep their firms' names out of the national press.
Dealers at Harvard Securities found it amusing to ring up a client  at 8.20 am. and to interrupt his shaving, breakfasting, or love-making in order to press him into buying stock.
It also proved effective.
Caught at such a weak moment, the client could not help feeling the situation was urgent, and was often more susceptible to persuasion.
If the dealer backed his case with some item from that morning's news, he would appear thereby more on the ball.
Of course, a tactless dealer irritated him even more at this sort of time.
Many licensed dealers' clients boast to friends of their broker or their "man in the City" , who gives them tips.
They believe, because they want to believe it, that he is offering disinterested advice, as best befits their needs.
The skilful dealer does all he can to maintain the illusion, by for example, saying reassuringly: "My clients' interests are my own." 
Before selling, many dealers psyched themselves up.
One dealer at Bailey McMahon, just before picking up the phone to speak with clients, would chant: "I'll rip your head off.
I'll shit down your fucking neck…"
Willpower often works — although it did not for Bailey McMahon, who found themselves on the receiving end of action by the Irish authorities.
Many dealers at Harvard Securities emulated this effective sales line for OTC stocks which a leading dealer introduced: "What's wrong with this stock?
Isn't it good enough for you?"
The more sales a dealer produces, the more revered he is by the rest.
In the case of a female dealer she is the more lusted after.
A female dealer at Tudorbury Securities felt the hand of chief executive Roderick Alexander Innes Hamilton, affectionately known as RAI, sidling over her bottom as she was queuing at the SEAQ screen.
She turned to him and smiled coolly: "You wouldn't like me to size you up, would you?" 
Share salesmen, even after A-Day, have upraised their status in the eyes of clients by quotation of imaginary praise from other clients, e.g. "One of my clients is kind enough to say he's never had a bad tip from me." 
If he is vague, it is impossible to prove he has lied.
In the licensed dealing game, impressions often counted for a lot.
Sometimes dealers and clients alike wondered whether the whole thing wasn't just a game of bluff.
Certainly, each party laughed at the other.
Only, the last laugh was on the dealer the client's sense of humour subsiding into resentment.
It was, after all, the dealer who manipulated the client, by giving him advice which was often biased to suit the requirements of his firm.
Despite being an ignoramus, the dealer who lasted even a matter of weeks would have a certain animal intelligence, as well as the true smooth operator's knack of twisting information to support the argument his firm insisted he presented.
At any given moment, he could present a convincing case for the client to sell British Telecom shares, reinvesting the proceeds, or to hang onto them and sit tight, or else to double up, or even to buy more shares in a distinctly dubious OTC stock, while hanging onto British Telecom.
If he sounded logical and authoritative enough, the dealer would usually have his way.
To achieve this was a gift, and had little to do with how much he really knew.
It is just as easy to sound authoritative if you know a little than if you know a lot.
It is a question of personality, or more precisely how this is projected in the voice down the telephone wires.
If for instance the market was temporarily down, following a sharp rise, a dealer would address the client with whichever of the following pitches both suited his sales needs and clicked with the client's mood and personality:(1) Buy another stock using fresh capital.
"The market is down in the dumps.
You'd be crazy to sell today.
What I would suggest is that you seize the opportunity to buy…while the price is right.
Make hay while the sun shines, you know.
We'll cover the purchase by looking to coming out of your present holdings towards the end of the account, maybe today if the Index picks up…"
(N. B. If a client bought one stock today, and sold another tomorrow to pay for it, the time difference served as a cover for the dealer's churning.
This so-called "delayed churning" was commonplace.)
(2) Buy another stock, transferring capital.
"The market is looking grim.
Quite frankly, we're worried how much further down it's still got to go.
You'd better sell out of your holdings now while you still can without too much of a loss.
What I would suggest is a straight transfer into…which has resisted the general trend downwards, and should soon be moving right up.
I'll do the exchange for you now.
You won't be paying out more money.
In fact we'll be sending you a small sum this time, for the difference."
(N.B. The dealer would do such a churn if he knew the client had no money from other sources.)
(3) Pick up more shares in your present holding.
"Hang onto your stock for goodness sake.
The company's prospects are looking brilliant right now.
The share price has only gone down because the market is generally down.
Obviously the market is having an off day, and this is a marvellous opportunity for you to double your stake.
You'll get shares today for far less than you paid for your present stake, and for astronomically less than their true value.
What we're doing is called averaging out.
The overall price you have paid for your shares is now…
This is how the professionals make money in a bear market, you know.
So now you've got…shares in…
I'll ring you in the next account period, and I expect I'll have some very good  news for you!"
(N.B. Buying more of the same stock seemed less like spending money, perhaps because it doesn't require the grasping of an entirely new situation.)
(4) Sell out now.
Buy big tomorrow"Sell out of this now because you'll need those funds and a lot more tomorrow morning for a marvellous American stock we've got coming in.
I'll put aside £5,000 worth for you.
The shares should go quickly, so I'll ring you at 9.00 a.m. tomorrow.
I don't suppose you'll be in the office earlier?"
(N.B. The client may then say: "You can catch me at home up to 8.30 a.m.)." 
(5) Don't imagine I'm going to let you sell out of your holdings.
"We're waiting for news on what we can expect the market to be doing tomorrow.
Quite frankly, we're advising all our clients to sit tight, at the moment, and neither to buy nor to sell.
I think you'll agree it would be counterproductive to act hastily at this stage.
If it seems appropriate for you to sell, I promise you I will be back to you immediately.
Are you in the office for the rest of the day, or are you going home?"
A good dealer might ring later and reassure the client.
Many dealers would not bother.
The variations on these themes were endless.
One particularly effective line often used by dealers was as follows: "Don't sell out this morning, sir Wait until 2.30 p.m. when Wall Street opens.
We're expecting good news from the States and there should be a knock-on effect."
A person of conscience would never twist the truth in these ways, so the critics claim.
The dealer's response was that every one of the positions was tenable, depending on which aspect of the truth was considered more important.
In fact, total objectivity of vision is as much a gift as the ability to persuade people, and many dealers didn't have it.
They believed, or almost believed, in what they were saying.
They were often not interested enough to develop their own bona fide opinions.
The client who was not convinced and pacified by what his dealer said would not only refuse to trade further with him, but would not sleep easy at night, tormented by the thoughts of his investments tossing up and down like a rowing boat in a stormy sea.
The smaller the client's investments, paradoxically the more bothered he got.
Sadly the performance record of OTC stocks had little reassurance to offer him.
The quickest way to discover this was often, sadly, the hard way.
The client who claimed he would rather know the truth was usually the type who would not.
He who really wanted the facts had other sources by which he ascertained them, like his bank manager who invariably would advise steering clear of licensed dealers, and the OTC market in particular.
The streetwise client resorted to trickery, just like his dealer.
If he   said: "I won't buy until I've seen written information on the stock" this frequently meant he had no intention of buying at all, and the astute dealer would pretend he was sending an Extel card (a written fact sheet on the stock) but in fact he would not bother.
Afterwards, he could always claim that it was sent to an old or wrong address by mistake, or that it must have got lost in the post.
Likewise the client who had received information could pretend it never came.
A client, to get a dealer off the phone, could say: "I'll consider your proposition.
If I'm interested, I'll ring you back.
What's your number?"
Once the dealer gave his number under these circumstances, he was submitting to the client's own terms, letting him off the hook.
Dealers would be taught to respond like this: "We could do that.
You'll appreciate though that with shares you've got to move quickly.
What I would suggest is that you pick up 1,000 shares now at…
There are not many guarantees I can make in this game, but one thing I can assure you of is that you now have 1,000 shares in.
at…
If you want to pick up some more, ring me back in the next twenty minutes.
Don't leave it too late…"
(N.B. The dealer would himself ring the client fifteen minutes later and would spin the following yarn: "I've got just 5,000 shares left on my books.
Take them!"
A suggestible client would comply.)
Clients who have gone in for Public Issues often rue the day they chose to sell through a licensed dealer.
Making money on speculative stocks was a far more remote possibility than on British Telecom or  TSB, although it might have taken them six months or longer to discover the bitter truth.
By this time they might have gained a portfolio They might well have got hooked.
Their only prospect of immediate escape would be through selling everything, but the prices at which they'd do this might prove Unexpectedly low.
Their heads had been eased into the yoke, and they were now locked into the system.
A second stage would set in.
Clients acquired a paternalistic interest in their stocks, started looking at profit figures and earnings per share, perhaps for the first time.
They might ring up and ask why some of their share certificates had not arrived.
They found themselves becoming increasingly dependent on their dealer's advice, at the same time sensing it might be fatal.
Some clients pulled away by sheer willpower; many did not.
 "Nothing ventured, nothing gained," the punters told themselves.
A few people were real risk-takers; these types were often company directors, and inveterate investors.
They understood what they were going in for.
Recognising sharp practice in their dealers from the outset, they would be less likely to blame them for huge losses.
Sharp practice might even seem normal to some of them.
The majority of clients, it has to be said, were basic-rate taxpayers, educated perhaps, but too trusting.
Many did not know the difference between a licensed dealer and a stockbroker.
They were impressed by professional looking brochures.
Even a name carried weight.
For example, Harvard Securities may have reminded them of Harvard Business School, although no claims of any connection were made.
Financial Planning Ltd Sounded very orientated to clients' interests.
The columns displaying prices of licensed dealers' stocks in the national newspapers did not always appear to be the paid advertising they actually were.
Nor was it generally known that some newspapers had declined to accept such advertising on ethical grounds.
What was it about the stocks various licensed dealers traded in that seduced clients?
The dealer's colourful stories captivated their imagination, made capital of their greed.
The sales pitches were frequently exaggerated.
Here follow Some pointers that were actually used.
Your author wishes to make clear that in no way are any aspersions being cast upon the firms involved.
(1) Crane Holdings (Eyas Securities OTC) A Northamptonshire based engineering company with a subsidiary that handles removal of asbestos.
Crane Holdings are what is left of Crane-Freuhauf, the well-known trailer manufacturers that used to be around.
MOD orders are coming through after a recent exhibition in Scandinavia.
With the looming British Steel flotation, Crane's services are much in demand.
Crane Holdings have just taken over Grey Rook PLC, which has a three year trading record.
By this acquisition Crane can get a listing on the USM which is what the directors want.
You remember Parkfield Engineering, on the OTC briefly, then straight onto the USM, with a phenomenal rise in share price.
This is what Crane Holdings should do within a few months.
Here are the real facts: Crane Holdings was in fact a highly speculative investment which in the event performed very badly.
As its prospectus very properly pointed out, the subsidiary Crane Engineering Ltd was in receivership, but this fact was not pointed out to investors by Eyas dealers.
The subsidiary handling removal of asbestos was owned by a director of Eyas Securities.
Crane Holdings was no offshoot of Crane-Freuhauf.
The MOD reneged on its orders.
A reference to British Steel was something the punters would relate to, much to the dealers' amusement.
Crane Holdings did not achieve a Stock Exchange listing, but the share price collapsed when Eyas Securities, on A-Day (29 April 1988), was stopped from trading.
The shares, probably worth around 15p on fundamentals had been sold at various prices up to a staggering 45p.
(2) Osprey Financial Trust (Eyas Securities OTC) A specialist in corporate finance, advising City institutions.
They have taken a major stake in Crane Holdings.
The shares trading at around 10p, should gain 50% in value on the back of figures due in December 1987.
Come in big.
Osprey Financial Trust was the parent company of Eyas Securities, an Eyas being a baby Osprey.
This link accounted for Osprey's directors' interest in Crane Holdings which was part of the same network.
Investors were not told of these connections before they purchased the shares.
Figures were riot released in December.
Sadly the share price never saw the proposed gain.
Clients unable to break even, let alone to sell out at a profit, found themselves locked in.
(3) Waterslides (Harvard OTC)"They are opening the world's largest water-theme park, just outside Madrid.
I can tell you confidentially that a well-known boxer who owns a company has been stake-building.
I can't tell you his name…"
Investors who bought on the strength of this pitch saw the share price drop.
Subsequently, a serious accident at the company's water-theme park in Surrey had a detrimental effect on its public profile.
Here is one client's comment: "On 30th October 1986 I naively, and reluctantly purchased 2,000 shares in" Waterslides "from an" enthusiastic"hard-sell Harvard salesman…
I have tried to sell the shares on several occasions through Harvard, having been told "now is not the time to sell," and "best I can do is 5p!" 
Having paid 38p per share, I thought I would wait!"
(4) Rigby Electronics (Harvard OTC)"They've just brought out a device for checking whether a credit card belongs to a particular person or not.
This is very much in demand, with so many credit card thefts going on at the moment."
The above may be so, but it took a long while for anything significant to happen to the share price.
(5) Bleasdale Computers (Harvard OTC)"The company has just arranged a major deal with British Telecom who will market and supply their computers.
The share price is only 6p.
It has previously been as high as 60p, and should rocket."
This one proved a disaster doing nothing significant, and the huge spread prevented investors from selling out except at a substantial loss.
The fact that the share price had been 60p did not mean it would return to that level.
(6) Hilton Mining (Harvard OTC)"Between ourselves, somebody may be picking up a huge stake in this company.
In a week or two, the share price could be right up…"
Within weeks, the directors in charge of the dealing room were instructing dealers to prevent clients from selling out at all costs.
The shares were suddenly suspended, and returned, worth almost nothing in the form of an investment holding company with plans to bring a Harvard director Charles Mitchell, onto the board.
Following this manoeuvre, the Harvard dealing director and dealers questioned the performance of Harvard's corporate finance department.
Later Clive Lawrence resigned from that department.
(7) Spencer King (Harvard OTC)"They're a recovery engineering stock.
They should be getting a lot of work through the Channel Tunnel project.
They appeared on TV last night."
Another poor tip, insofar as it has mainly lost clients money.
The TV appearance was so brief that it hardly warranted comment.
(8) Audiotext Harvard OTC) "They are expanding their telephone lines dramatically, as they are getting several times the number of calls they had anticipated." 
Another failure in terms of making money for investors.
Many dealers didn't think much of their recorded lines either.
(9) Pacific Records (Harvard OTC)"They are major distributors of compact discs.
Their clients include Virgin, Our Price, and HMV.
They were tipped in the Investor's Chronicle."
They were tipped as a recovery stock after investors had lost much of their money in a few months.
(10) Thew Engineering (Harvard OTC) "They helped to lift the Mary Rose…" 
Clients came in at 45p plus, only to see the share price drop rapidly to 18p, although it did later recover.
(11) Weymouth Clinic (Harvard OTC) "They have the backing of the AMA who should be putting patients their way." 
An appalling "short-term" investment, which it was sold as.
Investors lost more than half their money on this one.
Here is one client's comment: "I bought shares in Weymouth Clinic as a result of a concentrated selling spiel on the telephone.
It was strongly hinted that "a dividend is expected in a few weeks time" which is equivalent to "a discount on the purchase price." 
Of course the company didn't pay any dividend, and has now been taken over by a firm making china and porcelain goods.
I received a porcelain candlestick as a gift from this company last Christmas, and judging by the quality of that product, I doubt whether dividends can be expected from that quarter either!"
(12) For Eyes (Harvard OTC) "They've got eighteen opticians, including a fantastic new one in Oxford Street…" 
Too many shops too quickly, judging by their losses, and the takeover by Cooper Vision, leading to a drop in share price.
One dealer would pitch Towerbell Records in this way.
He would say to clients in his gruff, urgent voice: "Have you heard of Bruce Springsteen?" 
 "Yes" the client would say excitedly.
 "I didn't say that," the dealer would continue.
 "But Towerbell Records are signing people up, I can tell you, so come in heavy." 
The dealer knew full well that Bruce Springsteen was not signed up by Towerbell.
He also knew how to sell shares.
Another dealer would sell an Australian goldmining stock, by saying: "Do you want to be a millionaire?" 
His clients were entranced.
The tragedy of clients' huge losses is that they were sometimes led to believe they would make fortunes on the above stocks within a month or two, maybe within three or four weeks.
As a long-term hold (i.e. at least six months) some of these stocks weren't so bad.
Harvard dealers were frequently selling shares in their own company.
To some clients this seemed a cheek, but few regulars could resist the line: "You've got the cart.
Now buy the donkey that pulls it."
Besides, Harvard's own shares, when purchased in sufficient quantity, dispensed with the need for clients to pay the £12 administration cheque on their deals.
This is not, however the perk it seems, as clients were perpetually dreaming and plotting to stop dealing with Harvard.
If they had more efficient stockbrokers, they might indeed have broken away from Harvard long before.
As it was, some struggled on, more often than not incurring further losses.
Anyone who bought Harvard's own shares got effectively locked in, as it would take three months to sell out, on the matched bargain basis a fact not usually explained to the client at the time of sale.
The riskiest OTC stocks can attract surprisingly intelligent investors.
MENSA, the organisation for people with very high IQs, started an investment club which bought from one sharedealer an American OTC stock Biotech Capital Corporation.
The share price promptly plummeted.
There were, occasionally, high performers on the OTC market.
Leading Leisure and Corton Beach spring to mind.
Dealers, after working in the business for a month, could pinpoint the good ones.
So could the wiser clients.
At Harvard, to sell shares in Leading Leisure, for instance, was always relatively easy.
Investors who had watched the company's share price climb often wanted to increase their own stakes, or were amenable to the suggestion that they should.
The power of the Press is dangerously high.
Corton Beach were tipped in the national newspapers just before they left the OTC to start on the London Stock Exchange's third market.
This led to frenzied buying orders.
When companies such as Airship Industries, who are known internationally for their airships in advertising and military defence, were tipped in the press, there followed a flurry of buying, without the dealers having to work at it.
Dealers, normally reluctant to answer phones (to likely sell orders), then competed to take the calls.
Whoever received and processed a buy order would gain both the  commission and a client, without having had to prospect in the first place.
It was money for old rope.
Indeed, the author once took a phone-in for 100,000 shares in Leading Leisure, which netted him a substantial commission, although he had to fight off an unscrupulous colleague who had tried to seize the telephone receiver.
Clients would fare better if they examined profit figures, checked track records.
Most OTC companies were all gas and promises, no substance.
Clients stupidly trusted their dealers.
"You're in the City.
You should know"one client said, and his attitude was typical.
If he had been a little more aware, he would have realised that licensed dealers were largely excluded from the square mile, both physically and psychologically.
The many Harvard dealers who introduced themselves: "This is…from Harvard Securities in the City of London" were perhaps sharing in their company's wishful thinking.
No less optimistic was Harvard's attitude that employees should maintain the standards of dress appropriate in any "City" firm.
Harvard was not a City firm.
After Big Bang, private clients discovered that stockbrokers were offering them an increasingly impersonal service.
During the market decline in August and September 1987 many brokers weren't even answering the phones.
There were proposals for a telephone price information service at 38p a minute for private clients.
Clients would then only have to phone stockbrokers to deal, so every phone call should generate commission.
This, if implemented, would have led to a still more impersonal service.
While such proposals were being mooted, it is no wonder licensed dealers were still in demand.
Licensed dealers offered a personal service, but this was marred by their self-interest.
Amongst firms wound up early on, Prior Harwin was alleged to have mixed clients' money with its own, to have been mismanaged, and to have had insufficient indemnity insurance.
Greenwood International Securities was said to have given biased advice.
Trafalgar Capital took clients' money and vanished.
Nor was the OTC stock the only poor performer licensed dealers offered, although it without doubt put up a worse show than most shares traded on the Stock Exchange.
Licensed dealers also specialised in penny shares.
A few of these were known to have galloped, often due to tipsheet promotion, and herd instinct buying, leading to an inflation of the share price beyond what the assets and figures justified.
Indeed the chairman of Rotaprint, a penny highflier, publicly admitted in August 1987 that his company was overvalued.
This led to a bursting of the bubble.
Investors, some of whom might have earlier come out with a fortune were suddenly losing.
The penny share flourishes on the fallacy that if you get more shares for your money, you must be getting a better buy.
The large spreads (up to 25%) and thin markets of many penny shares are reminiscent of the OTC market, and indeed most licensed dealers have traded in both.
The Stock Exchange's Unlisted Securities Market (USM) has not always performed well.
Ever since Tom Wilmot won his historic battle with the Inland Revenue to deal in USM shares without incurring 1% stamp duty on every transaction, licensed dealers have welcomed and participated in the growth of this secondary market.
It remains relatively easy for a USM stock to obtain a listing on the London Stock Exchange.
A three year trading record (sometimes not even that) is needed, instead of the five year record required for full listing, and advertising requirements are less onerous.
Only 10% of a USM company's securities need be in public hands, as opposed to 25% for listed companies.
The USM shares often have a very thin market like penny shares, so a few buyers will send the price right up.
The USM has had big successes, such as the Burford Group, a property investment company which came to the market in March 1986 at 80p, and in September 1987 was trading at 420p.
In August 1987 top USM stocks under scrutiny for a new monthly rating by chartered accountant Deloite Haskins &Sells included: Burford Group, Glentree (Estate Agents), Rockwood Holdings (Electronic Components Distributor), Regina Health and Beauty.
It has proved possible to make a spectacular gain on the USM, but also a spectacular loss.
Investors in the USM as in OTC stocks dealt all too often on grounds of glamour, as distinct from sound track record and figures.
Some shares on the USM have outrageous P/E ratios.
The momentum often subsides, leading to a tumbling of the share price.
The ride on a climbing USM stock such as Tyne Tees Television during the bull market was breathtaking.
Spreads (i.e. differences between buying and selling prices) have sometimes been enormous, particularly if quoted by a Harvard market-maker when they would sometimes overreach the 10% level.
Licensed dealers have made markets in some USM stocks, and have dealt through stockbrokers in the rest.
Many a Harvard dealer has needed to haggle with one of the market-makers in the adjoining room, in order to obtain something like a fair deal for his client.
If the market-maker of one dealer wanted to take back shares in a specific USM stock in order to balance his books, he would scribble "bid only" over any quote slip the runner would present him on behalf of a dealer.
If he was willing to part with stock as well, the market-maker would quote a two-way price.
He was not supposed to know whether the dealer was buying or selling on his client's behalf, but nonetheless he attempted to guess this from the runner's facial expression and comments.
He was in a position to adjust his price to maximise potential gain for the firm, and to minimise it for the client.
He would sometimes ask the runner directly, before quoting a price.
The runner would tell him in cases when the dealer clearly did not mind whether or not he would get the best price for his client.
For the dealer who did want a good price, the procedure became a matter of negotiation, and it paid him to buy the market-maker a drink sometimes.
Once TOPIC and SEAQ screens had been introduced into a firm, the dealer could check what approximate price he ought to be getting, to be varied by what the firm took off or added to quote its price "net" of commission.
That way he had a basis for haggling.
If he did not haggle, he would sooner or later lose out, with a consequent loss for his client.
In the author's time, there was always a queue in front of the TOPIC screen at Harvard, although many dealers didn't know how to work its controls.
Which USM stocks did licensed dealers recommend?
Harvard (1986–87) bought in bulk stocks such as Hobsons, Tyne Tees TV Dewey Warren, Monument Oil and Gas, Derek Bryant, etc.
Dealers have pumped these out to clients who often have an aversion to OTC (too risky) and to listed stocks (too boring).
In the words of a Harvard director they want something "a little bit sexy!" 
Once Harvard had disposed of a stock, the price would often drop.
This was because it was often bought at a high.
The individual Harvard dealer also picked his own USM stocks for trading.
One dealer of the author's acquaintance was guided by a specialist journal from the Fleet Street Letter stable.
Others relied on the weekly USM reports in the London Evening Standard (Fridays) and The Times (Mondays).
One Harvard team for instance, punted out Campbell &Armstrong, and Rockwood Holdings on the basis of write-ups in The Times.
In their sales pitch for such stocks, some dealers would make out the recommendation hailed from their own research department, but by coincidence, The Times had seen fit to tip the stock as well.
Clients were invariably impressed by guff about "our analyst" and "our research team!" 
Dealers who have left Harvard to go to other firms will tell their ex-Harvard clients that Harvard didn't in fact have that much in the way of research facilities, but clients were reluctant to accept this.
Significantly many successful Harvard dealers have failed in later life.
Some dealers at various firms would sell specific USM stocks on  the account immediately after they had bought enormous quantities of the same shares for themselves.
A manager at one dealer did this regularly.
He would, for instance, secretly buy 30,000 of a stock for himself on the account.
He would then sell it on the account to all his big clients.
Furthermore he would instruct all the dealers in his charge to do the same, on the grounds that a joint effort would shift the share price, and that, besides, the company's prospects were good anyway.
Due to a relatively thin market in the stock, the share price would climb.
This unscrupulous dealer (now at a stockbroker) would then pull out of his own holding before the bubble burst, well within the account.
On occasions when the whole dealing room was punting out the stock, the price might climb even further.
Anybody who "ramps" or causes "ramping" of USM stocks in this way cares more for the profits on his own transaction profits possibly running into thousands of pounds than he does for those of his clients.
Nonetheless, sometimes clients made money through such practice.
It all depends at what stage the dealer chose to take him out.
At other times, both the ramping dealer and the clients would lose out.
It was important for a dealer occasionally to make profits for clients, if he wanted to stay in business.
One dealer of the author's acquaintance would keep telling his clients: "There's been a lot of buying this morning" when what he really meant was the dealers had been selling the stock all morning.
He thus conveyed the false impression that it was in demand.
Another dealer would regularly punt out £40,000 or so worth of stock or so on the account to — wait for it — a school dinner lady.
Another dealt a vicar 130 times in nine months, reducing a £30,000 portfolio to around £8000.
He then brought up the £8000 to £8,000 by steering clear of the OTC, and the vicar was ecstatic that at last he seemed to be making some money.
The dealer moved to another firm and stuffed the client with £12,000 worth of a speculative American stock which ultimately proved a dud.
From his original £30,000, the client had finished up with around £000.
One dealer would regularly say to his clients: "I've just had lunch with the market-maker.
I know he's anxious to move up the price."
This was usually untrue.
This same dealer would sometimes take clients out of many solid stocks to reinvest proceeds in just one huge holding in an OTC stock.
As the bargains were all processed, records were kept of what he and other dealers were doing.
The dodgiest deals-discretionary, and big account trades — were done whilst the chairman of an OTC firm was addressing the dealing floor.
Dealers would then whisper appalling things into the telephone knowing that they would not be monitored.
Harvard Securities introduced its own Personal Equity Plan Scheme (PEPS) which uniquely involved USM stocks.
Like PEPS everywhere, this was slow to catch on, especially as dealers were forced to sell it for days at a time without getting paid commission for it, so most didn't bother.
Another reason for the lack of interest in PEPS is that its benefits were predictable and it tied up clients' money for at least a year.
Clients of licensed dealers wanted exiting stocks, which would move quickly.
PEAS capital gains tax savings were of value only to those whose capital gains had in the given year exceeded the free allowance — not a predicament in which the average punter found himself.
Later, a carrot was offered to dealers who should sell Harvard's PEPS schemes.
A fiver was paid in cash for every PEPS application form that a client sent back to Harvard.
This motivated dealers more than a previously introduced incentive to sell PEPS which had been merely an increase in dealers' OTC takeback allowance.
Still not much PEPS got sold.
Harvard's dealing director started getting desperate.
Finally, he shouted to all dealers: "Ring all the clients that made money by coming into Helene of London on your advice.
Pitch them on PEPS!"
Yet again the PEPS pushers worked pretty well in vain.
So few forms came back.
The effective dealer always made a client feel that he had personally decided to go into any given investment.
One way of achieving this was by closing each sale by some phrase like: "It seems foolish to miss this one, but it's up to you." 
An ineffectual or inexperienced salesman would remind clients that he had "put" them into their stocks.
Clients didn't like being told they had been manipulated, and in the circumstances would be likely to terminate relations with that dealer.
Licensed dealers may offer facilities for trading in options.
Harvard, for example, had its own options department.
However, this form of investment has proved a dangerous risk for clients.
Once clients got launched into the option game by a licensed dealer one of two situations developed.
Either they became hooked on them, like gamblers to the roulette table — having no time, no inclination and no money left to invest in equities.
Alternatively, they lost so much money so frequently on them that they became  disillusioned with all options and by proxy any other financial instruments.
In a word, they were no longer clients.
Of course, money tied up in options furnished just one of numerous excuses the client used to terminate relations with his licensed dealer.
Another excuse was that he needed liquidity for a property deal or something of the sort, so a complete sell out would be necessary within the next month or so, albeit with the least possible losses.
The salesmen at one licensed dealer generally managed to persuade such clients to stay in their shares on grounds that the share price was perpetually due to move up, so they could avoid the losses they would incur through selling out at that moment.
Warrants were less addictive than options, and on the OTC market (except in rare cases like that of Corton Beach warrants) were no money spinner.
Warrants on shares rise and fall by approximately the same amount in pence as the share price, but by a much larger percentage of their trading price.
Dealers at one licensed dealer were instructed to sell specific OTC warrants on a specific day, just like shares.
They would offer them as a high reward investment (playing down the risk) with all the liquidity of shares, and with a potential to convert into shares perhaps on one specific day each year.
The client who bought warrants often didn't understand what they were, although he would pretend to.
This was hardly surprising as his dealers often didn't understand either.
The client would puzzle out an explanation later, if he got informed by letter of his right to exercise the warrants.
Then he might ask his dealer's advice.
By this stage, he who sold the client his warrants would probably have left the firm.
If not, he would almost certainly be unwilling and unable to advise whether or how to exercise the warrants.
The same could be said for his successor.
After all, they got no further commission for such a service.
The client invariably had to make up his own mind, that is if he was lucky enough to be alerted to the exact opportunity.
Some owners of OTC-traded warrants claimed that they had never received anything written about exercising them at all.
Often clients of licensed dealers who were genuinely interested in options would be easily led into warrants.
There were clients who continually pestered dealers about their warrants.
How did dealers not well versed in the technicalities of these cope?
One popular way was for the dealer to refer his client to somebody in the administration or accounts departments, or else to the director in charge of such details.
The client then had to ring a different number.
Even if the phone was answered, the client might not get through to the person he wanted.
If he did, he might not get a satisfactory answer.
If the person promised to ring him back, he might fail to do so.
The administrative backlogs and incompetence at certain licensed dealers became a nightmare for clients.
It was sometimes stated on contract notes that the firm, as well as the clients, owed interest when late in settling.
One controversial licensed dealer often did not pay its interest due, although expected it from clients.
Further clients of this firm were often asked for interest payments they did not owe.
How did they sort out the mess?
Dealers often advised pet clients to demand to speak to the chairman.
Clients who did this suddenly found their complaints listened to.
Clients who withheld money they owed often achieved satisfaction on their particular bone of contention.
Money counts with licensed dealers.
As a Harvard director once put it, "Money talks, bullshit walks!" 
The Harvard dealer was on the sharp end of clients' complaints.
It was he who had to listen to how the clients could never get through on the telephone, how they were chased by debt collectors even when they had paid, how they could not find up to the minute share prices, etc.
The good dealer was something of a social worker as well as a salesman, developing a very intensive relationship with clients who didn't mind being churned every day.
Sharedealing developed into the pretext for regular human contact on the part of lonely clients who carried on trading because they could not live without that friendly familiar voice on the other end of the telephone.
Some dealers derived pleasure from the clients.
It would boost their egos to talk to a director of a leading bank, or a key man in a well-known company as an equal, and it was incredibly revealing how little such high up people seemed to know about shares, how desperately motivated they were by greed.
When the London Stock Exchange's new third tier market started up, most punters were interested.
Here was an OTC style casino, only with official back-up.
Most held their breath and tried a punt or two on the third market stocks their licensed dealer recommended, which in some cases had been quoted on the OTC market earlier.
Some dealers tried to convey the false impression that the two markets were in cahoots.
Prior to the 1987 stock market crash, the third market went through lean periods.
The share prices of Catalyst Communications and of Corton Beach, strictly on a temporary basis, dropped back; these erstwhile giants of the OTC market seemed to have come a cropper.
 "You'll be better off investing in OTC stocks," Harvard dealers urged; they were paid a higher commission on OTC than on third market sales.
The Third Market had considerable advantages over the OTC.
Liquidity was better.
Third market companies had to find a member firm to sponsor them who would ensure not only the suitability of the company for trading, but also that the company's decisions were communicated to the shareholders, and that there was an effective and orderly market in the shares.
Third market companies remain "gamma" or "delta" securities for the purposes of SEAQ and TOPIC.
This means a punter can follow the price movements himself, or obtain up to date prices from his stockbroker.
Likewise, transactions in third market stocks must be trade-reported, and are subject to publication in the Stock Exchange Daily Official List on the following day.
The Third Market, like the USM before it, doubtless owes its existence in part to the competition posed by Harvard Securities and the OTC market.
Despite this, the new market must have met a demand as its performance was soon outpacing the FTSE 100 index.
This is in spite of a poor start, in which the Irish based Eglinton Oil and Gas performed unpredictably.
The OTC traders have gained an enormous amount of extra business from the Government's Business Expansion Scheme (BES).
This has, however dwindled since investors have found increasing access to a form of BES unshackled by the OTC.
The BES originated in 1981, offering tax relief to investors in the form of the Government's Business Start-Up Scheme.
The scheme probably led to no more than £20 million being invested, and so a more attractive plan was formulated.
Under the BES that has succeeded it, UK residents can invest up to £40,000 in one or more UK resident companies.
There is a minimum investment of £500 per company.
Relief is paid at the tax-payer's top marginal rate of income tax, provided the investment is bed for five years.
After this date, the shares may be sold without losing relief, although capital gains tax is payable, subject to the usual free allowance.
If the shares are sold before five years are up, there is a clawback of tax relief.
The higher rate tax payer has found the entire scheme irresistible to such an extent that he has invested in companies he would otherwise not have touched.
Is this sensible?
If he loses all his money it is no use his having saved tax.
After five years, there is no guarantee BES sponsored companies will survive.
What sort of companies have attracted BES support?
There have been some very diverse schemes, including a wine company that after five years would offer investors a taste of the booty.
Amongst
other BES companies, we have seen a school in St John's Wood, and a company proposing to use investors' money to breed pedigree mohair producing Angora goats, and to produce an Angora "super goat" through cross-breeding.
The BES fund is an alternative that has been made available to investors.
Such funds usually offer less flexibility than individual shares handpicked by the investor.
If one share in a client's portfolio is relinquished, tax benefits can be retained through the remaining shares.
If a client sells out of a BES fund — no easy matter — he loses his entire tax savings.
It was quite common for an affluent client to insist: "I'm only interested in BES schemes, although a skilful dealer would tempt him into a short-term punt in a stock outside the BES.
If an affluent investor had invested in a poor stock, he might not object as he would enjoy setting losses against capital gains for the year.
This would appeal to his sense of order, even if he should lose out financially.
Dealers were told to say to clients: "We're getting involved in the BES next year in a bigger way.
This did not in fact happen, but the earlier suggestion of it kept some of the wealthier clients on tap.
In the 1987 budget, a "carryback" was introduced for BES investors, enabling them to carry back to the previous tax year relief on up to 15,000 invested.
The purpose was to prevent crowding of BES issues at the end of the tax year, but the ceiling limit meant that investors putting up the full 140,000 still made most of their investments as near as they could to 5th April.
A survey published in September 1986 by accountants Peat Marwick Mitchell revealed that out of a total of 213 British companies seeking a flotation on the OTC markets by August 1st 1986,80 raised money under the BES terms, and more than half the OTC entrants were BES schemes.
Obviously BES depresses the liquidity of the OTC market, since sellers of BES investments would lose their tax relief.
As a result of this, upward mobility in the OTC market has been adversely affected.
A company seeking a flotation might be better off skipping the OTC and starting out on the third market or USM.
The OTC market in America is taken seriously.
Top American brokerage Weedin &Co has constantly rejected the New York Stock Exchange for the American OTC market, which it considers superior and this attitude is by no means uncommon.
Literally hundreds of US companies that have qualified for exchange listings have elected to remain on the OTC, preferring a more competitive system of market making to a single exchange specialist.
One or two OTC dealers in order to present an aggressive American
image, as well as to convey by implication a market of the status of the American OTC, toss around American phrases and terms in their sales presentations.
These are perhaps more appropriate when offering an American OTC stock.
References to "poison pills"  "shark repellants" and "golden parachutes" irritate some investors even as they impress others — and they flummox almost everybody.
Some dealers would do well to heed the advice offered by Mark McCormack in his book What They Don't Teach You at Harvard Business School — Awareness of when you are imposing can be an important asset."
The NASDAQ system has increased the American OTC market's liquidity.
There is no evidence that the UK OTC market will ever attain its size and respectability.
Clients will never love the UK OTC market, or at best will only love an isolated stock or two, like Hard Rock Cafe, which achieved a proper stock market listing in the UK and in the United States, and which was taken over by Pleasurama in July 1988.
Compulsive investors in the UK's OTC market enjoy at best a love-hate relationship with the stocks, the dealers, and the whole manic unpredictability of it all, weighted against their interests though it is.
Clients who are truly hooked will go to any length to meet their dealers' demands.
They will take out overdrafts, empty their building society accounts, even sell their second houses.
Licensed dealers will hold surplus money on deposit from them and take every penny they can.
However, nobody seems to blame the clients for falling prey to their own greed and stupidity.
In April 1988, just before A-Day a top dealer set new standards of ruthlessness.
He got clients into his grip and pressed them to buy shares in huge quantities.
They begged him to let them off this time, but he rang back hour after hour, day, after day: "Sell your car.
Mortgage your home.
Get an overdraft.
Clients settled for amounts they didn't have.
They just dug it out from somewhere.
The attitude of another dealer was almost more callous.
A client bought from him a large quantity of shares in an infamous CTC stock which went bust.
The client lost money he could not afford.
He rang up his dealer, almost deranged: "What shall I do?" he ranted.
"How the fuck should I know?
Go and jump in the Thames,"said the dealer.
The client was heard from no more.
The relationship between dealer and client is not always divorced from the occult.
A salesman at one licensed dealer used to read his clients' horoscopes for them.
He would then say something like: "The sun is in Pisces.
It's your lucky day today.
And this is the share you should be going for.
Come in big…
Even FIMBRA members have succumbed to the continental share
sharks.
Professional investment analysts and advisers are sometimes attracted to the OTC market like bees to the proverbial honeypot, and significantly seem no more interested in figures and ratios than the common or garden punter.
Accountants sometimes pretend interest in the figures, but this subsides when the dealer tells them what they want to hear: "I earn my living by making people money.
If you want to make money, just listen to what I say.
Don't worry about P/E ratios and profit figures.
Put in £5,000, and sit tight for eight to ten weeks."
Oil stocks are particularly easy to sell, because a dealer can twist the latest news to substantiate his pitch, e.g. the situation in the Middle East indicates that there will be a massive rise in oil prices.
He can waffle on about OPEC ad infinitum, and most clients won't know what the hell he's talking about, but they'll pretend to agree with him and will buy on the strength of what he says.
Furthermore, the dealer can point to the oil stocks that have made investors good money, e.g. Monument Oil and Gas, Clyde Petroleum, Cluff Oil, Britoil.
He can claim, whether truthfully or not, that he had recommended clients to come in at exactly the right times.
He need not mention any of the failures.
The only time the ace dealer comes a cropper here is when he stumbles across a client who works in the oil trade.
One dealer at a London based sharedealing outfit was selling an unknown oil and gas stock to a client who replied: "I work in the oil industry myself, and these speculative situations, I know can go badly wrong.
I'll pass on this one."
Many see oil stocks as too risky.
For instance, a sales pitch claiming that a major discovery has been made in the North Sea sounds suspect to the investor who has lost out several times in the past.
Some dealers find it hilarious when clients take their investments so seriously that they investigate the OTC companies personally.
Their comments, although not always fair, are heartfelt.
One client of a Harvard dealer visited the premises of a medical clinic, then got on the line to his dealer grumbling: "There's nothing to it!" 
Another client was not particularly impressed with the new Oxford Street branch of For Eyes the opticians.
Yet another who went into a Scoops (now Staks) Reject China Shop described the stock in less than enthusiastic terms, although this was doubtless sour grapes over the sluggishness of the share price at the time — contrary to what his dealer had led him to expect.
Somebody who claimed to have visited Punters wine bar in the City said he found it "virtually empty!" 
The telephone lines of companies such as Thew Engineering, when the share price was going down, have been constantly busy with shareholders trying to find out what's going on.
The suspension of an OTC stock for optimistic reasons (like Thew Engineering, Rigby
Electronics) or for pessimistic reasons (like Weymouth Clinic, Hilton Mining), has led to investors ringing Harvard constantly to ask what's going on.
The newsletters issued by licensed dealers, whether written in house, or anonymously by stockbrokers, tend towards propaganda.
Some of the recommendations may be bona fide, but slipped in will be those of stocks the firm wants to offload.
It is a fact of life that a client who spends real money will be better treated than the rabble that doesn't.
Somebody with a £100,000 portfolio who deals £5,000-£10,000 worth of stock at a time will be protected from the worst stocks, doubly so if he is lucky enough to be in the hands of a dealer with a longer-term commitment to his profession than average.
He may never appreciate the VIP treatment he is getting.
Clients who make money with licensed dealers, by accident or design, imagine this is what usually happens.
Naturally, friends of dealers tend to do well on their investments.
This may be technically insider-dealing, which is far more rife in the City than people have generally been led to believe.
Salesmen discriminate between clients in their own ways.
One successful dealer distinguishes between his "dustbin" clients, i.e. occasional or stupid, or with limited financial resources, on whom he off-loads OTC shares, and his "regulars" whom he treats more carefully.
For shareholders in Hard Rock Cafe, originally Harvard's best OTC stock, a perk was permission to jump the long queue outside the Hard Rock Cafe off Piccadilly.
Harvard dealers were granted the same perk and for that reason kept it concealed from clients, even if it would swing the sale.
Dealers' young girlfriends were always impressed by a visit to Hard Rock Cafe.
Dealers sometimes work in pairs, which can lead to a double efficiency if the talents of one complement those of the other.
For example, if the soft sell chap fails to wheedle his client into buying, his partner can ring him up and say: "My colleague's at an important meeting, but he asked me to call you about this stock.
We've saved you 10,000 shares."
This dual approach often works, proving that two heads are better than one.
Likewise, one's workmate can take awkward calls, e.g.;"My colleague's not in today, I'm afraid.
I'm a senior dealer and I work with him.
Perhaps I can help you…"
If he pacifies him skilfully enough, he might even make another sale on his colleague's behalf.
The term "senior dealer" was generally understood to apply only to those who had achieved certain levels of business which would usually take at least three months.
This term has, in practice, been used generally by dealers who want to impress their clients.
It gives   the impression of long experience.
If a dealer has worked in the business for only a few weeks, the client has no way of telling whether he is senior or not, and some licensed dealers have taken advantage of this.
This is yet another example of how the business most dealers attain is a tribute to their capacity for sounding convincing.
Indeed, claims by inexperienced dealers to be senior dealers became a matter of complaint by aggrieved clients.
Success to certain media people means earning your age in thousands, e.g. £30,000 a year at thirty years old, etc.
Good dealers in shares and futures would laugh at this yardstick.
Earning twice that, they would challenge their "Greypower" critics with a fist in the face.
Older people, or "wrinklies" are just cardboard cut-out figures to them.
Dealers feel an instinctive dislike for Stock Exchange member firms where position is awarded according to age and experience.
They feel this is old-fashioned and stultifying.
They regard stockbrokers' work as tedious.
Understanding of figures and a modicum of research seem called for.
The hours of work appear sometimes ridiculously long.
Such sentiments are confirmed by reports from the few dealers who make it into stockbroking offices.
Stockbrokers never more than now lack enthusiasm for the small client.
They fail to keep him informed, and to advise at crucial times, such as takeovers.
They give him poor tips and charge high  commissions.
Their settlements are not always on time.
Moreover they are difficult to get through to.
Despite their prestige, they seem to have less to offer the private client than licensed dealers.
On balance, provincial brokers seem to offer more of their time, although giving no higher quality advice than their London rivals.
Nor do banks and building societies provide satisfaction.
Their saving schemes, if safe, are boring and investors get alarmed by the low interest rates.
Many, despite their bank manager's warnings, plunge into speculative shares whose prices are likely to make them lose all or most of their money.
They hear most usually from the share salesmen, the most amazing stories of quick and fantastic profits.
For instance, shares in OTC-traded Burrough, the Beefeater gin business, leapt from 445p to £12, after the company had been bought up by Whitbread.
The skilful dealer represents such rare gains as a regular occurrence.
He does this more by implication than by direct statement.
Licensed dealers still deal in certain shares the punter reads about in the tip sheets.
There are some unsavoury tie-ins at work here.
Punters are just crazy about penny shares, and their blindness, some might argue, is only too readily exploited.
Punters who rely on the tip sheets must get into stocks early, and maybe sell out quickly.
They must form their own judgments, from a variety of sources.
Those who depend solely on their licensed dealers to find them another Polly Peck (probably the most spectacular penny share success ever) are probably doomed to disappointment If they are lucky, they will be the blind led by the blind.
More often, their dealers will be all too clear-sighted in losing them small fortunes.
It may take a while before the clients cotton on to what is happening.
Even then they will have no evidence — unless perhaps they tape all conversations with their dealers, for themselves.
Clients equate reward potential with risk, a fact dealers exploit, but the two may not coexist proportionately.
Only by researching stocks thoroughly or by taking skilled impartial advice can a client ensure against being misled.
Laziness is a greater cause of failure to make money in shares than bad luck.
Don't the share salesmen know it!
Some clients, usually the more ignorant ones, stupidly assume they are experts.
They rely on hunches that are based on their cravings rather than on hard facts.
Disappointment, again, lies in wait for them.
The dealer will agree with his client's proposals, even offering what evidence he can muster provided he gains business this way.
He will be laughing at the client behind his back.
One dealer wrote on his client lead card: "Likes to think of himself as a professional.
Will take no crap from dealers.
Send info."
Such  a client will prove eventually manipulable.
In truth, he is begging to be convinced.
Client record cards are not necessarily helpful to a dealer who inherits them, however.
Witness this comment from another one: "He's died.
Gone to meet his maker.
He's propping up the daisies.
He's fucking snuffed it"In actuality, in this particular case, the widow of the deceased, when offered the apparent investment of the decade, certainly spent something.
This leads the author to conclude that shares not suitable for widows and orphans are often sold more easily to widows and orphans than to anyone else.
Although dealers have been sacked from their firms for hard selling to the aged or infirm, it is usually only when complaints are made.
New dealers are then brought in to replace the dishonoured ones.
As an ex-Harvard dealing director once pointed out,"Dealers are two a penny nowadays!
This is manifestly untrue of the good ones, but mediocre young men on the make are proliferating.
As one manager wryly remarked of his firm: "All aboard the pirate ship!" 
Futures salesmen are a tougher breed than share salesmen.
The best earn a great deal more money.
They seem born to the hard sell ethos although new severe regulations against cold-calling and for "knowing the client" are forcing changes in their attitude.
The overlap between dealers in futures and dealers in shares is nonetheless considerable.
Both sell financial instruments, and can be ignorant about the markets.
But the equities salesman who goes to work for a futures dealer may find the going hard.
Most private investors do not understand the concept of futures, whereas shares present no problem.
Furthermore, the risk warnings for investment in futures put many punters off.
Yet Account Executives (AEs) push them into investing in futures capital they cannot afford to lose by underplaying the extent of the gamble, emphasising the potential gain.
Before blaming AEs too harshly, it is essential to understand the tremendous pressure their directors have put them under.
AEs at one futures bucket shop cheered or hissed colleagues in the early morning, according to their individual sales figures on the previous day.
A large wall chart tracked commissions earned by each AE per month.
Salesmen who underperformed even over a short period at the futures bucket shops, were put on "terminal!" 
The ultimatum was as follows: "Get in X number of clients next week, or get out!" 
The loss of face that would result from getting sacked served to spur on the AE.
In the heat of the moment, he might slacken his moral principles.
Selling methods at DPR were moulded on those proven at LHW.
AEs found the negative sell easiest.
The DPR client was left feeling that DPR did not need his business, it was prospering so much.
It did not usually occur to the client that DPR might be prospering from his losses.
AEs find the hard sell more difficult.
inexperienced AEs attempting the hard sell will often have "blow-outs" , i.e. cancellations, on their hands.
A former AE of a major futures bucket shop here recalls using hard sell techniques on a visiting client: "One day, he came to lunch with me, and I became quite drunk while he stayed determinedly sober.
Over coffee back at the office I tried to pull myself together and sell him a traded option in copper which would, as it turned out, have made him quite a lot of money.
I was with him for four hours and got nowhere; I requested colleagues to have a crack at him all to no avail.
After this episode I stopped telephoning him, only to find he enjoyed the game so much that he began calling me."
This AE recalls a sales manager who tuned in to AEs' telephone conversations, thereby gaining snippets of information about their private lives which he would not hesitate to use.
The AE at such firms as these had to get in a minimum number of clients per week.
The level of their investment was not at that stage important.
Clients once opened up were handed to the Senior Account Executives (SAEs) who would squeeze them like lemons out of their very last pennies.
The Senior Account Executives (SAEs) at DPR Futures were dealers who had graduated from the ranks of the accounts executives due to their exceptional sales performances.
When an executive had been thus promoted, his style and approach would become refined.
He was then a smooth operator.
After a new client was ushered onto the market by the AE, the SAE would then assume responsibility for looking after the client's market positions, and for obtaining future business.
Normally, the first trade was done for about £2,000.
The SAE, two or three days later would ask the client to pay ludicrously high sums of money for additional contracts.
Unlike the AE, the SAE would inject subtlety into his hard sell tactics.
He gave the impression of being a high-up executive who had years of experience in advising investors.
He often wore pinstripe suits and braces, coordinated with a smart shirt and tie, like the outfits portrayed in the film Wall Street.
He was the cream of the crop.
One SAE of DPR, who for the purposes of this book shall be called Oliver was known to have earned around £19,000 over one Christmas period.
He was brilliant at handling the most difficult client.
These high  earnings, however confounded the directors, as he achieved them while the markets were quiet, and while business was usually slow, at a period when morale was low from the market crash a few months earlier.
His clients were normally able to come into the market with at least 110,000 each per trade, and sometimes as much as £100,000.
The competitive instincts of AEs at DPR were unleashed by the allurement of cash prizes.
The £50 offered daily to the first AE to get a bike back with a client's cheque, seemed to the world-weary AEs worth more than three times the equivalent, as paid at the end of the month.
They were not convinced of delayed payment until they saw it.
They could lose their jobs, or DPR could go bust, without warning.
A weekly competition at DPR awarded 1100 and a bottle of champagne to the AE who got in the largest amount of money over the five days.
Perhaps four or five, out of thirty AEs, were realistically in the running.
The rest put money on whomsoever they thought would win.
The betting would start on Monday.
By noon on Friday, the competition would become heated.
There might be three candidates or so left, bulling into clients.
DPR's competitions stimulated most AEs to greater effort by instilling purpose into the dealing room.
The few AEs who were distracted were unsuited to their roles in any case.
The good DPR Futures AE could squeeze money out of real "stingebags" and "whiners" .
He could tackle clients whose records contained comments like this: "He has lost £50,000 with LHW, and is not interested now.
Keep in touch…send brochure first.
Will read.
Get back to him in a fortnight…
He doesn't understand futures, but he knows they're bad news.
He'll discuss the proposal with his wife…
Has dealt with other futures firms such as Bailey Shatkin.
Isn't doing anything now."
The national press has brought DPR's hard sell techniques into the public eye.
At one stage, AEs found that the very mention of DPR's name almost guaranteed no sale.
So they were told to introduce themselves like this: "I'm calling from Deller Page and Rycott Ltd in the City of London!
This sounded respectable, and many punters failed to make the link.
AEs also took to answering the telephone with: "Deller Page and Rycott!" 
Executives amongst themselves called it Deller Page and Rip-off.
The strongest selling point for AEs at DPR or LHW was the "limited liability" concept, which meant clients could lose no more money than they put in.
Many a more respectable futures dealing firm did not offer this.
However the cost to DPR of providing this facility was only between $60 and $90 and the stop loss level was set so close to the market price that many contracts were very quickly wiped
out, since all the investors' margin was used up.
DPR AEs sent out to clients a glossy brochure entitled "Opportunity Unlimited" containing a photograph of a glamorous country house with a Porsche parked in front of it.
Underneath was this dazzling byline: "The rewards can be greater and faster than any other form of financial speculation!" 
AE's sometimes addressed themselves to irate people who said they would never invest in futures, let alone through DPR.
Typically the punter would say: "One of your crew rang me three months ago.
Scratch me off your mailing list.
I'm tired of you lot pestering me.
I have no money.
Your firm's methods are always being exposed in The Times.
After an earful of this, the AE might laugh, and write on that client's coupon a misleading comment like this: "Has been in hospital.
Recovering from a minor op.
Call in three months and bull into him.
Will be ready with £5,000!"
Such faked coupons were handed to trainees.
When they pitched these clients, trouble sometimes arose.
The beleaguered ones might threaten complaint.
In early 1988, DPR were prone to particularly vigorous sales campaigns ahead of trade figures, or on significant movement of interest rates, as opposed to all the time.
This self-imposed limitation was attributable to their desperation for AFBD membership.
But AEs who could hard sell were still valued the most in the firm.
The American trade figures were generally the high moment of the month.
On the morning of the days on which they were due to be announced, the dealing manager of DPR Futures would scream at the AEs: "This is it.
Get 'em in.
Get as many as you can for the trade figures.
We've got our forecasts right this time…
If they're afraid, get 'em in for the minimum.
Bull up.
Bull up."
The AEs would scramble between their dealing screens and telephones, negotiating afresh every minute.
Their voices conveyed urgency.
Furthermore, the infamous cassette tape recording of open outcry on a real trading floor was turned right up to impress clients, so the AEs had to shout loudly to make themselves heard.
DPR often appeared to get its forecasts wrong.
Days before the trading figures were due, when it should have recommended a long position, the firm was likely to recommend going short.
After a succession of incorrect forecasts, DPR suddenly switched tactics.
One of the bosses announced: "We don't know what the real trade figures are going to be.
This one's really difficult to judge.
Let me suggest a new way to handle your clients.
Talk to them from Monday about the trade figures due out on Thursday.
Tell them the company hasn't taken a stance at all, that our analysts are still working on it."
Insist that they are ready on Thursday afternoon to go in either direction, long or short, that the company takes.
Executives started to smile.
This sounded like a psyching-up treatment that clients would respond to.
The boss quickly interjected: "This is the best time to get new clients on board.
They may not understand the Deutschmark or live cattle, but even idiots know about the Yankee trade figures.
They are talked about everywhere.
They affect the grannies."
One executive opened seven new clients for the next American figures.
In his polished accent, he informed one new client who was sceptical: "Sir you have nothing to fear.
You are in my capable hands.
If DPR takes a long position, I'll press a red button.
If a short position, I'll press a blue button.
It's as simple as that.
Everything's computerised, you see.
You'll be in and out of the market before you can bat an eyelid."
Unknown to the client, DPR's facilities were far from being computerised.
There were no red or blue buttons to push, only a lot of paperwork.
The controls signalled a dozen dealing screens, but only three were in use.
DPR's actual trading room consisted of a matchbox style office in which two overworked traders would place the company's orders to brokers situated in London, Chicago, or New York.
DPR demanded funds in immediately, but, paradoxically took their time about executing the clients' orders.
Executives led clients to believe they were being put on the market immediately, and, indeed, this was what they themselves thought was happening.
One executive smelt a rat when a new client queried a contract note.
The executive took care not to let it slip out that he had never seen a DPR contract note.
The client stated his contract had been executed at an unexpectedly high price.
The executive checked the documents, and noted that the order should have been executed at a much lower price.
The difference in price suggested that the client's order had been executed a full day after it had been placed.
Imagine yourself in the role of a client.
Would you be happy with this sort of practice?
