Opening For Going Through
If one is not true to and fails to realise one's expressive possibilities one is liable to be legally sued by oneself for misrepresentation 
A twisted tree reached up for air,
its crippled branches flailing there.
Its bark was gone quite long ago
but it's still there, out of its row,
out of its life, out of its death,
but there no less — and breathing breath.
Page Watcher
Hello, hello, it's me again.
I'm writing with a felt-tip pen.
Why am I writing?
I'm not sure.
Maybe I've got word allure.
 "What's word allure," they ask again.
It's writing with a felt-tip pen
and watch it squiggle 'cross the page
and watch grey hairs fall out with age
and watch the wind blow 'cross the page
and watch the page go brown with age.
Someone'll preserve it, never you fear,
to drag its corpse out year by year
and clog a brain or two quite hard
and coat an ear or two with lard.
It's freshness!— that's the thing to get,
so now read on and don't forget.
Conscious analysis of anything is only scorned by me if it's the best you can do!
There is so much rich super-/ sub-conscious flow available from every man that he should learn when to slide the conscious away in its drawer.
Seen
A pretty, lithe young housewife is stretching up,
pegging a large yellow sheet to the washing line,
her short fashionable jumper
parting company with
the top of her tight cuddling slacks.
The wind
is causing cheeky corners of the sheet
to tickle the soft sides of her tummy.
Will her husband come before she does?
Bitter Letters
Dear Aura of Life, Thank you for jumping and kicking me in tender places cos it gives me something to cuddle — a bruised gut.
Dear Internal Thought, Thank you for the consoling sympathy about my swollen flesh — it makes me strong again to admit Life's Aura into my world.
Head Boil
Roaring at the ears, shoes melting, feet boiling, wrists wrenchy, teeth and jaw moved big and heavy by 85 steaming black slaves, each with a large wooden handle-bit between his teeth and 3 ropes to manipulate, one for each hand and one clasped in both feet, his waist tied down with leather to prevent any unnecessary movement of bum on bench.
Thus did I emerge from the night tunnel of restless body movement.
What hair that is left on my head became steam that wisped past my left eye, a ball that has bounced in and out of many a brain cover.
 "Surely I am not alone!" 
I screamed in a low, unreadable voice and, on its return, the echo got grated and serrated through and over multi-farious jagged pots that people have built and called "chimneys" .
 "Surrrrlllyee-noloan!" might have been the echo's echo but an extremely-dirty-white-coloured Con-dis-corde melted through the flesh of my left ear lobe on its path to a tasty dish of stewed pound notes, and some of the cooks had chartered it to make sure it got there so I didn't receive the echo's echo.
But the serrated gratings must have sufficiently broken the crust of the brick-broken mutilated plastimetal that covers a great deal of the world that is an eyeball, and little light yellow-green stubs poked through, cos the Sun was still up there, way up there, even though someone had devised a new kind of force of matter transference and was attempting to move the Sun to his laboratory-country where it would be used to grow humlants — in which the old human brain was to be stretched in durable fibrosity and connected inextricably to root and flower, making rings of energy that took their partners for a whaltz or a flexitrot and multiplied their species by being fried on a plasetal plate whose temperature was so great that they never actually touched it but skimmed over, coming off the other side as a more-than-when-they-started.
Notwithstandingfor that this is predictably possible, the little light yellow-green bumpouses poked their little selves up (or out, whichever scale you are looking at the plane terrain of the global strain with for) and waved to one another as a positive signal.
And on the third day, some men who thought this to be a favourable sign went forth to water the bumpouses and to bring them to their maturity and wholesomeness.
But they should have used ethylene glycol and not water since the bumpouses were a very very new phenomenon and the little bumpouses melted and formed an impenetrable crust in that area which, from that time forth, served to remind the silly, pea-brained man species that new thinking is needed for new times.
Beer Posture
In tight-formed jostling company, if one holds one's beer mug with straight arm downwards, one may get it rapped round one's balls, or the contents out of control down one's trousers.
If it's up near the mouth, it may get burst on chin or teeth.
Therefore it must be held with elbow at right angles and the mug cuddles in near the navel.
Alcoholic Intake
Is the speed that people sip/guzzle beer or other intoxicating liquor and therefore the speed they get pissed directly proportional to their desire/need to press on in their resolving of life's problems?— which could mean a nice early death!
Scraped Youth
I've just travelled on a train that has had its inside scraped and engraved with the upside-down, sideways, capitals language of fanatics of the football game.
If only they could make this even a little communicative of what's careering about in their heads, maybe there would be less physical damage done.
Self Note (1970)
When I started travelling extensively in trains (1966), which tend to go faster for longer than bicycle, car or bus, I could think better.
Then that was changed by my weaker side of brain and I could no longer "get inspired" .
Now I find I'm getting "inspired top-off-the-brain" signals and ideas while travelling in an aeroplane — at the window and looking out at the snowy cotton-wool cloud land (no artificial stimulants!).
This helps me concentrate and drift into more intense areas of thought.
I must be able to get this brain condition at nearly all times.
Is it that in this society there is much too much material clutter, which is a manifestation (infestation) of the weaker sides of brains everywhere, and this is placed as a permanent distraction from, and avoidance of, truth (the complex abstractual reasoning of which we are all capable)?
Are humans frightened of discovering their purpose or, rather better, non-purpose and, if this occurred, would mass suicide occur or would there be a new amazing enlightened state of humanity with everyone truly an individual and fully capable of "switching on" everyone else?
Brain Slivers
If the makeup of the whole of a person's being was represented by a frozen block of egg yolks and whites (colour coded — dyed different colours ) then any other person wishing to investigate and make conscious or broadcast his feelings upon this being might have to take a sample or sliver through the block or might collect a number of such slivers, some from other people's different angle scanning of that being, then I would suggest that the picture of flat slivers built up would in no way give the many complex proportions of shapes originally in the block.
In fact, some people's remembering of the exact colours and their proportions might be so far out as to scramble the possible building of any picture.
How does a biographer give his idea of a true picture of a person?
If he discounts other people's slivers, he can give only his limited view and the true proportions of the 3-dimensional many coloured  "whites" and yolks may be grossly misrepresented.
If he includes other people's slivers, he may well perpetuate damaging myths about that person.
A Revelous Fellow
A revelous fellow, with brain made of yellow,
came down from the clouds one day.
 "Good God!" he said and, with dismay,
 "I've never even met the fellow!" 
So he crossed himself and went away.
Two years later, and several days,
the man who had the yellow ways
popped up from the ground, making lots of sound,
bowed to the nearest Government
and rushed off to the Underground,
where he got cemented in —
of course!
Two Way Site
Flocks of young people at twilight.
They're gravitating to a large noisy mechanical crudely-lit fairground.
I'm travelling against the flow towards a beautiful sunset with all of the layers and shades of light orange through to deep violet.
Youths wandered lonely in a crowd with golden-shoe-stepped little girls for all the purpose in the world.
 "Darling, if you put your ear close to mine, you'll hear last night's electric, whining, beating group that should still be issuing from the brain tissue." 
Knock Down — Stand Up
A brick came through my head.
It was projected by a thin young student at a concert where I was trying to do my performance, and it reminded me of my intentional projection of wrong words at the English Teacher when I was at school.
This time it was I who disintegrated.
The next day, some well-planted flowers and a nippy little spider that jumped quite considerable chasms to get to where it wanted to go showed me that juice was still to be had for Life and, quite soon after, I found bits of myself on a train looking out at the curious modern mixture of silver birch trees growing on slag heaps.
The wind, being drawn in through the open window, lifted the fibrous material on the top of my head so the Sun could heal the brick-shaped gash.
I had now gained sufficient confidence to look around.
Nobody smiled much — or even at all.
Life just had to be raced and there really was no way of climbing through the lavatory window to get out of it.
Then a man with more than a few hairy £10 notes sticking out of his ears said,"We'll build a factory there, and another one over his hill here.
The first one is to manufacture the people to buy the moderately priced poison that's brewed in the second one.
The money gained makes my wife an old withered bag in next to no time and then I can go out and have a special house built with ceilings made entirely of succulent young ladies' pendant breasts".
He soon achieved all this, but due to an error in carpet thickness calculation, he had to climb a ladder every day for his carnal dinner which meant that when the actually made it p to the nipple-ceiling he ate much more than originally intended.
This necessitated a step up in production in the people-factory which escalated through the whole system until his bath sponge ate him.
I remain continually on the look-out for unusual behaviour from inanimate objects.
Poster Defacing
The defacing of posters may be a natural intuitive desire to turn the perfect images thereon displayed into the imbalanced, imperfect, real life state.
Could this be true for all types of defacing?(razor-slashing other people's faces not counted!)
Litter Dropping
I always thought the dropping of litter showed a lack of environmental relationship awareness, but could it also be linked with the "defacing" thing in that cities, streets with paving-slabs etc. are sensed by the human as too perfect and devoid of the texturous imperfections that make up the multi-levelled human life experience?
Dropping litter might also be linked with the kind of ceremonial spitting and pee-ing that is a demonstration of claim of territory (old men sitting on bench at village square or park etc. seem to spit a lot/ the marvellous wide-astride attitude of the countryside pee-er claiming that bit of ground as his for that glorious moment — I am aware it's different for ladies, but maybe the same mentally, given that fright of discovering be removed!).
Nice Old Lady
Nice old lady with your leg done round —
elastic bandage holding sound —
regular rhythm of the train wheels' feet —
spectacle-case tap-tap quite neat.
Posture pleasing, eyes outside
noticing trees in breeze beside,
quietly changing head around
brown fur hat is mole's earth mound.
Wonder where blind mole is now?
Does he know of Human's row?
Click clack rush roar — train speeds on,
nice old lady on your sit-upon
swaying gently, never flustered
little lace hankie, fingers clustered
tap little beat out — forefinger key
sensing smooth skin, not like me!
I'm always searching, never finding
your knowledge nodding, never minding.
I'm driving on to the train's roar beat,
you'll tap your years out — comfy seat.
Here we go then — through our eye,
I'll take the whippy hedge, you take the sky.
Little lace foot tap — gone quite pleasantly.
I'll run to catch up — get there presently.
Curses fiendish on Mankind
since to ignorance it is inclined.
It learns and learns and learns and learns
but no true knowledge does it find
since it, having lost the Art of Life,
goes instead in search of wife.
A human is not a human without another human.
If one doesn't have the immediate outlets, one seldom bothers to manufacture the goods.
When one finds a sympathetic platform from which to display an idea, many more ideas are stimulated which, although having no sympathetic platform, may be strong enough to create their own.
Living too close to things blunts the nose.
Living too far away from things: a) doesn't do anything at all, b) extends the nose so much that it sags and closes down, c) allows the nose to examine other things which are too close and therefore blunts it again.
Living at just the right distance from things is impossible cos one had to move about in order to know where one is — the principle of 2 or more radar points plotting the position of an object.
He was shipping water at a furious rate and could plainly see that he was drowning.
Opening his mouth to cry for help, he —!
Why do train travellers and see-ers off always say the most meaningful things to each other just when the train is actually moving off, gathering speed and making them further and further apart?
Circular Frustration
A man sits alone on a bus seat, desperate for the comfort of someone, or even a young female semi-innocent, to sit beside him, but trying so hard to look like he's not caring and actually scaring everyone off.
A Useful Brick
A little Brick stood up one day
and said, "I'll build a house!" 
He found a mate and Fuck Fuck Fuck
but dear oh dear they had no luck
until a lorry smeared in muck
did come along and up did pluck
their red-embarrassed toil-baked selves
and took to man who digs and delves
who needed them to make a womb
for giving compost rotting room,
and after years of frost and rains
the Brick was split and coursed with veins,
and bugs that help compost to loam
came wending through and set up home.
So Brick, who had at first dismay,
now had no room to grouse.
The Postman Carried a Large Tree
The Postman carried a large tree.
Fourteen housewives of varying degrees of nationality climbed, showing the holes and ladders in their upper parts of their stockings.
These leg covering were.
And the Postman's nearly was.
Well, they jogged along for some time but, as you might care to imagine, there had to come a moment when the legs had reached the top of the tree, everyone could see everything and therefore the game had finished.
That is, unless the Postman was called out on urgent strike.
Ah, but the district council had caused letter boxed to be melted down and fashioned into stainless steel tree holders, at a great deal too much extra cost, and these were positioned at every dog-relief point so the housewives could be held in suspension at any point in the area and time.
This appealed to them as their grocery listing had been long ticked to exhaustion and their husbands were all unsympathetic pathetics.
Not forgetting the cat's dinner.
Even at this early break in the morning, several husbands had lost bets and were to be glimpsed shouting at themselves in silence in corners.
And the Postman's spectacle was covered in greenflies from the vigorous activity up the tree: "No, but I says to him" — "Really, all right" — "Well" — "and" — "Oh, you've done it" — "Must go down to the" — "Taps, got to get some" went the song to the rhythm of empty beer bottles dropping into the side pocket receptacles of tree-holder number 29 on the dustmen's route — and the tip-holding pockets for the dustmen were not full or anything cos the ladies had all forgotten their purses, and the paper, folding, crumpled, torn money had long since fluttered down from their knicker-elastic banks.
That was why the Postman had so many dogs following him!
Oh, one houseywife had no knickers, but had improvised her skirt between her legs for the benefit of the television cameras.
Ooooooh, how her leg muscles did ache from holding her skirt in this proper fashion — with blue flowers on it.
It was the wrong time of the year for bees.
Nearly all the —
No!
By this time, the Postman had re-negotiated a fresh pair of trousers, for all that dog-relief had worked wonders with the cloth!
Now he was fit to continue the game originally set out in this paper concerned with the sociological conditions in factory estates and the attitude of dogs to someone else's underwear.
The Postman carried a large tree.
Some people say I'm mad,
but I say,
 "I'm a great deal more mad than that!" 
which brings me back round —
to the front of the extremely sane.
Look here
and there
and everywhere
for the remains of what might have been.
But where indeed?
Down the lavatory?
Very possibly, even.
Machines (1971)
The motivation for too many people's lives at this time seems to be the achievement of navigating through the spikes of complex material gadgetry which had been invented as a supposed aid to living.
If a particular human is capable of handling the proper aspects of a gadget, which must include mental knowledge of its place in the Machine of Evolution, then it is possible to use it as an aid, but as there are increasing numbers of gadgets being invented and marketed, so the human brain has no time and space to see these in relation to its own life/thought scale because, upon being born, the human is thrown immediately into a multi-armed and legged wrestling match with levers, wires, buttons and switches and fails to grasp the meaning of it all, being occupied totally in rushing to partially master the use of one before the marketeers rush in faster with 10 new gleaming diversions.
Our Dance
 "Dance" is the cogs of bodies meshing in one section of a machine that turns out Collective Unified Expression.
Collective Unified Expression (CUE, an accident, honest!) is the cogs of small groups of life meshing in the machine that turns out Evolution Progress.
Evolution is Discovery.
If we do not discover, we do not evolve.
If we do not evolve we stagnate and rot.
What is happening now, 1975 — and for some time past, is material evolvement, leaving spiritual evolvement to stagnate in the pond of Man's Over-Conscious Analysis Of His Own Deeply Natural Sub-Conscious Development (e.g. Christianity's mistaken conscious self-analysed identity).
Because of this stagnation, material evolvement has grown cankerously over-dominant since materials merely serve to aid man's spiritual realisation.
If the spiritual realisations become bogged in the mud of the stagnant pond, materials stagger about pulling this way and that on the lead that joins them to their master.
If the master panics, the materials dash about more frenziedly and wrap the lead round themselves, tightly encircling their master too.
The process of death and rot follow.
In the past, there's always been a little farmer over the hedge who jumps to the rescue — or a Hitler dressed up as a little farmer.
That which is, is and ever shall be so — despite all out efforts to analyse our destiny.
But we now know a little two much for comfort and have to analyse cos we've got some goal/task to keep us lively.
I do feel we could be a bit more lively though!
Train Travellers
Sunlight flickered through the trees
upon the almost eyes of train travellers.
Limp bodies
flop around
and finger nails are most important,
as are specks on suits
and
turned-up
turned-down
stitched-out
stitched-in
trouser-leg coverings.
Do not forget
the tie adjustment procedure,
the cuff aspect,
and the almost eyes of train travellers.
Newspapers
The only thing you get from reading newspapers is dirty hands.
If you must read newspapers, read old ones.
These show up the lies of the society clearer.
Below Bungalow
One fine and gloomy night, while taking my body for a walk past many soothingly whispery hedgerow growths, my eyes noticed a bungalow porch light which dictated the policy of activity in its immediate region.
Dizzily entranced by the yellow novelty, I floated free as wood smoke and fluttered around the noisy house, while my anaesthetised feet padded cement steps up to the front door.
The brass key was there, at shoulder height.
Assaulted by a tumbler of wine and the smell of much mixed nervous human activity, I was soon crawling about on several elbows, being splashed from high above by excess wine while my eyes, ears and mouth were up there and at the same level of height of depth as everyone else, adding to the massed attempt to obliterate the loud dancing music which obliterated the loud dancing which packed the conversations into pouring constipations.
Straining to ascend off the shattered glass cigarette floor in earnest attempt to join my head apertures and their height of depth sound bouncings, I had failed to allow for their wine intake and just glimpsed them rushing past in their plunge to a new yesterday.
Realising that I was now unrepresented in the 5 ft 11 inch society, I searched my soul, but had become insufficiently double-jointed to see round the back!
Finding myself in the coal bunker at the back of the bungalow I did nothing till the morning of dawning when maximum light was to be utilised for a rather essential cold water wash under an outside tap, and I was soon back on the solid road remarking that the hedgerows' newborn leaves utter great things.
Friend Relations
If one tries to "find" oneself in one's friends, there will constantly be a state of tension in those relationships.
If one "finds" oneself in one's work or life-endeavours, the result can be shared with one's friends and all will be well.
Of course if one "finds" oneself correctly, but certain friends do not, and they try to find themselves through one, or even through one's findings, all will not be well!
All this supposes that the persons mentioned want to go on the search trek in the first place.
Rainbow Bit
Just cos there's only a little bit of one side of a rainbow showing is no reason to regard it lightly.
I don't suppose you'll be able to climb up half of that anyway.
Molecular Structure
Everything is molecular structure.
Art construction in all its forms is simply the choosing of separate or possibly groups of atoms and molecules from diverse existing structures and re-grouping them with mental science.
One might start by repeating examples done by previous mental-art-scientists to get the feel of what it's about, but since each brain is complexly different from the next, so its expression has to be complexly different and one must soon press on with one's own structures — and yet there is the universal bond of molecular structure, which is another way of saying "form/art is everywhere" .
A handbag placed on a seat becomes, visually, part of the molecular structure of that seat.
If the handbag is moved to another part of that seat, the whole visual structure is changed.
So, a tiny red dot placed specifically on a large white area becomes a work of art, but it's also a criticism that art is viewed too reverently since people will spend time and money to trek to view, maybe worship, the little red dot on the large white area in an art gallery but will swiftly get the handbag removed from the seat cos they want to sit down!
The artist of the red dot work may have dropped the dot onto the large white area from 20 metres with an uncertain gusty wind blowing just as the handbag may have been dropped onto the seat from an overladen pair of hands.
Because I have worked for some time now on the forming of music and sounds, and through this specific endeavour have become aware of the "molecular structure" parallel, I can see great form in "Beautiful Landscape Traversed By Electricity Pylons" , "Tiny Aeroplane In One Expansive Sky" , "One Cup of Tea With Spoon And Attached Shadows" , "One Bogey Slightly Protruding From Person's Nose" and, apart from when I'm blackly depressed, Life is seen from inside me to be better every day because of my positive use of the rich energy that is emitted from every thing, live or dead.
On Emerging From a Walk-Way Tunnel To Wait For Tube Train
Then there's this fellow sucking at the stub of a fag with 3 fingers pinched in, mirroring his mouth attitude.
His double-buckled shoes are spanning and deeply embedded in two concrete paving slabs, showing him ready to repel all advances, metal or human.
Ladies, two, with ample flesh flapping from the bones of their legs spread themselves thickly on the tube train seat and gather in their posh polythene well-advertised shopping receptacles like a doting mother with five children.
Some people don't watch anything, in fact, it has become a serious offence to acknowledge the existence of anyone else.
This mode is attained by shutting down the eyelids.
I just saw a man trying not to pick his nose behind his newspaper!
Workmen constantly punch each other with their mouths.
When the roaring giant of a tube train came, the fag sucker suddenly withdrew his double-buckled shoes from the concrete and became a little scuttling pixie to compete with all the other scuttling pixies, but managed a further quick change to a hunched-up half-shut-marble-eyed frowny scowling monkey as he took his tense unrest out on the floor of the tube train that was carrying him to his necessary employment.
 "I admit failure!" he wrung from his sodden brain.
 "You give up too easily!" loudly twitched his panicking employer.
Half a breath dimly lit itself exactly in the middle of his head.
When the browny-purple dust had blown away, the deserted concrete expanse was ready for more litter-clutter.
Dinner Party (1971)
Clog up the world with Art!
Which way round is Life?
Are people in cities topside up?
Are humans in meadows?
Whose thought are you?
 "I'll swop you four sentences on" Which House You'd Prefer To Live In "for three on" When I'm Depressed "" .
So the interested parties projected barbed missiles at each other from behind their quick-to-assemble, remains-upright-in-a-force-9-mixed-metaphor barricades.
When, after 3 hours, melon with glace cherry and the wrong spoon, casserole chicken, 4 bottles of cold red wine, fresh fruit salad with soapy tinned cream and far-too-strong instant coffee, it was realised that their missiles, although of different manufacture, were terribly equally matched, they all suddenly had to go home.
On Visiting A Middle-Class Aspect
Corrugated, half truncated
brains of nearly being
pester me about this time
as I do search another line
or up a pole do try to climb
to aid some people's seeing.
By Jove, or God, or Christ knows who!
I'm pinioned here in some old zoo
with cups, and saucers, up my flue!
What will it come for me to do?
Get back to Sussex, quick, the noo
in choo choo train,"Whooo-woo-ha who?
Me.
A tottering old oily fellow kicked the cafe door open, after he'd opened it with his scrawny hand!
How out of pace things are with themselves.
I worked extremely hard on this dream!
Then, one night, when I was slowly asleep, it issued forth in a rather unexpected fashion and I missed it.
Nice old lady, no matter how often you tug at your woolly skirt hem to persuade it to cover your knees, I can still see your new shining cream bloomers!
The critics are a funny lot!
They swing from tree to tree.
I don't know where to go from here!
Do they?
We are all so lonely in our minds that when the slightest opening appears for expression, we pour out much more than need be presented — which soon clogs the opening.
But we need to pour out as much as possible (arguable — see "Thought Pressure" ) and the recipient wants to hear as little as possible!
Thought Pressure (1970)
I carry too much in my head!
Write it down!
Write it down!!
Write it out to read it back, not for publishers to petrify and clog other people's heads with stone thoughts.
(That's done this book in!)
The act of writing thoughts down helps to relieve brain pressure.
It also prevents one from churning out the same stuff of conversation over a long period to different people (to use words at people) which is using those people as hard reflective surfaces and not, as I feel properly, soft digestive reflective surfaces.
Addition (1974): Churning out the same stuff gives one that sick, ecky feeling in the head and I think in advanced cases the feeling is counter corrected in the head to one of numbed atrophy which is shown in those people who find it impossible to let thought in conversation run fluidly-fluently but must talk tensely about weather,colour of curtains, ailments, grouses.
Another Night Thought
The jangling, chipped mobile that is my window of vision makes thought very tiring.
Should I bother at all?
The little onward-beating heart of my son bashes on through the night, its strong signal being transmitted through and across several layers of pillows.
 "It's half-past-bleedin'-four of a mid-cold September morning and the loudest thing for miles around is the scratching of beard and conformist HB pencil!" 
Agitated sticky legs in bed clothing slide slowly up, the body's only answer to another removed part of itself having flashed the bedside illumination department into positive mode.
The counterpointed duet of miniature heavy breathing and onward bashing life-pump forever continues beside me in defiance of the social laws of 1973 and reminds me how innocently fresh is young life, to be soon stained and bleached in alternating frenzy before it even has time to realise just how freshly innocent it is.
I blink my eyes for some inkling of orientation, but the high-pitched multi-signals whine and cascade about in my head just to make things quite clear that they're not going to be harassed into full-powered service tonight.
I really must design a multi-signal-scrambling-decoder for trapping these essential little fly buggers — except that I don't have the technical knowledge and I'd certainly burst at least one ear drum trying to fit it in!
All of life is bits and pieces.
Pieces and bits is life of all.
 "Palindrome!" 
I hear you call,
outspoken figure of spoken wall,
outlasted head of buzzy bee?
And what does all this mean to me?
It means my son will fit in place
and fetch his boots to run the race.
Mind you, the boots are on wrong feet
which makes us smile — cross-legged feat!
The human module multiplies.
 "Empty the seas and fill the skies!" 
He who sees has not got eyes,
he who breathes broadcasts his lies
and on and on — perpetuate.
I'm going to sleep, it's far too late!
A Brisk Walk Out
Mr Postman scluff your heels.
Try to see how Pavement feels.
Big dogs, small dogs squat and strain
on the Pavement!— miss the drain.
Spit and gob on Pavement grey.
I'm off to grass and there to stay!
I made a movement!— and everybody looked.
They made no movement — and I looked.
Material Miss
The Trade Winds blew deficits and the workers got so bored striking at every available Sunny Day that they began working really really and blew the gaskets of many a Director's heart.
No that the Directors' Wives were at all troubles by that sine now they could get those extra carpets for ceilings and special dog-teeth-mountable tin openers so their little doggy babies could open their own bloody tins of meat.
WHY HAVE PREGNANCY WHEN YOU CAN HAVE SENSATIONS FROM YOUR POODLE DOG!
 "JESUS IS ALIVE TODAY!" 
if you can call being nailed up, taken down, preserved (mostly with artificial colouring ), cheeks rounded out with cotton wool padding, bent into position, propped up, light bulb concealed neatly protruding slightly out of the back of this head for aura effect, wired to a battery strapped behind his back and mouth wired for peaceful benign smile, life.
Well, it is life — but not very live.
If God's up there, we're his excrement.
One Pair of Eyes
A sweaty pair of eyes looked out
at many things advancing
to pluck them from their sockets
and set their brain a-dancing.
A-dancing off the boot
of shorn-haired trousered foot,
off long-haired shredded pockets,
off regimented boot.
To meet their destination,
yes, turn around and face it,
of concrete brains and plastic feet
and ladders up your facelift.
Ropes tied to ears and rings to hands
and humans gathering in bands
of light and shade and darkness blind,
that thing that does upset the mind
and causes plucked eyeballs to find
a home of sorts in gutter deep —
a sludge-filled hall in which to sleep
for ever on and nearly ever.
Don't despair
Clouds and Storms
still have the Sun behind them.
I bet we burn ourselves out before the Sun!
Thought Burn
Particles of steel squirt from between forward-heated relentlessly rolling wheels and polished every-disappearing never-ending parallel track.
Hot oil and grease, broadcast from rushing bearings, becomes gelatinously sterile in the cold air and plops dirtily into the granite chips that support the track.
Diesel oil is burnt, some of its usefully, to propel the whooshing metal train-animal forward into the world's next molecular movement.
At 80 miles per hour, the sight of passing foliage and man-made monuments gives one a cross-eyed headache and the intense activity within the guts of the animal makes standing or walking persons feel like slightly out of balance gyroscopes.
Soldered into one corner of one of the swaying carriages is a solitary, plain, ordinary, short-hair-cutted man clad in a fairly new dark blue suit which does not quite match his black hair edged with grey or his furry, hairy watch strap.
He is hunched over, his elbows fused to his knees and his hands pressed flat against the sides of his head, blinkering his downwards stare from the irreconcilable contrast of ever changing outside and never-changing inside.
Whatever activity he is engaged in, he is certainly calling upon all the normally unco-ordinates parts of his being to unite in the task.
Two tiny areas on the randomly spotted vinyl composition floor begin to raise slightly as if marbles are being pushed from underneath.
One after the other, the bubbles plop and the rough edges sizzle back just like they're being eaten away by invisible acid.
The man's hair mass rocks back and forth on his rigidly stationary head like a wildly excited toupee and is only matched for unusual activity by his furiously trembling eyebrows and the cracked black toe-caps of his shoes moving up an down like wasps' abdomens about to insert their stings.
He seems to have at least gained some contact with his thought-penetration circuits and this is confirmed by the smelly fumes of wood smoke and melting plastic that wriggle their way into the atmosphere of the carriage.
His eyes, attacked by the fumes, film over with their protective water and the lids are now brought into this canon of electrochemical body counterpoint by the deep-driving need to continue probing for his inside of beyond.
Venetian blinds of furrows ripple down his forehead as his every external body activities mirror all that is going on in his head.
Due to the expanded floor hole, the blue-grey atmospheric rubbish is now whooshing, spurting, billowing upwards to conceal the perpetrator of it all, making the carriage a hazy, out of focus, 3-dimensional black and  white TV image.
His pronounced asthmatic-like breathing, now much louder than the high-pitched roar of the onward-speeding train, is further encouraged by wild elbows pumping in and out from his sides, and the brief sight of an ear that fluctuates between light yellow through red to dark purple signalling through the fog communicates that the moment of knowing the truth of the deep is imminent.
Yes, the final firework show of burnt metal splutters and pops to a gradual halt, the red-hot smoke energy subsides and his searchlight balls of eyes, straining to gain a little bit more open aperture, operate under hydraulic pressure and push downward.
His head moves for the first time to follow his eyes and maintain the essential link of communication signals.
He is now seeing the moment of ultimate feedback.
An eruption of hissing spluttery steam, carrying wood and metal splinters and crusty bubbles of burnt floor, violently emits from his thought-crater and covers him in gritty black rubbish, the cruel knowledge flashes through to his spine spring which, uncoiling viciously, bashes his head on the back of the seat.
The train lavatory has just jettisoned its contents!
He staggers and bumps his way to the toilet for a cold wash and rough up with some semi-absorbent paper towels, all the while discovering and tweeking out small splinters of wood and metal from his face.
He eventually slumps back into his seat, his smarting face and aching eyes reminding him of the misled thought journey that took him back round to before where he started.
As we leave him, he is blurredly registering clumps and layers of passing foliage, his lower lip moist and hanging out slightly, with an uncomfortable draught agitating up his trouser legs from the hole that was his very own creation.
Ideas in Trees
Is a human being and his idea-thinking process like a healthy tree in that there is the stable main trunk with subsidiary branches that grow slowly and are added to through the years?
Also, with healthy deciduous trees, the leaves all come with great show every Spring and die off in the Autumn — but more come each successive year cos the tree has grown a bit so the foliage is thicker, more complex in structure — until it dies of course.
Seeds are projected from the tree and only a few are actually germinated to continue that species.
Animals eat the seeds and convert them to other energies.
Then there is the decay of the tree which sometimes holds on to a little bit of life well past when it should die completely.
A tree that has no leaves in Summer, has insect and animal life growing inside it instead.
Blessing Of Art Craft
Now that this good party of concerted artistes is safely ensconced in the vessel that is to be its forward conducting medium, let all good-thinking people wish it the Speed of God and safe from the influence of diverse foreign bodies that lurk in animated suspension in this murky putrescence of Thames.
Forever Onward through contraceptive devices and old sticks, carrying the good words to new and freshly rotting society, signalling the path of Entertaining Effervescence and weaving artistic patterns of dirty foam while endeavouring to avoid and repel all hellish floating things that do seek to sink its buoyant ideals.
Xmas Croppers — From Crackers
1.
 "How do you punch a hole in a hole?" 
 "You don't, but building fresh matter round it, might cause it to drop right through into the downness of spatial alti-librium." 
2.
 "How do you see in the dark?" 
 "By eating lots of carrots!" 
 "No, no, they're only good for peeing in a park." 
 "All right, how do you see in the dark?" 
 "By creating enough luminescent brain energy that your eyes turn into searchlights!" 
Now — More Or Less
I glide in bumpy uncertainty through the darkness, my over-positive shoe-step correcting this into the Greater Tomorrow Inclination.
The city's many chimney pots offer themselves in silhouette against the mildly energised off-black glow, but they neither smoke nor steam while God, lit with 25 watts, claws desperately to glance even faintly out of an over-high stained glass church windowledge.
Through a cracked squinting window high up in a cracked squatting tenement, a 25 watt woman is wearily flattening her husband's future shirt with a nearly-steaming iron in an environment where the purple sweat and aggro must eventually print its feeling on the creamy-browny ever so piled up non dish washy ever so squashy piled up feelings ever so— ironed out onto the stove under the sink beyond the plug-hole of anyone's conception.
I live on in my own agony.
Reaching out, I can't even burst through the paper bag that envelops my being.
I notice a man in a big railway station striding out and pushing a very over-noisy luggage trolley in front of him.
This is the way to proceed in living!— Make such a loud noise in front of you that you drown the thought of your own uncertainty.
Lots of people talk surface dribblings most of the time simply because they're not teased out from under their brain-covers often enough by other people.
If everyone had no confidence, no one kindly, passionate-feeling human person would ever be approached by any other kindly, passionate-feeling human person.
Mental Institutions would overflow.
If negro girls didn't wear white coats and white shoes, you'd bump into them in dark streets!
 "I want to make a film!" he said
and picked his nose into his head.
Said I,"First learn to blink the eye
and look about, perhaps the sky,
perhaps a cow about to shit
with tail erect, perhaps a pit
that's dug by men
who work all day from ten to ten to ten again,
and not much pay do they get then".
So, make the most of all the land
and then perhaps we'll understand —
why ladies powder nose on trains.
In Group Dressing Room (1970)
What does one do with an old piece of linoleum, especially one that covers another old piece of linoleum.
Cold on the feet on the cold and damaging on the eyeball.
Frayed edges, broken by a very below average human finger, nearly fit round corners of chipped cream-painted cream furniture.
Flattened, frayed cigarette stubs, carefully arranged by the little men who live under the linoleum, dance about partnered by well chosen old stick of match.
The tune is forever guitar on the guitar.
A cymbal splashes to the tune of a brandished stick of drum and runs about the auditorium, bashing its head on the available hard surfaces, fastly chased by a bass note from another kind of guitar-mad guitar.
The cymbal is indestructible, except by nearly-silence which skulks in a corner unable to really move or communicate with other potential nearly-silences.
Nothing more moves.
Performance Aspects
When an audience demonstrates for an encore from the performers, it is supplying its own encore by performing its shouting, clapping, raving, etc., to the performance.
Does this show a desire to be involved in the performance?
When one has told a friend about a stage performance or some media utterance that one feels he should go to see, one has performed that work to the friend and partly negated his need to see the work for himself.
Modern house building gives less room for more people.
When there's less room than that, there'll be no people.
Conservation Piece
"Sycamore!
Sycamore!"
 "I can't," said the Sycamore,
 "I'm sick enough already!" 
Thought Spot
I've got a spot on the back of my head!
I don't wear shirts so that's all right.
I've got a pad at the side of my bed!
I don't sleep tight so that's all right.
I write all right from night to night,
I smile all gay from day to day
even though my face don't show it
dash it —
blow it —
suck it too.
Not the spot on the back of my head!
Man all doleful — all fall down,
the muscles in his face — causing frown,
the hustle of the race — hair was brown,
now it's all grey — for — fall out, pay for,
bustle to a place — get things down
 "Where?" — Upon a face!— not your gown.
Get them down!— that's no good —
serves to scramble mental food.
But it's quite good to be so rude!
and what's more, brother,
"Lace tablecloths!
And have more food!!"
Environment
Three pieces of large crumpled brown paper,
twitching and dying,
a rusty iron-bed springs frame
and a little boy,
aged 7
with fair hair —
and rocks to throw at passing public transport!
I Dream Of Life
Our 4 month old baby, naked to the air and grass of the world, lies side by side in a perfect row with his 5 naked sextuplet brothers — all kicking in slow motion like upturned tortoises.
Our square red-brick house stands some 100 yards away (as I look into the Sun) with its french windows open.
My father and mother stand nearer to the babies than I and the whole ensemble is posed on an interminable expanse of medium-cut grass.
My father gently picks up the nearest little one and begins to fit its harness on.
This harness is of special metal and encases the head, the nuclear warhead being tightly lodged in the maximum area of wide open mouth.
These babies are to be the first of a new kind of missile, powered by life.
My father strokes the little soft pink downy body and exclaims how perfect a little machine it is and ideally suited for its mission.
 "So," I said, "when it gets to the target area it drops the warhead and returns to our warm outstretched arms?" 
"Oh no, it goes down all the way and sacrifices itself.
That's why you people today are encouraged to cause multi-births.
Look at the drugs that are available, and the superb advertising!"
I could not see my mother sine she had got herself well hidden behind my father so I rushed to the house, through the open french windows, saw my wife sideways on to me gazing at a blank wall and screamed,"See what's happening — our baby to be plastered over half of some alien landscape!
We've got to stop it!"
She turned.
 "Nothing — can — be — done." 
She turned away to light another cigarette.
"Daddy, I love you a lot.
Please help me up onto your knee so I can pull your hair and punch you in the mouth."
Dance when rhythm hits.
Nod head politely — won't do.
Gyrate, leap, ankle exercise.
Gut throb ear dance.
Foot and leg trot.
Neck wrench — thought tornado.
Whaaaaaaaa!
Glasgow — An Aspect
An extremely fat and gummy bus conductress wobbles and frets and poddles and wets on the opposite seat to me of the bus's lower, non smokers deck in fierce counterpoint to the holey road beneath.
Grey white chewing gum matter presents itself spasmodically at her mean Glasgow lips, alternating with her cigarette which is sucked when it is not rolling druggedly about on top of her ticket-issuing machine or charging up and down, and off, the long seat, dropping its fire and ash amongst the plastic cups and other less white rubbish, further propelled by chewed and muttered whinings about the discordant duet of erratic driving bus man and undone Corporation road holes.
A scrawny cloth cap and neck nods to the Pope who has got himself several small stalls supported with bent cardboard boxes scattered variously along the roadsides.
Many various-sized painted plaster images are on sale and quite a number with large pieces broken off are being brought back in torn imitation plastic leather bags, only to have it explained that the purchasers probably have not been confessing enough and absolution is only granted by their completing a 13-page questionnaire through which they get a special adhesive that breaks all mends.
Three 14½-year-olds are glimpsed taking turns with an 11 inch bread-knife at stabbing a derelict brick wall.
It is surmised that he whose hand slips on the handle of the knife upon impact with the wall has lost — his hand!
Oh, the blancmange of a conductress bites and wrenches pieces of nail from her fingertips and is well schooled in this art, making them like embryonic heads of pre-life.
A crumbly chunk of derelict stone topples off somewhere or other into the roadway, stopping the bus and not before time either, cos it allows a man to rattle down the stairs and nearly reach the gutter before a partly digested steak pie and beery gravy is offered to the land from whence it originated.
But there are no workmen available to dig and pick the necessary hole through the bus platform, tar mac, gas pipes and hard core to allow this ecological flow so the matter rests on the bus platform — and keep fit classes are hastily arranged with coughed
shouts from Madam Sweaty Pie to enable the older of the canned bus company to leap this obstruction whenever they wish to dismount.
Dogs, of course, have done their street work and further matters have yet to be overcome!
The bus terminus is finally reached and I choose to exit through a 4 inch square window and slide down the caked mud of the tin side, my coat brushing sufficient mud off one area that reveals an emblem which informs me that "Glasgow Flourishes" !
Two Ways — At Least 
1.
Some rampant males go sticking their members into places that were not originally designed for them.
2.
Some males, mistaking the original rules of their membership, go crashing with a variety of lies through various-shaped doors to other clubs.
BBC Fees
Upon complaining to a middle-aged lady at a Hampstead nice intellectual party that the fees from the BBC are ridiculously low:
 "You should be thankful for the privilege of being allowed to broadcast to the British Nation." 
Talking is all right— if accompanied by an adult.
To the Sterile Village Of Bothwell, Lanarkshire
I've been shut in!
Claustrophoberised!
Everyone looks so brisk in fresh suits of upright postures, so stiff and tense their buds won't open.
Any buds that do manage it do so with such energy that they propel themselves away to project their seeds into wilder gardens.
Most people carry secateurs and prune the heads off other people with flicks of the wrists and cracks of the brains.
A Great Tightness lies on most pavements unleashing itself round all passing ankles.
For those people who can sever their own feet and lurch away, they got it round the neck later from a special breed of Tightness that lives in the baskets of flowers up lamp posts.
To cap it all, the Devil has taken over the church and sits impaled on the spire with a long snaky whip sorting out anyone who's left.
Two Fellows
Come sit beside me on a wall,
(really I'm not here at all)
examine pavement, shuffle boot,
feel in pocket — off you shoot.
To where indeed with glasses dark
cos twilight's here so "What a lark!" 
 "A lark!" 
I said, and someone frowned,
a flush-faced man who made no sound
save that of ears along the ground,
that home-made lump of beery mound.
He's drunk his tears, peed out again,
cried out inside like other men
and now, in realising life,
he's off to belt his home's neat wife.
War On The Ground
War on the ground is really a man with a large field with curved corrugated metal huts to keep pigs in to grub all the vegetation off to feed them up to get themselves eaten by other men to help those men to have the energy to work to make the curved corrugated metal huts and grow other food in other fields that gets eaten by another lot of men who leave some of it to feed back to the pigs.
Hot late Summer day
train carriage glass box
lady's jacket off
window open
sweaty sigh.
Nobody's noticed the heater switches!
Conceived
My casual posture, feet crossed and resting 3 ft (914.5 mm) high up the door frame of the train carriage, my wry chuckling as I conceive notions for this wee book, certainly have had an effect on the middle aged Polish man and his Welsh wife who sit opposite each other at the window.
She's got her stocking feet right up between his legs and cuddles his feet in her ample bosom, having previously removed his shoes and socks and displayed them in sideways V-sign on the little shelf at the window.
The couple exhibit great joy of life.
Maybe they've got me going and not me them since I'm so used to seeing dribbly noddings on trains.
,
Perversity
I have noticed a tendency of (I meant to ) do the opposite of what was meant.
I just wrote a "w" for an "m" and frequently do "k" for "g" , also "p" for "h" and "f" for "l" 
March of Time
Red Brick Armies sweep past — window buttons tarnished — TV aerials at half mast — arms of prams certainly not shouldered — backyard scrap-heap haircuts growing long — slate helmets askew —
smoky thought-mutterings drifting up to add to those fume-clouds of the knowledge that can only be furthered by its own mistakes.
Unbuilding
A crumbled wall, a crumbled head,
a gritty tooth to chew.
 "Unbuild, unbuild" the council say,
but what are they to you!
But you will chew and maybe eat
those bricks that fall about your feet,
excreting them in rows and rows,
called "houses" that do scare the crows,
so they all sit in yonder tree
and "Caw, caw, caw" at you and me.
So we'll get head down, plodding on
through thick and thicker, spirit gone,
trying more with less to guess
the size of deep dug pitty mess
in which we'll splosh, not caring less.
But those of us with plug in socket
will have a ladder stowed in pocket —
to climb out with.
Exclamation Sideways
My eyes are dim — up to the brim.
I lurk in shadows and them in me.
My eyes are green — to go unseen.
I sneak about through greenereee.
My eyes are blue to see through you.
 "Who, me?— no, never!— Who said that?" 
It's you!
 "It's who?" 
Him, over there,
that one with face beneath his hair
and if you stand like that and state
he'll very soon return to lair
and gather strength from close walls there
and preen his length, and balls, and hair,
emerging again in a fresh pair of trousers and lighter weight shoes to take the weight off his soul.
Forever Onward! shouted me, and the man at the bus-stop went spinning round and round trying to reach the correct change in his left-side back pocket with his right had.
God stopped all that of course by sneaking a hurriedly hand-written clause into the back of everyone's bible in the middle of the night with a silver threepenny bit under everyone's pillow.
And a fat greasy lady fell to a dead position out of a flat storey while attempting to see just how one of the TV newsreaders did his hair at the back.
Life continued, and the rubbed and burst blisters were incorporated in the universal art of melting the ice-blocks in which the Governmental Bleeders preserved everything that had been preserved.
 "When, and by whom??" 
It is not prepared to answer its predicament or disclose its recent whereabouts.
However, it will say that everything is being done to see that whatever attempts that are made on the whereabouts of its disclosures will be judged by their predicament and a positive answer will be prepared.
God speaks, but the stammering is so great that his wig slips off to reveal a fairly well-carved wooden figure.
Bifurcated — Half Truncated
I was caused to go for a walk to get some fresh m-m-m-m-m-m—
The socks in my shoes would not move together.
They were chosen from the same drawer but were not a pair!
Two different frictions made the soles of my life grate upon the uppers of my loaf.
Gravel crunched and a large coniferous variety of evergreen-layered tree waved the path forward as clear.
And discs of stereophonic coverage permeated the accompanying orchestra's instruments and the reshaped discs spun off slowly, but in great number, from the heads of the mouths that fed the instruments
But vinyl discs don't spin at the same wave as evergreen-layered branches and an almighty crash occurred soon after.
The news had not reached the papers of news by the next day and thirteen days later came out as:
'683 valuable discs broken by irresponsible youth i coma-like disturbity'.
Youthful Optimism
Yes, you see, I saw a lot of miserable people on the tube train one day and said:
 "Get your peg in the right hole, missus, before you chip off the corners — and possibly even lay bare your embarrassment" .
which caused them to be no better, it would seem, but I'm only young now so maybe something will happen later.
Lonely
If we all realised just how intimately lonely we all are, the word and feeling ‘lonely’ could be cancelled from life's experience and we would relate to one another in a more true fashion since we would be aware of the limitations of relationships.
Due to our natural resilience and desire to live, discover and perpetuate the species, this common bond would be positive, not negative.
My head's in a turmoil!
Why can't I take it off and rest it awhile on someone's mantel-piece?
Cos the mantelpiece is well taken up with the supporting of toy dogs.
Statement Made Before Knowing How To Work Properly
New thoughts come when you need them.
But when you need them, you are out of practice with drawing them forth so, by the time you've got practised, you're on to a new set of thoughts which needs a different extraction technique — which has to be practised!
Every man to his own straw basket full of apples.
Usually the ones at the bottom start to rot first, but they take a while to discover.
