INTRODUCTION
It's funny, when I read your notice in the magazine, I turned the page and I thought, wait a minute, I'm a teenage mother.
It's quite strange because when you think of teenage mothers you think of Michelle in Eastenders having all those problems and the father running off and everything.
I don't think of myself like that.
I'm lucky it's worked out quite differently for me.
(Julie, aged eighteen with a nine-month-old daughter)
Unlike Michelle in Eastenders, my situation was quite different as I was going out with the father of my son.
But in the nine months of carrying my child, the feelings and reactions of Michelle's were very much the same as my own.
(Teresa, aged nineteen, with a three-year-old son).
When Michelle got pregnant at sixteen in the television series Eastenders, she brought the situation of teenage mothers to the attention of the nation.
Millions of viewers became aware of some of the practical and emotional problems and watched as she struggled to bring up a baby without a partner or an income.
Many of the young mothers contributing to this book would identify with a lot of her responses and feelings.
Society tends to ignore the inherent sexuality of younger teenagers, especially girls, preferring to see them as innocent children, so consequently when girls do fall pregnant, they have few rights or benefits as mothers.
Adolescence is accepted as a time to explore and experiment and find some sense of identity, and yet when this includes sexuality  it is condemned and denied.
Those who have become pregnant are treated as children who have made mistakes, and who are assumed to make inadequate mothers, which is patronising and wrong.
However unintended the pregnancy was, if a girl decides to keep the baby for whatever reason, she is becoming a mother with all its attendant responsibilities.
She deserves to be treated with respect and sensitivity, and to be formally recognised.
Everyone's life is different, and so I wanted to hear from as wide a variety of teenage mothers as I could.
I wrote in several magazines asking girls to share their experiences of pregnancy and motherhood with me, and received a tremendous response.
I got letters from all over the country, from young mothers of all ages and circumstances.
Several more were contacted through teachers and other sources, and I also asked some older teenage mothers to write about their earlier years.
Subsequently I travelled to many parts of Britain and met over thirty girls, mainly in their homes with their children.
They made me welcome and gave up their time to talk freely and openly about everything that had happened to them.
I really enjoyed our conversations and feel privileged to have shared their very personal experiences.
Their voices can be heard throughout the following pages, where I refer to them consistently by name.
All their names, however, have been changed to preserve their anonymity.
Becoming pregnant and having a baby changes your life completely, whatever your age.
For younger mothers it usually comes as a surprise, an unintended consequence of a past or current sexual relationship, and an event for which there has been little planning or preparation.
Many of the things that may happen to you if you are young, pregnant and choose to keep your baby, are described by the girls talking here.
Their experiences and feelings embrace lots of important areas of life —love, boyfriends, sex  and contraception; relationships with parents and friends; school, adoption, abortion, pregnancy and birth, Mother and Baby Homes, surviving on social security benefits, living alone, getting married, and much more.
Each chapter of the book concentrates on a specific area, which is illustrated by the lives of several mothers who have had particularly relevant experiences.
It's not difficult to get pregnant, as many young girls have discovered, but nowadays the options have changed.
It is easier now to prevent pregnancy through contraception, and to terminate it through abortion.
Although it is a subject often exploited by the media, teenage motherhood has in fact been decreasing.
It fell in the 1970s and early 1980s while the abortion rate was rising.
This fall in pregnancy rate has been explained by the greater use of contraceptives by teenagers, particularly those over sixteen.
The proportion of younger mothers (under sixteen) is very small compared to the total number of teenage mothers, and this applies to other countries such as Australia, New Zealand and Canada, as well as to Britain.
However, there is evidence of a slight increase in teenage pregnancy rate in 1981 in England and Wales for all ages between fourteen and nineteen compared to the previous year, with a consequent rise in the numbers of girls who had babies and who had abortions.
Teenage mothers are not a significantly large group, nor are they a particularly increasing "problem" in this country, but their lives are quite different to those of other girls of the same age without children.
And as those talking in this book illustrate, what has happened to them can easily happen to any girl.
The teenage years cover a period in which young women and men mature physically, intellectually and emotionally.
Therefore a fourteen-year-old teenage mother who is at school is in quite a different situation from a nineteen-year-old  who may be working and married, and her pregnancy is usually viewed quite differently too.
The majority of teenage mothers in Britain are eighteen or nineteen, but a significant number conceive below this age.
The ages at which the mothers in this book became pregnant range from thirteen to eighteen, the majority between the ages of fourteen and seventeen.
Many surveys divide teenagers into those over and those under sixteen, which is the official school leaving age.
This often creates a confusion in estimating the number of school age mothers, as a sixteen-year-old can be counted both in the school age group and in the sixteen to nineteen-year-old group, depending on whether her birthday falls before or after the end of the school year.
Sixteen is a crucial age for teenage mothers.
If you are under sixteen you are obliged to receive some kind of education until you reach this age.
Not until sixteen can you legally marry, which means that all babies born to under sixteen-year-olds are inevitably illegitimate.
It is also the age of consent for sexual intercourse, and therefore for a girl under this age to be pregnant is proof that an illegal act has taken place.
If this wasn't enough, the state does not recognise you as a mother until you are sixteen, when you are eligible to claim supplementary benefit, maternity grant and milk and vitamin tokens.
(This has recently been changed in the new Social Security Act; before this, mothers under sixteen were entitled to maternity grant (£25) and milk and vitamin tokens.)
This means that the cost of keeping a young mother and baby usually falls squarely on the family.
All in all, being an under sixteen-year-old mother has little official recognised status at all, even though this involves the same care and costs as for an older mother.
The reasons why teenage girls get pregnant are many and various.
Although a minority have wanted and planned  having a baby, most have not intended to get pregnant, at least not consciously.
Some became pregnant through contraceptive failure, such as missing taking the Pill for a day, or a faulty condom, but most do it through not using any kind of contraception at all.
While sexual activity amongst teenagers has increased, the use of contraception has lagged behind.
Despite knowing about birth control, girls fail to go to the doctor or the clinic to get anything.
Pregnancy often seems unreal, and something which will not happen to them.
Sometimes the intention to go on the Pill is there, but it is put off until next week, or until their sixteenth birthday.
When Victoria Gillick campaigned to prevent girls under sixteen getting contraceptive advice without their parents' consent, she created a lot of confusion, and although she was ultimately unsuccessful, many girls still assume that they cannot get the Pill or any other form of contraception, such as the cap or diaphragm, until this age.
If you are in your late teens you may be very happy to be pregnant.
Some older teenagers are married or in stable relationships within which having a baby is a wanted event.
Some younger ones too may want children to fill some need for love and affection that may have been lacking in their lives.
But on the whole, pregnancy comes as a surprise and a shock.
The decision follows as to whether to have the baby or an abortion, assuming the pregnancy is made known early enough.
Many pregnant teenagers delay making their pregnancy known until too many months have passed to do anything but have the baby.
Sometimes they do not even realise they are pregnant.
Adoption is another option, but is a less popular choice nowadays.
With the pregnancy confirmed, there are the reactions of boyfriends to deal with, assuming they are still around.
Sometimes girls have already started another relationship by this time.
Harder still, they have to tell their parents, whose reaction may be greatly feared.
Sometimes parents are very upset and angry, but only very occasionally do they take the extreme course of making girls leave home.
When they've got over the shock, most are mainly concerned for their daughters' welfare, and give them a lot of support, as illustrated many times in the accounts that follow.
Life is disrupted by having an abortion, but it is totally changed by having a baby.
If girls are under sixteen, they can either continue at school, have a home tutor, or perhaps attend one of the few projects run specifically for pregnant schoolgirls and schoolgirl mothers, two of which —the Arbour Project in Liverpool and the Barkerend Unit in Bradford —are described here.
They may for some reason go to a Mother and Baby Home for a short period before and after they have the baby, or even go to live with foster parents.
Where to live is another question, and who to live with.
Some get married, others live with their boyfriends, but a lot are on their own, and either return to the family home, or get a council flat or house.
Having a baby usually means not being able to have a job as well so most young mothers have to make do with the various state benefits they are entitled to.
Although personal experiences vary a lot, teenage mothers in Britain tend to share certain similarities in their backgrounds.
For instance, most girls come from lower income families —often one-parent families —and may be early school leavers.
This is not to say that middle-class girls don't get pregnant, they do, but they are more likely to be encouraged to use contraception, and also take the option of an abortion more than working-class girls.
In working-class families it is not unusual for girls or boys to become parents at a relatively early age.
Proportionally, quite a lot of black teenagers become pregnant too, and they may well have to contend with racism and discrimination in many  areas of their lives.
It is quite common to find teenage mothers written about as people with certain medical and social problems.
Emphasis is laid on the risks involved, the higher incidence of birth difficulties and subsequent infant illness, and the social difficulties encountered in coping with a baby, both emotionally and practically.
Although these problems obviously exist, there are older mothers too who find it hard to cope with daily life.
It is more often the poor conditions that many young mothers are forced to live in that negatively affect their lives, rather than simply their age or the experience of being a mother.
The mothers talking in this book are mainly in their mid to late teens, with children whose ages range from a few months to four years.
The majority, both white and black, come from working-class backgrounds, a few have had a middle-class upbringing and education.
Most of them are deeply committed to their children.
Although having them has not made their lives any easier, they have got immense enjoyment from them and would not be without them.
Looking back, they would have done a few things quite differently, but they certainly did not conform to the view taken by some authorities that they encountered, that they are children who have ruined their lives and wasted their education.
They are now mothers with the responsibility for a child, and some of them would maintain that it is their baby that has given them the determination to do something more with their lives, however hard this may be.
The years to come, as several older teenage mothers illustrate here, may confirm or contradict their current ideas and view, but it is the present that is important to them.
It is usually they who made the choice to have and keep their babies, even though this does not always work out as happily or as easily as they may anticipate, and they deserve recognition and respect.
I hope, as do the teenage  mothers talking here, that this book will contribute to providing this.
I think it's good to have a book on teenage mothers so other people can read it and see what others have gone through.
I like to think I've been helpful to somebody else, so that they don't make the same mistake as I made, or so that they know the responsibilities they're taking on if they do have the baby.
I wouldn't wish it upon anybody to get pregnant so young.
Even though it's great having the baby, it's still a lot of hard work, especially when you are younger than usual.
So I like to think I'm helping somebody else.
(Bridget, aged sixteen) I feel personally that the most difficult thing to cope with is not the physical and emotional changes I am going through but the attitudes of people around me.
I have found the way I have been treated by qualified and unqualified people patronising and presumptuous and deeply offensive.
The thing that makes this worse is that they really have meant well and were, I believe genuinely concerned.
Their attitude, however, seemed to be that because I was young I was utterly unaware of what was happening to me, emotionally unstable, childish, and being forced into womanhood by a terrible mistake I had made.
I love my unborn baby deeply, just as I know other teenage mothers do.
I do not consider he or she a terrible mistake which I will regret for the rest of my life, and I don't feel I have lost important years of my adolescence.
I know that I have gained tremendously.
Not only have I learned that soon I will not only be responsible for myself but a small vulnerable child who for many years to come will be under my protection, but I have also gained an inner strength that I never knew I  was capable of having.
I hope your book will reveal a new and refreshing view on teenage pregnancy and motherhood.
Perhaps changing some people's old and dated views so that soon when other young women undoubtedly become pregnant they will be protected from what I personally find I am going through.
(Zoe, aged sixteen, and six months pregnant)
LOVE, BOYFRIENDS, SEX AND CONTRACEPTION
Today's teenagers have sex at a younger age than ever before.
One recent study of teenage mothers showed that two-thirds of these were already sexually experienced by the age of sixteen.
Contrary to some people's beliefs, this does not imply an increase in casual sex and promiscuity.
For most, there is an enduring search for bonds of love and loyalty, and other research showed that four out of five teenagers involved in a sexual relationship had been going out with their partner for six months or more.
It is these teenage girls who more often fall pregnant, rather than those having more casual relationships, as the mothers in this book illustrate.
Most of them had few or no sexual relationships before the father of their baby came along.
This is not to deny that some young mothers do have short-term relationships and one-night stands, but the ones that get "caught" are more often those who are in love and in a steady relationship.
This may mean they have been going together for as little time as a few weeks, and a relationship of more than a month or two may be regarded as serious.
Most of the mothers talking here had known their boyfriends for at least two months before they "did it" , and for almost two-thirds of them it was their first sexual relationship.
Love and romance are amongst the most important ingredients of life in these teenage years.
Many hours may be spent daydreaming about meeting the ideal boyfriend and falling in love.
At the beginning of a relationship sex is often taken for granted as a possibility, but girls have to  take care that it does not happen too easily or too often.
Being labelled a "slag" or a "sleep-around" is something that destroys a girl's reputation, and she often treads a fine line between being labelled as someone who does it or someone who doesn't — "if you do it you're a slag, if you don't you're a tight bitch." 
One young mother, Folasade implies that the distinction is implicit,"Only true slags are slags.
If you slept with a boy and he was your boyfriend, it didn't really matter."
If you are in love with someone, that makes it all right.
In her girls' school, it was a bit like joining a club — "girls who had on this side, and girls who hadn't on that side" .
But in general, sleeping with your boyfriend is a relatively accepted thing.
For the majority of young mothers I talked to, it had been a mutual decision to have sex in the first place.
For a few it was more their boyfriend's decision, and for two of them, the decision had been their own.
In Denise's case,"He didn't really know it was only his idea.
I let him think it was mutual."
Some of them had found making love an enjoyable experience but others talked about how they had found sex an anti-climax, especially the first time.
It hurt, they didn't feel anything much about it, and it was not at all the way they had thought it would be.
Several thought sex was more important to men than to women.
The effect of having a baby had also put some of them off sex altogether for a while, which is something that also happens to older mothers.
But it seems sad that so many did not have a more enjoyable sexual introduction, especially when for a few it had been the one and only time.
For Melanie, at fifteen, it had been her first sexual relationship, she now had a baby daughter and was still living with her family.
I didn't think much of the first time really.
It wasn't how I imagined it.
I thought you were supposed to enjoy it, and it was half and half really.
I've gone off sex altogether  now, but my boyfriend hasn't.
Sometimes I enjoy it, it depends what mood I'm in, and if she's been playing up.
Every time he sees me he thinks I'm going to sleep with him and I don't want to.
I'm tired all the time and I'm afraid of getting pregnant again.
Even though I am on the Pill.
I used to enjoy sex, he can't understand why I don't anymore.
Compared to many of the others, Marie was quite sexually experienced:
I first had sex when I was fourteen.
It just happened.
Parties.
The people I used to hang around with were much older than me anyway, they never knew how old I was.
I didn't think much of it the first time.
I didn't see what all the fuss was about.
It was a quick in-and-out job and I never knew what happened.
It's not until you get older that you start experimenting.
First couple of times it was very quick.
No love or anything.
It seemed to please him so I let him get on with it.
It got better after that, because then you started meeting blokes who cared about you as well.
Then I met my husband and was sure I'd fallen in love with him because he cared so much.
Several had become pregnant on losing their virginity, or very shortly after, and their boyfriends had gone off, leaving them both scarred and scared about having any subsequent sexual relationships.
This had happened to Shona, whose boyfriend encouraged her to have the baby, and then left her, with the result that whenever any subsequent boyfriends have tried to get close, she becomes cold and distant, they cannot understand and eventually leave her.
Sexuality is a sensitive subject, laced with complexities.
When you are young and still living within the family it is  often hard to acknowledge that you are sexually active and need to take some precautions.
This is something that many parents also find difficult to accept in their daughters.
After the initial shock of discovering their daughter is pregnant, parents have to come to terms with this.
As a consequence, mothers especially may become closer to their daughters because they now have the experience of pregnancy and childbirth in common.
But sometimes parents still cannot accept their daughter's sexuality, especially if they return to live in their parents' home.
Even though they have a baby, sleeping with their boyfriend may still be regarded with disapproval, unless the baby's father has moved in.
Girls themselves may feel very sensitive and embarrassed to be having sex in their parents' house, especially if it was not allowed before.
Marie's parents had strong religious views that made her feel very guilty about having sex in their home when she and her husband had to live there for a while: "We did it on the bedroom floor on the wedding night because I wouldn't use the bed, in case it made a noise.
Even though we were married, their religion made me so guilty."
The difficulties that many girls and boys have in talking to parents about sex and contraception often make it a subject to be mutually avoided.
Learning about sex and birth control
I was told by many teenage mothers that the best thing about having a child so young in life is that you can grow up with your children.
The small age gap will bring you closer together, and you will be like friends.
This presumably includes talking openly about boyfriends, sex and contraception.
This may not turn out to be so easy.
Most of the girls I spoke to said they could not talk about these things  to their mothers, and some of their mothers were no more than seventeen or nineteen years older than themselves.
It can be hard to combine parental authority with a friendship that implies equality, and some girls do not even want this.
 "How can you tell her things like that —she's your mother." 
The teenage years span a period of growing up and finding your own identity.
Neither girls nor boys of this age usually want to tell their parents exactly what they are doing, and prefer to preserve some distance, as Denise describes.
She had left London without telling anyone, including her mother, that she was pregnant.
She did not feel very close to her mother, although they had been through some rough times together:
There's a gap between you because you're always your parents' child.
You can't accept them as adults like you and they can't accept you as adults like them.
Parents aren't people, they're your parents.
And you're their children, you're not people to them.
This makes some subjects taboo.
You expect your parents to be superhuman, and they expect you to be kids forever.
You want your parents to come to you first and they want you to come to see them.
It's all a bit confusing from both sides.
It is tempting to push the blame, as some young mothers do, on their own mothers for not telling them about sex and contraception.
This is not always a fair criticism, as they themselves may have been extremely resistant to being told anything.
What would be helpful perhaps is to have a close relationship with a mother-type figure who is not your mother.
Someone who could be trusted with confidences, give advice, and yet not be constrained and influenced by being your parent.
Relationships like this sometimes do exist, with young aunts or friend's mothers, for instance, and sometimes elder sisters or brothers.
But for most girls, if you can't talk to your parents, or your friends, that's it.
If talking about boyfriends or sex to your parents has been difficult, asking for contraception may seem impossible.
It is a clear admission that you are sexually active, and parents may find this hard to deal with.
They may respond in quite contradictory ways, like Bridget's parents.
She was thirteen when she started sleeping with her boyfriend:
When I was younger they used to say if I ever did want to go to bed with somebody to ask to go on the Pill.
But after they found out I was sleeping with my boyfriend, my mum said she wasn't going to put me on the Pill because it was the easiest way out.
I suppose she meant if she put me on the Pill she was letting me sleep around.
Marie wanted to go on the Pill when she was fifteen:
I asked Mum if I could go on the Pill.
She said, "I don't know, ask your father." 
So I asked Dad, it took me ages, and he said, "What do you want to go on the Pill for?" 
I said, "In case anything happens." 
He said, "Are you having sex?" 
I couldn't say "Yes" , so I said "No" .
He said, "Well then, you don't need to go on the Pill." 
Some girls don't even want to ask in case their parents get angry and ban them from seeing their boyfriends.
There are mothers and daughters who can talk freely about sex, and mothers who send or accompany their daughter to the doctor to get the Pill, as Tracy's mother had, but they tend to be the exception.
Yet studies show that if parents are open about sex with their children and accept their potential sexuality, their daughters are more likely to use contraception.
If girls discuss birth control with their mothers, they are more knowledgeable and take more control over this area of their lives.
This assumes that girls themselves want to do this, unlike Kate whose response to being given contraceptive pills by her mother was to put them down the toilet.
One study of how teenagers learn about sex and contraception found that for both girls and boys, friends were the most frequent first source of information.
Of those whose initial source was parents, most were girls, and more middle-class parents were cited as a first source of information than working-class parents.
Working-class children in general were less likely to first learn about sex from parents, and it is less likely that they have positive relationships with their teachers.
Although the school is also an important source, it is not always a particularly satisfactory or effective one.
Recent surveys have suggested that parents want their children to learn about these things at school, and from quite an early age.
Although some sex education programmes have been introduced into schools, the nature of these has largely depended on the attitudes of the local authority, the individual head teacher, and the teachers assigned to the subject.
Their impact and success are also partly determined by the subject area sex education is included under, how it is presented, whether there is any discussion, and whether outside speakers are used, as well as girls' and boys' own willingness to participate.
Also whether it includes contraception and abortion, and personal relationships, as well as the "facts of life" .
But even the most comprehensive programmes may not bridge the gap between information and behaviour.
Knowing about methods of preventing pregnancy does not make you go to the doctor or the clinic and ask for them.
And a demonstration of the variety of birth control methods available, if not done sensitively, can end up being as unappealing as the contents of a doorstep brush salesman's suitcase.
Folasade's recollection of being told about contraception at school was in Biology 0-level:
There was, just this square packet and this rubber thing  shaped like an oval, and a row of yellow pills.
That was as far as it went.
The cap they showed us was for an elephant, a massive thing.
You couldn't get it into perspective at all.
The time I was supposed to be going through this a lot of schools were getting a bit of stick because a lot of parents didn't like it.
I think we saw a film of the birth of a baby and that was it, sex education in a nutshell.
I said once to my biology teacher, "Why are so many girls getting pregnant?" and she said, "Didn't you listen in lesson?" 
I said,"You didn't tell me anything.
Did you tell me where the family planning clinics were, what they do, what age you can get the Pill?
Did you tell me how to go about it?
You have to search through for yourself.
It's either you get pregnant, your friend tells you about contraception, or your mother, apart from that, tough.
Sex education —if they're not going to tell you how to and where to, it's pointless.
Everyone knows how to sleep with a bloke, or they soon find out, but when do you hear about family planning?
For young women and men to want to use contraception, it has to feel relevant to their lives —something they can actually envisage themselves using.
Maybe it would help to bring in people from outside, not just in the form of professionals, such as from family planning clinics, but also people like themselves talking about their own experiences of birth control, pregnancy and motherhood.
This is not so easy of course, because some schools take a negative view of pregnant schoolgirls and school-age mothers, and also girls themselves may be extremely loathe to set foot in any school again.
They often feel vulnerable, afraid of people's stares, and understandably nervous about discussing such personal and private experiences in this situation.
And yet friends and acquiantances of a similar age and background are often those whose views have the most  impact.
Sara, for instance, personally persuaded two of her pregnant friends to attend the antenatal classes for pregnant teenagers that she went to more effectively than any advertising campaign.
The government has decided to take power over sex education out of the hands of local authorities and give it to school governors and parents.
up to now, the scope and style of any programme depends on the attitudes of the local authority and the individual school.
If parents and governors are now to be involved, this may make sex education even more complicated as teachers try to accommodate a variety of differing moral views on what should be taught.
As we have seen, parents are not the best communicators of sex education.
Meanwhile, girls continue to get unintentionally pregnant.
Parents generally worry less about the sexual behaviour of their sons, and teaching boys about sex and contraception is sometimes considered less crucial than it is for girls.
But it takes two to get pregnant, and it is just as important to educate boys about contraception.
Few men go to birth control clinics, although the Brook Advisory Clinics have reported a slight increase, and contraception is certainly not a salient feature in men's magazines, where sex never seems to bring such consequences as birth and fatherhood.
The Pill has probably been even more liberating for men than it has for women, as men have to worry even less about contraception than they did before.
Yet if they become fathers and stay with their partners, this affects them too, and for the rest of their lives.
Using contraception
I think I avoided the issue on purpose.
I think that secretly I wanted to get pregnant, although I tried to kid myself I didn't.
(Diane, pregnant at eighteen)
I thought it would never happen to me.
I thought my boyfriend would make sure that he knew what he was doing,"cos at that time I didn't know what I was letting myself in for and also because he was nineteen I said to myself that he was more responsible.
(Bridget, pregnant at thirteen)
It did go through my mind a few times, but at the time it doesn't seem that important.
(Jenny, pregnant at seventeen)
I was bound to get pregnant, but after the first few times, when I was really scared I thought "I'll be lucky." 
(Denise, pregnant at sixteen)
The main problem with contraception is that many young women and men know about it, but they don't use it.
This gap between learning and behaviour is one through which many fall pregnant.
Lots of young couples do not use contraception on their first time, and many do not use it at all.
Although only one in five of the mothers in this book had positively wanted to have a baby, and a few didn't mind, the rest had no particular wish to get pregnant and were rather shocked to discover that they were.
Nevertheless, four out of five of them were not using any form of birth control.
Of those that were, one was using a sheath, and the others were on the Pill.
Since having their babies, most were using contraception, generally in the form of the Pill.
Few had discussed contraception with their boyfriends.
Ever since the Pill took over from the sheath in availability and popularity, the onus of responsibility has fallen even more heavily on women.
Many men simply assume that women are on the Pill and don't even bother to ask.
On the first few dates or longer, some young couples are too embarrassed to talk about it, let alone go and do anything about it, and girls don't want to be seen as anticipating sex  and run the risk of being labelled as slags.
Alan thought men could be more responsible:
Men should be more careful.
I think they should find out if the girl's on the Pill or not.
But for some people it's not easy to discuss it.
The times I've had to go in and get Durex for somebody else, because they haven't the nerve.
Nine times out of ten it's a female behind the counter.
It even embarrasses me, but I do it.
I know now that you can get Durex free from family planning clinics, but not many people know that.
But then how many fellas will go into a family planning clinic?
I don't know what it's like for a girl, but it's not easy for a fella to get hold of contraception.
I think a lot of fellas think it's her responsibility.
It's her that gets unstuck if she doesn't use it.
But I think if Durex were free and readily available, fellas would be more responsible.
Since the advent of the Pill, the condom or sheath (Durex) has fallen in popularity.
However, with the current serious concern at the spread of the disease AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome), people are reconsidering its value, not only as a form of contraception, but as protection against the AIDS virus.
This attacks the body's immune system, which is its defence against infection, and at present there is no known cure.
The virus is most effectively passed on through blood or semen, and has to enter the bloodstream to become established.
Therefore it can be contracted by having sexual intercourse with an infected individual.
If you are contemplating having sex with someone who you have not known for very long, and do not know much about, you are strongly advised to use a condom during intercourse.
This also protects you against other sexually transmitted diseases such as gonorrhoea and herpes, and vaginal infections like thrush.
Young men may be more concerned with doing it right to start with, rather than with using contraception.
Then when it "just happens" , spontaneously and romantically, they and their girlfriends hope they don't get pregnant, or they don't think about it at all.
And one study looking at the experiences of black teenage mothers found that although they had begun using contraceptives as much as white girls, some had been persuaded by their boyfriends to stop using them.
This was linked to ideas of motherhood as confirming both male virility, and adult femininity.
Ironically, at the start of a relationship it may not seem relevant to use anything as nothing may happen, so it may not seem worth all that trouble to get the Pill.
And the more unstable a relationship is, the less likely it is that contraception will be used.
Yet one study showed that about one in five of all premarital pregnancies occur in the first month of a sexual relationship, and half within the first six months.
Several of the young mothers here, for instance, had got pregnant almost straight away , two from their first and only sexual experience.
If a relationship is clearly becoming either more established, or girls (and boys) are moving on to other sexual relationships, it seems logical to take precautions.
But although many have been told about birth control by friends.
or parents, and may have had this information included in lessons at school, relatively few do anything about it.
 "Why didn't you use anything?" is a familiar question, and there are various explanations —getting pregnant may have an unreal quality about it, something which younger teenagers in particular may feel, and even if they know the risks they assume that they'll be lucky.
Some have a fatalistic approach that if it happens, it happens.
There are also those old myths still around about when you don't get pregnant —like if it's your first time, or if you have sex infrequently, or if you do it standing up.
An important step towards seeking contraception is to acknowledge to yourself that you are a sexually active person.
This can be difficult if part of you thinks it is wrong and you shouldn't really be doing it.
Getting contraception then seems like a public and official recognition of having sex and may be a psychological barrier that some girls may be reluctant to cross.
At Folasade's school, asking someone if she was on the Pill was the way of asking her if she was sleeping with her boyfriend or not.
Girls who are very aware of parental disapproval may not feel able to take this step and also not want to run the risk of parents somehow finding out that they had gone to the doctor or the clinic.
Some are also unaware or confused about where to obtain birth control and what this involves.
One girl told me she had even thought family planning clinics were where a woman went with her husband and children to plan their future together.
Some young women are too embarrassed to ask their doctors and afraid of being refused, especially if they are under age.
The Victoria Gillick campaign to deny contraceptive advice to girls under sixteen without their parents consent did a great deal of harm in this respect.
Even though her aim was eventually defeated, it led to a lot of confusion amongst teenagers which still persists.
Refusing to give contraception to young girls is not going to stop sexual activity; all it means is that more run the risk of pregnancy, which can be far more dangerous.
Take Denise, for instance, who had told her boyfriend she was on the Pill when she wasn't:
When we started having sex I was fifteen and scared that if I went on the Pill the doctor would tell my mum.
I promised myself I would go on the Pill as soon as I was sixteen.
I did make an appointment at the local family planning clinic.
I was going to go down with my mate.
Then she couldn't go so I didn't go on my own.
When  I finally went for the (pregnancy) test, I thought, this is it, this is the point where I go on the Pill.
But of course it was too late.
Although many doctors are sympathetic, prescribing contraception is left to their discretion and so there are a few who refuse to give it, with or without parental consent.
At fifteen, Melanie went with her mother's permission to her doctor to ask for the Pill, but this was refused.
The result is her five-month-old daughter.
Another result of the ease and availability of the Pill is an assumption that this is more or less the only method of birth control.
It is the Pill or nothing.
Young men and women tend to dislike the other more mechanical methods, such as using a sheath, diaphragm or cap, which although quite effective, are seen as too planned as well as being comparatively messy.
And many women don't like the idea of having a coil fitted inside them.
So if a girl does not feel able to go and ask for the Pill, or if she is reluctant to use it because she sees it as a health risk, the alternative may be to use nothing.
But the Pill is not suitable for some girls, who have a lot of problems and side effects using it.
Claire and Nickie were both in the process of changing pills when they fell pregnant.
Given the information about birth control, whether or not young women go in search of contraception crucially depends on their motivation to do so.
This in turn depends on the relevance it has, how important it is to them not to get pregnant, and how easy emotionally and practically it is to go somewhere and ask for it.
Girls (and boys) need to know how to approach people about contraception and feel confident enough to do it.
Having got it, it also needs continued motivation and commitment, especially in the case of the Pill which has to be taken every day without fail, otherwise it is not totally effective.
Boyfriends
The first person to hear about a pregnancy is often the boyfriend involved, assuming he is still around.
Some relationships have already split up before girls realise that their periods have stopped or they feel a bit sick, and they discover they are well and truly pregnant.
In such cases, telling the baby's father often produces a quick denial, of paternity or support.
Sometimes both partners have started new relationships in the intervening time.
Perhaps the relationship is still continuing, but the boyfriend does not want to know about pregnancy.
His reaction is "get rid of it!" 
Jenny's boyfriend left her with that attitude, and this made her even more determined to keep her baby.
Sometimes boyfriends may go though a radical change of heart in the middle of the pregnancy.
Their reaction turns from pleasure to indifference or hostility as they realise what impending fatherhood actually involves.
This can be very upsetting, especially if their promises of love and support were an important factor in girls wanting to continue their pregnancies.
Wendy's boyfriend was pleased with the idea of being a father at first but he could never really come to terms with the reality of it, nor his responsibilities.
He went out with other girls, spent Wendy's money, and knocked her about.
The age of consent for a girl to have sexual intercourse is sixteen, and therefore any male over fourteen having sex with a girl under sixteen has actually committed an illegal act.
When Cathy got pregnant at fourteen by the lodger who until recently had lived in her family's home, her parents decided to take him to court.
They were extremely angry, feeling that he had taken advantage of her age and vulnerability, and he also had several other children with women in the same area.
Parents take this course of action relatively rarely, however, because it can clearly be a very  traumatic experience for both the girl and their family, as Cathy had found:
They dragged me to the Police Station where I had to make a detailed statement of everything that had happened the first time intercourse took place.
And I had to say this in front of my mother who had to be present, which was even more degrading.
I felt quite dirty having to tell all these intimate details to total strangers and most of all my mother, who I had to live with and would always know everything, as they are not the sort of things you discuss with your parents.
At first they asked me if I wanted my mum to go out but I said No, but when they started asking me all those sorts of questions they asked me again and I said Yes.
So my mum went out but then she still had to read it all because I was under-age and she had to be there.
They had made an exception, but she still had to come in and read it.
It made me feel horrible.
As Cathy was several months pregnant by this time, she subsequently had her daughter, who is now two years old.
She has not been out with anyone else since this happened, and is very cautious about having any other relationships.
Many prospective fathers are, however, overjoyed at the prospect of parenthood, and do stay around to give love and support to their partners.
In cases where marriage has been discussed, pregnancy is not unwelcome, and may even have been anticipated, as it had been for Claire, who married her husband when she was five months pregnant.
Folasade and her boyfriend had both been pleased when she got pregnant; they were still together alter three years and hoping to build a stable future for themselves.
Lindsey and Pete had started talking about having a baby when she was fourteen, and did so the following year: Pete and me had been together for eleven months and loved each other more than words could say.
When we first found out, our relationship became a bit rocky and when I was three months pregnant, Pete walked out on me.
But he came back three days later crying his eyes out and begging me to forgive him, he looked like a helpless puppy.
After that we became disinterested in each other and I only had three weeks to the deadline, a last-minute decision to make, but I suppose I'm one of the lucky ones because my parents were behind me all the way.
But Pete did stay around, and they live together in her parents' house with their nine-month-old baby.
He reflects back on how he felt:
I didn't know what to do.
A lot of my mates said if they were going out with someone and they got pregnant they would run.
I told them they didn't know what it was like.
When it happens to you it's totally different.
It changes you.
I've got a responsibility now.
That's how I look at it.
I've got something out of life now.
It doesn't bother me.
If anyone takes the mickey I turn round and say I've got a daughter."
That's all that matters.
It did get a bit rocky after she became pregnant.
I just sat down and sorted it out.
I was all right after that.
Just getting over the shock.
Being single all the time, and suddenly landed, if you know what I mean.
What happens to those who are already going out with another boyfriend when they discover they are pregnant?
How is he going to take this news?
In Bridget's case, her subsequent boyfriend stayed around for a year or so until she and her family moved house.
He kept her company and gave her support when she was pregnant and didn't like to go out.
Alan met Lesley when she was already pregnant as a result of a brief incident at a party that she can barely  remember.
They live together and as far as he is concerned, he will treat her daughter as his own.
For teenage mothers on their own, the prospect of meeting and going out with boys may not be easy.
Some have become extremely wary of men through their experiences, and feel suspicious and distrustful.
They are sometimes loathe to tell men that they have a baby for fear of being rebuffed or being seen as easy, like Shona, now twenty with a daughter of two:
Now I feel it is very hurtful when you have a boyfriend and when he finds out he doesn't want to know in case the child calls him Daddy.
I begin to really hate men and don't want to get close to them in case I get hurt again.
I don't understand them and think that I'm never going to meet anybody nice that will accept me as a single parent.
They seem to think because you have a child you re an easy catch to bed and breakfast.
Some feel too vulnerable to cope with having boyfriends at all, at least not for some time, and almost all are determined that any man who shows an interest in them will have to accept and love their child too.
Another option open to any single mother is to sue the baby's father for child maintenance.
This may be inappropriate if he is very young, or long since gone, but it can be worthwhile.
Bringing up a child is hard work and expensive on your own.
Quite a lot of young girls, however, choose not to sue for child maintenance.
They often feel that because the relationship has finished, maybe on a sour note, or the father has shown little interest in his child, they don't want any more to do with him.
Receiving maintenance payments would perpetuate this link and also gives him unwelcome paternity rights.
And if a mother is on social security, as many are, his payments get included in this total amount, so it means no extra money in the hand.
Something that concerned several mothers I talked to who were on their own, was what to tell their children about their real father when they are old enough to know.
Sometimes he may live nearby, although there may be no contact whatsoever.
Some too were worried, like other single mothers, that their baby had no immediate father figure around.
Certainly not all boyfriends of teenage mothers are teenagers themselves, although a significant number of them are quite young.
The ages of those involved with the mothers talking here ranged between sixteen and thirty-five when their babies were born, but the majority were aged between seventeen and twenty-two.
They didn't all desert their girlfriends when they became pregnant, some have remained to provide crucial emotional and practical support.
However, about two-thirds of the mothers in this book are no longer with their baby's father.
Either he left when he discovered the pregnancy, or he had already gone, or the relationship had broken up in the first year or two after having the baby, when he had been unwilling or unable to settle down and take the responsibility.
For most of these young mothers, their parents have proved to be a more sustaining source of support than their baby's father.
Those with older boyfriends seemed to fare better; for instance, two with partners in their thirties were much more economically and socially secure.
Other boyfriends, like Alan, who describes living with Lesley and her baby daughter in the following pages, may be more supportive than the baby's own father.
Also illustrating this chapter, Charlene and Wendy describe their experiences with boyfriends, pregnancy and motherhood.
FOLASADE
Folasade is an eighteen-year-old whose daughter, Natalie, is almost three years old.
She is redoing her A-levels in chemistry, physics and biology in the sixth form of a London girls' school.
She has applied to do a nursing degree.
She and her daughter live most of the week with her mother, who works as a night nurse, and her sister and brother.
They spend the remaining part at her West Indian boyfriends home.
Folasade's parents come from Nigeria, where her father returned when she was seven years old.
She met Michael, her boyfriend, when she was fourteen and he was nineteen.
A year later, when she was working for her O-levels, she became pregnant.
She had miscalculated her dates, so when she went into labour she thought she was only five months pregnant and having a miscarriage.
As she had told no one except her boyfriend that she was pregnant, it came as a shock to her family.
Going back to school was never a problem.
The school easily agreed to take her back, her friends were pleased to see her, and her daughter goes to day nursery on the days when she has to be in school.
Folasade has many plans for the future.
She and her boyfriend will get married, study for their careers, get a place to live, and she wants several more children.
Her dream is to be the director of a children's hospital; her boyfriend will own his own garage and she hopes that they'll live happily ever after.
"When I discovered I was pregnant, Michael was more worried for me and what would happen at school and with my mum than anything else.
About four months before, a friend of mine got pregnant and she had to have an abortion, and I was quite upset about that.
So I said, if I got pregnant what would you want me to do?
And he said, he supposed that an abortion would be the sensible thing, but he would like to have kept the child.
We didn't dwell on it that long.
So when I was actually pregnant, although it would be fairer on me and the baby and everybody concerned if I did have an abortion, he made me know that he didn't really want me to have one.
He would like to have the baby.
I wasn't going to have an abortion anyway, I was going to keep my baby.
I've got very strange ideals, and one of the things I've got a very definite mind on is abortion.
I can understand the reason for other people having them, but I can't really see myself having it.
So I said, "That's good." 
There were smiles all round, we were smiling secretly at each other.
It was nice, because he sort of stood by me.
He was very reassuring.
I'm quite an independent person, but I was quite insecure, I needed someone to say this is good, this is bad, and because he was doing that it gave me the determination I needed.
It was nice.
I wasn't sitting at home crying into my pillow.
It was there a bit because I was hiding something from my mother.
I told my boyfriend but I couldn't tell my mum.
I didn't feel I could tell her on my own.
He felt that I should tell her on my own.
Mum had only met him once and that was it.
It was very secret.
So, it was like a relief that I could talk to him about being pregnant.
But I still wanted to tell my Mum.
It was the first thing I'd ever kept from her.
Going back out with Michael, and being pregnant, and still she doesn't know.
It was horrid to do, it was very unfortunate, because every time, like, when we were alone together, I'd say it in my head—I'm pregnant, I'm pregnant —but my mum really flares up, she goes crazy.
So I thought, I'll tell her after my exams.
And what happened was, the exam finished Friday, and I had the baby on Sunday.
I thought I had ages and ages.
But I didn't.
So I never actually told her.
I thought at first she had taken it well, and then she went  crazy.
She exploded at me in the hospital.
I felt betrayed.
Why do it now, why didn't she do it in the first place.
I was comfortable, I had just accepted things how they were.
But we've got a very close-knit family, in that if two people aren't getting on, everybody in the family will make them be friends.
So when things go wrong, they're always there.
So everything was all right alter a little while.
And alter a few months, my mum and Michael managed to sort out their differences.
So from then on it was just, get on with it.
I think at first she blamed Michael, the first few days.
Then it was You re a naughty child"sort of thing, and it all fell on to me.
But now it's like that part never happened, we're just one big happy family.
I didn't feel I was able to tell her I was pregnant right from the start.
Some girls have the relationship with their mothers that if anything happens they can tell their mother.
But in our house, everything is very secretive.
You tell your sister, but you don't tell your mother.
You hear about these girls going with their parents to the family planning clinic, my mum would never do that.
My mum never warned me about getting pregnant because she thought I was a good girl.
My sister was the person who'd been the trouble, she had boyfriends in infant school, I was the girl who always beat up the boys in infant school!
I was totally uninterested in boys, apart from playing football with them.
up to about the age of fourteen.
All the warning had been thrown at her, and I wasn't interested in blokes, so I didn't need it.
My mum's attitude was "You can have boyfriends, but don't have boyfriends" .
I asked her, "Would you mind if I have a boyfriend?" and she said "It depends" and I said "What if I said somebody wanted to take me to the pictures?" and it was,"If a boy wants to take you to the pictures, he's only alter one thing.
He gives you an ice cream and you give him a kiss", that sort of thing.
That was the last thing she ever said about  blokes.
But I still went out with Michael.
At first when I started sleeping with Michael, I thought, there's no reason to say no.
Apart from my age.
So I did.
But it was very much for him.
I thought, well this is what everybody does, this is what you're supposed to do.
I didn't realise that I could enjoy it for myself, not just for him.
I didn't enjoy it when it happened the first time.
I just slept with him.
There were times when I tried to tell him before that I was just sleeping with him because he wanted to sleep with me, but he's a person who can get easily upset, and I didn't want to hurt him.
In our sexual relationship he's been very good.
Now, perhaps because I've had a baby, friends talk to me about sex, or about their relationships with their boyfriends, where before they wouldn't.
I can accept it now.
But before it was, no, don't talk to me about it.
I didn't want to know.
And even though I'd had the baby, I was still very naive.
I didn't use any contraception.
I was so stupid.
up till the age of, about sixteen, after my birthday, the baby would have been a few weeks old, I thought well, if you're under sixteen, don't think about the Pill, they're not going to give it to you.
I never actually spoke to anybody about boyfriends, contraceptives, intercourse, whatever, I just sort of picked little things up, I thought if you were under sixteen either your parents came with you or you don't get anything.
I thought there was no way my mum was going to hold my hand down the clinic.
Now I know that she probably would have done.
She wouldn't have liked me sleeping with him, but if you're going to sleep with him, you get contraceptives.
So I thought, sixteenth birthday.
Then by my sixteenth birthday, I'd already had the baby.
When I was in the hospital after I'd had Baby, a bloke came round with the different contraceptives, saying which one are you going to use.
My mum wanted me to say, well I don't need any, I won't be sleeping with him.
And I knew for a little while that would be true.
But for the long term, for me to let her carry on thinking that way would be stupid, I'd be starting another one all over again.
So I said "I'll take something just in case, if you don't mind, Mother." 
It was a chance to start afresh.
She was there with me and she knew these people were asking me.
It would have been stupid to say I wasn't going to sleep with him, because I knew I would.
And the Pill was the easiest way.
Even the Pill, I'm very bad with.
I have one month when I take it on the dot, every day, I then forget, and I think, oh God I'm pregnant.
I'm getting better with it.
I still don't like the idea of having to take it, but it's just something you've got to do.
If you don't want a baby, take the Pill.
I knew I could get pregnant when I was sleeping with Michael before.
At the time we were doing withdrawal, which is pointless, but we were doing something.
I used to say, oh God, what if I get pregnant.
It was something that was more or less always on my mind.
But it didn't stop me sleeping with him.
He was constantly saying, when am I going to get the Pill.
And this particular time I said, well maybe we should use Durex.
And then it was who was going to buy them.
You can buy them, no you buy them.
In the end he got them.
I think we tried to use it once, and it was like a comedy show, it was crazy.
I've still got the packet at home, to remember the day by.
But I think it was, "it hasn't happened so far, so why should it?" 
At school there's always the two or three girls in the class that you know are sleeping with guys, and they had no qualms about it.
But it's like —in the third year it's "have you got your periods?" and then the fourth year "have you slept with your boyfriend?" 
But then when I had Baby, and came back, everybody was telling me, this girl's got pregnant, that girl's had an abortion, this girl's done this, this girl's done that.
I thought I was the bad girl, but everybody else was doing exactly the same.
When you  come back, because you've had a baby, they feel free to talk to you.
Obviously you've slept with a bloke if you've got a baby.
It's a bit like being a member of a club.
It's crazy.
And maybe because I went to an all girls' school, it's not so obvious, you don't see girls and boys walking hand in hand in the playground.
I think it wasn't seen as good or bad to sleep with your boyfriend.
It's like, girls who had on that side, and girls who hadn't on that side, —can I join, kind of thing.
It was just something you had or hadn't done.
But there was this thing about virgins, in class.
It wasn't bad, it was —well, I know something you don't know but you'll find out.
I wasn't considered a slag.
If girls are considered slags, they are considered slags from before, because they had slept with guys when they were young, and they had this, that and the other guy.
Only true slags are slags.
If you slept with a boy and he was your boyfriend, it didn't really matter.
I couldn't believe how many people had abortions when I went back to school.
I think it's crazy.
Not for the fact that, Oh God, abortions are bad, how come so many people have had them?
It's just that to have an abortion you have to be pregnant, so all these people have got pregnant.
It's amazing.
It's not such a magnificent thing that I've got pregnant, it's just I'm the only one that's kept it.
Before it was, why me, nobody else gets pregnant.
But then I found out lots of people have got pregnant, they just had abortions.
They're usually on the Pill before they have abortions.
They're just a bit careless.
There's only one girl of my age that I've known who's on the cap.
But everybody else is on the Pill.
You say, "Are you on the Pill?" 
 "Yes, I'm on the Pill." 
That's the way you find out if they've slept with somebody, ask them if they're on the Pill.
When mum first met Michael she didn't mind that he's West Indian and not Nigerian.
But when Baby came she thought if it was a Nigerian boy it would have been so easy.
But that's just because of the way she knows Nigerian boys are brought up at home.
Little does she know that Nigerian boys here aren't the same.
We've got this thing about respect, anyone one second older than you, you respect them.
Your father, your mother, you know.
West Indians have it, but not to the same degree.
She had this thing that if it had been a Nigerian boy, the mother would be here saying"I'm sorry my son has got your daughter pregnant.
They'd be talking for days on end.
So when she was going on about Nigerian boys, I said, "So what, if I went out with this guy, you'd be lucky if he stayed with me." 
I said, "Michael's come, Michael's still here and he doesn't have to be here." 
So from that angle she was sort of grateful that anybody was there.
I suppose inside though she would rather it was a Nigerian boy.
Michael still lives with his mum and I live with my mum, but if I sleep up my house, he sleeps up my house.
If I sleep at his house, he sleeps there.
We're always together.
We're planning to get a flat.
We've already bought most of the stuff to put in the flat, half at my house and half at his house.
Marriage, or engagement is on the cards for next February.
It was something that was already planned before I got pregnant.
I'm not the sort who can go out with someone unless my feelings were so deep that I can imagine spending my life with them, and having a child.
And the same thing with Michael.
Even though he was so much older, I was his first girlfriend, he was my first boyfriend."
WENDY
Wendy is eighteen and lives with her twenty-month-old daughter Lucy, and two white mice in the ground floor flat of a high-rise council block on a bleak council estate.
She was sixteen, working as a sewing machinist and engaged to her boyfriend with when she became pregnant.
They had  often fantasised about how nice it would be to have a baby.
Her mother had brought her up in the strict religion of the Mormon church, which made her very guilty about having sex.
She and Keith moved into a cold, damp flat together when she was pregnant, from which they were moved into a hotel before ending up in her present home, on the outskirts of a sprawling town.
Although he was initially delighted to be a father, Keith was totally unable to cope with the responsibility and came and went in their relationship as he pleased, giving little help or support.
Wendy had more idea of what to expect, she had helped to look after her little brothers at home, but it was still hard work having a baby of her own.
She had always been quite dependent on Keith, which was why he got away with such a lot, but eventually she has grown more confident, and believes that she can now make it on her own.
"I knew almost straightaway that I was pregnant.
I was due on Keith's seventeenth birthday.
It's funny, Lucy wasn't exactly planned, I think I thought I would never get pregnant.
Keith and I had got engaged four months before and we said if I did get pregnant we would get married but we never did.
Every month when I came on we would say, never mind, next time.
Then it came to March and I didn't come on.
Even though I knew I was pregnant, I kept thinking, no, I can't be.
Something changed in me and I suddenly felt very scared, but Keith said don't worry about a thing, I'll take care of you.
I hadn't gone on the Pill because I didn't want to admit that I was doing something wrong, because mum had always brought me up that it was wrong before marriage.
Also my auntie went on the Pill and she became infertile.
But then I started to think, well at this rate I am going to get pregnant, so I decided to go on the Pill, and that was the  month I fell for Lucy.
Also Keith thought he couldn't have any children because he'd been out with a girl for a year before I started going out with him and they didn't take any precautions and she never got pregnant.
Mum told me the facts of life when I was twelve.
I was so shocked, it just didn't register.
She had to tell me three times before it sunk in.
I kept saying, "How do you do it again?" 
But I had a very strict Mormon church upbringing and it was not exactly a taboo subject, but it was just taken for granted that you didn't do that until you got married.
So there was no need to talk about these sort of things.
Mum told me about the various forms of contraception but apart from that we didn't really talk about it.
I'd been out with other boys other than Keith but they never touched me.
With Keith, I fell head over heels in love with him from the first time we met, and I'd only been going out with him two weeks and he asked me to get engaged.
I was very much in love.
And it just happened.
I cried my eyes out afterwards though.
I don't know why.
That I'd actually done it I suppose.
He said,"You all right?
What's the matter?"
I can't say that I did honestly enjoy it at first.
I had more guilt feelings than anything else.
Like I'd betrayed my mum.
I was sort of torn between my mum and Keith then.
And I lost all my urge to go to church, because I felt I was doing wrong, so I didn't go, and then I didn't have the strong principles anymore.
Just before I got pregnant, Keith had started hitting me.
We used to have arguments, mainly over my going to church.
He used to say that I loved God more than I loved him.
He is a very jealous person.
He had told me that he didn't want to go out with me anymore.
I cried my eyes out, I felt so lost and lonely, he couldn't do this to me, not after all he'd said.
Anyway it ended up in a fight and he started pushing me around and went to punch me in the stomach but I managed to stop him.
Then he ran  out and left me crying on the kitchen floor.
I went into the sitting room and there I was, tear-stained face and red marks when Keith's mother came in.
 "What on earth has happened to you?" she said.
I just blurted out, "I think I am pregnant and Keith doesn't want me anymore." 
When she'd calmed down she asked me if I'd been to the doctors, and we made arrangements for her to take me down.
When we told my mum, she started to make plans for me and Keith to get married.
I was always very close to her.
I wasn't very close to my dad at all.
At one stage I thought he used to pick on me.
When I told my mum I was pregnant she phoned my dad up.
As he was doing night work I didn't see him until Saturday when we had a good heart-to-heart talk, it was really nice.
I'd never felt he cared for me but at last we sat and talked.
He said,"I've talked to Mum about it and if you don't want to get married then no one is going to force you to.
If you want to stay here with the baby you can or if you want to go with Keith that's okay with me."
After that things with my dad were so much better.
I was such a goody-goody at school it was unbelievable that I was pregnant.
Everyone was totally shocked.
I was the last person anyone thought would get pregnant.
We'd often talked about it and I'd always said, No, I would never do anything like that until I got married.
Very sure of myself then.
Things change!
Keith was over the moon at first at the prospects of being a father, but that all changed.
It hit home, what it involved.
He said he was scared about all the girls he'd miss going out with, stuck with one girl.
So when I was pregnant he went out with somebody else.
So we finished.
Then we got back together again and I was living with him at his mum's house.
I felt special when I was pregnant and carrying this little  person inside me.
But it started to make me feel scared that it was something I was going to have to bring up for the rest of my life.
It's different having a child of your own to bringing up your brothers.
When I was seven months pregnant we decided to get a flat of our own.
It was strange at first because I was used to Mum cooking dinners.
Keith was working then.
He was a presser, although he had a number of jobs.
I used to lie down and have a sleep because I got very tired towards the end with the baby.
He used to come back and say, "Where's my dinner?" and start moaning at me.
His mum spoilt him a lot, he was the youngest, and was used to having everything done for him.
He used to say, "Mum does it like this." 
He stayed in the flat until Lucy was about two months old then he left again.
He went home for about two weeks and then came back again.
Keith was a right proud Dad.
When we used to go to town he used to get her out and carry her.
I wasn't allowed to push the pushchair.
But once we got home that was it.
All back on me.
He used to help out now and again, but only when he felt like it.
The flat was an absolute dump.
It was the attic part of an old house.
It was in a terrible state when we moved in but we cleaned it up and made it quite homely.
But finally the Social moved us out of there because we had no hot water.
We had to go downstairs to the toilet, and in the winter the water used to freeze up.
The electric bill used to be so high because we had the electric fire on all the time and we used to leave the oven on as well.
Frozen breath came out of your mouth otherwise.
So they moved us out into a hotel.
Keith stayed with us there for about three weeks.
Then he accused me of going off with everyone there, which was totally untrue.
Then he hit me, so nobody spoke to him, and he moved out.
Me and Lucy stayed there another five or six months on our own.
I didn't like living in the hotel at first.
It was quite away from the area I'd been brought up  in, but I got to like it and make friends, and I got more independent.
But it was horrible being in one tiny room.
Just the beds, wash basin, little cupboard.
You couldn't swing a cat in there.
Once Lucy was in the cot you could just squeeze in the door.
Keith didn't give any financial support because he wasn't working then.
Then the social worker got us this flat and Keith moved in with us, and he stayed until just before Christmas, and we've been on our own ever since.
When we moved in here, he took out a loan because he's in a band and wanted a new guitar, but we couldn't afford the payments on Social.
I had to go out to work.
He tried to get a job but he couldn't.
I worked as a dress machinist.
I only worked there for about two months, I was so tired I was like a zombie.
I was paying for bills, food and everything from my wages.
I used to get home absolutely exhausted from work and he was sitting there and he'd say, "What's for dinner then?" 
He looked after Lucy during the day while I was at work, but I found out afterwards that he used to leave her a lot with my friends upstairs.
He'd take her up and she had only her vest on and her socks, and this was getting winter time, so I thought I can't have that.
At first I didn't take any notice that he wasn't helping me.
I used to just let him get away with it.
But when we moved in here, because I'd been away from him for five months and I'd learned to cope for myself, I started standing up for myself and he didn't like it.
He said I'd changed.
I wasn't depending on him anymore.
I said what do you expect?
I hate being on the Social.
They give you just enough money to survive.
I'd like to get nice things but I can't.
The social worker organised some furniture for us.
This old fella had died and she took us there to choose what we wanted which was horrible.
They gave me a cheque for some stuff, but Keith just wanted to spend it and didn't  really think about what he was buying.
The cheques were in his name so I didn't really have a lot of say in it.
He bought some clothes and records.
I wasn't too pleased about that.
I wanted to get some nice curtains.
The worse thing is being on my own.
During the days I go and see my friends, most of the people who were at the hotel at the same time as I was have been moved up here.
But it's the night times, sitting here when Lucy s in bed.
I think, what can I do now?
But I don't mind living here, it's all right.
Even though I'm not one to go out, some days you wish you didn't have someone dependent on you and could just go out and about.
Even if someone looks after her you wonder, is she all right?
You think, what was it like not to have this little thing to care about?
I can't even remember just being me.
All I remember now is me and Lucy.
I've always wanted children.
I want at least four when I do finally settle down and get married.
I love kids, but it was never an obsession.
At first, with Keith, we were so wrapped up with ourselves.
We talked about it and said it would be nice to have a baby.
But I don't think Keith was prepared for everything that went with it.
I wasn't totally prepared but I knew what it was like.
We thought it would be a nice idea.
I have been out with a couple of people, but I can't see myself with anybody else but Keith.
Still.
It doesn't feel right.
A couple of months ago he wanted to come back but I said there's no way he'd come back here without us being married.
I'd never live with anybody now until I was married.
I've changed over the last couple of years.
I'm more independent.
I can stand up for myself.
Before when Keith left I'd be a total wreck.
I love Lucy, but at the time he was more important to me than she was, in one sense.
But I'm not dependent anymore, he's not worth it.
He still hasn't grown up.
He's the same as he ever was.
He doesn't want to work.
He wants to go out when he wants.
Even  with all his bills to pay he'd rather go to the pub.
So he still can't handle responsibility.
He's back home where his mum does all his cooking, washing and ironing for him.
He's got it made.
I didn't feel loved before, but now I have somebody that's dependent on me, I have something of my own to love, and she loves me back.
I wasn't looking for something to fill my life by having her, she just happened.
I think whatever age you have a child, if it's fine for you, then it's all right.
But unless you're really sure that you want a baby and all that goes with it, think twice.
It's not just something you can dress up and take for walks in the park.
There's a lot more to it.
Before I had to feel secure and loved, but now it doesn't bother me.
I feel secure in the sense that I'm my own sort of person and I feel loved by Lucy.
Obviously that's not the sort of love I would have got from Keith or whoever, it's not secure like there's someone looking after me.
There are times when I wish I had someone to look after and who would look after me again, but I am confident now I can do it on my own."
ALAN
Alan is twenty-two and lives with Lesley, now aged seventeen, and her ten-month-old daughter in a northern coastal town.
They have one room and a kitchen in a large house, and share bathroom facilities.
Before Lesley met Alan, she had been to a party where she got drunk and ended up sleeping with someone without knowing it.
She suspected that she was pregnant when she began seeing Alan, but this was only confirmed when she had to go for a check-up because Alan had a urinal infection.
Her father and mother are divorced and she was living with her father, her stepmother, her sister and brother, and a  stepsister and stepbrother.
She was responsible for a lot of the housework and looked after her younger brothers and sisters.
She was arranging to have an abortion when her father found out, and told her if she went through with this, he would no longer consider her to be part of his family.
So she decided to have the baby.
She was still at school, and sat her exams when she was four or five months pregnant.
She and Alan lived together at her father's house until after she had the baby, an experience that Alan did not enjoy.
At seven months pregnant, she started bleeding a lot and was rushed to hospital.
The baby was born by Caesarean section and went straight into special care for five-and-a-half weeks.
After they had brought her home, she developed a collapsed lung, pneumonia, and later gastroenteritis, which landed her in hospital again.
At ten months, she seems fine.
They are both living on social security, although Alan has had various jobs in the past.
He has worked in shops, factories and stores, and has trained in engraving and drycleaning, and has worked as a medical assistant.
He had wanted Lesley to have an abortion, but because he feels committed to Lesley he is prepared to bring up the baby as if she were his own.
"I knew she was pregnant when we started going out.
I knew that I liked Lesley, and that was all that was important.
I just went along with her and supported her with whatever she did.
Her real mum gave her a lot of support, and so did I. But supporting her doesn't mean hiding what I think.
I wanted her to have an abortion because it would have given us more time to get ourselves sorted out and get our life going together before bringing another person into it.
But we didn't get that chance.
We'd set on living together, and seeing how it worked out, with or without the baby.
But it was a hard decision.
What angered me most was the way her dad went about it and her stepmum, giving her ultimatums.
Telling her she'd have to get out and she wasn't part of the family and all that.
To me they were ordering her to have the baby, which wasn't fair.
They said they'd give a lot of help.
But they're not going to be there after five or six years to help.
A baby, to me, is a lifelong thing.
It's for the rest of our lives really.
To me she's my daughter now.
We've got to keep her at least until she's sixteen.
We both had thought about having the baby.
You see, I'm a very practical person, I think of whether we'll be able to do things.
Lesley's more of the heart, if it's set on something she'll do it.
When she was thinking about having an abortion nobody told her to have it.
I think she wanted the baby but she was going to have the abortion because she realised the possibility of a better life.
But I think she was fairly relieved to have the situation taken out of her hands by her parents telling her what to do.
The only way we can do anything now is with help from somebody else.
For money and things like that.
We can't get a house because we're not working.
Even things people take for granted we can't do.
It's tied us down a lot.
We can't just nip on a coach and go somewhere for the day.
It stops you doing things I think couples should do before they start a family.
If she'd had the abortion it would have given us time to do that sort of thing.
We lived with her parents for a short while before she had the baby.
I didn't like living there.
To me it's the unhappiest house I've ever been to.
I used to hate sitting there, so in the end I never bothered.
The family never really put much pressure on me, they put more pressure on Lesley.
If they ever wanted to have a moan about anything I did wrong, like using the bathroom too often, they used to tell Lesley to tell me.
I used to go mad.
What's wrong with telling me?
I'm virtually one of the family now.
If I thought they were doing anything wrong to Lesley I couldn't say anything because she'd get it, I wouldn't get it.
So that made me unhappy, and in turn made Lesley unhappy, so it wasn't a very good situation.
We're on social security and we've virtually had to fight for everything we've got.
We manage just about.
But if they ever cut the money or knock something off, we'd be in deep.
If we want to buy anything at the moment we have to borrow the money.
Even if I was still working I don't think we'd be able to buy anything outright.
Every time we save a bit of money we find something we have to spend it on.
With the HP you have to pay, so we do.
We get £93 including the rent.
If I get a job now I've got to get one that pays £110 or £120 which isn't all that easy.
So it's not worth getting a job because we won't be as well off.
We go out in the day together, we try to go to town once a week, and every Sunday we go to my aunty's house.
Lesley goes out about one night a week and I go out occasionally.
Although we go out quite a lot, we just go for walks.
That's the main problem, if we want to go anywhere, it costs money to get there.
I do the difficult cooking, Lesley does things like beans on toast.
I do look after the baby a little bit but I don't often change her nappies.
I can look after her, but I don't know about every single day.
When the baby cries a lot, and Lesley gets angry with her, I tell her to go off for an hour and I'll look after her.
I wouldn't like another baby for another three or four years at least.
I don't really like this situation.
It's not the real way to bring up a child.
And when she starts seeing things she wants, that her mates have got, we might not be able to afford things, because we've sort of been dumped in this situation.
The main thing that upsets me is the fact that she's a bastard.
I never found out that I was a bastard until I was eighteen.
That hurt me.
My father's my dad but they never told me they weren't married.
I don't want that handle on  the baby at all.
I'll be telling her as soon as she can understand.
It's upsetting to find you were born out of wedlock.
It upsets me.
I'd rather Lesley had had an abortion and tried for a kid when we were married.
But we've got no intentions of getting married at the moment.
The only benefit of getting married now is the Family Income Supplement, that's only £7 a week.
I'm pretty easygoing, no problems.
I like Lesley, I think that's all that matters really.
You can't alter the past.
I know that from experience.
Quite a lot had gone wrong in my life.
What's done is done.
A few years back I got a girl pregnant and I think she was forced to have an abortion, which is opposite to Lesley.
Lesley was forced to have the baby in my eyes, and to me that's totally wrong.
Given a few ideas either way on what a girl should do, I think family and friends should support her on her own decision.
I've noticed a lot of difference in Lesley.
She's more confident now.
She'll go and talk to people, sort things out for herself, say with the Social or something.
Living at home it was arranged for her.
They even filled in forms for her.
She was never left to do it for herself.
I think she's realised she's a person and not somebody to do the bidding of other people.
I'll tell her to do something and she says, "Do it yourself" .
Her Dad treats her more like an adult now, asks her to do things instead of telling her.
Little things like that have changed.
Lesley probably doesn't even realise, but I can watch it.
And I've changed a lot, with the baby.
I've become close to Lesley, closer to the baby, and I'm more careful with money.
I was atrocious before with money.
I realise now it's not just my money anymore.
I suppose I am more responsible as well.
But any other way I've not changed.
I've been away from my part of the family since I was fifteen.
I've seen more of life than the majority of people my age.
I think I settled down a few years back.
The only big difference in lifestyle is having a baby."
PARENTS: REACTIONS AND RELATIONSHIPS
After the first feelings of shock turn into either joy or dismay, the question that immediately arises is, "How do I tell Mum and Dad?" 
It sometimes seems like an impossible thing to do.
It usually depends on the relationship that girls already have with parents —and mothers in particular.
If you have a good and close relationship with your mother you should be able to talk to her, but sometimes things are not even as straightforward as this, and if you are close to someone who you know is going to be upset or disappointed in you, it may be even harder to do.
Therefore you don't say anything for a while, conceal it, perhaps even kid yourself that the pregnancy will go away if you don't acknowledge it.
Perhaps the moment is never right, there's always some excuse.
You don't want to spoil Christmas, or it's your sister's birthday, or you're afraid of your mum's temper.
Bridget concealed her pregnancy from everybody until she was about four months when she told her boyfriend, who was not the baby's father.
Eventually it was he who told her mother when she was about eight months pregnant: "We'd been planning it for ages to tell them but we hadn't had the nerve to get round to it.
We were petrified.
A couple of months before, my Dad said if I ever did get pregnant he'd chuck me out, so I thought they would."
Although her mum was upset and her dad was cross they didn't chuck her out but have been very supportive and she still lives at home with her two-year-old son.
It's also a source of distress to parents that their daughters couldn't feel able to confide in them, but it happens.
It may not just be because of the reactions girls fear from their parents, but also because of the mental block they themselves create, illustrated in this chapter by Joanne.
One thing emphasised by every girl here who had delayed telling her parents about her pregnancy was that looking back, each wished she'd told them earlier, since the consequences were never as bad as she'd feared.
Parents may feel upset whatever the age of their teenage daughter, but those with younger daughters are obviously going to react more negatively than those with older teenagers.
An eighteen or nineteen-year-old is usually much more mature than a fourteen or fifteen-year-old, and may even be contemplating marriage by this time.
I found that most parents were initially rather shocked at finding out their daughter was pregnant, some cried, some got angry, some were very matter-of-fact, and some were quite pleased.
But most were, sooner or later, very supportive.
Often they wanted only what seemed best for their daughters, and some are prepared to set aside strong religious beliefs for this.
Judy's father, for instance, despite being a devout Catholic would have encouraged her to have an abortion if she had wanted one.
Some parents, whether openly or secretly, may feel quite pleased at the prospect of being grandparents.
Sometimes there did seem to be different reactions from mothers and from fathers.
Mothers often had an immediate and emotional response, anger or tears, but this was often quickly resolved into practical and psychological support.
There are always the exceptions, mothers who remain distant and angry, or who actually tell their daughters to leave.
But in general, parents love their daughters, and are very concerned about them and their welfare.
Fathers too may respond in a positive way, but I definitely felt that  fathers tended to have a more extreme reaction of anger of hurt, or said they were ashamed of their daughter, and felt let down, and some refused to speak to their daughters for days or weeks.
Girls were often far more scared of telling their fathers than their mothers, and mothers were often given this task.
Diane locked herself in her bedroom and wouldn't come down for a day because she was afraid of her father's anger.
Sandra's father also reacted strongly.
I had just turned sixteen.
My mother told my father and I think that must have been the worst time of my life.
My father went mad and I think he actually hated me for a short while.
He said he didn't want to see my baby, and that I had to go into a home for unmarried mothers.
It was my mother who stuck up for me and in the end he came around and now him and my baby are inseparable.
Fathers may have very strong views on what course of action their daughters should take.
Lesley, for instance, had kept her baby because her father said if she had an abortion she wouldn't be considered part of his family anymore.
Mary's father was frosty with her because she didn't have an abortion, right up until she brought her son back from the hospital.
Some of this paternal anger is also rooted in the loss or "violation" of father's "little girl" , and the recognition that she has become a sexually active person with a man of her own.
Actually seeing her physically pregnant may increase this response, and so when she has had her baby and gone back to her usual size, it is easier to relate to her as a daughter again.
Men are very protective and sometimes possessive towards their daughters and often find it hard to "lose" her to another man.
However, whatever the initial reaction, a significant number of the girls thought that in fact their relationships with either their mother or their father, or both, had actually improved since they had had their baby.
Sometimes  it was through being treated as more grown-up, more mature, not a child anymore.
Now they and their mothers could share more things because they had been through the same experiences —something that happens with older mothers and their parents as well.
This is what Helen had found:
My relationship with my parents had never been close.
I never confided in them about anything except school or college.
Mum and I are much closer now.
I can talk to her in a way I couldn't before and she's been a great help over the past year.
I wouldn't have got through it without her.
Dad, on the other hand, is steadily getting further away.
We've never been close and my getting pregnant hasn't helped at all.
Folasade felt she had changed in that having a baby had given her more confidence and put her on a more equal footing with her mother.
We've always been close, but we've got a different relationship now.
Before it was cheeky girl and mother.
Now it's mother and experienced daughter.
I can say what I like.
I don't have to hide the fact that I'm sleeping with Michael.
I can talk to her about things.
If one's got something beneficial to say, they'll accept it readily, whether it's mother or daughter.
Whereas before the advice flowed one way, it all came from my mum.
Studies of young mothers have found that history tends to repeat itself within a family, and teenage mothers tend to have children who in turn become teenage parents themselves.
This was the case with a significant number of the girls talking here, for instance, Lorraine and Cathy, both of whose mothers had had children in their teens, and consequently had felt very sympathetic to what their daughters were going through, and Debbie's mother, who  had been more upset because she did not want her daughter to have the same sort of life as she had had.
How easy or difficult it is for girls to tell their parents that they are pregnant also depends on how accustomed they are to confiding in their mothers or fathers about periods, boyfriends, sex and contraception.
Only a few girls told me that these matters were ever discussed within their families.
The others said that they had gained what knowledge they had elsewhere.
Living with the family
Bringing the baby back home to the family heralds the start of another sort of life.
If the baby's grandmother is young and has young children herself they may all be brought up together, just like one generation.
Tracy lives with her mother and their young daughters, born within twelve months of one another.
They go out together, babysit for one another, and sometimes get mistaken for friends or sisters taking their children out.
Sometimes the baby may be cared for mainly by its grandmother, so that its young mother can carry on leading her teenage life.
Bridget looked after her son for the first eighteen months before getting a job so he recognises her as his mother, whereas it could be quite easy for a baby to start calling its grandmother "Mum" .
Joanne, however, goes out to work during the day and is out nearly every night, while her mother looks after her eight-month-old daughter, so they spend little time together.
Whereas this involvement by grandmothers is welcomed by their daughters, conflict can arise when a mother tends to "take over" the care of her grandchild, telling her daughter what to do, how to do it, what to buy and so on.
This may be done with the best intentions, but it can lead to frustration and arguments.
In Diane's case, her mother  had bought most of her baby things and also her maternity clothes.
She found trying to be responsible mother, dependent daughter and "normal young person" a source of constant conflict between her and her mother.
My mum expects me to take all the responsibilities like feeding him and things but I don't get to buy his food.
For instance, I wanted to feed him on the baby food in jars and I keep telling her I do, but I end up feeding him the powdered food like my mum wants.
It seems to me she makes all the rules and I'm expected just to carry them out and still be responsible.
But overall, where girls were still in close contact with their parents, which the majority were, they were strong in praise of all the invaluable support and help, both financial and emotional, that they had got from them.
JOANNE
Joanne is a lively, darkhaired nineteen year old with an eight month old daughter.
She lives with her parents in a comfortable house overlooking fields and trees on the edge of a provincial Midlands town.
She hated school and left at sixteen to go and train in a riding stables to be an instructor.
Her daughter is even named after one of the horses she'd nursed there.
She developed a complete mental block against her pregnancy, and concealed it until four days before she went into labour.
Her boyfriend was not interested and later denied that she had told him anything about it.
She left the riding stables and went on the dole.
Her parents never suspected she was pregnant but rather worried that she was ill with some other condition.
They had recently had to cope with her elder sister becoming pregnant.
Despite being rather shocked, they responded extremely  well, and gave Joanne a lot of help and support.
Joanne had carried on with normal life as best she could, even going to discos at seven months pregnant, and all-night parties.
Because she did not have any preparation for pregnancy or birth, her labour and delivery were quite difficult, complicated by her having curvature of the spine which was not realised at such short notice.
Her boyfriend, having disappeared during her pregnancy, returned and acted like a concerned father for a few months after the baby was born, even coming to live in Joanne's house, but then left as suddenly as he had come, and all the family feel very bitter about this.
For a few months Joanne stayed at home, but became desperate to get a job and regain her independence.
Her mother was willing to look after the baby, so she got a fulltime job as a teacher's assistant in a mental home.
She also reestablished a fairly active social life in the evenings, again using her mother as a babysitter.
Although Joanne clearly loves her daughter very dearly and feels that having her has made her more responsible, she spends relatively little time with her.
However, Joanne and her parents agree that having the baby has brought them all closer together as a family, and it has provided a focus and role for her mother who, after Joanne's account, tells her version of the way that this has positively transformed her life.
"Mum used to send me down to the job centre for jobs.
I used to sit outside the job centre, then come home and say, "I have applied, but I had to send in an application form" , and I hadn't even gone in there.
She used to say, "Get some weight off you, get a job and get some weight off you." 
It was funny because to start with I lost that much weight, because I wasn't eating.
Then the weight started coming on.
First of all Mum thought I was anorexic and then she thought I'd got thyroid trouble.
My sister had that.
My dad used to sit here and say "Why don't you go to the doctors?" 
But I just ignored him and, watched the telly.
That would get him annoyed and we d all end up fighting.
A few times I sat down in the kitchen and almost told mum but changed my mind.
I just couldn't do it.
I think I've always found it hard to talk to people except for my best mate.
But I've never really talked to my mum about anything.
1 knew straightaway after the first month.
So I told Tim.
Get rid of it,"he said.
I'll pay.
It's the only thing he has offered to pay for.
I wish I'd taken the money now! finding I was pregnant scared me more than anything, because my sister Vanessa was also pregnant and saying to me, "I'm pregnant—what am I going to do?" 
I thought here we go, two of us.
Who's going to tell mum first.
She told Mum, and the reaction she got from Mum — I thought I can't cope with this.
So I kept it to myself.
I told my best friend to start with, and she said "For God's sake, I'll book you in down the doctors." 
I said no, I wouldn't go.
The one thing I did not want was an internal.
I think that was half the reason why I didn't go down the doctors.
To stop her going on at me I said, "No, I'm not." 
Then I stopped seeing her.
I dropped all my mates, dropped everybody.I got to the stage where I wasn't coping any more.
I just had a complete mental blockage.
I think I was sick about twice, and that was it.
I just forgot it.
I was still going and getting the shopping for my mum, and looking after my sister's baby as she couldn't cope because he was a naughty little boy.
I was carrying him upstairs in his pram thing, with only about a week to go.
I thought it might go away.
I think, looking back on it, I really did.
I used to cry myself to sleep every night, hoping Mum wouldn't come in.
It obviously showed, but I wore big baggy clothes.
The first thing Mum did when she found out was throw them all away.
It got to the stage where me and Mum were coming to blows.
Just because I  wouldn't say anything.
I felt really guilty afterwards.
She said, by the shape of me she wanted to ask me, but she didn't want to in case she offended me.
So I just went and told my sister.
I said I was eight-and-a-half months.
She phoned up the doctors and said she'd make an appointment for me.
Then she came down here to tell my mum.
My mum rang me up and said, "Look, everything's going to be all right." 
She said come down and we'd sort my dates out.
Then my dad's car was here, and the first person who came out was my dad and he came and put his arm round me.
They were really good, if I'd known I'd have told them sooner.
They were fine with me, and funny with my sister.
That's what really put me off.
If my dad went up the wall with that, what was he going to do with me?
But they were completely different.
Perhaps because the circumstances were so different.
They let me wear a maternity dress then, because I hadn't worn one up till then.
The thing that upsets me when I see all these pregnant people walking around is that I didn't do it.
I never really was officially pregnant.
I didn't wear maternity clothes.
I didn't do anything, and I didn't feel pregnant.
I'd walk down town with Vanessa, and she'd be looking at baby clothes, and I'd think, Oh God.
I wasn't interested.
Whereas usually I would be.
It upset me really to think that I just wasn't interested.
I think it upset her as well.
She was really enthusiastic.
I wasn't keen on babies, I'm still not now.
I've never been child minded.
It's always been animals.
I didn't really want to start a relationship like that.
We both got a bit drunk, and it was just the way it was.
just happened.
I regretted it straight after.
But it was too late then.
It was my one and only time.
And I won't get pregnant again.
That's it now.
Sixteen hours in labour.
Vanessa was there the whole time.
All I kept asking for was my dog.
The gynaecologist who was there was fantastic.
I really knocked him about…
I just got that scared, because  I'd never been to an antenatal class, I didn't know what was going to happen.
I didn't even read a book on it, I just shut out that much.
I used to be a punk.
It's Tamara that's calmed me down.
Used to have my bondage clothes, and the hair.
I don't think I could now.
I wouldn't do it, for her.
I d never walk round town looking like I used to.
But it's still nice to go out and enjoy myself.
Nightclubs and things, and stop at my friends.
I've become more outgoing since.
Stuff the world, I'm going to enjoy myself.
I think this is because for the last five months I was pregnant I was so withdrawn and wouldn't talk to anybody—wouldn't go out of the house, I used to sit upstairs or here hoping she wouldn't kick too hard and my dad wouldn't see anything.
hoping he wouldn't ask me to turn the telly over and I'd have to get up.
But my friends really got me out afterwards, they came round and took me out.
Got me back into the swing of things.
I think I forgot how to enjoy myself.
Mum looks after Tamara.
I pay her housekeeping and I buy her things.
I do feel guilty about it sometimes.
She cooks the teas and does the housework and everything.
If I'm here I try and help.
I'm always rushing around doing things.
I've never been very good at it, but I do try.
Mum's really been fantastic.
It's made her look much better, she's put on weight, and stopped smoking.
She was smoking for twenty-five years.
I suppose it's because she's got something else to think about now.
Before she used to sit and worry because she had nothing to worry about.
My dad's like me, he's never been really been over-impressed with kids, but he's good.
He'll sit and play with her and talk to her.
And he realises I'm not a child anymore.
Before I used to have to rebel to get my own way.
Now I just say, I m doing it.
And he says, yes all right.
They've never been hard on me on times to come in and that, but he's great now.
I come in when I want.
As long as I get up in the morning.
Before, I was the youngest, and he didn't approve.
Tamara's the best thing that's happened to me.
I feel very close to her, but I'm never here.
Now I spend a bit more time with her because I don't go out to work until later, before I was starting at seven.
I've become more open, and I think in away it has made me grow up.
When I'm with her I'm more responsible.
I was completely irresponsible before.
I couldn't care less about anything before.
Although I don't feel I've changed much because I'm doing exactly the same things.
But when I go out she's the only thing I talk about, she's more important.
I don't really think of myself as a mother.
A lot of people don't believe she's mine.
I'm still young.
I still want to go out, do what I want.
I know it's my fault she's here, I suppose in a few years time I'll wish I'd been here, but now I want to be out enjoying myself.
I would never advise anybody to keep it to themselves.
Get it out in the open.
There's nothing worse than keeping something like that to yourself It cracked me up terrible.
I didn't really know what was happening.
I used to lay there absolutely amazed when she moved inside me.
I couldn't believe it.
I used to poke her to move her round.
That was the only time I really enjoyed it.
Four o'clock in the morning she used to move about.
I couldn't believe there was something alive inside me.
It's funny, I didn't appreciate the fact that I was putting on weight.
I saw myself as thin, and not pregnant at all.
Now I realise I must have looked awful.
Three other girls I've spoken to said they didn't tell their mums till they were six months pregnant.
They had to tell them because they started showing.
I'll never know how I did not tell anybody.
I couldn't do it again."
JOANNE'S MOTHER
"Every other mother has said, well if it was my daughter, I'd have known.
But I never once thought.I really thought she'd got kidney trouble, or thyroid trouble.
But I couldn't get her to the doctor, she wouldn't go.
At first she kept passing out and she was sick.
I thought oh no, she's gone on to a vegan diet.
She's got anorexia.
And then she got fatter and fatter.
And she looked dreadful.
She must have gone through hell every day, because we kept on to her how fat she was, how ugly she was.
It wasn't at all like her.
We were worried sick about it.
And very upset that she looked so awful because we always thought she looked so lovely.
Even if she was punky, she was lovely.
Then suddenly she had no make-up, she was fatter, drooping about.
She wore boots, all through the summer.
Her legs were so swollen, she had to cover them up.
Then she told her sister, who came down in a taxi and I was talking to a woman who would not get off the phone.
Poor Vanessa was stabbing a cigarette, a cup of tea, another cigarette, hopping from one foot to the other.
When I came off the phone she said,"Mum you'd better sit down.
I've something terrible to tell you."
"I thought, oh, her and Colin.
They'd only been married months, I thought they'd had their first row and she'd come home.
Then she said, Its Joanne she's pregnant.
I said, "When is it due?" 
 "Now." 
I thought she was joking.
As she said that so dad arrived in the car with my mum, who is an absolute prude, and my auntie.
I got the rest of it out of Vanessa, and I said I had to tell them now.
It would probably kill my mum but I had to tell them.
They all came in, they d had a lovely day shopping.
I told Mum to sit down, and I just said,"Joanne is pregnant.
It's due now.
What are we going to do?"
I went and phoned the doctor, and he said bloody hell, what are you going to do?
I said that's why I'm phoning you.
We had  to get her into hospital quick.
And we spent all day in maternity ward.
We went through all the books, a crash course literally.
Nine months rolled into hours.
I felt shattered.
We just didn't get time to think.
We had just four days.
Luckily.
If I'd had time to think I don't know how I would have felt.
But if I'd had eight months of thinking, I don't think I could have taken it.
As it happens, she couldn't be better.
The baby's so good.
And she's made such a difference to me.
Mentally.
The doctor has said to me that since she came I'm changed completely.
I no longer need sleeping tablets, I no longer need the occasional valium.
I don't smoke any more.
I'm just completely relaxed, and I'm not tense any more.
I'd began to think I'd got this agoraphobia whatever it is, I never wanted to go out.
I have to tell myself that she's not mine.
And I know that one day she will go, and then what will I do?
This is what the health visitor keeps saying to me.
Don't get too attached.
Joanne must look after her own baby.
One day she'll break your heart.
But Tamara is such a happy, nice, pleasant baby.
And if I made Joanne stay in, she would be so miserable, that it would make the baby miserable.
So what's the best thing?
Joanne can't sit still long enough to feed her, but I love it.
We agree on more or less everything.
The only thing Joanne really doesn't like is her pretty dresses.
I used to hate taking her out in a track suit.
She should have pretty dresses and frilly pants on.
Dad was very upset that she hadn't confided in us.
He felt that she should have cared enough to confide in us, where really she cared too much and didn't.
Now he thinks more of her than he did of these, when they were babies.
He pays much more attention to her.
He plays with her, talks to her.
She's had a positive effect on the whole family.
It's totally different to my own children.
I seem to have more time for her than I had with them, and I still do my  housework and all the washing.
I haven't got the rush, somehow.
I don't know what it is, but it's different, bringing her up to what it was bringing them up.
It's very hard for parents.
Joanne really has been hard work, right from the day she was born.
She was awful at school.
It was nothing to be sent for by the headmaster.
I don't know whether she's changed or not, she's got an awful lot of growing up to do.
She's not responsible for Tamara at all.
She's got to be out and about with her friends.
You can't do that with a baby.
She thinks nothing of going out at ten o'clock at night.
How can you if you've got a baby?
If she didn't do it, she would blow up, I'm sure.
Which is why we say, if she has to go out, do it."
NICKIE
Nickie, aged eighteen, lived with her parents, who had come to Britain from the West Indies in the 195Os, until she was sixteen.
Then she had been forced to leave when it was discovered that her real father was a white man.
The father she had always known would no longer have anything to do with her so she had eventually got a tiny room in a house in London which served as a hostel for single girls.
She had a good job working with an airline company until she became pregnant after missing just one day of taking the Pill.
Neither her mother and father, nor her white boyfriend were pleased at the news.
When she was about three months pregnant, and feeling totally rejected by everyone, she got into a very depressed state, staying in her room for several days without moving, wondering if this was what it was like to be dead.
Then she brought herself out of it.
At the same time her mother came to visit her, her boyfriend appeared again, and things started looking up.
However, she went into labour eleven weeks early, and  her baby daughter went into intensive care, where she still was when she talked to me.
At this time there seems little chance of Nickie getting rehoused into her own flat, which is her main dream in life.
Meanwhile, the only alternative seems to be for the baby to be looked after by her mother, and she will go and visit in the evenings when her father has gone off to his night work.
Although her twenty-six-year-old boyfriend has an income from his job managing a shop, he has so far taken little interest and no responsibility for her or the baby.
He just comes round once in a while and they go out.
She is finding life very tough and depressing, stuck in her room, her baby in hospital, with little hope on the horizon of a proper home or family life.
She is quite bitter about what has happened, resentful at what she sees as the inconsistent attitudes towards pregnancy and teenage motherhood held by members of her family and other West Indian people and still upset at her father's extreme change in attitude towards her when he found out she was not his daughter.
"This all began when I was fifteen.
My brother and sister, they're very very dark.
I used to say to my mum, "Why am I this colour?" 
Mum said,"Oh well, it goes back to your ancestors.
I had a grandmother that was half-caste."
My dad started saying to my mum, "What's this?" 
And because I kept on asking, my dad started getting a bit funny.
I came back from school one time, and my brother said, "Stay outside" .
I thought, something's up with my mum, and I went in the house.
I said, "What's happening?" and my dad went like this, right across my face, and I went flying over the table.
Alter all these years I thought the man in our house was my dad, and he wasn't.
It upset me a lot.
Before my dad was really good to me, but after that it changed.
I'd come in from school and he wouldn't say hello  to me.
Mum would dish up my plate of food, and I'd go and sit down with it and he'd get up.
So I left, and went to stay at a friend's.
Then I came back.
My mum said to me, "You've left once, you might as well stay out." 
He doesn't speak to me.
He's told friends, "All these years I've thrown away money on that child." 
He's proud of his granddaughter, but he won't have anything to do with me.
My brothers and sisters knew my dad could harbour a grudge, but not like this.
I mean, we've lived together since we were young babies, and to them it's nothing.
To me, they're still my brothers and sisters.
They don't care, because they know me.
But my dad, he will just not accept it.
And to make matters worse, it was a white guy my mum had an affair with.
I think that made it worse, my dad said you can't mix, in this world, you should have white, Indian and black.
You shouldn't mix.
A lot of people think you shouldn't mix.
When Robert and I first met, it was, "Oh dear" .
They just think it's wrong, it's the worst thing you could do.
I've got aunties with daughters married to white guys, and they will not accept the guy.
Some of them will just forget the guy and just relate to the daughter.
Others will just forget that they have a daughter completely, just for the reason they're married to a white guy.
just cut them off completely.
I was down the market with this other girl, and we saw her mum there.
I said hello, and she was all right to me, but not the girl.
It was like they were strangers, and they're mother and daughter.
I really don't know why it's so wrong.
When they first came to this country —like my mum, when she first came she said she couldn't find a place to live because people didn't want black people on their premises.
I say to her, "Forgive and forget, because times have changed." 
I m not saying people aren't racist, but things have changed.
People accuse the whites of being prejudiced, but blacks can be just as bad.
With Robert's mum —to start with it was fine.
Then it just got worse and worse.
And his dad-oh my God.
I didn't say "Hi" to him, I said "Hello, good evening" .
And it was like I wasn't there.
Like I was just a shadow, or a dog he doesn't have to talk to.
And at first his mum said, "Don't bring that girl in my house." 
Then she invited me to dinner.
But his dad just wouldn't have anything to do with me.
It's weird, because before all this happened, I thought this country was great —but people have got really bad attitudes, and no matter what anybody else says, they'll just stand by their beliefs, they will not change.
If I took Robert home, mum would say "Don't bring him in, what you bringing him for?" 
And then my friends' boyfriends, on an evening out, they used to just have a go at him, and I'd feel really embarrassed.
They'd tease him about everything.
He was glad when I got pregnant to start off with, but he's changed.
He was glad because —well, not having kids before, he only thought about the nice side of being a dad, he didn't think about the bad side.
We had a little bit of money, we wanted all these things for the baby, but he couldn't afford the money.
His image of being a father was different.
He thought, this isn't the way I thought it would be.
So now he just comes round once in a blue moon.
I didn't think he'd do that, because we'd had problems before, because of the black and white thing, There's a lot of people who will just stop you in the street.
He didn't mind that at all, he argued for me.
And if I'd had any problems, he sorted them out.
So I didn't think because he's got pressure, with the baby situation, that he'd go.
But he did.
And we were very much together, and in love.
My family are just so typical.
The mother will have a kid, not necessarily with another man, but they'll have kids before they're married.
Like my aunties.
Some of them had babies before they were married.
Some had kids when they were fourteen and fifteen.
And then you get yourself  pregnant and they treat you like it's a sin.
It doesn't occur to them that they've done the same.
I've pointed it out on many occasions.
And if you say you did the same thing, they just think, oh my God, look at this girl being really rude.
And then there's the attitude towards black girls with babies.
They say, "These girls have no ambition, they just come out of school and make babies." 
That's the expression.
They don't say "having" babies, they say "make babies" .
My mum was always saying, "All these girls making babies" .
They think white girls will get their house.
My mum and aunt are always saying to me, a white girl will first of all be engaged, then marry, then live in her mum's house for a little while until they can afford the mortgage on their place, then buy a house, live there for a couple of years, then they'll have the baby.
I say,"Mum, you're living in the dark ages.
Not all girls do that.No, says Mum, a black girl leaves school, and as soon as she leaves school she'll start making babies.
She wouldn't even rent a place, she'd just start making babies.
That is just an attitude, and I don't know where they get that from.
It's a bloody stupid attitude.
There's a lot of white girls that get pregnant as well.
These West Indian girls, they're living in their mum's houses, and they say, "Mum, I'm pregnant." 
Before that, these mums won't sit down and talk about contraceptives, you have to learn it all from the walls at school or from friends, because these parents aren't telling you.
Then when you get pregnant it's "Lord Jesus Christ have mercy, you're pregnant, oh my God!" 
It's something bad, like you've got VD. or something.
They won t say, "I'll come to the clinic with you or I'll help you." 
Their immediate reaction is to kick them out, put their belongings on the doorstep and tell them to leave.
This has happened to my friends.
And it's only when the child is two or three, or beginning to talk or whatever, that's when the mums come around.
They go into bed and  breakfast.
And the boyfriend -when the mother kicks them out of the home — the boyfriend says, "Uh-oh, she's out on the street now, and pregnant." 
And away they go, some of them.
So the girl has no family and no boyfriend.
That happens to so many people, I think -alright, don't be happy about the situation if you don't want to be, but don't kick your daughter out on the street.
They said to me when I was younger, "You become pregnant and you're going, you're not staying in the house." 
Sometimes the mum, after a couple of years, the mum will come around, but not the dad.
First of all she'll start to for things behind the dad's back.
Then she'll say, "Oh I'll look after the baby." 
My mum -she doesn't say the word sex, she thinks the word sex is dirty -she'll say, "When you get in a mix up" -that's what she calls it.
I had to figure out what she was saying.
When she was talking like that, I'd say, "Mum what are you talking about?" and she'd say, "Oh never mind, you won't understand." 
And you don't get any more.
And so many of my friends have said the same.
Their mums don't talk to them about contraceptives, or sex.
They had to learn it from school, or from people out on the street.
But not from the parents indoors.
A lot of them say, "Oh, my daughter's pregnant." 
It doesn't occur to them that if they had told them about contraceptives, they would not be pregnant.
And many parents think, oh my daughter would not have sex.
Therefore it's not necessary to tell her about contraceptives.
And that's what makes them much more angry.
If I'd have my time over again, I'd do things so differently.
I'd not have a child at my age.
I'd rather use contraception, then know that I'm going to become pregnant.
But now, after what happened, I'll not miss the Pill again.
I've got this watch with an alarm on it, so that I know when to take it.
I shan't risk forgetting again.
I think it's harder, being black and having a baby.
People's attitudes, they're so different.
White friends that I've got, their mums argued at first, but now they're just bringing the baby up as their own.
They're not arguing any more.
With my black friends, their babies are two years old and the parents still cause so much strife.
I don't know why.
They've done the same thing.
My friend Pauline, she has a daughter of eight, and her mother and father still aren't talking to her.
My mum had my sister before she was married, when she was seventeen.
If she had sat down and explained things to me, I don't care how long it took, it would have been something.
A lot of the parents know what they're talking about, they've seen it all already, what we're going through.
But they will not open up and talk.
Some just don't want to reveal themselves when they were younger.
Mum would tell us things about her childhood, and then come to a bit and just shut up.
We'd say, "What happened next?" and she wouldn't say a word.
She loves telling me "Prevention is better than cure" , but she won't tell the rest.
TRACY
Tracy is eighteen and lives in a little house in the west of England with her mother, who is forty-one, and both their daughters.
Tracy's is two years old and her mother's daughter is three.
Her parents divorced about ten years before.
Her father lives quite close by, but they are not very close and she does not see very much of him.
Tracy got pregnant on the day she left school.
She got six CSEs of which two were grade ones.
She wanted to be a hairdresser, and had even started a course, but consequently had to leave.
Her baby's father was quite a bit older than she, twenty-six, and wanted her to have the baby because he thought that having mumps had made him sterile.
Tracy was  persuaded, but as time went on, decided she didn't really want to be with him, so she left him.
She soon fell in love with someone else, also about nine years older than herself, who seemed very keen and wanted to marry her.
He was in the Navy and away a lot of the time.
During the first six months after the baby was born he was very helpful when he was around, as Tracy sometimes felt she couldn't cope because her daughter cried so much.
But soon after he had a change of heart and left her.
Although she has had a few boyfriends since, there is no one special around.
She became pregnant again about six months ago, through a contraceptive failure, but this time she decided to have an abortion.
Even though her boyfriend at the time was against this, she was determined not to be persuaded to have another baby.
Tracy is on social security but by living at home she even manages to save a little.
She pays her mother housekeeping money, and her mother still tends to look after her.
They are good friends, do quite a lot of things together with their two young children, and are sometimes mistaken for sisters.
"Mum knew I was sleeping with my boyfriend.
People say she was lenient with me.
I think she was frightened to be too strict.
My mum and dad had been through a very bad divorce, so I suppose she was frightened of being too strict and pushing me away, in case I turned against her.
She never encouraged me, but she didn't stop me.
My dad blames my mum for the way things turned out for me.
She came with me when I first went on the Pill.
I was about fifteen.
It was her idea.
But it made me sick and dizzy, so I didn't take it.
I wasn't sleeping with anyone, it was just in case.
When I first slept with someone I used Durex.
Then I became allergic to Durex so I went back on the Pill, a different one.
But I was  bad again, so I came off it.
Then I tried a different Durex, but I was allergic to them all.
I just gave up.
I didn't bother then.
People say having a baby ruins your life, and talk about what you could have done in a job and that.
But I'll be young when she goes to school.
I'll be young enough to get a job.
I'll only be twenty-one or so then.
I can still get training and get a job.
Some people are older than that.
When I'm thirty, Sally won't be far behind me, not such an age gap.
Like me and my mum.
She had me when she was twenty, and we're more like friends really.
People think we're sisters sometimes.
We go out together.
Other girls at school used to think that was funny, because they never talked to their mums and didn't even know how old they were.
One of my friends thought she was pregnant and she told my mum before her own mum.
I do everything with my mum.
She's forty-one now, but she's young.
She looks young for her age and she acts young.
People think of her as younger.
When people know she's a grandmother they're amazed.
It's the way you dress and act.
She's jolly and up to date.
And because she's got a little girl, people think we're friends or sisters.
Mum looks after Sally sometimes for me.
But mostly I just don't go out.
If my mum wants to go out, or goes to work, I stay at home and look after the girls, and vice versa.
We don't oaten get a babysitter unless we want to go out together.
People ask me sometimes, why don't I get a flat and live on my own with my little girl?
But I don't want to.
I like living with my mum and her little girl.
She does too.
So what's the point of us moving out?
We get on well.
We have arguments, everyone does.
But not often.
The only thing is that the little girls fight.
They're terrible.
I don't see my dad very often at the moment, unless I actually go up there.
He's got his own business and shop.
Sally knows who he is though, although he's never looked after her.
I wish he would, but he's never offered.
My sister-in-law is just about the same age as me, and whether it's because she's not his daughter, but he treats her completely different.
I think he thinks of me still as more of a child.
He won't talk to me about sex, or boyfriends or anything.
I won't talk to him about it either.
I would say to other pregnant teenagers that I think it's great if they are happy about it.
But I was talked into it by my boyfriend.
I don't think you should be talked into anything.
I should have done what I wanted.
I suppose I was confused at the time.
But I'd say, just do what you want to do, nothing else.
Whatever it is, I was lucky, my mum was good, she didn't threaten to throw me out or anything.
Now I get social security and my family allowance.
I give my mum money for housekeeping and that.
She buys all the food, and pays for the laundry.
If we go out we take it in turns to pay.
She does the shopping, and the cooking she does too.
She's still like my mum.
We share the housework.
I don't suppose I'd manage that well if I was on my own.
I suppose you get used to it, but at the moment I haven't got to do it.
When Sally was born, she knew I wanted to look after her myself.
She helped but she didn't tell me what to do all the time.
She advises me but she doesn't take over at all.
She'll say, "Why don't you try it this way?" and not, "Do it this way." 
I think it's made me grow up.
I think I feel older than my age, and I suppose I do act older in a way.
You realise more what life's about.
If I was younger, I think I'd have still had her.
But now when I think about it, I think maybe I wouldn't.
It's hard to say.
But I can't imagine being without her, so I don't really regret it."
SCHOOL AND EDUCATION
If you are pregnant and under the age of sixteen, it is compulsory that you receive some sort of education until you reach this age.
There are three main ways you can do this; you can continue at school, have a home tutor, or attend a special unit or project set up for pregnant school-girls and school-age mothers.
The school year runs from September to August and whether sixteen-year-olds can continue at school or leave if they wish depends when their birthday falls.
This makes it quite difficult to get accurate figures about school-age mothers.
About two-thirds of the mothers in this book were at school or further education college when they became pregnant, and about half of these were under sixteen.
The option of staying at school or returning after the birth of the baby is often not a very popular one.
Indeed some schools do not allow girls to do this, seeing pregnancy, like measles, as infectious.
For girls themselves, it may also be a daunting prospect, especially if they're feeling rather vulnerable and embarrassed about their condition.
Other girls and boys can be very unkind, as Doreen had found: "All the kids kept pointing fingers, talking behind my back, starting rumours and were generally very bitchy." 
She left after a few months and had a home tutor.
Bridget too had a similar experience: "The other girls had mixed feelings, some of them were happy for me but some thought I was a slag and a tart and that I didn't know who the father was, and they were bitchy towards me when they passed in the corridors." 
Lyn went into school at fifteen when she was almost due to give birth.
She was wearing big maternity clothes and felt "dead weird" being with everyone else in school uniform.
It was break time and everyone was in the yard talking about her:
They won't come up to you because they think you're dirty, because you got pregnant and you're only fourteen or fifteen, but if you're seventeen or eighteen it doesn't matter, you're old.
But because you're still at school they think you're dirty and disgusting and they call you a slag, but it could happen to then any day.
Rachel remembers walking into school assembly the first time, after everybody had found out:
I walked into assembly and everybody turned round and they didn't look at me, they looked at my stomach, everybody in that hall.
I was with my three mates and they stood behind me and said, "I don't see why you should be ashamed." 
but I wouldn't go in after that, it was really horrible.
They don't call you names, what they do, they hurt you more by not asking you, but asking your friends, "Is she pregnant?" 
You've thousands of mates until you have a baby and then you discover who you real friends are.
These were both common complaints: that other girls or boys did not have the nerve to ask you to your face if you were pregnant or not, and that "you find out who your real friends are" .
Friends stand or fall by whether they stick by you and still see you when you have your baby and cannot go out much anymore.
It may be easier for someone who is a bit older.
Folasade, for example, left school without anyone knowing she was pregnant, and then returned to the sixth form after having her baby, to take her A-levels.
Before I got pregnant it was taken for granted I'd be in the sixth form, then when I found out, I thought I had two months to tell everybody I won't be back and they're going to say, "How come?" , so I was saying, "Oh God, I'm going to fail my 0-levels, you wont see me back here again" .
Then I came back, 0-levels and baby and all.
I didn't know what to expect when I came back to school.
It must have been halfway through the year, and it was"You were pregnant!
I couldn't believe it!"
I got asked about it for months.
I had a permanent grin on my face about it all.
I like talking about Baby.
Everybody talked to me in the corridor.
After the initial, "God, you've had a baby!" , everything was normal, my friends didn't treat me any different really.
Teachers would come up smiling —not having spoken to me since the first year and now I was a sixth former.
Sometimes things would happen, like when I first started potty training her.
I used to have Physics at half-nine and every now and then she'd have an accident in the road so I'd be running home, changing her and taking her back to nursery, which would mean I'd be half an hour late.
So this was the reason I was late and then it was, "Sit down, all right" .
At first it was very good, I couldn't do anything wrong because I had a baby.
The teachers treat me as an adult, but I've always been very mature for my age.
The one I mostly chat to is the biology teacher.
She had her first child, then I had mine, and then she had her second child.
So we bring photographs in.
Although girls may be understandably reluctant to expose themselves to the stares and comments of other girls and boys, their views and experiences of contraception and motherhood could be very relevant and helpful to others of their own age who are still at school.
Without  taking adequate precautions, they too could be in the same situation themselves by the end of the year.
The option of having a home tutor is often quite successful.
It is at the discretion of local education authorities to offer pregnant schoolgirls and school-age mothers a number of hours free home tuition per week.
London, for example, will provide ten hours a week, for schoolchildren eligible under certain categories.
Pregnancy falls under"medical grounds'.
Girls either go to a local centre for tuition, or to the tutor's home, or are taught within their own homes.
In London this continues for six weeks after the baby's birth, after which girls are encouraged to go back to school.
Tuition may be continued on special grounds.
Several teenage mothers in this book had had a home tutor and most had enjoyed it.
The one-to-one teaching usually meant that they learned more and did better than they would have in the classroom.
Some of them had not attended school very regularly before.
Often the tutor became more like a friend than a teacher, and continued to keep contact with them even after their period of education together had finished.
Cathy had been assigned a tutor, she used to take her daughter along to a little school (not her previous school) and have lessons there in the staffroom: I never liked school before but I liked this as it was only half-past nine till half-past twelve so it wasn't a long day and I could take Rebecca with me.
I used to have a load of homework to take home with me because I had to catch up but I didn't used to mind that.
It gave me something to do as well.
I got better results than if I'd stayed at school.
If I'd been at school I think I'd have wanted to leave at Easter.
They wanted me to do O-levels but I said no.
It would have been too much, having to look after Rebecca.
I got five CSEs and grade 2s.
This system can also work for older teenagers, but if you are over sixteen you are not entitled to free tutoring.
Alter Judy became pregnant in the lower sixth at school, she left and found herself a tutor for her A-level English, and also attended maths classes at the local college.
She had to pay for tutoring out of her supplementary benefit, but it was well worth it as she enjoyed her studies, did well, and is still friends with her tutor.
The third option is to attend one of the special projects that exist in various cities.
I visited two of these, the Arbour Project in Liverpool, and the Barkerend Unit in Bradford.
The Arbour Project operates from a converted two-bedroomed flat above a shop in Liverpool.
As well as providing pregnancy counselling to any girl at school up to the age of eighteen years, its ongoing work is to look after the social and educational needs of a small group of six or seven pregnant schoolgirls or school-age mothers who attend the unit every weekday for a period of twelve months.
There are three full-time workers —a counsellor, a teacher, and a nursery nurse.
There is also a health visitor who comes in to teach on the childcare course and to discuss any health problems, and a doctor who visits monthly to give inoculations and deal with any other aspects of health care.
The project is jointly funded by several bodies, the main support coming from the education and social services departments.
It has an open referral system, so girls can be recommended by their schools, educational welfare officers, maternity hospitals, and a variety of other sources, or they can come along on their own initiative.
These places clearly provide an invaluable experience for teenage mothers in which they receive education and social support.
Although to some extent girls are cushioned from the outside world, it is probably a good thing at this time, and the advantages of attending such a project far outweigh any disadvantages.
It is a great pity that there is  not more provision of this kind.
As it is, the number of girls that Arbour can take has to be limited in order to provide a good service within the constraints of the accommodation, and the number of staff.
A girl will start coming to the project when she is pregnant, and come back after she has had her baby.
It runs on the basis of a four-day academic week.
Every Thursday is given over to a drop-in day, which is open to the previous year's group to come back or to any girl on home-teaching, and sometimes girls from three or four years back may also drop in for a chat or advice.
After the intensive twelve months support with the project, girls need somewhere to come with any problems that may occur later.
It is during this subsequent period that many problems arise, such as relationships with parents and living at home.
Girls clearly get a lot from attending the Project.
They are taught a broad range of subjects, they learn about childcare and have a good preparation for motherhood, and they provide support and solidarity to each other.
There are few rules laid down, apart from not smoking in the classroom and informing the staff if they can't come in, and the rest of the rules about things like washing up and cooking are made and implemented by girls themselves.
Boyfriends are encouraged to visit, although not a lot of them do.
The are range may run between thirteen and sixteen, but most girls are fifteen and have got pregnant in their fifth year at school.
Girls usually leave Arbour after twelve months, having taken their exams and any girls who, for instance, come in the third year at school are required to return to school afterwards.
Therefore the unit also has to prepare them for reintegration into school life.
Educationally, girls work harder and do better than if they had still been in school.
They are usually quite a mixed group, some of whom have had bad experiences at school or have been long term truants.
They all do exams, even if this is only the one in childcare.
According to Hilary, the Project teacher:
They are told they are coming here to carry on their education, and I interpret this as being very broad-based.
I don't want to bring out a girl with six CSEs or 16+s who can't look after her baby, so you try to cater for the individual need.
They usually come in until the day they have their baby, and most come back again very early, as soon as two weeks.
And they're not coming back for their education; they're coming back for the support that Arbour gives them, so they may spend more time with Monica in the nursery looking after the baby and gradually they'll move back into the classroom in their own time and get back to their exams.
On the whole they do very well in the exams.
I think it's a reflection of their motivation, because I'm not a subject specialist.
I could be doing eight or nine subjects so generally the girls are responsible for their education.
They know what areas they've got to cover in maths or English and it's a question of their motivation.
If they're in here working all day and everyday and they see the other girls taking exams and they know I'm going to make them work, quite often they'll take the exams because there's no point in not taking them, whereas I think if they were at home they would not have the same incentive.
A lot of them actually do better for coming here.
And I think another reason why we do so well educationally is that the baby gives them a sense of direction and purpose and they may not want to get 16+ exams but they want to for their baby.
Girls remain on the register of their previous schools, and take their chosen exams there, unless they do not wish to go back into school.
In this case the Project becomes a temporary centre and they sit the exams there.
Obviously  very close relationships are built up through being in a small, close knit group everyday, and this helps to carry girls through their work and exams.
The workers are not just teachers or nursery nurses, their roles overlap and they are also more like friends than authority figures.
This can be very helpful on both sides, as their advice can be asked and issues discussed in a way that girls may not be able to do with their parents or anyone else.
There is also a tremendous amount of shared support amongst girls themselves.
For the pregnant girls it is often a real eye-opener to see the other girls go off, deliver their babies and come back, having survived it all.
But then they also see exactly what is entailed in having a newborn baby to care for, who does not sleep all day, but cries and is sick and needs constant attention.
They seem to come to terms with the reality of this much easier than a lot of other girls.
In this respect, pregnant girls at Arbour are also very knowledgeable and confident about giving birth because they have been so well prepared for it, and tend to sail through labour and birth without a lot of problems.
And some girls seem to change radically in personality after having their babies:
You think you know a girl for six months and then she has a baby and becomes a completely different person.
You get reports from school and it may say "difficult" or whatever, but they may be a very different person in the pregnancy.
They become very passive but as soon as they've had the baby they're back to their old selves again and you think, God, is it the same girl?
The girls at the Project talk with one another freely about their personal lives, and experiences and problems, and can describe and understand their situation better because they have become used to discussing it.
Monica, the nursery nurse, told me: They all know what it's like to come in and say, "I hate that child, it's been crying all night" ; whereas they feel reluctant to say that to other people because people are looking at them and their age.
It's quite normal for a mum to feel like that and they can talk to each other about it and support each other.
And if things are going wrong at home, or with the boyfriend or the baby and a girl is really distraught, the others will rally round and make her coffee, take the baby and feed it, because they understand, and they feel for her.
They can also talk very openly about sex and contraception, discussing any problems and giving one another advice.
They're very good with each other 's babies too, you can come in and not know which baby belongs to who, or a girl's got an exam coming up and they'll all muck in and change the baby for her.
It had been a really good experience for both Rachel, aged fifteen with an eleven-month-old baby, and Carol, aged fourteen and five months pregnant.
For me everything that's come out of Arbour's been good.
I come in all the time, I'm never away.
You can joke with them, have a laugh with them, it's just great.
I've done my exams and I think I've done well in them.
They've helped me with the baby, they take her away for a couple of hours a day, and they take you out to places — sports centres and hospitals.
They show you how to do things, not like in the hospital where there's all mothers round you and nurses and they're all watching you.
Here there's only Monica and she shows you how to do it and you get your confidence.
And sometimes when you've had a late night with the baby and you come in and think, Oh, I've got to work, and they say if you're tired just go to sleep on the couch.
At school you can't do that, and here you can have cups of tea.
It's nice to be among other mothers.
You've got all the same things in common, you've all got a baby and you were all under-age when you had the baby and most of us done exams.
And the amount of help you get the day before your exams -the same morning I turned round to Hilary after all the work she'd done with me and said, "I'm going to fail, I'm not doing it." 
And she said, "Get in there and do it." 
And when I started doing it I knew the hang of it and I turned round to her afterwards and said, "That was easy." 
I did six altogether.
You get told about Arbour by your school, or social worker or the hospital.
When you first come in you feel dead funny because you're pregnant and they're all with kids and they're screaming and running round everywhere and you think, "What have I got to put up with?" 
But you get used to it and I think it's a grand place, it's done me the world of good anyway, they don't half help you.
I think you should make more effort to find out about places like this, and I think the schools should make an effort to tell you.
It's good knowing that there's somewhere you can go for advice.
(Rachel)
It's helped me a lot.
I'd rather be here than be at school.
In school you'd be getting the looks and all that, but here everyone's in the same boat.
And even if you still can talk to your mum after she knows, you've got someone here to talk to.
It's easy here, Hilary, Monica and Yvonne are more like your mates than your mum, it's easier to talk to them than to talk to my mum.
I used to babysit before but for older ones, and coming here's got me more used to younger babies.
I'd never bottle-fed a little baby until I came here.
You've got no say, you've got to do it and you get used to having a little baby, because after they're born they're not three or four, they're tiny.
So you learn to cope with it.
(Carol) Coming to the Arbour is not necessarily an easy option, despite its positive results.
It requires girls to travel everyday, often across the city in all weathers.
But for most of them it is clearly worth it, and Carol would struggle in even when she was not feeling well.
And when the twelve months are over these young mothers usually go on to DHSS benefits, because they do not want to leave their babies and go to college or on YTS schemes.
They have not got many choices open to them, and they are also very aware of people judging them as mothers because of their age, and feel that they constantly have to prove themselves.
Alter the exams are over, the Project takes the girls around to nurseries, parent support programmes, local sports centres, swimming and other activities.
Although not strictly part of the academic programme, this is considered to be an important part of the project because if you enjoy your last experience of school, then you're more likely to return to studying something at a later stage in life.
The relationship that develops between the girls and the workers is quite unique.
Everyone's situation and problems get an airing and this does not mean any loss of respect, but more an insight into shared adult life.
It is an educational setting that is totally unlike ordinary school, where girls learn to be responsible parents while also expressing themselves like any other fourteen or fifteen-year olds.
They gain many things, from qualifications to self-awareness and confidence.
Barkerend is a similar unit that operates in Bradford, where there is no provision of home tuition, so pregnant school-age girls have only the choice of continuing at school or attending this unit.
It is staffed by three fulltime teachers, and its aims are similar to the Arbour Project in that it provides continuing education, it takes girls through their pregnancies physically, educationally, emotionally and socially to produce healthy babies and mothers, and it  tries to help girls achieve a level of maturity for taking on responsible parenthood.
The age range runs between about twelve to seventeen years old, and there were twenty-four girls on the register at the time I visited the unit.
As every girl has her own individual subjects, the teaching is on a one-to-one basis, and each has cards showing her particular set work which has to be in at a certain time.
The girls are required to plan their own day, and when they are used to this system, most prefer it to the structure of school and it gives them some control over their daily lives.
They start at ten o'clock and finish at three with lunch from twelve to one o'clock.
Any other breaks they organise themselves.
They also have group activities when they learn about pregnancy and parenthood, do practical work, and discuss relevant issues and problems and how they might deal with these, if and when they may arise.
Although a broad range of subjects is offered, the unit does not have the facilities for certain subjects such as science, so anyone wanting to do these subjects has to use the local college facilities instead.
Like the Arbour mothers, the Barkerend mothers have a very good record with the hospitals for having learned the language of pregnancy and birth.
They know what to expect and what to ask for, and they tend to deliver extremely well.
They too tend to work very hard, harder than they would have done at school, and get good results.
At first girls may be preoccupied with their pregnancy or baby and see education as unimportant, but seeing other girls working soon builds their motivation.
Although the unit obviously benefits girls who have tended either not to do very well in school, or who were regular truants, there is a tendency for more scholastically-minded girls to do worse educationally than they would have in school.
The reason suggested for this is that these girls feel that they should be able to cope with their pregnancy and problems on their  own instead of sharing them within the unit, as most other girls do.
In trying to struggle on independently they have less time to concentrate on schoolwork.
The unit lacks any proper creche facilities for the babies and therefore the girls take it in turns to look after them.
They are often quite loathe to leave their babies with anyone else because, like many other young mothers, they are concerned to show the world that they are as good and responsible as any older mother.
In this they have the basis to succeed, and one teacher noted after a drop-in day for former pupils:
All those people who criticise these young girls and say they won't be able to cope and won't make good mothers ought to come in here and look at them now because they were absolutely fantastic with those children.
The babies were developing properly and being well stimulated and doing the right things at the right age and they were really coping well.
Because they have been treated more as adults here, the contrast between this and ordinary school makes it sometimes difficult for them to return and adapt to being treated as children again, so it is obviously preferable for them to continue on at the unit.
The advantages of attending a unit of this kind or somewhere that gives similar solidarity and guidance has been shown in a study of schoolgirl mothers.
This found that girls who had felt isolated and embarrassed about being pregnant or having babies felt less stigma about this after they had attended the units and could take a much more realistic view of their situation.
They benefited both practically and emotionally compared to girls without such support, who suffered more from their lack of status and recognition as mothers.
If there were more such places it would help to combat the cycle of deprivation that young  mothers can get trapped in.
A fifteen-year-old girl having her first baby is twice as likely to live at the poverty level than a nineteen-year-old first-time mother.
Returning to education at any time is not easy with small children, little money and few available childcare facilities, but it can be done.
Sometimes if girls are living at home, they can reach some arrangement with one of the family to babysit while they go to further education college.
Elaine was fifteen and at school when she got pregnant.
Her mother had high hopes for her to take O-levels and go higher, so when she was pregnant, Elaine could not tell her because she felt she'd let her down.
It was not until she was over seven months pregnant that her mother asked her if she was.
Then they had to work out what to do.
She'd thought everything through.
She said, "Do you want to put the baby up for adoption?" 
And I said, "No, I don't want that." 
So she said, "Do you want me to adopt it and then I'll have all the responsibility and you can get on." 
I said, "No, I don't want that either." 
She was willing to give everything up, but we talked it through and I said I could manage on my own.
She said, "You've got to promise me you'll go back to college and finish your education." 
And I said, "Yes, okay." 
So we agreed and that was it, and I just got down to having Sam.
Then I took a year off, and she kept going on and on at me that it's time to go back to college, so I did in the end.
I'm taking a business studies course.
I didn't want to go to begin with, but it was really good fun.
Then it got quite boring, and it was really hard work, and now after the first year's finished I'm glad we thought of that because I've done quite well.
I came top in my class this year and I'm glad she pushed me into it now.
Elaine left her son with her sister, who also had a young child, while she took her course.
Helen left her daughter  with her mother while she continued to take her A-levels at sixth form college.
Kate's social worker organised nursery places for her two small children while she did her A-levels, and she has subsequently gone to a university where she can get creche facilities.
Rosemary waited until her three children were at school before she started studying again.
For any mothers wanting to go back to education, of whatever age, there are a variety of courses available such as Fresh Start courses and TOPS courses.
Some of them are run with creche facilities.
If you feel that you have quite enough on your plate with a small child, then the idea of going back to education may not appeal, and many mothers I talked to said they had no such plans at present.
They were happy to carry on taking each day as it came.
But if and when you do want something else, going to college when you are older and when you positively want to go, can be a very different and more satisfying experience than being at school.
JUDY
Judy lives with her twelve-month-old daughter and her parents in their house in the north of England.
At nineteen she is the youngest of four children and has always been treated as the "little one" .
She was in the sixth form at school starting her A levels when she met Andrew, the father of her baby.
The night she got pregnant she had already been feeling depressed, and afterwards she immediately regretted what had happened.
It had been her first time, she didn't love him, they didn't use any contraception and she definitely didn't expect to be pregnant as a result.
The next time she saw Andrew she finished with him.
When she finally went to the family planning clinic, the woman she saw was not very sympathetic, she said "What school do you go to?" and when I told her she said "You've  really thrown away your chances." "
When the pregnancy was confirmed she was in tears from the shock, even though she had her suspicions when her periods failed to arrive.
It wasn't an easy prospect to tell her parents, especially as her father was a strict Roman Catholic, but this was forestalled by her mother coming across her letter from the clinic.
Both parents got very emotional and threw their arms around her, although she had never felt they were very close before.
She decided that she did not want to have either an abortion, or to have the baby adopted.
Andrew, when he was told, denied responsibility and didn't want to know, and has not been seen since.
Determined to carry on with her education, Judy got herself a tutor for her English, and went to the local college to do maths.
At the end of two years she applied for jobs with various banks and when I met her she had just been accepted as a trainee accounting technician.
Having her daughter has not stopped her from doing more or less what she had planned, but has spurred her on to better results.
 "I had been off school since before my mum found out as I had been sick with gastric" flu.
My morning sickness I had explained away as the bug starting and a lot of the time it was sickness at an evening meal.
Because of this I decided it wasn't worth going back to school so I just went in to tell everyone and collect some books.
I was in the lower sixth, taking Maths, English General, and Biology, so I dropped the Biology and took up English with a tutor.
I had the tutor for a year right until I took my exams.
It cost me money though, I originally got her from a tutoring agency.
I had to pay out of my supplementary benefit, £7 an hour, just once a week.
She did the English, maths I did at the tech, which I got free as I was under eighteen.
That was Tuesday and Thursday from 6.30 to  9.00pm, it was a two-year course.
I really enjoyed having a tutor and I learned more than if I'd been at school.
You get it done more deeply at home, plus I did my homework properly.
I'm still friends with my tutor, and she was really pleased when I told her I'd got a job.
We ended up more as friends than tutor and pupil.
I've grown up since I left school.
Everybody said that after I had Louisa I got a lot older, more mature.
I didn't notice it myself but looking at the people at school you think how babyish.
If I'd not had Louisa I don't suppose I would have pushed myself when I had the job interview.
I knew I needed a job not only for myself but for her.
She's made me more responsible and I've done better in my exams and I've worked at my English.
I was really pleased when I got the job.
You go to the tech on day release, take an exam every year and by the end of the third year you should be a qualified accounting technician.
From there, if you want to, you can go on to be an accountant.
I'll have to see how it goes and after about three years, I'll see if I feel like doing any more.
When I wrote out the application form and it said did I have any experience, I just adapted it.
I put I had been to the grammar school and I got my O levels.
I said I was going to tech on a night for my maths A level and I was also taking General and English.
I didn't put about Louisa because a lot of people are a bit biased.
But at the interview he said, "I couldn't figure out if you were at school or not" , so I told him and he said, "And you've managed to do your A levels?" 
I said, "Yes" , and I plugged it that I'd done it while I'd had Louisa and that's what I think went in my favour in a way.
If she can manage A levels and a baby she can manage doing this work.
He also wanted a personality to fit into the office.
As I was picked from about a hundred applicants I think I did quite well.
I told him that my mum, sister and dad were looking  after Louisa—my parents are retired now —so he knew there was someone looking alter her.
And I had an incentive to work hard because the higher you go, the more exams you pass, and the more money you get.
Another thing about being a qualified accountant is that I could always leave and do books at home.
By that time she should be at school, and nursery when she's three.
My friend said, "Don't you think you'll be shirking your responsibility?" 
I said, "No, I'll be getting money this way for her." 
It's better having more money than living in rags.
I've always wanted to work in a bank so even if I hadn't have had Louisa it's basically what I'd have gone on to do anyway.
If it hadn't have been for her I wouldn't have been taking so many exams.
The more you pass the more money you get and you get better qualifications.
I get about £78 net and I think I get some allowances for Louisa.
I got £28.30 altogether before from social security when I was seventeen.
When I was eighteen I got £33.70.
My mum never took any board but now I've got this job I'll have to start paying her.
I buy clothes from my family allowance.
Now that I've finished my English and don't have a tutor I'll be able to get more.
I was also paying for my moped.
And I learned to drive —mum and dad paid for my driving lessons and I paid for the driving test.
I've always been good at saving.
It's never gone through my fingers.
My sister used to borrow from me and I used to charge her interest.
My brother said that I would make a good banker.
I know I'm better off at home at the moment.
If I had a place of my own I'd have to bring Louisa around here.
I would also be lonely.
One day I will have my, own place, but not until I've got some money behind me."
PREGNANCY AND BIRTH
Pregnancy
The pregnancy test is positive.
Girls who secretly knew that they wanted a baby, or who may have been trying to have one, feel pleased and excited.
Others have a mixture of feelings which tend to become more optimistic as time goes on, but at the initial discovery, pregnancy may seem like a disaster.
As we have seen, it is not uncommon for girls to have great difficulty telling their parents or anyone about it, and they may delay this revelation for many months or even right up to when they are going into labour.
Some do not realise that they are pregnant at all, like Lorraine, who had never even started her periods.
Parents become increasingly worried as they see their daughters putting on weight, and make suggestions about diets, and in Joanne's case, fear they have developed a thyroid condition.
Often girls in this situation are not only skilful in concealing their pregnancy through the loose style of clothes they wear, but remain physically small — that is, until finally the truth is out, and suddenly their pregnancy also seems to expand, as if with relief that it can at last be public.
Not surprisingly then, pregnant teenagers are more likely to delay going to the doctor, and in one study, over a quarter had not gone until they were more than three months pregnant.
Half of these had not realised that they were pregnant, and others had not wanted to confirm their fears, or didn't see a need to go earlier, or were afraid the  doctor might tell their parents.
Becoming officially pregnant so late means that many girls do not attend antenatal classes or clinic appointments, they carry on smoking and drinking, and probably eating food that is not particularly healthy.
It is during the first few months in particular that these sorts of activities can affect the developing foetus, producing babies that may be premature, and with a low birth weight.
A significant number of the mothers I spoke to had had babies who were between four and eleven weeks premature.
Medical evidence also shows that however good the care, younger mothers (under fifteen-year olds]have an increased risk of premature labour.
In the normal way, a pregnant woman would go for regular check-ups either with her doctor or with the ante-natal clinic, the first visit being around the eighth to twelfth week.
Here a check is kept on weight; blood and urine tests are carried out; and relevant medical history is noted.
These checks are very important because they can show, for instance, if there are likely to be any difficulties with the birth which may make a Caesarean section necessary.
The blood tests also show up certain abnormalities, such as spina bifida and Downs Syndrome (mongolism).
If these can be detected early enough, then women can decide whether or not to continue the pregnancy.
This involves a special test (amniocentesis]which has to be done between sixteen and eighteen weeks.
Debbie, who has a daughter with spina bifida, had not had this test and only discovered her baby's condition when she was nearly eight months pregnant.
One study showed that about half of teenage mothers did not go to the antenatal clinic until the third or fourth month, almost one in five had waited until the fifth month of pregnancy, and a few did not go at all.
These later attenders tended to be women who were younger, single, working class.
For girls who had delayed making their pregnancy  public, at the time it seemed impossible to tell anyone, but afterwards they all wished that they had.
Part of this was because they now felt they had missed being pregnant, missed the recognition and attention this involves, and simply the enjoyment it can bring.
Lisa, who didn't tell anyone until she was about eight months pregnant said:
You should tell people straightaway that you're pregnant, because that is one thing I regret, not being able to enjoy my pregnancy properly.
I mean I couldn't have, what with being sick and everything, but still I would have liked to tell everyone that I was pregnant.
Just being able to enjoy it more instead of being scared and worrying when people were going to find out.
It's going to happen, so you might as well tell them.
It's easier said than done, but I would if I could go back over it again.
Antenatal classes can be extremely helpful in explaining aspects of pregnancy, labour and birth; and in providing useful exercises and advice, and practice in baby care; and information on the type of pain relief available, what to ask for, and when.
These classes are usually run by local midwives, health visitors, or within the local health centre, or by the National Childbirth Trust.
They are unpopular with teenage mothers, however, either because they don't see the importance of going, or sometimes because they have been deterred by their experiences at classes where the other mothers are older and married.
This had happened to Shirley: "I went along to one and I felt so different.
It was like people were looking at me and guessing my age and looking to see if I had a ring on my finger.
I never went back after that."
This had also been Marie's experience, even though she had got married when she was four months pregnant:
I was the youngest one there.
They'd all had kids before.
I thought it would make a difference being a Mrs but it  didn't.
I didn't talk to anyone there.
They didn't talk to me.
They made me feel like a dirty slag and serve me right for getting pregnant.
I suppose I was paranoid.
Plus I felt guilty at getting pregnant.
I wondered if anybody dew I'd got pregnant before I was married.
I was only sixteen, just come out of school, straight into antenatal classes.
Antenatal classes could be more sensitive to their younger members, and fortunately some classes do exist specifically geared towards this age group.
At a hospital in Manchester, the midwives had just started a Teenage Parent Club.
From a local survey they found that many girls of this age were very frightened in labour, which made it worse, and that they had little idea about coping with a tiny baby.
But they were very reluctant to attend antenatal classes and so this club had been set up in response to this.
Here the girls meet the hospital staff and get used to the relevant delivery rooms and wards; they learn about the changes to expect in their bodies; are advised on appropriate food and clothes; and practise childcare.
They are told about maternity grants and other benefits, the possibility of having a social worker, and lots of other useful information.
Sadly, pregnant girls were not yet flocking to this club, even after a launch day at the civic centre, and radio advertising.
More community midwives are needed to persuade girls to come, but the most effective way at present is word of mouth.
The initial publicity had, however, encouraged some pregnant girls along, including Sara, who had started coming when she was twenty-four weeks pregnant, and now had three-and-a-half weeks left to go.
On the day I was there, she had brought along two of her friends who were in a much earlier stage of pregnancy.
If you go to the normal parents' class you get -Oh yeah  —another one, doesn't know a lot, just got pregnant for the fun of it, but the midwives, Ros and Maureen, they treat you different.
I've learnt a lot of things —how to bath a baby, feed a baby, it sounds dead simple but when you get that baby in your hands you're shaking.
Especially because mine was crying —I think the one I bathed was only a day-and-a-half old, so it was a bit scary.
We did pain relief and I did all my exercises, had films, talks, books that give me advice and everything, dead good they are.
And that's why I got my two friends to come.
I used to work with them before I finished at the same YTS scheme.
I talked them into it because at first they were scared, one because they thought they'd get docked for it —but they said we could have half a day off for it and not get docked —and also because they thought Ros and Maureen were going to be looking down on them,"Oh, you're only young girls', things like that.
Like the midwife who came to see me said, "Ooh, you're only seventeen" , and I looked at her —how old do you have to be to have a baby —forty or something?
It's happened and you can't condemn me for it.
And when you go to your antenatal clinic, they just look at you and look at your finger to see if you've got a ring on, and then give you a dirty look, and I think, Oh, get lost.
It also gave Sara a sympathetic outlet when she was feeling low:
If I'm down or arguing with one of the family, because I've been ratty through not being well, then Pat the physiotherapist, I have a talk with her and she talks to me and it helps me to talk to somebody else.
Like at home I couldn't talk to my mum about it, and I couldn't talk to my boyfriend about it.
The one person I could talk to was Pat and she was great.
Some teenage mothers get on fine at the usual antenatal classes, but others, like Sara and her friends, obviously do find it much more helpful to go somewhere with people in a similar situation so they can share experiences and gain a sense of friendship and solidarity.
It can become a pleasant social occasion rather than a chore.
Teenage antenatal classes exist in quite a few hospitals now, but there are not nearly enough.
One aspect that not all antenatal classes give enough attention to is the special needs of black mothers, and those from other ethnic groups whose family patterns, food and diets may be different.
And according to one study of young black mothers, they are often deterred from attending clinics and classes because of judgemental and discriminatory treatment by hospital and community staff.
If a young woman is feeling fit and healthy, it is very tempting to skip the effort of going to the clinic, having to make an appointment long in advance and then waiting in long queues but it is extremely important to have regular checkups for the sake of both your health and that of your baby.
Experiences of being pregnant
Once the early shock is over, if girls have come to terms with being pregnant, there are a lot of enjoyable things about it, as many girls have found.
In common with a lot of other mothers-to-be, they find they are blooming with good health, they get a lot of extra care and attention, and they feel special:
I loved being pregnant.
I am a small and thin person and being fat was great!
(Debbie, pregnant at sixteen)
My pregnancy was really good.
I felt sickly occasionally but I felt really happy throughout my pregnancy.I used  to be quite shy but since I found out I was pregnant I felt very confident in myself.
I suppose I was proud of myself.
I found my changing body very comical at times.
It just looked so out of proportion and we had a few giggles about it.
(Lucy, pregnant at sixteen)
Apart from being sick and having to keep going to the loo I loved being pregnant.
It felt so special carrying this little person inside me.
It was so wonderful every time she kicked although towards the end I got terrible backache and I was so tired all the time.
(Wendy, pregnant at sixteen)
I must admit I did like being pregnant.
I myself felt special.
I used to love it when he kicked me and enjoyed just sitting and feeling the bulge.
I felt at peace.
(Marie, pregnant at sixteen)
I felt wonderful, healthy, excited and very feminine carrying the baby.
I didn't care about my body changing shape.
I thought it looked lovely.
(Noreen, pregnant at fourteen)
I felt my lump quite comforting, soothing.
I liked just lying there after the antenatal classes, holding my lump and feeling the baby move gently.
(Denise, pregnant at seventeen)
Everyone has a different experience of pregnancy, and some are troubled by less pleasurable effects like backache, morning sickness, fainting, and high blood pressure, as well as other physical or emotional changes:
I was happy that I was having my own baby but sometimes I used to cry for nothing and I was easily upset.
I was ever so surprised when my belly started blowing up, it always felt so hard, and it was great to feel my baby moving about inside.
I couldn't walk until he was born, I had very high blood pressure and I used to get very bad swollen ankles.
Where I was stretching I used to itch all over and I used to get very upset.
(Bridget, pregnant at thirteen)
I had morning sickness all the way through my pregnancy.
I looked awful and felt awful most of the time.
(Lisa, pregnant at sixteen)
Growing large and pregnant conflicts with the pressure on women to look slim and beautiful.
Expecting a baby is obviously a special state of "fatness" which can be enjoyed.
As Debbie observed, she could eat and eat and not worry about getting fat.
And also there can be something especially beautiful about a pregnant body that many men and women appreciate.
But some of these young mothers did not like losing their figures, and also found the stretch marks particularly hard to deal with.
Stretch marks are a normal reaction to the skin stretching to accommodate the growing baby, and fade away in time.
Some people have them more conspicuously than others, and if you are not expecting, and even if you are, it can be a very upsetting aspect of pregnancy, as several mothers had found:
The thing I hated most about my pregnancy was the hot weather and my body changing I had quite a nice figure before but now along with the stretch marks, I hate my body.
(Elaine, pregnant at fifteen)
For Anna, pregnant at eighteen) her stretch marks had had quite a devastating effect on her by the time she was eight months pregnant.
Some were up to an inch wide and ten or eleven inches long.
These have covered my thighs my calves, my belly, my backside and my breasts.
 "They'll fade," people say.
I know they will, but only from purple to pink or  silver.
They will always be there.
At the moment I look as if someone has slashed wildly at me with a knife.
If this had been the case I may possibly have been offered some cosmetic surgery, but this won't happen because it's a natural part of pregnancy.
However natural it is, it still has the effect of making me cry when I catch sight of myself and nurses have visibly cringed upon seeing them.
As well as being unsightly, they have also been very painful, resulting in my not being able to wear tights, etc. and often not being able to touch them to rub various oils and ointments on them to ease the pain.
This may all sound very trivial but it has the effect of making me almost hate my body to the extent that I feel ashamed to let John see me naked.
There was also a stage where I deeply resented the foetus, although now I think I have killed this feeling.
Being pregnant is hard work, no one told me that.
I didn't suffer from morning sickness but I've become an insomniac over the months and had the good fortune (or so they tell me) to have a healthy foetus that started kicking me at thirteen weeks.
Two months after having her son, Anna still had her stretch marks:
People tell me they'll fade and that I shouldn't worry about them, or that I shouldn't bother about things like that when I've got a baby, but I can't help it.
It's made me lose a lot of self-confidence in myself
Amongst the girls I talked to, experiences of pregnancy were on the whole mixed.
There was a lot of enjoyment to be had, but this was tempered by the anxieties and fears that many had felt during earlier stages, when girls were worrying about parents' reactions, or trying to conceal the pregnancy.
Not always knowing what to expect makes some of the physical and emotional changes associated with pregnancy harder to deal with —things like feeling more  vulnerable, being easily upset, and crying a lot, are easier to take if you know this is a normal, if disturbing, aspect of pregnancy.
If girls have support from their family and from their boyfriends, this can make an enormous difference to this experience, but if they are on their own, it can be very tough.
Birth
The sort of.
birth you have cannot easily be predicted.
Everyone is different, and although obviously some birth complications can be foreseen, such as if the baby is in an unusual position, or if the mother is particularly small and slim, in general, every expectant mother goes into labour hoping for the best, hoping that she'll be the one to have a quick and easy time.
However the labour accompanying the birth of a first baby is often quite long and can be difficult, and this is true whatever the age of the mother.
Learning about both pregnancy and birth at antenatal classes can be a great help.
The fear that many teenage mothers have when they are wheeled into the delivery room makes the experience more painful and terrifying than it need be.
The length of labour of the mothers in this book ranged from about five hours to twenty-six hours.
Although a few had had quick and relatively painless births, many had found it a very painful experience.
Some knew about the various methods of pain relief available, but others had no idea at all, and this made them feel even less in control of what was happening to them.
The three basic methods are gas and air, which many had used, some so enthusiastically that they ended up either very sleepy, or as one said, "as high as a kite" .
Then there are pethidine injections, which are also quite commonly given to lessen the pain.
The strongest method is the epidural, which is a form of local anaesthetic, injected in the base of the spine, which numbs  the body from the waist down.
This gives complete pain relief and is helpful for women having a long labour or who are getting very distressed, but it has disadvantages in that it obviously makes women feel quite passive and helpless.
It also means that they cannot feel the contractions, so the midwife has to tell them when to push, which can take longer.
Sometimes there can be complications, and forceps have to be used to pull the baby out, or other more serious problems arise and a Caesarean section is performed.
When the baby is born, sometimes the vaginal entrance will not stretch enough for its head to pass through.
In this case a local anaesthetic is used and a little cut made in the perineum.
This is called an episiotomy.
After the baby is born, the cut is stitched up and heals.
It is quite a normal procedure, and for two mothers who had quite easy births, having these stitches had been the worst thing about it.
Every experience of childbirth is different, so the accounts by teenage mothers that follow illustrate just a few of these.
Some had relatively easy births, others were very painful and often traumatic.
Jane had a short and fairly easy time, as did Folasade, who had told no one but her boyfriend that she was pregnant:
My pregnancy was lovely.
I was skinny but I'd never been so healthy in my life.
And I had a two-hour labour.
No stitches.
I just had him.
They left me alone because they thought I had hours to go.
They hadn't bothered to check my cervix.
With a first baby you're a long time, especially with my build.
But I started labour and just had him in the room.
The nurses happened to come in.
I was sitting up and I said, "I feel a bit funny" .
I just looked down and his hair was sticking out.
They said,"Don't panic.
Stay there.
Don't move!"
It was painful and the more painful it became the nearer I knew I was getting.
So I thought, this is so bad something's happening.
Then it started to slow down, and I was sick.
I had nothing else to do, so I just started pushing.
That hurt, but it wasn't horrible pain.
So when they came back they said, "Push" , and out he came.
That was two hours of pain, the whole thing might have been a little longer.
But I got to hospital by half-past eight in the morning and by eleven o'clock I'd had him.
I was relaxed and I wasn't worried or scared.
(Jane)
As soon as I'd woken up, I started to get strange pains in my stomach.
I'm quite a lazy person so I ignored them.
I carried on.
Everyone was wandering around the house getting everything ready for my uncle who had come over from Nigeria.
I got dressed and they got slightly worse.
About eight o'clock they were getting very bad so I went to bed.
I told everyone I wasn't well.
Then my sister came in.
We share a room.
By that time they were bad, so I told her I thought I was having a miscarriage.
She didn't even know I was pregnant.
She raced to the bathroom and got a bowl of water and a towel.
I said I didn't need it.
So she said, "Shall I tell Mummy?" 
I said, "No" .
I said I was thirsty so she went to get me a drink.
I had to get up because when I walked I found it was easier.
I walked into the bathroom and by then labour had started.
So I told her, "Go and get Mum." 
Our house is only a flat, it's not very long, and from the time it took my sister to leave me, go to the kitchen and tell my mum and bring her back, the baby was in my arms.
I was standing up, so I suppose that helped.
So the baby was already out.
I had one leg up on the bath and I had the baby.
It was weird because as soon as she came out I started to wash her.
You know the white stuff they have on them, I thought -Oh, you're a bit dirty aren't you, so  I started washing her.
My mum came in and said, "What is this?" 
You can imagine what I said.
I said, "Oh, that's a baby." 
The umbilical cord and the afterbirth were still inside me, so she began to yank this baby and I said "Excuse me, I've still got a bit inside me." 
Thinking about it now, it's funny.
But it was very uncomfortable at the time.
She took me into my brother's room, he hadn't come back yet.
She stripped the bed and lay me on the bed.
All the films you see, they never show the mother having the afterbirth.
I didn't know you had to deliver that as well.
Then Mum started saying, "Push." 
I said, "Push what?" 
She didn't tell me what I was doing, so all right, I pushed, and I gave birth to the afterbirth and thought, Oh, that's why she wanted me to push.
It was all very innocent.
I didn't really know what was going on after I'd had the baby.
Mum just wrapped her up, rang the ambulance, and I was taken to hospital.
(Folasade)
I had a show about 11.30 a.m.
I was pleased as I was already a week-and-a-half overdue.
I thought it wasn't worth just sitting around waiting for something to happen and I had already arranged to go to my friend's house so I went out.
I didn't really feel a thing until about 5.30 p.m. when I began to feel a sort of tightening of the stomach, not a pain.
So my friend rang the hospital so that they were ready for me.
They told me not to bother to go in until the contractions became regular.
I went home from my friend's about 6.30 p.m.
Not a lot was happening and I was really tired so I decided to go to bed.
My mum got home from work about 10.30 p.m. and asked if I was all right, but I told her that I thought it was a false alarm.
I woke up about 12.30 that night, and I really did know I was in labour by this time.
I was really shaking.
I called my mum and dad and asked if they could take me to the hospital.
I got there and they asked me why I didn't get there sooner.
I just said I was asleep.
By this time the pain was really bad.
I think the worst thing was that I couldn't stop shaking.
I wasn't really afraid, I just held onto my Mum's hand.
About 2.30 a.m.
I asked if they could give me something for the pain.
They gave me a pethidine injection which just made me feel a bit sleepy.
I had Stuart about 3.55 a.m. which I'm told wasn't bad for my first child.
I think I was expecting it all to be much worse, but I enjoyed it and could honestly say that it was one of the best days of my life.
(Shirley)
I'd been given a date for the baby to arrive but that came and went, but then I woke up in the early hours of the following Friday.
I often used to get stomach-ache if I hadn't had enough to eat so when I woke up with a pain I thought maybe I was hungry again, but because the baby was due any day I thought it best to tell my mum.
She was quite calm and told me to get a watch and try and time how far apart the pains were.
So I sat in bed with a slice of bread and jam in one hand and a watch in the other, trying to time the pains.
They didn't hurt exactly, it was more of a niggly pain but I worked it out to about once every four minutes or so and my mum said we'd better ring the hospital.
The hospital said I'd better go in and sent an ambulance round for me.
It's funny, but as me, my mum and dad, all piled into the back of the ambulance, I remember thinking it was a shame it was so early in the morning and there wasn't anyone around to see me go.
At the hospital I was put into a side room and a nurse came and examined me.
It was about six in the morning and the nurse thought I would have the baby by about twelve o'clock.
I'd heard stories of women being in  labour for twelve or fifteen hours with their first child so I was quite pleased.
The nurse was wrong.
The doctors had already decided I should have an epidural for the birth.
The baby was quite big for me because I was so small.
I didn't know what an epidural was, but I knew I wouldn't have any pain so it was okay by me.
I had the epidural injection in the base of my spine and then I was all rigged up to a machine so the nurses could monitor the baby's movements.
The epidural numbs you from the waist down so I couldn't feel any of the contractions.
By now I think mum and dad had gone home but they'd rang Ian and he'd come straight to the hospital and sat with me.
I felt okay, I had no pains, except for a belt around my waist.
It was attached to the monitor so the nurses could see what was happening to the baby and every time I had a contraction my stomach went rock hard so the belt dug into me.
It was quite painful, especially as the time went on and the contractions were coming closer together.
But the nurse couldn't move it and I had to put up with it.
I did make a bit of fuss about it and the nurse told me to stop moaning.
Then unfortunately for me, the nurses forgot to top up the epidural injection and the pain killer started to wear off.
I could feel every contraction and it was agony.
The nurses topped it up again as soon as they realised but it took time to go through and have any effect so I had about twenty minutes of real labour pains.
up until then I still wasn't too worried, but I think then it started to dawn on me that this wasn't going to be much fun and I felt a bit scared.
I didn't know what to expect and no-one had really told me.
Perhaps they didn't want to scare me and thought it better not to say too much, but I wish they had said something.
The epidural was working and I couldn't feel any real pain apart from the belt and I was lying there watching the monitor shoot up and down as the  baby moved around.
Then suddenly a doctor walked in all dressed up in his green gown and a face mask and said, "Hello, this is it then," and a nurse took my ankles and shoved them into some stirrups and covered me up in all this green cloth.
In the doorway there were about six or seven young student doctors all in their white coats smiling at me, and the nurses were milling around and talking.
I wondered what the hell was going on and I suddenly felt absolutely terrified.
I don't remember anyone of them saying anything to me.
They knew what they were doing, but I didn't.
I wanted my mum or Ian, but my mum was at home and Ian had been told to go into the waiting room.
I screamed and cried all the way through the birth.
I had a nurse either side of me telling me to push, but I couldn't push.
I was numb from the waist down and couldn't feel anything.
In the end the doctor had to cut me and use forceps to drag the baby out.
They took the baby and I remember asking if it was okay and did I have a boy or a girl.
I'd always wanted a little girl, but one of the students at the door told me I had a beautiful little boy and he was fine.
I was so relieved it was all over and my baby was alright and I held him for the first time.
He was gorgeous.
(Mary]
Sometimes when it is not possible to have a normal birth, a Caesarean section is performed.
This may be because the mother's pelvis is too small, or because the baby is in an awkward position in the womb or gets in distress.
Lesley started haemorrhaging before her baby was due.
The speed at which everything then happened made it all seem rather unreal:
I just couldn't get comfortable.
The most comfortable position was to stand up.
I made the bed and was putting the clothes in the cupboard.
I sat down, and then stood  up, and there was blood everywhere.
I had two months to go.
At the hospital I got changed and was in the admittance room and I heard my dad outside saying, "Do you want me to sign for anything?" 
I had this idea they had booked me in for a Caesarean because I'm small, but hadn't told me.
They took me down to the labour room.
They put monitors on me, and injections in my arms.
They said that's just in case the baby comes early, that's all they said.
And then they got me to sign a form, they didn't say what it was for.
A doctor came and said, "You'll probably be having the baby today." 
But nobody told me.
And they sent Alan off for his dinner in the hospital canteen and when he came back I'd gone.
I just remember them wheeling me down to this room and going to sleep.
I woke up and I was aching.
And he was sitting there.
I said, "What's happening?" they said, "You've had a baby." 
I said "What is it?" 
I thought that being pregnant had been a dream and I'd woken up.
I had no idea I'd had a baby.
I didn't know what the hell was going on.
Everybody kept coming in.
I kept going to sleep and waking up.
It was the next afternoon that I first saw her, she was in an incubator.
Tubes and wires everywhere.
She only weighed three pounds.
Lesley's baby daughter was premature, in common with quite a number of other teenage mothers.
She therefore had to go into Intensive Care, as do other babies who may have had birth complications or other problems.
This may mean that a mother is left on her own in the ward, while all the other mothers are sitting there nursing their babies.
This can be a disconcerting and distressing experience, and some young mothers are not confident enough to ask to see their babies and may end up feeling as though they have not really had one.
Nickie's baby was eleven weeks premature.
She had not even had the support of her mother, sister, or boyfriend while she gave birth, and the baby had to stay in hospital for several weeks after she returned alone to her bedsit:
I had a little stomach-ache and I thought it was something I'd eaten.
It didn't occur to me that I was in labour because it was too early.
But the thing I hated most was that there was nobody there.
All these other women in labour, other girls had a mum or a sister there.
I had nobody.
I phoned my sister and said, "I'm in labour" , but she said, "I'm working tomorrow and I can't come." 
I was really frightened.
People told me it is like a period pain, and to start with it was very like a period pain.
And then later I had an epidural because the pain was so bad.
And there was nobody there.
I keep thinking to myself that if somebody had been there I would have managed, but there wasn't.
It lasted twenty-two hours.
I've never felt anything like that.
She came out and they lay her on my stomach.
They let me hold her for a few minutes and then they took her away upstairs to Special Care.
I saw her at six the following evening.
I kept saying, "Can I see her?" 
 "No, we're busy, I'll get someone to take you up in a minute." 
I finally got upstairs and she had all these tubes attached to her, it was horrible.
She looked so tiny.
I'd seen premature babies but never a baby that small.
She couldn't breathe properly, I thought she was going to die.
After all the tubes had gone my family came to see her, before that they didn't want to come and see her.
It was embarrassing because the nurses kept saying,"Where's the baby's father?
Where's your mum?"
I'll never forget being in hospital.
I was in a ward with four beds and all these women had their babies beside them and I didn't.
That really did hurt.
This woman came round to take pictures.
They look at you and they assume, if the baby's not there, your baby must have  died.
They just ignore you as if you're not there.
Finally I said, "She's in Special Care, she's not dead!" 
It was a long while before I could even change her nappy, and putting clothes on, you had to disconnect all the wires, put the clothes on and put them all back.
After having a baby, the usual feelings are relief, joy, tiredness, and overwhelming love for the tiny baby.
Teenage mothers are no different from any other mothers in this respect.
But some get very depressed.
Studies have shown evidence that teenagers may be particularly susceptible to depression alter childbirth.
This may be associated with financial or housing problems, loneliness, problems with relationships, or difficulties coping with the responsibility of having a tiny baby.
A few of the mothers talking here had also experienced quite severe postnatal depression and detachment from their babies.
Joanne and Diane were two of these.
Joanne had delayed telling anyone until four days before she went into labour.
She had a difficult labour as, having no details, the curvature of her spine was not detected.
She had very high blood pressure, and was given two epidurals that didn't work.
At one point, her sister, who was there with her, was almost asked to choose between her and the baby.
Her daughter was taken away to Special Care, and she, like Nickie, hated seeing fathers come in looking pleased while she sat alone on her bed, waiting for her mother.
I had terrible postnatal depression.
I used to just sit and cry.
up until she was about four months old.
If anybody said anything to upset me I'd just burst out crying.
That wasn't like me.
At the slightest mention of her father's name I got upset, and even when people said isn't she a gorgeous little baby.
She cried when she first came home.
I used to get so cross with her.
I think if Mum hadn't been here I'd have done something to her.
I  thought it annoyed Dad, and we'd get kicked out.
The first six weeks I didn't want to know.
She wasn't mine, nothing to do with me.
It took me quite a long time to get over it.
I think I was so detached when I first had her because of the mental blockage, and the labour, and the birth was so messy and horrible.
In a way I blamed her for it, and to start with I think I hated her.
I thought she was going to pin me down and that would be it.
I'd been so used to my, freedom.
The mental blockage just carried on.
It wasn't until she was really ill that I realised she was mine and I loved her more than anything.
From then on I just didn't look back.
She's mine and that was it.
The birth of Diane's son was "the worst experience of my life" .
She found it very painful indeed.
And despite having had a good, healthy pregnancy, she had already started getting depressed:
In the last month I got depressed.
Suddenly I felt detached from the baby.
All through the pregnancy I felt special, then suddenly all my friends didn't want to know me, only one friend, Karen, and she made me feel worse, as she was so glamorous and I was sitting there all fat.
When he was born I felt detached.
I heard him cry immediately and the doctor say it's a boy, but I didn't feel part of it.
He was put in my arms and immediately he stopped crying but it was so strange I didn't feel anything.
In the early weeks after I had him I suffered from postnatal depression.
I felt as if the slightest thing, even feeding the baby, was too much.
I was extremely tired and the night feeds really got me down.
I couldn't feel anything for him and sometimes even resented him.
I'd feed him and clothe him but not because I loved him.
I had to, to keep him alive.
It affects you funny.
One  minute I was happy and the next I was depressed.
I was crying all the time.
My mum got fed up with it.
I'd read all about it but when you've actually got it, it's horrible.
Nobody talked about it in the classes, only the birth and the pregnancy, not about the baby afterwards, or how you will feel.
I went through a long period of thinking of having him adopted.
Now I am very ashamed of the way I felt but at the time my feelings were very strong.
As time went on these feelings wore off.
Now I love him very much, he is a little person in his own right.
Now I feel like any other mother.
I love him, I play with him, I feel normal.
I rush round to the health visitor if something is wrong with him.
I'd never do that before.
When I had depression I went to a self-help group.
I still attend as I do get days when I feel depressed.
I'm beginning to cope and adjust gradually.
I've been depressed before, at not having a job I suppose.
Even now though, I still get depressed.
Some teenage mothers complain bitterly about the attitudes and treatment they receive in antenatal clinics and classes and in hospital, which are sometimes patronising and even rude.
They have been treated as people who did not know what they were doing, have made some terrible mistake and are wasting their lives.
They are quite rightly upset and offended as they have usually made their own decisions and are going through with them.
Doreen, a nineteen-year-old mother of three young children, felt strongly about this after her experiences, and correctly points out that it was her own choice to have her children, and she should be given the same respect as any older mother:
When I went to the antenatal clinic for my very first check-up, this elderly doctor burst through the door, looked at me and said, "You shouldn't be having this  baby, you should be giving it away to somebody less fortunate." 
I felt upset because I wanted the baby.
I saw this programme, about girls of fifteen who had had abortions, and they said the nurses made them feel they shouldn't be having abortions, they should keep the baby.
Yet when I was having my baby they made me feel as though I shouldn't be having it.
That I should have had an abortion or given it away.
You can't win.
I was fifteen, and the nurses treated me as though I shouldn't have been there.
They stuck me in a ward with four older women who were married.
Theyspoketo them nicely but if I asked them for anything it was as though they couldn't be bothered.
And the other patients didn't know whether to speak to me or not.
I felt really out of place.
A year later when I had Katie and I was married, I didn't want"to go to hospital in case I got the same treatment, but they were totally different.
Just because I had a wedding ring on.
They talked to me, I couldn't understand the difference.
It was all the same nurses and midwives.
They remembered me from the previous year too.
They seem to think that teenage mothers can't look after children properly.
If I had felt that I couldn't cope with him, I probably would have had him adopted, or had an abortion, but it was my choice to have him.
SUBSTITUTE HOMES
If you are young and pregnant but your family is unwilling or unable to accommodate you and a baby, and you don't have a boyfriend or husband to look alter you, your only alternatives may be a Mother and Baby Home, or less frequently, some fostering arrangement.
Traditionally, Mother and Baby Homes were religious-based, charity-run institutions that took in girls who had "fallen" , and cared for them during their pregnancy and for some time afterwards.
Parents put their daughters in there to hide them away"from the public eye until the baby was born and adopted.
This attitude has changed somewhat over the years and there are now fewer homes than there used to be.
Those that still exist continue to be quite well-subscribed.
They are usually open to girls from around the age of fourteen upwards.
Sometimes girls are there because they are very young or they are homeless, sometimes it is because their parents cannot cope at home with the responsibility for them and a newborn baby, and in other cases a home takes in and assesses girls whose ability to look after their baby is in question.
The girls and women who go there are not necessarily teenagers, some may be in their twenties and thirties.
Finding such a home is usually done through social workers or pregnancy counselling agencies.
Some homes are still religious and dependent on the church, some are run by local authorities, and others are a combination of both.
The Catholic Church, for instance, runs a network of such homes called Life Houses as part of  its constant effort to persuade pregnant girls not to have abortions.
The Church of England is also responsible for some homes, but unmarried mothers have never been a very popular cause for charity funding, and therefore these often depend mainly on local funding.
A few of the teenage mothers in this book had been in such a home.
Sheila stayed in one until her daughter was born and adopted; Denise left London to live in the West Country on her own, and organised a place in one for herself and her eight-week-old baby; and Lisa went into one when she was about six months pregnant.
Another kind of Mother and Baby Home looks alter girls who, in addition to being pregnant, have particular social or medical problems.
One of these is run in a large old house in its own grounds in North London which has been used as a private Mother and Baby Home since the late 1920s.
It is a Church of England Home, now funded mainly by local boroughs and minimally by church donations.
It caters for up to fifteen girls and babies, from fourteen years old upwards.
In its earlier days, pregnant girls would come there because they were homeless, they would stay six weeks before and after the birth and their babies were almost invariably adopted.
This pattern has been changing; there is a tendency now for girls to keep their babies, and over the last year or so girls have been sent there for a variety of other reasons, but essentially so that they can be assessed on their ability to care for their child.
Girls may be there simply because they are young and things are not working out at home or with their boyfriends, or they may be designated as "ESN" (educationally sub-normal), or have had previous children that they have lost through negligence or ignorance.
A significant number have been brought up in children's homes themselves.
It is the staff's role to give an assessment on the girl and her basic care of the baby and her anticipation of its needs.
It also"gives girls some breathing space from all their other problems.
The average stay is five to six months, but sometimes it may be as much as a year.
It is the babies who come first here, and the mother a close second.
As well as being taught the basic techniques of childcare, some girls may also need to learn how to give and take love, if they have come from environments in which they experienced very little love and affection.
There are very few rules, girls can get up and go to bed when they like, and have visitors up to ten o'clock at night.
The main concern is getting a good routine with the baby.
All the girls have social workers, or probation officers, or welfare officers.
The present superintendent estimated at this time that about half of all girls coming there had never really had any home life, or had been in care, and believed that this cycle would repeat itself: "as high as 85 per cent of these babies, it's going to happen to them.
And then again I think it is escapism for some of them to get pregnant where there's so much unemployment, it's something of their own to be proud about.
So I think it is a circle."
It is possible that Barbara, a sixteen-year-old West Indian girl living in the Home with her two-week-old baby may get trapped in that circle.
She, together with her brother and sister, had been in care —a children's home on the south coast —from the age of four until ten years old.
Unlike the mothers of some of the other children, her mother came to see them quite a lot, and she remembers it not being so bad — "once you get used to it, it's just like your home" .
When she got pregnant her social worker booked her into here, as there was not much space at her home and Barbara agreed that it wasn't right that her mother should have her back with a baby as well.
She had already left home several times to stay with her boyfriend.
As she was still at school, she had been assigned a tutor but this had stopped as they did not get on.
Although she was  looking forward to leaving the home, she felt she wasn't ready to go quite yet, and her baby son had been harder to cope with than she'd expected.
After I get out of here, I'll just have my flat and I'll continue.
Its not as if everything's done for you here.
You have to look after your baby yourself here, so it's the same when you leave.
I'm not saying it's easy.
He's a hard job.
It's all right here.
When I first came I couldn't stand it.
I never used to stay here more than two days.
They used to have to drag me back.
But when you get used to it, it's quite an all right place.
For every girl they take in there are many more who end up in bed and breakfast where they are more likely to suffer from living alone in unsuitable accommodation.
Often it is girls from already deprived backgrounds who end up in such circumstances, and who are less able to cope on their own.
After staying here, most girls, apart from the very young ones, go off to their own flats.
A few go to a kind of "halfway house" , of which there should be many more, which usually consists of four or five small flatlets which girls either share or occupy on their own.
They look after themselves, but there is always someone responsible around if they have any problems.
Although most girls can't wait to leave the home for their own place to do their own thing, some always come back to show what they've achieved, or to say it wasn't so bad in the home after all.
LISA
Lisa is eighteen and now lives on the nineteenth floor of a block of London flats with her nine-month-old daughter.
Her Grenadan boyfriend, the baby's father, lives there too, and gives her a substantial amount of his wages from his clerical job.
He is very helpful financially"but does not  he! p Lisa with much else.
She was sixteen and doing some 0-level retakes at further education college when she became pregnant.
The year before she had missed some exams because her mother had chucked her out of the house for coming in too late at night.
She returned home, but she and her mother did not get on very well.
Her parents had divorced when she was fourteen, her father had been in and out of prison, was often alcoholic, and had occasionally beaten up her mother.
After her divorce her mother suffered a virtual nervous breakdown and had to look after her and her sisters for a while.
Lisa kept putting off telling her mother she was pregnant.
 "I know it was silly really, she'd already thrown me out so she couldn't do much worse really." 
She put it off because Christmas was coming up, and then Tony her boyfriend wanted to take her to Paris and she knew if she revealed her pregnancy she wouldn't be allowed to go, so she said nothing.
 "Then March came and I thought I cant tell her now, I'm too far gone, she'll go mad." 
But her mother had already begun to suspect and sat her down and asked her.
She was about twenty-four weeks pregnant by this time.
She had not told Tony either, because she knew he'd want her to have an abortion, and she would have refused, and this would have split them up.
She agreed to have an adoption to keep the peace with her mother.
Lisa always knew she did not really want her baby adapted, and before she was even born had decided against it.
Her father had to be told; Tony was terrified of this joint meeting but it went all right.
Lisa was always his favourite and he seemed favourably impressed that Tony had stayed around.
Lisa had given him the choice of staying with her, or going off but she insisted he decide then as she didn't want him leaving in the middle of it all.
He chose to stay, although it hasn't always worked out well.
Her mother thought it was better for her not to be at home as there was not much space, so the following week they saw the social worker and it was arranged that she go to a house run by the Catholic anti-abortion organisation LIFE.
This was chosen more because it was available rather than for religious reasons.
"Two weeks later I was ready to go to a place I didn't know, and where I knew no one.
I was very upset and scared.
When I arrived the housemother showed me around.
There were five bedrooms, one for each girl.
We shared the toilets, bathroom, living room and kitchen.
It was a lovely big house with a big garden out the back.
I was told the rules, there were not that many and most were sensible.
No smoking upstairs, no pets, no visitors, and there was a cleaning rota.
The housemother didn't live with us, she lived down the road.
That afternoon I sat in my room and unpacked my things.
I also cried a lot.
At the time there were only three other girls in the house.
It felt a bit lonely, the first night I was crying upstairs because all my family came, and me and my sister are really close and it was upsetting to leave her.
Then a girl came upstairs and said, "Oh don't be silly, have a cry on my shoulder," and she helped me to settle down.
Then she said "Come on downstairs, Eastenders is on," so we went down and then I was all right.
Over the next two months I spent my time between staying at my boyfriend's house at weekends and the LIFE house on weekdays.
The place was a bit religious but they didn't kind of drum it into you, they used to go on about church a bit.
But some of the rules, about not having visitors, meant that all my visitors that came from London had to walk round town.
But I used to bring them in anyway, and I used to let them out the back door if the housemother came in.
Most of the girls in there were nice.
They were all different ages.
After awhile it was nice being so far away from home, no one to moan at me.
I got used to doing what I wanted to do.
It was luxury, lovely.
We had to cook our own meals because the housemother wasn't living in; we used to do everything for ourselves.
one day I'd cook something and the next day another girl would.
We used to have some fun with that.
After I had the baby I stayed seven days in the hospital and then returned to the house.
They all thought she was gorgeous and they were all making a big fuss.
And making a fuss of me because they knew that my stitches had burst.
And like we used to bath the babies by the fire, even though it was mid-July.
You should've seen us.
I'd taken her back with a woolly suit, mitts, hat, booties, everything, in the middle of July.
I was scared she'd get a cold!
They didn't really teach us anything at the house, you just learned for yourself through being there.
Once there was a couple of girls who had had their babies and they'd say to you, "Change the baby for us while I run upstairs and get so-and-so" or "Will you feed the baby for me a minute?" or "Can you make up some feeds?" 
We all helped each other.
I knew everything, they couldn't believe it at the hospital.
They said, "You've got to have a lesson on how to make up bottles" , so I said, "I already know, there's no need" and they said, "We want to make sure" .
So I made up a couple of bottles for them and they said "Oh." .
After I had the baby, things got bad.
Tony let me down time after time.
Every time we arranged to come to London he would decide he had other things to do.
When I did come he would go out and leave me in, just me, the baby, and four walls.
I hated him for that.
In January I received my flat, a nice two-bedroomed flat.
But things got even worse between me and Tony.
We even split up for a while.
I took him hack because I love him and can't do  without him, so now I'm back to square one.
I can cope with him and everyday life now.
I go to a mother and toddler group nearby.
I have a new set of friends and something to look forward to everyday.
At the moment I have no plans for the future except I want what's best for my little girl.
She comes first before everything."
Fostering a teenage mother
There is another alternative for young girls who are pregnant and homeless.
This is to be fostered.
It is an option that is not very often used, either through choice or simply because it is not much publicised.
It is obviously different from fostering a small child, because there may be far more potential for personality clashes as young women try to cope with having a baby and having a foster mother.
Fostering a teenage mother is therefore something we do not hear a lot about.
It came to Noreen's rescue when she was just fifteen, pregnant and living in a Children's Home with little hope of anywhere else to go.
For her it had worked well in some ways but not in others, which had mainly to do with the relationship between her and her foster mother after her son Sean was born.
In retrospect she had mixed feelings about it.
Sadly, at the end of her stay, her promised flat had failed to materialise and she had nowhere to live yet again.
She did not want to go to her parents through fear of her father and because she might run into her baby's father.
As a last resort, she and her son went back to the Children's Home.
Here she felt lonely and depressed, as it seemed as if she'd made no progress and was back in the same vicious circle again.
NOREEN
Noreen is the youngest daughter in a family of four, living in Wales.
Tragedy hit them when her youngest brother  died of cancer when he was thirteen.
It wasn't a very happy family, her father, who worked long hours as an engineer, hit her mother and sometimes the children too, but he never hit Noreen.
When she was thirteen, Gerry, who was her sister Rosie's boyfriend at the time, began to take a strong interest in her.
She found him nice and easy to talk to, and they soon started seeing each other regularly.
They were together for about two-and-a-half years and he is her son Sean's father.
Over a period of about eighteen months, her father hit her mother to such an extent that she went into a Battered Wives Home five times, taking her two daughters with her each time.
But she always went back.
Noreen and Rosie became very scared seeing their mother so frightened and in pain.
When Noreen was fourteen, it happened for the fifth time, and her mother ran out of the house.
Her father sent her and Rosie to look for her.
They never went back.
They found their mother and went to the Battered Wives Home as usual, this time for six weeks.
Rosie was very insecure and a bundle of nerves.
Noreens only reassurance lay in Gerry.
Her mother seemed to be coping this time, and they sincerely hoped she wouldn't go back, but she did.
Her mother and father saw each other in the street one day and that was it.
But Noreen and Rosie would not return and Noreen asked her mother to leave them alone.
She told her she was having a relationship with Gerry, but not that they had started sleeping together.
Her mother was upset as she didn't approve of Gerry.
At first, Noreen and Rosie stayed at, their brothers flat, and then at a friend's, but they weren't very happy there.
They went to the Social Services and saw a social worker about finding somewhere else to go.
They waited but nothing happened so they made a fuss.
The next thing they knew they were on their way to a Children's Home run by nuns about twenty miles away: "It was nice and clean, I had a bath and went to bed.
I was so happy.
We were so relieved to have got away and to somewhere nice.
I used to go home now and again.
And I used to see Gerry.
Then I stayed with him and got pregnant.
That was Christmas.
I knew from January bet I didn't know who to tell.
We never took precautions.
I knew one day I would get pregnant.
I never worried.
I told Gerry and he was shocked, but he was excited and everything.
I wondered what my parents would say.
Our social worker came and he said Mum had told him I had a boyfriend.
I thought, "Oh No!" 
But he said, "Don't sleep with him" , and all this time I was pregnant.
In the end my sister went and got Sister upstairs.
I'd been sick.
I told Sister.
I was the first person in a nun's care to get pregnant I'm famous!
She said that I had to tell my parents.
They told my social worker and he told my dad.
 "Dad said," If you have an abortion you can come home and we'll forget everything.
If you keep the baby I don't want to know."
So I said, "I'm keeping the baby." 
I was prepared to give up my parents, and wanted the baby.
I tried to explain that to the Sister.
She said, "It's in God's hands." 
Even my doctor said I ought to have an abortion, because of my age.
I was under so much pressure, I couldn't believe it.
My doctor had arranged it all and I didn't want to do it.
Nobody would help me.
In the end I just came out with it to my mum, "I'm having a baby and I'm keeping it." 
So I lost my parents as well.
Social Services didn't know where to send me to have the baby.
I couldn't stay where I was, it's one of the rules.
They could only think of another children's home.
I didn't want to go.
I went to see it but the lady running it said they couldn't take me.
Then I said to them, "Its a pity you couldn't find me foster parents" , and the social worker said, "What a brilliant idea!" 
Sometime later they came back and said, "We think  we've found somebody." 
It was a couple, with a young son.
Pam was a very down-to-earth person and they thought I'd get on well.
It was in an upper-class area.
I was from a working-class area.
He said they had a big swimming pool with the house.
I said,"I'm not going to fit in there, but I got excited about it, mainly because of the swimming pool.
I needed somewhere to live, I was six months by then.
I went to see her and she was lovely.
Pam knew about Rosie, that we'd done everything together and hadn't been split up and that it was hard for me to leave her.
We arranged that I'd go for the weekend, but I wouldn't leave my sister.
So she said, "Bring her" , so she came as well.
It was like it was all meant to happen.
We got on like a house on fire.
Nobody said, "look, she's only fifteen and she's having a baby." 
Everyone else had, or that's the impression you get.
But they made me feel great, I told them, "I want to live here." 
So a week later I moved in, and I was there for a year-and-a-half.
It was lovely.
Pam prepared me to look after the baby.
The whole time I was carrying it, I wasn't worried about the birth.
I used to talk to her about it.
I used to look at birth books and that, otherwise I wouldn't have had a clue.
I'd say, "What's going to happen there?" because I was determined that I was going to have the baby on my own.
But I didn't.
My parents wouldn't come and visit me.
Mum used to ring me but that was all.
I never had their support.
I always did everything on my own.
I got support from my sister, but I did miss them.
They never liked Gerry.
Gerry has never seen his own son.
When I went to Pam's we still kept contact.
Nobody knew this.
I still had to talk to him.
I spoke to him while Pam went to pick up her son.
But it hit me one day, he didn't care or he would have made that effort to come and see me and he didn't.
So one day I said, "I've had enough." 
I haven't seen him since.
I was fifteen-and-a-half when Sean was born.
I couldn't have coped when he-was first born, with a house or anything.
The only thing that made me go into any routine was Pam.
She has made a great difference to me, she was wonderful.
She's changed my personality altogether.
I know if I got a flat tomorrow I could cope, whereas I couldn't have before.
She was so helpful.
They don't realise how much they've done for me.
But sometimes I felt she took over and I got annoyed about it but didn't like to say.
And I didn't want to have to turn to her and say, "Is it all right if I let so-and-so take my son out?" 
I felt I had to ask her.
So until he was about a year old nobody took him out except me.
She used to sometimes say, "You shouldn't do this, they'll take him away." 
Just to get things through to me.
But she didn't need to.
I got paranoid about it.
I used to think if somebody else took him out they'd take him away.
She said it so much I really thought it.
I couldn't relax with the baby.
Everything I did she watched me.
But then when Sean was about fourteen months I couldn't take any more and I'd just do it my way, and I'm glad I did.
Also at times I was overcome by tiredness, really knackered.
I couldn't sleep.
But the whole point of Pam being there, my being fostered, was if I couldn't cope was for her to take over.
But I felt I couldn't give up, for my own sake or the baby's.
I wanted to prove I could do it.
It used to get to the point where I was completely shattered but I wouldn't ask her to take over and yet she wouldn't offer.
She was so good, yet there were so many things she didn't do which I would have thought she would have.
It's probably the same vice versa.
There were a lot of little things that I felt were wrong.
I think she did as well.
And there was her attitude towards the baby.
At home she wouldn't bother with him.
When she was out she wanted to show him off.
I just felt like his  sister sometimes.
It really got to me.
She didn't realise she was doing it.
Pam loves children but she doesn't like them when they're mobile, it gets on her nerves.
And she said she wanted me to leave —not because of me, any girl who came to her pregnant must leave when the baby's eight or nine months.
But of course they hadn't found me anywhere to live.
So I was there until Sean was seventeen months, which put a strain on all of us, I think.
The idea was, I was to go to the foster parents, stay there until the baby was born and mobile, and then move to a flat.
I just wanted somewhere to live, have the baby, then the two of us to be on our own somewhere.
And I still haven't got anywhere.
I think things could have been a lot better at Pam s.
If I got fed up with the foster parents there was no one I could turn to really.
Although I had them, I didn't have anyone.
It's the same here in the home.
It does get to the point where you think, "Oh Cod, is there no one in this world who is going to help me?" 
It does feel like that sometimes.
But I don't know what I'd do if it weren't for Sean.
He's the only thing that has kept me going.
This is a difficult time now.
I've broken down a lot more than I ever have over the last three months.
Coming back here.
This is where I started off.
At Pam's I felt I had achieved something.
I felt proud of myself.
Then to come back here, everything just goes.
Since talking to me, she has been given a council house about fifteen miles from her family home, so at last she and Sean can get on with their lives together.
