1
It was the first dead body he had ever seen.
At first it had been a shock and had made his heart beat faster.
Now he knelt down and looked at the dead girl curiously.
Something unpleasant had happened to her face; it was swollen and a greyish-blue colour, and her eyes protruded under strained shiny eyelids.
She had been very fair, a blonde, he could tell that by her pale brows and lashes, though not by her hair, for someone had clipped all that off very close to the scalp.
She lay on her back on the grass within the avenue made by the great standing stones, between the ninth and tenth of them on the northern side.
It was still early in the morning, 8.30 or so, and he supposed she had lain there all night.
The sun was shining and there was an east wind blowing which set the clouds tumbling and their shadows rushing across the shallow hills and the craggy outcroppings.
The shadows of the perpendicular stones lay parallel to one another like the teeth of a giant's comb.
It was very cold, the biting brilliant cold of April in the middle of England.
The girl was dressed in jeans, a thick sweater and a thick quilted jacket.
She had been a slender, tallish, very young girl.
He had known at once that she was dead.
Now for the first time he touched her skin, the skin of her forehead, with his fingertips.
It felt like marble, like the angel on the Tace tomb in Chesney churchyard, as cold and as unyielding.
His instinct was to lift her up and carry her down the  hillside to the village.
He was strong enough to do that without effort.
But memories came to him of books he had read and films he had seen.
She must be left there for the police, he must get the police.
What a climax to a moorland walk!
He had left home a little before eight, having put a cup of tea on the bedside table next to Lyn, walked through the village and climbed the fell.
An ordinary walk on the moor, such as he had taken two or three times a week for years and years.
What had he been thinking about?
A kitten, of all things.
He had been thinking about buying Lyn a kitten for her birthday, and as he came up to the great dolmen, had paused to look at it for the thousandth time, he had seen the bundle on the ground.
An incongruous coloured speck among the green and the grey.
A patch of red and blue with the head of a damaged doll.
After a while he got up from his knees.
He had a strange sensation that for many minutes he had been holding his breath, though he couldn't of course have been doing that.
The girl's eyes were exactly like the turquoise blue marbles he and Peter Naulls had played with as children.
He took in deep breaths of the clean, icy moorland air.
High above him a hawk hung like a pendulum.
The wind had torn open a rift in the clouds and the sky revealed was as blue as those dead eyes.
He turned his back abruptly and walked away.
He walked back the way he had come and let himself out by a gate in the railing where a metal notice planted in the earth read: Department of the Environment.
Ancient Monument.
The Foinmen.
The hawk dropped to the ground, rose again in a flurry of striped feathers.
In those parts where they call hills foins and mineshafts soughs, the paths that ascend the hillsides in hairpin bends are crinkle-crankle paths.
He made his way down the crinkle-crankle path that traversed Chesney Fell.
He took long strides and he walked fast but he walked easily too and without great exertion.
His body was a strong vigorous machine which the moor had developed and sustained.
He wore an anorak over a wool sweater with a polo neck and  he wore tough cord jeans and walking boots.
He was twenty-nine but he looked younger because his hair was fine and very dark and his skin a fresh white and red.
On the cold air as he made his way down his breath blew like smoke.
The clock on the tower of St Michael-in-the-Moor chimed nine as he came onto the road.
The milkman's van was on the green; Mrs Southworth from the Hall was at the pillar box, posting a letter.
He walked on away from the green and the houses up the bit of the Jackley road from which Tace Way turned off.
The council houses, of fudge-coloured brick, stood in two rows and a horseshoe shape with a screen of Leyland's cypress hiding them from the village.
The moor was all round the saucer in which Chesney lay but the best views of it were from his house, the last house before the road curved round.
Lyn's mother, still in a dressing gown, was watching from her downstairs window.
She waved and he waved back.
He waved too at Kevin Simpson who was getting his car out.
He waved and grinned as if nothing had happened.
The wind came whipping off the moor and bent the cypresses as if they were blades of grass.
Lyn heard his feet in the sideway and opened the back door to him.
Though she was dressed, her long fair hair was still in pigtails, the way she wore it at night.
She looked like a tall little girl.
"You weren't long.
"I hadn't got far.
Oh, Lord, darling, there's something pretty ghastly up there.
A girl and she's dead.
I found her lying among the Foinmen."
It occurred to Lyn — fleetingly, to be gone in a moment that most men would have broken such a thing more gently to their wives.
She spoke steadily in her soft, low voice, "What do you mean" dead", Stephen?
Do you mean she's had an accident?"
He shook his head.
"Her face is all blue.
And her hair's gone, someone's cut off all her hair."
These days when Lyn had a shock it made her shake.
No matter how controlled and calm she might sound, her hands would shake and sometimes her whole body.
Her mother said it was all nerves, but what had she to be nervy about?
Her body began its trembling.
 "Oh, Stephen, no!" 
"Pretty frightful, isn't it?
She's been murdered.
Strangled, I should think.
I'd be willing to bet she's been strangled.
Oh, Lord, now I've upset you."
 "I'm all right," said Lyn.
 "Are you going to phone the police?" 
"I certainly am.
Straightaway.
I came back at once.
I came back as fast as I could."
 "Oh, Stephen…" 
They were standing close, looking at each other.
She put her arms round him and held him tightly.
He allowed her to hold him but it was an effort, he was impatient to act, to get to the phone.
She let him go.
 "Where?" the man on the phone said.
It amazed Stephen how little local people knew of their countryside, their heritage really.
Those Simpsons, for instance, who knew the Foinmen no better than they knew Stonehenge, Dadda who bragged he hadn't been on Vangmoor these twenty years.
 "At the Foinmen," he repeated, "between the ninth and tenth stones on the north side." 
"The best thing'll be for you to show us, Mr Whalby.
You stay where you are and we'll come to you."
Stephen wasn't having that.
"I'll meet you on the green.
I'll be waiting for you on Chesney Green."
While he was on the phone Lyn's sister had come in, big-boned, yellow-haired Joanne, only nineteen and married six months.
Her voice was as strident as Lyn's was gentle.
 "I don't reckon I ought to have shocks like that in my state of health." 
Lyn said worriedly, "I wish you hadn't listened." 
"Come on, love, don't you know when I'm kidding?
I'm going to dash back and tell Kev.
Does Mum know?"
Stephen went out again.
Joanne and her mother were talking on Joanne's doorstep.
He didn't stop.
He walked back down to the green and waited out of the wind on the churchyard side.
Between the lychgate and St Michael's ancient oak door was the Tace tomb, white marble, black bronze and Giacometti's agonized angel with wings like fishbones.
Stephen leaned over the gate, waiting for the police.
The square tower of the church was built out of the dun-coloured limestone called foinstone and so were all the cottages and Chesney Hall itself.
Long ago it had been quarried out of a deep pit called Knamber Hole.
You could see Knamber Foin from here, a bleak mass of rubble rising out of a plain that was grey, smoky-looking with the leafless boughs of ten thousand little birch trees.
Clouds shadowed densely those south-eastern parts, but the north and west were broadly lit by the sun, the higher hills gleamed in sunshine, and a flock of birds flew across the expanse of blue sky above Big Allen.
The wind was like a blade that just skims the skin.
Stephen saw the police cars coming a long way off, three of them in a convoy coming up the white road from Hilderbridge.
An army of police — well, enough to show they believed him.
The cars parked one behind the other in a row on the road that crossed the green from the Hall to the church.
Already there were a couple of people watching, Kevin Simpson's mother and an old man whose name Stephen didn't know, hungry for excitement on an empty April Saturday.
He said to the police,"This way.
We have to go up over the fell."
There was a detective inspector, a thickset man of about his own age, athletic-looking but red in the face and with reddish hair, and a detective sergeant, a bit younger, dark with a wedge-shaped rodent face, a beanpole of a man.
Then there were officers with particular functions, one whose job it was to be at the scene of the crime before the  body was touched or moved.
Stephen took them up the zig-zag track.
If he had been on his own he would have gone straight up but he was more used to walking and climbing, no doubt, than these policemen.
He fancied too that he felt the cold less than they did.
They had stamped their feet and rubbed their hands while they were waiting about.
The inspector said to him suddenly, "Are you the Stephen Whalby that writes that nature column for the Echo?" 
 "" Voice of Vangmoor?"
Yes.
Yes, I am."
No one had ever asked him that before and Stephen felt pleased.
It was seldom, of course, that he met people who didn't already know.
 "Are you — he tried to speak as a real writer would one of my regular readers?" 
 "On and off," said the inspector.
Stephen now remembered he had said his name was Manciple.
 "You must know the moor like the back of your hand." 
 "I know it pretty well." 
Stephen couldn't resist boasting a bit.
 "I daresay I'm actually the greatest living authority on Vangmoor." 
Stephen said this very seriously but for some reason it made the wedge-faced sergeant guffaw.
He had an unpleasant grating laugh and Stephen felt anyway that it was unseemly to laugh in these circumstances.
He compressed his lips in silent offence.
The inspector gave no sign of noticing.
 "You'll be watching" Bleakland"on the telly, I expect.
They say that chap Alfred Tace who wrote the books, he knew the moor inside out."
 "Alfred Osbom Tace," Stephen corrected him, and said after a little hesitation, "He was my grandfather." 
They were both impressed now.
 "Is that a fact?" said Manciple, and the sergeant said, "You'll maybe be getting a bit of money out of this series, then?" 
 "Good Lord, no!" 
He wanted to laugh, though it would have been a bitter laugh.
 "Actually, it was through the female line," he began, wondering how much he meant to  explain, but they had ceased to listen to him.
They were at the top of the hill and Foinmen's Plain had unrolled itself before them.
The wind scored shivering channels through the ling and bilberries, the growth of fine, dry grass.
Against the bright, constantly changing sky the dolmen stood stark and black.
 "Look, over there." 
Stephen pointed.
They went forward slowly.
They could all see it now, there was no need for hurry.
The scene-of-crimes man stumbled as one of his feet went into a rabbit hole.
Stephen liked to make a ceremony of his visits to the Foinmen, walking slowly the length of the avenue up to where the Giant stood, but there was none of this now.
They didn't even bother to use the gate but swung their legs over the low railing and walked straight in among the stones to where the girl was.
A small green insect with folded wings had settled on her forehead.
They looked at her and for a time no one said anything.
Then Manciple said, without touching her, without even bending down, "She's dead all right." 
One of the men Stephen had taken for another policeman in plain clothes came closer, looked at the girl's open blue eyes.
The sergeant called him Doctor.
 "Of course she's dead," the doctor said, and then,"A moors murder, my God.
Sooner or later it had to be."
A gust of wind roared across the plain and the insect, blown by it, took wing.
He was most of the day at Hilderbridge police station.
Manciple disappeared and Stephen was questioned by a chief superintendent called Malm.
Why had he been out on Vangmoor so early?
Wasn't it very cold to be out on the moor at that hour?
Had he ever been to the Foinmen before?
Dozens of times, maybe even hundreds?
Then why had he gone this particular morning?
It was impossible to make Malm see that one might love the moor, enjoy walking, have become accustomed to the  cold.
The sergeant, whose name was Troth, came back and sat next to Malm.
They were perfectly polite, curious, baffled.
After an hour or so of that Malm changed his tack and wanted to know whom Stephen had met on that morning walk, everything he had seen.
"I didn't meet anyone.
I hardly ever do."
Stephen tried irony.
 "I saw a hare and after I'd found the body there was a sparrowhawk, a kestrel." 
He saw he had made Malm think him of unsound mind and he said quietly, earnestly, "There was nothing, nothing but what I've told you." 
After that they went back to why was he there and didn't he mind the cold.
They didn't tell him the girl's name or where she came from.
He had to find that out from the television when he got home.
Lyn jumped up when he came in.
 "That's what you get for being public-spirited." 
Stephen forced a laugh.
 "They're acting as if they think I did it." 
"They can't be, Stephen.
It must be just their manner."
"I feel worn out, much more than I would if I'd been for miles on the moor.
D'you know, that was the first dead body I've ever seen.
It's a strain on you.
Have you ever seen a dead person?"
"My grandmother, my mother's mother.
She just looked as if she was asleep.
Would you like a drink, love?
A proper drink or just tea?
I've made supper, we can have it whenever you want."
"Put the box on, shall we?
It's time for "Bleakland" ."
Lyn brought tea in and then supper on two trays.
She sat beside Stephen and held his hand.
Vangmoor came up on the screen as if they were looking out of the window, but Vangmoor in summer without the wind and with leaves on the trees.
Stephen had watched some of the film-making, the scenes they had shot in the Vale of Allen.
It was a strange experience to see Lady Irene in her Edwardian dress, Alastair Thornhill in Norfolk jacket, Big Allen behind them, and then, when the romance was over, the episode ended, the real moor of today come onto the screen  with the news.
It was as if the moor were the whole world and there was nothing anywhere but the moor.
The announcer said that the dead girl had been called Marianne Price and that she was twenty.
She had been stopped and killed while cycling home from Byss to Hilderbridge late on the previous night.
A picture of her as she had been in life came up on the screen.
A round face with a high forehead, blue eyes, short straight nose, a mantle of shining, fair hair.
Stephen's name wasn't mentioned.
Police were searching for the missing bicycle, but the announcer said nothing about the missing hair.
Stephen switched off the set.
He went to the window and drew back the curtain.
There was a bright, nearly full moon.
The silhouette of Big Allen stood out densely black against a lustrous, opaque sky.
"When I was a child I used to imagine the moor belonged to me, that I was a young prince or the heir to an estate or something.
It was after Mother left that I started thinking like that."
 "You needed something to make up for it," Lyn said.
He shrugged.
"Yes — I suppose Freud and people like that would say I was compensating for losing my mother.
I don't know.
I used to think of the moor as all my property, my kingdom, I suppose, and I'd decide where I was going to build my capital city and where I was going to have my hunting forest.
And the Reeve's Way, that was where I was going to march my army.
You'll laugh, but I was going to have a coronation.
I was going to be crowned at the Foinmen, standing on the Altar."
Lyn didn't laugh.
She had heard it all before but he always seemed to forget he had told her.
His voice went up in pitch.
"Good grief, when I think of some creature coming onto the moor and doing a vile thing like this!
It makes my blood boil, it's sacrilege!"
But Lyn said quietly, "I wish it hadn't had to be you who found her." 
There were Sundays when Dadda didn't come to lunch, when depression kept him from stirring out of doors.
His depressions were an illness, not merely a feeling of lowness or irritability.
They dragged him down into horrors he said no one could imagine.
But between bouts, in a precarious euphoria that to others seemed like dourness, he drove up from Hilderbridge in Whalbys' van.
The depression of last week had lifted like a fever passing when the patient sleeps or asks for food.
Dadda looked shattered by it, though, bruised under the eyes.
He wore his one good suit, grey with a white chalk stripe, and he had brought with him Lyn's birthday present in an unwieldy brown paper parcel.
He didn't kiss Lyn, he never touched women, or men either for that matter, but he seemed to make a principle of shrinking from the touch of women.
Lyn unwrapped a small round table, high-polished, with curved legs and a top carved in a design of a chestnut leaf and cluster of spiny fruits.
"It's beautiful, Dadda.
You are good to us."
 "Don't go ruining it with hot cups." 
 "What a lovely piece of work!" 
Stephen exclaimed.
 "Early Victorian, isn't it?" 
 "Late," said Dadda.
"You ought to be able to see that with half an eye.
You're supposed to be in bloody trade."
Lyn's parents and Joanne and Kevin always came over on Sunday afternoons.
Mr Newman was a small quiet man, half the size of Dadda, probably literally half his weight.
He ran a finger along the carving.
 "We shan't be able to compete with that." 
 "It's not a question of competing," said his wife.
"Lyn knows she's getting a cardigan, anyway.
Have to wait till Wednesday."
She had brought two Sunday papers with her.
Everyone had a paper except Dadda who never read anything.
Mrs Newman's face was round and healthy and high-coloured like Joanne's.
 "It's a funny thing," she said,"but in a place like this, a sort of open space, forest, moors, anywhere that's National Trust, you always get killings.
It's a wonder we haven't had them before."
Joanne said, "What d'you mean" them", Mum?
There's been one young girl killed so far as I know."
"So far.
You get one now and another in a couple of weeks and folks are scared to go out or we women are.
It'll be one of those pathologicals."
 "Psychopaths." 
"Whatever they call them.
Maniacs, we used to say."
 "A proper ghoul, isn't she, Tom?" said Mr Newman.
Dadda didn't answer but gave his awkward humourless grin.
He sat with his huge shoulders hunched up.
He was used to company but hopeless in it, he never improved.
Many men are as tall as or taller than their fathers and Stephen was six feet, but Dadda still towered above him.
He filled his armchair, all long, gaunt, bent limbs, that somehow suggested a cornered spider.
All but he wanted to know how Stephen had got on with the police.
"I'm their number one suspect.
No, it's a fact."
 "He's exaggerating," Lyn said.
Dadda spoke.
"Beats me why he had to stick his neck out.
 "Once I'd seen her," Stephen said, "I had to report it." 
"I'd have shut me eyes and carried straight on.
It all comes of this traipsing about the moor."
"Good grief, you sound just like the police!
Can't anyone understand a man can love the countryside?
It's a simple  enough pleasure in all conscience, harmless enough, I'd have thought."
Kevin winked.
 "I tell folks Lyn's not a grass widow, she's a moor widow." 
A grim smile moved Dadda's mouth.
Mrs Newman said,"I should think this'd put you off anyway, Stephen.
You won't want to be up there with this maniac about.
I don't like that word widow, Kevin, that's not very nice."
Joanne and Kevin held hands on the sofa.
"I knew that girl, that Marianne Price, Mum, did I tell you?
Well, you must have known her, Stephen.
She was in the cash desk at the Golden Chicken."
 "The Market Burger House they call it now, Joanne." 
 "Whatever they call it Don't you get your lunch there, Mr Whalby?" 
"Me?
I keep me feet under me own table.
Stephen goes out for his dinner, he's young."
 "There you are, Stephen, like I said, you must have known her, you must have seen her hundreds of times." 
"Good Lord, Joanne, how would I know?
She'd have looked a bit different, I can tell, from what she was like lying up there with her hair all cut off."
Joanne gave a little scream and put her hands up to her own abundant blonde hair.
 "She won't be there tomorrow," said Mrs Newman.
"I shouldn't be surprised if they were to close tomorrow out of respect.
I remember when you and your brother were little, Lyn, Joanne wasn't born, old Mr Crane over at Loomlade got killed in his car and they closed the electric shop two days out of respect and the branch in Byss."
But next day the Market Burger House was open for business as usual.
Stephen took particular note of it after he had taken Lyn to the Mootwalk and parked the car in the market square.
The restaurant was the only one in Hilderbridge, in the Three Towns probably, that served breakfast.
People were breakfasting, some were just having  coffee.
An Indian girl in a blue sari was at the cash desk in Marianne Price's place.
Stephen went across the square to Whalbys.
Dadda lived alone in the three-storey house in King Street, a narrow foinstone house, one room deep and heated with oilstoves.
The workshop was the coachhouse next door and the room above it.
Over the double doors, painted dark brown, was a sign in gilt lettering that said: Whalby and Son.
Restorers of fine furniture.
The sign was peeling and you couldn't read it from the other side of the square but the Three Towns knew who Whalbys' were without that.
A Whalby and his son had been there for as long as anyone could remember and Dadda used sometimes to boast on his good days that Alfred Osborn Tace had himself been a customer and that Whalbys had re-covered the seats of the Hepplewhite chairs at Chesney Hall.
Stephen said hallo to Dadda before going upstairs to start work on the three-piece suite they had brought in on Friday.
Dadda was smoking.
Between his nutcracker lips was one of the thin twisted little cigarettes he made himself.
The frames of the furniture were sound, a lot better than the kind of stuff they manufactured nowadays.
He began tearing off the old, almost ragged, tapestry and prising out tacks.
The scent of tobacco was wafted up the stairs.
Dadda only smoked when he was contented and then he would get through forty or fifty a day, bringing on a cough and staining his fingers yellow-brown.
Dadda might have been a lot different, Stephen thought, if his wife hadn't deserted him.
Or was it because he was the way he was that she had walked out one day when Dadda was at work and he at school, leaving a note on the kitchen table and the remains of the week's housekeeping money?
He had been too young to read the note but he could still remember how that table had looked when he came in, its top at the time the height of his own shoulder.
He could still remember the piece of folded exercise book paper, the three pound notes and the pile of coins at eye level.
Dadda never spoke of her directly.
When, a long time ago now, Stephen had tried to call him Dad or Father and drop the babyish name, he had shouted that Stephen was all he had in the world and couldn't he have a little bit of kindness and call him by the one name that meant something?
And sometimes he had clasped Stephen to him, almost crushing the breath out of his body, muttering his tortured affection.
It was only in such oblique ways that he referred to his state of deserted, now divorced, husband.
There were no photographs of her in the house in King Street, and the photographs Stephen had seen he had wrested out of old Mrs Naulls.
He guessed she had been named after Lady Irene Nevil's daughter in Wrenwood.
She had Tace's colouring.
She was slender and very fair with long golden hair and as unlike as possible any Naulls that had ever been.
The wind had dropped and a cold whitish mist from the river lingered in patches.
Lyn walked across the cobbles and over the Old Town bridge.
This morning the water was clear and silvery, chuckling a little as it lapped over the smooth, oval, brown stones.
A pair of swans drifted down towards the town centre.
She was early for work as usual because Dadda liked Stephen to be in soon after nine.
She whiled away time walking along the Mootwalk, an ancient wooden cloister that faced the Hilder and under which was a row of shops: an optician's, a hairdresser's, a wine shop, a jeans and sweater boutique, a newsagent, the pet shop.
There was a pale green sweater in the window of Lorraine's she thought she might buy.
That sort of green, a clear, pale, jade, was her colour.
The newsagent's Sunday paper placard was still outside: "Local Girl in Moors Murder" .
A few cars passed along the cobbles or parked, a few people on foot were on their way to work, not many.
The great influx would be north of the river, the other side of town where Cartwright-Cageby's mill employed 60 per cent of the working population of Hilderbridge.
Down here it was always quieter, it was older, it was peaceful.
The ramparts of the moor could be seen in the distance, its peaks blurred against a leaden sky, their lower slopes wrapped in mist.
Lights came on in the Mootwalk shops as one by one they began to open.
Out of the pet shop window a cat looked at Lyn with champagne-coloured eyes.
It was in a wire pen on top of some tortoises and under a pair of lop-eared rabbits.
The cat looked at Lyn and opened its mouth in a soundless mew.
Lyn didn't much like the old man who kept the shop.
He ogled her and once he had come out and asked her if she would like a dear little puppy dog to keep her warm in the night.
He wasn't there this morning.
Instead, there was a man of about her own age, no older, tidying up the cartons of fish food on a shelf behind the counter.
She pushed the door and went in.
 "I've been looking at the cat in your window." 
He came out to her.
 "Attractive colour, isn't it?" 
 "I wanted a ginger kitten, but it's not exactly ginger." 
"More beige, wouldn't you say?
Or even peach.
It's not a kitten either, it's more than half-grown.
Someone brought it in on Saturday and said she had to go to Africa and would I take it."
Lyn was indignant.
"That's awful, taking it to a pet shop.
You wouldn't know who might buy it.
It would be kinder to have it put down."
"Oh, come.
Not this pet shop.
Not under my management."
Lyn glanced up at him.
She had trained herself not to look at men, a restraint that wasn't difficult to practise in this case.
He was rather nondescript, not very tall, thin, mousy-haired, as unlike dark handsome Stephen as could be.
But what on earth made her compare them?
"Are you the manager?
What's happened to Mr Bale?"
"In hospital, having a hernia operation.
I'm his nephew.
I'm looking after things for him."
The cat mewed, not soundlessly this time.
He opened the pen and lifted it out in his arms.
"He's a fine healthy cat, a neutered tom.
I'd estimate his age at around nine months."
 "I wanted a kitten," Lyn said.
 "Isn't it strange the way everyone's got kittens to dispose of when you don't want them and none when you do?" 
 "Have this one and save him from a fate worse than death." 
Lyn held the cat.
It felt tense and afraid.
Its eyes seemed to her full of tragic puzzlement.
She made up her mind quickly, the way she always did.
 "I will have him," she said.
"I can't take him now, though.
I have to go to work, Gillman's the optician's.
I'll come back at one when I finish."
She phoned Stephen.
 "How much does he want for it?" 
 "D'you know, I didn't ask." 
 "Never mind, darling," Stephen said,"as long as it's what you want.
You're to have just what you want."
He went back to the armchairs.
Dadda wouldn't have a phone extension upstairs, preferring to summon him with a shout when it rang.
He got his way in most things, had despotically guided Stephen's life, had chosen Lyn for him, before that had picked him out of this school, pushed him into that, as soon as he could removed him altogether from academic threat.
Stephen would have liked further education, though he hadn't expected Oxford or Cambridge or even, say, Nottingham.
He would have settled for Hilderbridge College of Technology.
If he had fought Dadda, with the backing of the school and the rumblings there had been about court orders to override parents, if he had struggled, he could have got there.
But he never fought Dadda.
He had left school willingly, or very nearly, glad to be pleasing Dadda, rewarded with a secondhand motor bike and next year a car, and had learnt Whalbys' trade.
Or learnt some of it.
He would never be able to do what  Dadda could, those exquisite inlays, that delicate carving, achieving that mirror polish, and all with hands like a gorilla's paws.
His heart wasn't in it.
He could drive the van and upholster a settee.
He had started on the second chair when Dadda shouted up the stairs.
 "Stephen!" 
 "What is it, Dadda?" 
The phone again?
"Some woman says she's from the paper.
You can bloody come down and see to it."
Stephen felt embarrassed that this women, a Three Towns Echo reporter presumably, should have heard him call Dadda by the shameful name.
He went down quickly.
Dadda was back at his polishing, making figures of eight on the already brilliantly lustrous surface of a mahogany dining table with french polish on a knob of wadded lint.
He had turned his back.
The reporter was a young girl in denim dungarees and a bright red knitted coat.
She had a red woolly hat pulled down round her ears.
"Mr Whalby?
You're the Mr Stephen Whalby who writes "Voice of Vangmoor" for us, aren't you?"
Stephen had thought of describing his discovery of Marianne Price's body in this week's column.
It was due in tomorrow and he planned to write it tonight.
The girl reporter said this wouldn't really do.
What they wanted was a news interview with him.
He felt disappointed because writing "Voice of Vangmoor" was the only money-making activity he did that he enjoyed, and this would have been more enjoyable than usual, a piece of real journalism as against the usual pedestrian stuff about the view from the top of Big Allen or hearing the first cuckoo.
But this girl who couldn't be more than twenty-two or twenty-three was going to do it, not he.
It was rather indifferently that he described to her his walk, his find, his leading of the police to the spot.
The girl took it down in speedwriting, not proper shorthand.
 "When she didn't come home on Friday night," she  said, "her parents thought she was staying with her boyfriend and the boyfriend thought she was at home with her parents." 
 "A bit too permissive, those sort of parents," said Stephen.
"Oh, well.
He was her fiance.
They were going to get married in June."
 "Maybe if they'd postponed living together till they were married, she'd be alive now." 
"That's a bit hard, Mr Whalby.
Anyway, you can't say that, you can't know.
If her parents had reported her missing the night before she'd still have been dead, wouldn't she?"
The girl was getting belligerent.
She probably lived that sort of life herself, Stephen thought.
 "What's the fiance called?" he asked.
"Ian Stringer.
He lives in Byss."
 "I was at school with an Ian Stringer," said Stephen.
 "I wonder if it's the same one." 
 "He's about your age." 
The girl put away her notebook.
"We'd like to send a photographer to take your picture.
Will that be okay?
Around twelve?"
Stephen said it would, though Dadda's mood wouldn't be improved by it.
He saw the girl out and put the bar up across the double doors.
 "Bloody keep off the moor in future," said Dadda.
 "Keep your feet under your own table." 
The receptionist who took over from Lyn in the afternoons came into the cloakroom where she was putting her coat on.
"There's a man who says his name's Nick Frazer asking for you.
The girl with the beautiful hair, he said."
She giggled.
 "He's brought you a cat." 
Lyn reddened at the description of herself.
She took off her scarf and tied it round her head, and then thought better of it — why allow herself to be provoked?
She put  the scarf back round her neck and went through to the shop.
Nick Frazer was standing just inside the street door, holding a wicker basket with a barred opening in it.
 "I thought you'd like to have this basket to take him home in." 
Between the bars wary golden eyes stared out.
 "It's very kind of you." 
She undid the lid of the basket.
The cat made no attempt to get out.
She stroked the soft, thick fur which felt warm, though the cat was trembling.
Like me, I shake like that sometimes, Lyn thought.
 "He's very afraid," she said.
"He'll be all right with you.
You'll bring the basket back, won't you?"
The way he said it, it was as if he was only lending it to her in order to have her bring it back again, but she was forced to agree.
 "How much is he?" 
"I'd like to give him to you.
I didn't pay the Africa lady anything but I ought to make a bit for Uncle Jim.
Shall we say two quid?"
Lyn gave him two pounds.
She closed the lid of the basket.
 "Do you have a long way to go?" 
 "Not really," Lyn said, then briskly, "Goodbye." 
The Hilderbridge to Jackley bus was three-quarters empty.
Lyn took the cat out of the basket and held it against her.
I shall call you Peach, she thought.
The trembling had stopped, though the cat didn't yet purr.
It occurred to her that the way she was holding Peach was the way a woman holds a baby and she lowered him gently into her lap.
Taking care not to swing the basket, she got off outside the gate of St Michael-in-the-Moor and walked across the green.
Police cars and police vans were parked everywhere.
Just inside the gates of Chesney Hall was the lodge where Stephen's grandmother had lived.
Police had taken it over as an emergency headquarters.
She could see lights on inside and men moving about, and as she stood there a  policeman in uniform came out of the front door.
Pinned to the gate, poster-sized, was a blown-up snapshot of a blonde girl not unlike Lyn herself, a girl with a vulnerable face, tender and a little melancholy, a girl who wore her long fair hair like a cloak.
Lyn put her free hand up to touch her own hair.
When she realized what she was doing and that those policemen might have seen her, she felt her face grow hot.
She turned away and carrying the basket with great care, walked on up the road to Tace Way.
 "Bumble bees are appearing in large numbers," Stephen wrote, beginning his fourth paragraph,"due, most probably, to the exceptional mildness of the past winter.
Few, however, will escape the predatory beaks of our Vangmoor songsters, bent upon feeding their young.
Let us hope that this year we shall see an increase in the butterfly population, notably that rare member of the family Lyaenidae, known as the Foinland Blue."
That would do.
He finished off.
 "Next week I shall be writing about moorland walks and suggesting an itinerary that takes in the ever-attractive Tower Foin." 
In the morning he would drop it into the Echo office on his way to the inquest.
 "Ever-attractive" didn't sound very good.
What he really meant was that Tower Foin exercised a perennial attraction, drawing people by its beauty and its majesty, but he couldn't say all that.
It would have to stand.
Nothing he ever wrote came near to conveying to the reader the way the moor really was or the way he felt about it.
The grandeur of the moor, its wildness, its time-lessness and peace, seemed to get lost in his prose.
He didn't know why because he took pains and there was no doubt of his writing talent.
This particular inheritance was as striking as his physical resemblance to Tace.
Perhaps the articles turned out badly because his heart wasn't really in that kind of parish pump, chatty writing.
It would have been a different matter if they had let him write his own account of what he had found at the Foinmen.
He clipped the sheets together and put them into an envelope.
Then he put the cover back on the typewriter and tidied up, lining up the pile of sheets of A4 bank paper and his box of carbons with the edges of the desk.
Might as well put the butterfly book back in its proper place.
He had more than three hundred books on his shelves now; everything that had ever been written about Vangmoor, of course, its history, geology, geography, wild life; all his old school textbooks, all the adventure stories of his boyhood.
He didn't know why he kept them really, except that they helped to make up the number on the shelves.
In pride of place were the Bleakland novels, Quenild Manor, The Mountainside, Elizabeth Nevil, Wrenwood, Lady Irene, Last Loves.
Stephen had them in the handsome, leather-bound edition of the International Collectors' Library and also in the paperbacks that had come out to go with the television series.
His study, which was in fact the second bedroom, was acquiring an important, even scholarly, appearance.
On one wall was a big map of Vangmoor, on another a print of the only painting Constable had ever done of the moor, Loomlade church with Big Allen behind.
His paper-weight and doorstop were of ground and polished foin-stone.
The calendar was the one produced by the Echo, "Moorland Views" , turned now for April, by the purest coincidence, to a photograph of the Foinmen at sunset.
On a small round table, polished for him by Dadda, was a bust of Tace.
The bust looked like bronze if you didn't examine it too closely.
In fact it was papier-mache on which someone had done a skilful paint job.
Stephen still remembered the delight he had felt when, wandering through Jackley market, he had come upon the bust on a junk stall.
He could have sworn, though it sounded silly, that Tace's eyes with their hooded, ironical gaze, had compelled him to approach, and Tace's mobile lips had adjured him, "Buy me!" 
Only £1.50, it was almost laughable.
Although the room and the whole house was full of really good stuff made or renovated by Dadda, secretly he valued  nothing more than this bust.
Its features, high, intellectual forehead, straight nose, long upper lip and fine-cut mouth, were so absolutely his own that he wondered others didn't remark on it.
He closed the door of his study and went across the landing to the bathroom.
Lyn had had her bath and was in bed, her new cat, his birthday present, in a basket on the floor by her side.
 "Just till he gets used to us." 
 "Good Lord, darling, I don't mind." 
Stephen had his bath in the mornings.
He washed his hands and face and cleaned his teeth with the water pick he had bought with Dadda's Christmas money.
The time was after eleven and he was tired but he could never sleep without reading for a few minutes at least.
Currently he was rereading Tace's autobiography of which the author had completed only Book One, dying in the midst of describing his thirtieth year.
He read for a quarter of an hour and Lyn read, and then Lyn put her book face downwards on the floor by the cat's basket.
Stephen put a leather marker with an engraving of Tower Foin on it in his book and switched out the bedlamp.
 "Good night, darling." 
 "Good night, Stephen," said Lyn.
 "Sleep well." 
A pathologist called Dr Paul Fleisch described how Marianne Price had died.
He used a lot of abstruse terms like "cricoid" but what it amounted to was that she had been strangled.
The murderer had done it with his bare hands.
Before this evidence Stephen had had to give his.
He was the first witness at the inquest.
Once he had begun he didn't feel nervous, he spoke slowly and levelly, and once his part was over he began to enjoy the rest of the proceedings.
Ian Stringer, sitting with the dead girl's parents, he recognized at once.
At school he had been an ace rugby player and had become a big burly man.
The inquest was   adjourned and Stringer came up to Stephen outside the court.
"I don't know if you remember me.
Byss Comprehensive.
I think I was a year behind you."
Stephen nodded and took Stringer's outstretched hand.
 "It's only — well, I thought I'd ask you — how she looked when — I mean they say some people who die like that, they look sort of, their faces…" 
"Good Lord, no, there was nothing like that.
She looked as if she was asleep."
Stringer didn't believe him but he was grateful for the kindness.
Together they walked along the High Street towards the Market Place where they parted, Stephen for Whalbys', Stringer to return to Cartwright-Cageby's where he was a foreman fitter.
Dadda was out, doing something to a very ancient, very special ceiling in Jackley Manor with Tudor roses carved on its beams.
Stephen worked on the armchairs till lunchtime.
After he had had a sandwich m the Market Burger House, he loaded the van with small stuff to be returned and went out delivering.
There was an early nineteenth-century firescreen to go back to a house in Trinity Street.
Next to Trinity Church where Dadda and Mother had been married was the old people's home called Sunningdale.
Stephen parked the van and delivered the screen.
The matron of Sunningdale was an easy-going woman who let visitors come pretty well when they pleased, this entailing no great inconvenience as few did please.
Helena Naulls was in the day room with the dozen or so other old women and the two old men.
In the Three Towns, as elsewhere, the men died and the women lived on and on.
A big colour television set was on and one or two were looking at it, at a programme designed for seven-year-olds, but most were just sitting.
One woman was knitting, an old man was reading the Daily Minor.
Mrs Naulls was among those who just sat.
Seeing her there, Stephen had to remind himself — for nothing in her bearing hinted at it and no vestige of hand-some  looks remained — that she had once been the mistress of Alfred Osborn Tace.
She was a scrawny flabby woman who had once been stout.
Her face had become big and vacant, the eyes sluggishly furtive, the mouth vague.
Her hair, snow white and abundant, had been topped off in a ragged uneven way by the home's hairdresser.
Today — such muddles often happened — she was wearing a cardigan of matted grey wool belonging to a much smaller and slighter inmate, a long brown skirt, brown stockings that wrinkled round her still-narrow ankles, and blue check carpet slippers.
Once she had been pretty and lively with a twenty-three-inch waist.
She had been second housemaid at Chesney Hall and Arthur Naulls had been under-gardener.
They had had several children, of all of whom but the eldest Arthur was the father.
Mrs Naulls was in Sunningdale because her son Stanley was a Hilderbridge councillor and had pulled strings.
Otherwise there wouldn't have been a chance for someone with such a large family, almost any of whom could have taken her in.
The only one, in fact, who had offered had been Lyn.
Stephen had vetoed that, though, before she had made her offer to anyone but him, and now he tended to tell people they couldn't have his grandmother because it wouldn't be fair on his wife.
He had been brought up to call Mrs Naulls "Nanna" but had had more luck with her than with Dadda when he wanted to change this mode of address.
 "How are you, Grandmother?" he said.
He had brought her a box of fruit jellies, the only passion she still had.
She took them in unsteady hands stained with grave marks, and peered with suspicion at the manufacturer's name.
 "How have you been getting on?" 
 "Just the same." 
 "Anybody been to see you?" 
Mrs Naulls shook her head.
 "Nobody ever comes to see me." 
She took the cellophane wrapping off the box.
 "Not a soul." 
 "Oh, Mrs Naulls, what an untruth!" said the old woman in the next chair.
She was the one who had been knitting.
 "Your son Leslie was here only yesterday." 
 "Haven't got a son called Leslie, have I, Stanley?" said Mrs Naulls, dropping cellophane on the floor.
"Leonard.
And I'm Stephen."
 "Nurse'll be after you," said the knitter.
 "You're what they call a litter bug." 
Mrs Naulls ate a crimson jelly and then a green one.
She didn't offer the box.
A bovine contentment came into her face as she chewed.
Stephen had never been able to talk to her about her relationship with the great novelist.
He had been over twenty before he had even found out about it but he hadn't been old enough to dare ask his grandmother how it had been and how she had felt and what they had talked about.
Now when he might dare it was too late.
But still he searched for ways to bring the conversation round to Tace.
 "I expect you've been watching those" Bleakland "programmes, haven't you, Grandmother?" 
 "Pardon?" she said, her mouth full.
 "On the television, Saturday nights." 
A woman who had been looking at the screen turned to him and said,"I saw one, round at my daughter's.
It was lovely.
Lovely dresses."
 "Why can't you see it here?" 
 "They get us to bed," said the knitter.
 "Eight they start getting us to bed." 
 "That's a pity," Stephen persisted.
 "You'd have liked to watch that, Grandmother." 
 "How's Rosemary, Keith?" said Mrs Naulls.
"If you mean Lyn, she's fine.
And I'm Stephen."
He looked at her hopelessly.
She had come to this, to a limp white heap who had forgotten the names of her nearest and dearest.
Once he had tried to extract so much from her, and not just details of the Tace affair.
She was the key to a past he needed to understand.
Dadda's temper, that  he had inherited along with Dadda's darkness and Dadda's height, had got the better of him and he had attacked her, physically attacked her.
But that was more than half his lifetime ago.
He got up.
 "Time I was on my way." 
Mrs Naulls said lucidly, as if veils had suddenly, when it was too late, fallen from her mind and her speech,"It was good of you to come, dear.
Thank you for the jellies."
The knitter waved.
Stephen was sure his grandmother had fallen asleep before he was even out of the room.
It had begun to rain.
Soon it was raining hard enough, Stephen noted dismally, to keep him off the moor for the evening.
He felt as he had done when a small boy and rain or some other calamity of nature had kept him from a picnic, resentful and somewhat indignant.
It was the end of the week before Lyn took the cat basket back.
There were ten birthday cards on the mantelpiece, but they had been there two days and she took them down.
Two of them made her feel, not old exactly, but as if life was passing her by They were the one from Joanne that said, "You've reached a quarter century" and the one from Stephen, "My dearest wife" .
She was uneasy about going to the pet shop.
In her imagination she saw Nick Frazer as a young version of his uncle, a young wolf instead of an old one.
But if she didn't take it back he would only come along and ask for it She was surprised he hadn't already.
Peach was sitting on the window sill, watching the raindrops run down the outside of the glass and trying to catch them with his paw.
He behaved as if they were insects.
Lyn stroked him and reminded him she would be back at lunchtime.
Nick Frazer was locking up the shop when she came along at one.
She had remembered him quite differently from what he really was.
He looked at her with a pre-occupied air before he recognized her, perhaps because she had put up her hair rather severely deliberately into a  tight knot on the back of her head.
The pleasant, serious face, the steady brown eyes, disconcerted her.
Was this the wolf who was going to make double-edged remarks, even a pass, at her?
He took the basket, thanked her quietly, locked the shop door again.
She was so surprised by the warmth of his smile, by his being able to smile so frankly, so like a friend, that when he said he was going to lunch at the Blue Lagoon and would she come too, she said yes, all right, without thinking.
They walked along by the river.
The rain had almost stopped.
The Blue Lagoon was the old Red Lion renamed, no one knew why, on the corner of Bankside and Trinity Street.
She had already had second thoughts.
 "I ought to get back to Peach." 
She had told him what the cat was called.
He smiled again.
 "The great beauty of keeping cats is they don't tie you." 
She sat at a table while he went to get their lager and ploughman's lunches.
Lyn took off her gloves.
She saw that her left hand was bare.
In washing her hands after breakfast she had taken off her wedding ring and must have left it on the side of the basin.
It was the kind of ring you had to take off to wash, a kind of chased inlay of platinum and gold that Stephen had had specially made on Dadda's advice.
She was always taking it off and forgetting it.
Kevin's brother, who fancied himself as an amateur psychologist, said you didn't really forget things like that and it meant Lyn must unconsciously want not to wear it — ergo, not to be married.
Nick brought their drinks and food on a tray.
 "And how is Peach?" 
"Quite happy, I think.
He's not shaking any more."
 "But you are," Nick said.
It was true.
Her hands were trembling, she could hardly hold the glass.
She managed to laugh, held her hands for a minute in her lap.
 "It's a nervous thing I have." 
He made no comment on that.
It was then that she  noticed how gravely and interestedly he was looking at her, had looked at her ever since they met outside the shop.
It was as if he was very concerned with her as a person.
But when he spoke it was not of her but of Peach, how to feed him, what sort of supplements he should have, that although he had had his routine immunizations, he must have a booster at a year old and also an injection against a new sort of feline virus.
 "How is it you know so much when you only took the shop over last week?" 
 "Well —" Again that warm, frank smile.
 "I'm a vet." 
 "Are you really?" 
A hangover from Lyn's childhood, a mother who cleaned at Chesney Hall, a father at Cartwright-Cageby's was to feel respect that had once amounted to awe for the professional man.
But good sense asserted itself.
 "Why aren't you being one then?" 
 "I've only just qualified." 
He added almost apologetically,"It takes a long time.
I've got a job waiting for me in London, but I can't start till August when the man retires.
Hence Hilderbridge and Uncle Jim."
 "And are you living over the shop?" 
"I think Uncle rather hoped I'd live in the two rooms at the back but they smell a bit too powerfully of monkey and parrot so I've moved up into his flat.
It's nice, you must come and see it."
This was a remark that three days before she would have thought of as wolfish.
Now it seemed merely friendly.
But she didn't answer it.
She was afraid he would ask her about herself and to forestall this she asked him to tell her about his training and what he hoped for in the future.
He talked.
They ate their bread and cheese.
Lyn's hands had stopped shaking.
 "That's enough about me," he said.
 "Tell me about you." 
I am twenty-five, I am married, I was married in church and have lived with my husband four years, so I must be married, I have no children and never shall have, but I am waiting, waiting, for what I don't know…
"
Nothing to  tell,"she said.
And there was nothing, nothing she could tell.
Mr Bale would come back in two or three weeks and she need never see Nick Frazer again.
 "| really must go now." 
While they were in the pub, in a corner far from a window, the rain had come on heavily, the kind of rain that will soak you to the skin in two minutes.
Nick stopped her inside the door.
"Will you wait for me?
I'll be very quick."
He came back, and he had been very quick, with an umbrella from which, as he plunged in through the swing door, he was tearing the plastic wrapping.
 "You bought it specially!" 
 "I had to have an umbrella to walk you home." 
 "But I live in Chesney," she said.
 "I'm going on the bus." 
 "To walk you to your bus stop then." 
It was something she hand't looked for and she was almost dismayed.
Under the umbrella they had to walk very close together and after a while he took her hand and hooked it through his arm.
It was precisely the action of Joseph Usher in The Mountainside, and Isabella Thornhill had slapped his face for it before rushing off, unprotected, into the downpour.
Lyn felt the blood come up into her face.
She held Nick's arm and felt him warm and somehow tough against her side.
He talked about the town, how he had never before been to this part of the country, how he had never before been to this part of the country, how one day soon he must try to get out on the moor.
There was an opening for her here.
My husband, who is in fact the grandson of Alfred Osborn Tace, is really quite an authority on Vangmoor…
She didn't take it.
She would have found it hard to speak, anyway.
It was taking all her concentration to breathe normally, not be begin shaking again, with their arms linked and their bodies so close.
The bus saved her.
As they turned up River Street it was coming down the hill and there wouldn't be another for an hour.
 "There won't be another for an hour!" she cried.
 "Would that be so terrible?" 
"Oh, yes, yes, it would.
Thank you for lunch, thank you very much.
Goodbye!"
He stood on the pavement, smiling in perplexity, making swirls in the air with the umbrella.
Her cheeks burned and she turned away from the window.
The bus pulled away, through the rain, up towards the moor.
A full week had gone by and it was Saturday again before Stephen went out on the moor.
There was not a soul to be seen, though it was a weekend and the sun was shining after many days of rain.
The week before last, when it had been colder, he had seen parties of hikers, a fisherman coming from the Hilder, cyclists on the Loomlade road, campers with tent and calor gas stove and blankets on their backs.
This morning Vangmoor was deserted.
It was impossible to avoid the conclusion that the murder had emptied it.
At first he disliked this thought.
It meant that the moor had in the past few days become known not as somewhere unique and beautiful but as the place where a young girl had been killed.
Then, as he crossed the Loomlade road and entered the Vale of Allen, his feelings underwent a change.
The moor seemed more his own when it was unpeopled, so that his childhood fantasy might have become real and he be the lord of this wild country.
Big Allen, the highest peak of the foinland, which was so often veiled in mist or appeared as a blurred blue shape, this morning showed every crevice and crag on its slopes, every wind-bent bilberry, every clump of ling.
The air was as clear as the air only is after prolonged rain.
The crinkle-crankle path that traversed the hillside was a bright brown hairpin, woven between the green and purplish and silvery heather.
Now, in the dales beyond he could see the remains of the old mine workings.
No lead had been mined on Vangmoor for a hundred years, but the engine houses and the housing for water wheels, once deemed so hideous, now in ruin had a beauty of their own.
He climbed the lower slopes of Big Allen and stood, looking westwards.
From here the Foinmen were hidden by the bulk of Ringer's Foin with the rock on its top like a bell.
In order to see them he would have had to climb a couple of hundred feet more.
But the Hilder revealed itself, running down like a tinsel thread, crossed at one point by stepping stones, at another by the massive stone pillars that once had supported an aqueduct bringing water to the buildings of the Goughdale Mine.
The waters of the river were broken and scintillating, splashing in bright sparks where it bounded over rocks on its way to the town.
And Hilderbridge lay in the sunshine, its slate roofs all turned to planes of silver, its spires sharp needles, as if a silversmith had made it and dropped it in the valley between the meadows and the moor.
Beneath where he stood, under the western slopes of the foin and the wastes of Goughdale, was a network of subterranean chambers and passages and galleries.
The last of the mines had been closed around the time of Tace's birth and the entrances to the shafts had been closed or blocked by rockfalls.
Stephen walked down and back to Loomlade.
An hour later he was in Chesney, having seen no animate thing but two bumble bees and a rook.
The gatehouse lodge to Chesney Hall that the police had taken over also looked deserted today.
David Southworth who owned the hall and who was the nephew of Tace's widow, had done up the lodge as a home for his wife's mother but since her death it had stood empty.
Stephen went up the path and looked in the window.
He hadn't been in the lodge since Helena Naulls had left it on the death of her husband.
The old wallpapers, nasturtiums in the living room, stripes and posies and true lovers' knots in the hall, were gone and the walls painted white.
There seemed to be no dark corners left, no little cupboards and half-hidden shelves through which a boy could hunt for evidence of his lost mother.
A man was sitting at a desk, typing, another stood by a  filing cabinet.
Both had their backs to him.
Stephen moved away before they could become aware of his head blocking out some of their light.
He walked home through the quiet and at this hour deserted village.
The fanbelt on the car broke, making Lyn late for work.
Stephen tied it up but the string broke and he had to drive the car into Hilderbridge very slowly and carefully so as not to overheat the engine.
Mr Gillman had had to attend to his own patients.
He said to Lyn,"The young chap from Bale's was in here asking for you.
Asking for "Miss" Whalby actually, but I put him right on that one."
Lyn took off her coat and came back to where her desk and typewriter and appointments book were.
Two women had come in and she asked them to wait, giving them magazines to look at.
She felt disproportionately upset.
It was ridiculous to be upset at all, since she had herself intended to tell Nick she was married as soon as she saw him, or to make sure he saw her left hand on which today she had taken care to wear her wedding ring.
She was imagining him shocked by what Mr Gillman said, leaving without a word, returning to the pet shop and alone there ever since, brooding on his disappointment and her treachery.
But why should he have reacted like that?
How did she know it had been like that?
She could hardly ask Mr Gillman.
Nick might have laughed when Mr Gillman told him "I didn't know she was married" or even,"Married, is she?
Just my luck."
Come to that, he might have been relieved.
He might have thought he had said too much on Friday, buying the umbrella specially and walking arm in arm with her, and be afraid she would think he had meant  more than he had.
Why couldn't she believe that and stop thinking about it?
 "Mr Gillman's ready for you now," she said to the older of the women, and helped her gently into the consulting room.
Of course it couldn't be that Nick had been relieved.
In calling at Gillman's at all, he must have been coming to ask her to go out with him.
The idea burst into her mind, a sudden radiant solution, that she could rush along to the pet shop at lunchtime and apologize, ask him to forgive her and make everything all right.
Just as swiftly, she saw that this was absurd.
How could she apologize to a man for being married to someone else?
And even supposing she did, what then?
Could she unmarry herself?
Make Stephen vanish?
And for what?
To go to the cinema with Nick Frazer?
She could unmarry herself.
She could have done that any time these past four years.
It would only have taken a word and the simple, undeniable proof.
She had often thought of it and each time she did Stephen's face came before her eyes, as clear as some mystic's vision, the most vulnerable face she had ever seen, the face of a brave child.
It was cloudy for most of the day of 30 April but the sky cleared in the late afternoon and by five the sun shone out boldly.
At about half past six Stephen set out to take the crinkle-crankle path up the fell, the way he had brought the policemen three weeks before.
Never, since he was a child, had he missed coming up to the Foinmen on Beltane.
There was little enough to see, of course.
On 29 April and 1 May the setting sun's rays were scarcely differently placed, but an ancient tradition attached to the eve of May Day.
The rays, just as the red orb of the sun sank beneath the slope of Ringer's Foin, touched the very centre of the Altar.
Long ago, thousands of years ago perhaps, a rune had been carved in the centre of the broad flat stone, and the faint marks which still remained indicated that the rune  had been in the shape the shadows of the Foinmen made at sunset.
No doubt some very holy ceremony had once taken place there on Beltane.
Stephen liked to stand and watch, to imagine the druidical forms as they must have been, going about their ritual, and to wait in silence and stillness for the sun to perform his precise function.
It had not always been possible for him to observe the phenomenon on his own.
Others often came to watch too.
Once there had even been a party of tourists, disturbing the peace with their groans and giggles as they struggled up the steep path from their coach.
On sunless Beltanes he had invariably found himself alone there, but never on such a glorious evening as this.
Nevertheless, he had met no one, could see no one on the whole spread of Foinmen's Plain.
In the past days people had begun cautiously to return to the moor, but not this evening and not here.
It was much warmer than on that last visit and warmer than last year.
There was scarcely a breath of wind.
The stones threw long, flaring shadows that suggested the shape of some ancient harp, only lengthening imperceptibly as the sun's angle grew more oblique.
Great towering clouds were massing behind Big Allen but to the west the sky was as clear as the inside of a mother-of-pearl-lined shell, of a pale, tender, pink-stained azure.
A flock of birds flew homewards very high over Ringer's Foin.
Thin streaks of cirrus lay parallel to the horizon, and between them the sun's orb had become a well-defined sphere of a rich rose-crimson.
It was five to eight.
Stephen had no feelings of aversion or horror because Marianne Price had lain dead over there.
He felt as he always did on the moor, and especially on this spot and on Big Allen, peaceful, without care, without self almost, at one with nature and the past, and as if nothing that happened down there could hurt or vex him any more.
The rays crept across the slab with its skin of yellowish lichen.
The granite was gradually being dyed carmine by the progress of the dying sun.
And now, as Stephen looked  at his watch, the tide of red colour crept to touch that central point where the rune was.
For a moment the rune gleamed in a pool of red light.
The shadows of the stones stretched to their maximum length, while the sun seemed to rest on the horizon.
It was poised there, a rosy ball, and then it began to dip below the rim of the land.
Down in Chesney St Michael-in-the-Moor tolled the hour — six, seven, eight, and on the last note, the red light glimmered and failed, the harp-like shadows fled and the Altar became once more a sheet of half-buried stone.
For another year the sacred meeting of the rune and the sunset was over.
With the departure of the sun a breeze came, making ripples in the turf and bending the ling to the ground.
Stephen made his way down and crossed the Hilderbridge road a little south of Chesney.
The road bisected Vangmoor, and north of the village the Loomlade road crossed it, thus dividing the region roughly into four quarters.
This south-eastern quarter was to Stephen's mind the least beautiful, but it was some weeks since he had been there and he liked to keep the whole of the moor under surveillance.
It consisted mainly of a large area of more or less flat heathland that was in places marshy and out of which rose the only hill to be found here, the broad, low Knamber Foin that looked from a distance no more than a heap of stones.
Away in the distance, beyond the foin, the land became fertile and fields began, enclosed by dry stone walls.
Stephen went first to Knamber Hole where they had found Marianne Price's bicycle.
Not a trace of the search or the find remained — or not as far as he could see.
Dusk was fast approaching.
All colour had gone from the landscape, leaving the ground a kind of shimmering, bright grey on which every bush and stunted tree appeared as a black silhouette.
The sky was pallid and clear between the encroaching tides of cloud.
You could not have called it grey, it was of some colour that had never been given a name, and it glowed as if the moon and stars were behind the skin of it, waiting to break through.
But whatever lit  it was not the moon, for this Stephen now saw slowly rising out of clusters of cloud on the rim of the moor, a reddish, mottled orb like the ghost of that sun.
It seemed bigger than the sun and it sailed with a peculiar swiftness up into the heavens, growing paler and brighter as it did so until it lit up the plain with a dull, yellow light.
He was glad of the moon, for he had been walking away from the road and the quarry for a long time and had reached the rising, stony ground at the foot of the foin.
At this point he decided to turn back, for even now it would be eleven before he was home and it was seldom he stayed out as late as that.
Lyn would worry.
To the north and west, in the right angle the roads made, lay a tree-dotted plain called the Banks of Knamber.
It was covered with birch trees, thousands of them, small and frail, none of them much taller than a man.
There was gorse as well and of course the omnipresent bilberries.
It took Stephen about half an hour to reach the banks and he began to head across them towards Chesney.
In the dull moonlight, which seemed to paint the landscape with phosphorescence rather than illuminate it, the region resembled a pale sky scattered all over with puffs of black cloud.
And from time to time the moon dulled even further as thin wracks of cloud and then denser masses passed across its face.
Once it disappeared altogether, and although a fair degree of brightness remained in the sky, the land became very dark and in this pathless place it was not easy for Stephen to find his way.
It was when the pale flood of light returned that Stephen saw the man — He was quite a long way off, not far in from the road, and he was standing quite still as if waiting for someone or watching.
There was no reason why this man shouldn't be out on the moor on a fine spring night, except that hardly anyone but Stephen ever was.
What was more remarkable was that he was not walking but standing still.
The figure remained absolutely still among the little birch trees and right in the path Stephen had mapped out for  himself to take.
He walked on steadily.
Although nothing could be seen of him but a silhouette Stephen was sure the man was looking at him, staring insolently at this approaching form across the intervening, pallid, tundra-like land.
Stephen perceived that he had no torch, or that if he had one he wasn't bothering to use it, which meant he must know the moor well, as well perhaps as Stephen himself did.
He felt a mounting resentment.
Although he could see no more than the man's black outline, he sensed it was a rival he was moving towards, one who saw himself as having rights in the moor, even rights of possession over it.
Stephen had no clear idea, no idea at all really, as to what he would do when he and the man encountered each other.
Now no more than a hundred yards separated them.
He wasn't afraid, though the man was evidently waiting for him, not moving at all.
To defy the man, to show him, he began to run this last lap.
The man went on waiting, almost as if he were teasing Stephen, and when at last he did move, it was suddenly and with a strange dancing skip.
It seemed to Stephen that he was skipping among the trees.
The moon went in.
At one moment the Banks of Knamber were bathed in pale light, at the next a gush of cloud had obscured the spotty yellow orb of the moon.
As it vanished, absorbed in the veils of blackness, Stephen stumbled over a twisted root and fell headlong.
He wasn't hurt.
But when he picked himself up he was shivering in the darkness.
Where the man was, gone or waiting for him behind the next tree, he had no idea.
It was now impossible to see more than a few yards.
He knew roughly where he was, or he knew in theory, and he stumbled slowly along in a westerly direction, sometimes holding onto the trunk of a birch tree.
Once he thought he heard a movement among the trees to the left of him, as of footfalls rustling the grass.
He stood still and listened but the sound came no more.
Then, it seemed hours later, when he sensed or smelt or somehow divined that he was  almost at the road, there came, as likely as not out of his own imagination, the delicate sound of an indrawn breath.
It was midnight when he came home to Tace Way.
Lyn was in bed but not asleep.
She came down to him and made him a hot drink and felt his forehead which was burning hot and covered in drops of sweat.
In the past Stephen had sometimes been like this after being out late on the moor, feverish next day and light-headed.
Lyn left him in bed and took the car to work, promising to be back early to give him his lunch.
It was to salve her conscience, she thought, and make up for her obsessional preoccupation with Nick Frazer.
Although she hadn't seen him again, he was always in her thoughts.
In her mind she talked to him, telling him about her life, day-to-day things, carrying on with him a long intimate dialogue.
It was in vain that she told herself he was a stranger, a man who had probably by now forgotten her.
This revolving of him in her mind led invariably to the same end, the same fear, that he would go away from Hilderbridge without her seeing him and then she would never see him again.
When her morning's work was finished she thought, as she thought every day, that she would walk along the Mootwalk to Bale's and at last set her mind at rest.
But she didn't do this.
She drove home.
She was afraid Nick might treat her with coldness and pretend he had forgotten who she was.
Stephen was still in bed but sitting up and there were books on Vangmoor all over the quilt.
Lyn put a cloth on a tray and laid it and on an impulse picked a small blue iris and put it in a vase to go on the tray as well.
Stephen's dark blue eyes were very bright and there was a flush on his cheekbones.
Otherwise he seemed much better and he ate his lunch like a hungry schoolboy.
 "I say, Lyn, did I ever tell you how I actually got into one of the old mines when I was a kid?" 
She shook her head.
Vangmoor bored her.
Sometimes she even found it oppressive, living in the middle of it.
Their bedroom window, by a lucky chance for Stephen, had the best view of the moor of any house in Tace Way.
The curtains were drawn back as far as they would go, and whenever she looked up the green-brown panorama confronted her and the pale bowl of sky.
She made an effort.
 "Aren't they very dangerous?" 
"Kids don't care about that.
We'd heard there was a way into the Goughdale Mine somewhere on the slopes of Big Allen.
Actually it's mentioned in one of the Bleakland books, though I hadn't read them then.
I was about twelve.
I went looking for it with my cousin Peter."
 "Peter Naulls?" 
Stephen nodded.
"Uncle Leonard's son.
We started looking for the hole in the long summer holidays.
We were jolly methodical, I can tell you.
Each day we covered a set area and we marked the bit we'd covered with sticks.
But it took us weeks and weeks to find it."
He hesitated.
He had begun his account, intending to tell Lyn the whole of it, but now that he had reached the point of disclosing the site of the hole into the mine and of describing it and what happened there, he felt uneasy.
Dadda he had told, though even to him he had given only a vague location, but he hadn't said a word to his grandmother and he was sure Peter wouldn't have told Uncle Leonard and Auntie Midge.
Why divulge the secret now?
 "We found it," he said and lied,"but we didn't go in or anything.
Too scared for that."
 "Oh, well," she said.
"It was pretty enterprising of us to have found it, wasn't it?
Dadda thought so.
He said what a waste of bloody time and then he gave me a five-pound note."
 "How exactly like Dadda." 
She straightened his pillows.
She took away the tray.
There was no point in asking him if he would like the curtains drawn.
He would come down soon anyway and say he was all right and going out on the moor again.
Perhaps she could write to Nick and explain  things.
Explain what?
Even if she were to write she knew she would never post the letter.
 "You were wrong about another one being killed in a couple of weeks, Mum," Joanne said on a Sunday afternoon.
 "It's been more like six" 
 "Listen to who's counting," said Kevin.
 "Thank God there hasn't is what you ought to say." 
"Well, I do.
I do say that.
I only meant it doesn't look like there's going to be another."
 "Early days," said Mrs Newman.
 "It could just be he hasn't been able to catch anyone." 
Joanne shrieked.
She was big now and the child vigorous.
The women had been amused though the men, especially Dadda, embarrassed, when its movements, or so Joanne averred, had bounced a plate off her lap.
Stephen told them how that morning he had seen a girl out on the moor alone.
 "Some folks want their heads examined," said Mr Newman.
 "I just hope you two girls have got more sense than ever to set a foot out there." 
Dadda, voyaging day by day farther out on his black sea of depression, made his one contribution to the talk.
 "That's right, keep your feet under your own table." 
Joanne got to her feet ponderously.
Her belly swayed, her ankles were like those of a woman with dropsy.
"I go climbing hills every day, of course.
Like a mountain goat, aren't I, Kev?"
There was laughter at that, shamefaced from Mr Newman.
Joanne fetched more biscuits, her current craving.
Stephen hadn't much to say.
The first thing he had thought of when he awoke that morning was that it was his mother's birthday, 25 May, and he had been thinking about it ever since, as he always did on that day.
Somewhere, on the other side of the world, she must be celebrating it.
She and her husband and Barnabas and Barbara…
 "You never told me about that old Mr Bale, Lyn," said Mrs Newman.
"You never told me he'd had a heart attack  coming round from the anaesthetic.
I had to hear it from Kevin's mum."
 "How could I tell you when I didn't know?" 
"Well, I'd have thought you'd know that, working next door but four or five or whatever it is.
And there's no need to colour up like that, it isn't as if it matters."
 "Do you mean he's dead?" said Lyn.
"No, of course he isn't dead.
I'd have said if he'd been dead but Kevin's mum said he was on the danger list."
The conversation, in which neither Stephen nor Dadda took part, then turned upon whether "danger list" was merely a figurative term or if hospitals actually maintained such ominous catalogues.
Stephen wondered if Dadda also remembered what day it was.
Probably, for he forgot nothing, his memory was prodigious.
But it was impossible to tell what went on behind that massive, tortured brow, perpetually corrugated as if in a continual wince and recoil from life.
It was at a family gathering, though one very different from what was now taking place in Tace Way, that had first alerted Stephen to the true facts of his descent.
Arthur and Helena Naulls had had their Golden Wedding party in November about the time of Stephen's own twenty-first birthday.
Before that he hadn't known Helena's wedding date.
Who but a genealogist knew his grandmother's wedding date?
But he had always known his mother's birthday and at primary school he had been allowed to make her a birthday card.
He could still remember it, a picture of a house and a tree and a sun with rays like a starfish.
Three weeks later she had.
gone off with a long-distance lorry driver.
Her birthday was 25 May and her parents had been married in November, though not perhaps the previous November.
They had been married for fifty years, but was his mother forty-nine or only forty-eight?
There was no one he could ask.
The idea of asking Dadda!
What he did was to go to Holy Trinity Church and look at the parish records where he found that his parents' wedding date was also May — the 27th.
Birth dates are not given on marriage certificates, only ages, and his mother's was there as twenty-five, which meant she must have been born in 1926 and have been twenty-seven when he was born.
Stephen was almost sure this wasn't so, that she had been twenty-eight when he was born and thirty-four when she ran away.
Perhaps there had been a muddle because her birthday and her wedding date were so close together.
He puzzled over the dates on the backs of photographs, most of which seemed to have been taken in May, and he  tried to get from his aunts the precise age gap between his parents and between his mother and Uncle Stanley.
Their answers were always, "A couple of years" or "Oh, three or four years." 
The true facts came out simply and when he wasn't even looking for them.
Looking for his own birth certificate for his own marriage, he found his mother's too — in a desk in the house in King Street.
The Holy Trinity marriage entry was wrong.
Brenda had been born in May 1925 and therefore conceived during the previous August when Helena was still second housemaid at Chesney Hall.
The other clarification followed swiftly from a photograph of Tace he saw in a newspaper review.
It was a few weeks after his marriage and Stephen had been feeling unsure of himself, unsure of life itself.
The discovery fortified him.
When he looked at the picture of Tace he might have been looking into a mirror.
Of course it had to be!
He had always felt he couldn't be the descendant of Naullses.
The Whalby connection was bearable, for they were good honest craftsmen, respected for their skills.
But to be a Naulls, formed out of the same genes as Uncle Stanley, mouthing platitudes in the council chamber, or weedy, weak-eyed Uncle Leonard, that was intolerable.
It was also false.
His mother wasn't the daughter of Arthur Naulls but born of a summertime passion between a pretty servant and one of the greatest novelists of the twentieth century.
Tace was married, so there was naturally no question of his marrying Helena.
But he hadn't deserted her, he had arranged a suitable marriage with his under-gardener, had given the couple the lodge to live in and had had the child named after one of his sweetest heroines, Brenda Nevil of Wrenwood.
Stephen never much cared to think about sex.
In the past, when his thoughts had turned to it as a young boy's thoughts will, his body hadn't followed his mind.
All he had been able to envisage was his mother, so slight and  fair, being mounted first by Dadda and then by the lorry driver.
So it wasn't the sexual aspect of Helena's affair that interested him but its romantic side.
He imagined Helena coming to some trysting place on a summer night, to the Banks of Knamber perhaps, or like Lady Irene and Alastair Thornhill, to the ghost of a road, the Reeve's Way, as it threaded through the Vale of Allen, and Tace meeting her there in the twilight.
Love children, he had read, were more beautiful, more charming and more favoured by destiny than those born in wedlock.
His mother was and must still be such a one.
For the loss of her he had compensated as best he could, first with the imaginary friend he called Rip, then with the moor itself, but in May he thought of her still and with a curious longing.
It wasn't for many weeks after coming to Chesney that Peach ventured out.
His favourite places to be were the chestnut leaf table and the top of the mahogany tallboy under the landing window on which he lay for hours, staring at the peaks and plateaux of the moor.
He grew large and plump and round-cheeked, but he was without kittenish ways as if his sad experience had robbed him prematurely of his youth, yet when he sat on Lyn's lap in the evenings he gave himself up to a drowsy and contented purring.
His first excursion from the house took him no farther than the garden.
Next time he was off and away.
When two hours had passed and he hadn't returned, Lyn imagined him finding his way back to Bale's and by this act leading her there in search of him.
She imagined herself reunited with Nick through the cat's agency, as lovers might be in some fairy story.
But Peach didn't go to Bale's or to his former home in Hilderbridge.
He came back in the evening, bringing Lyn a fieldmouse.
Her mother had come over to tell her Joanne had been kept in hospital with high blood pressure and threatened eclampsia.
She had gone to St Ebba's antenatal clinic and they had kept her there.
When Mrs Newman  saw the mouse, though it was dead, she jumped on a kitchen chair and squealed.
Peach took back his gift, which he had laid at Lyn's feet, and sat with it in his mouth, making cross twittering growls.
Stephen wrote for "Voice of Vangmoor" : "Those who declare our moorland puts up a poor showing when it comes to wildlife, should contemplate some of the offerings of my ginger tomcat: fieldmice, a shrew and even a water vole." 
Author's licence, he told himself, though he had hesitated over the water vole.
"Wild flowers too are to be found in abundance.
Not only is the bilberry putting forth its globular pinkish-green blooms and the uva-ursi prolific with blossom this spring, but a few orchids may be spotted.
I myself was lucky enough last week to see a fine sample of the Lesser Twayblade and another of the Small White Orchid, rare occurrences as far south as this and in these times.
Readers of our great Vangmoor novelist, Alfred Osborn Tace (or viewers, as one must say these days!) will be familiar with the scene in Wrenwood in which Brenda Nevil hunts for specimens of this orchid for her bridal bouquet.
It was true that he had found the orchid.
A little cluster of it was growing among the damp rock ledges between Big Allen and Mottle Foin near where the Hilder ran down.
Stephen came upon the flowers by chance after he had left the path and struck out across the rough marshy ground.
The sky was the way he liked it best and thought best suited to the terrain it overcast, piled with cloud in pillars and columns and towers and ramparts, so that in places the vapour seemed not insubstantial but composed of solid masonry.
The surface of the moor itself glowed with the flowerbuds on the grasses and the tiny recumbent plants and there was a feel in the air of new springing life.
The orchids, fresh and perfect against the damp stone, growing between cushions of bright green moss, had creamy flowers, fragrant and triple-lobed.
Stephen had hardly been able to believe his eyes.
Tace, describing the orchid in his novel, had also told  where it was to be found, and within a few years every tuber and plant of leuchorchis albida had been stripped from the moor.
Here, by the Hilder, was far west of the site of the plants mentioned in Wrenwood.
Stephen resolved to be wiser than his grandfather and, while telling his readers of his discovery, not to disclose its whereabouts.
He didn't even tell Lyn.
She liked flowers and planted flowers in their garden but he often felt she didn't really care about the moor.
When she asked him if he would come with her to see Joanne he put forward the excuse of having his article to write, so Lyn went with Kevin.
 "I reckon you're very wise not going in for this lark," Joanne said, shifting the mound of her body uncomfortably under the bedclothes.
"If you get like weakening, just remember me.
D'you know, they could keep me in here right up until the baby's born."
 "They won't do that," Lyn said.
 "They haven't got the beds." 
 "She's brought it on herself with overeating," said Kevin.
For once Joanne didn't round on him.
She sighed.
"It's all fluid, they say.
The baby isn't even very big.
I'm like one of those water beds, stick a needle in me and I'd go down to nothing.
Pity they can't."
Lyn left the two of them together.
St Ebba's, the maternity hospital, was a good way farther down North River Street from Hilderbridge General, but there had been no room left in St Ebba's car park and she had used the car park of the rambling, foinstone, turreted building that had once been the Three Towns workhouse.
It was nearly eight o'clock of a sunny evening, still light, as light as afternoon, but cool as early June often is.
The trees in the grounds were in full, fresh leaf, and behind them the sun declined towards the moorland horizon, its rays making a brilliant silver-gold glare through the tracery.
Lyn took one of the gravel paths into the grounds of the general hospital, walking towards the sun that dazzled her eyes so that she screwed them up against it.
Her hair was loose today and  she wore a blue and white striped cotton dress with her mother's birthday gift cardigan.
She had several pairs of sunglasses, perks of Gillman's, but she had forgotten to bring a pair with her.
She saw the man, not very tall, thin, wearing jeans and a tee-shirt, coming along the path towards her, towards the main gate into North River Street, but the sun blinded her and she didn't know him.
He saw her and stopped.
She closed her eyes and passed her hand over them and looked again.
When she saw it was Nick Frazer something very curious happened.
She behaved as she had never thought it would be possible for her to behave.
She didn't think.
It was a reflex, the result of those weeks of thinking and longing and wondering.
She ran to him and into his arras.
He put out his arms and caught her and held her, and they stood there on the gravel path in the grounds of Hilderbridge General Hospital, embraced as if they had long been lovers and had known each other with profound emotion and physical joy and had been parted only to meet again now, by chance, so felicitously.
 "I've thought about you every day, all the time," he said.
 "Oh, I know, I know," she said.
"I knew exactly why you didn't come and I thought you knew why I didn't come to you.
But it was a deadlock, no way of breaking out of it.
I even hoped that damned cat would find his way back so that I'd have an excuse to ring you."
 "I had a sort of fantasy he'd go to Mrs Africa's and I'd go there after him and so would you and we'd meet." 
"Did you?
I had a feeling like that too.
How mad we've been, Lyn.
Lyn, Lyn, that's the first time I've said your name.
Except to myself, I've said it a hundred times to myself."
She said in a level voice, though her hands were shaking, like puppets jerked on strings,"I've been visiting my sister.
My brother-in-law's with her now but visiting ends at eight  and I have to take him home.
I brought him so I have to take him back."
 "Let him take your car and you stay with me," Nick said.
 "I can't do that." 
They stood under a cedar tree.
Nick took her in his arms and kissed her but, when his lips parted and she could taste his mouth, she drew back.
There were movements in her body that frightened her.
She said, and her voice wasn't steady any more,"I have to take Kevin home now.
Should we — should we see each other tomorrow?"
 "Lunch at the Blue Lagoon?" 
She nodded.
"I don't want to let you go, but d'you know, I feel so ridiculously happy.
I am awake, aren't I?
I haven't succumbed to weariness at Uncle Jim's bedside and fallen asleep?
Of course I haven't, I don't dream, never have.
It's early closing tomorrow — we can have all the afternoon together."
She smiled at him.
Then she walked away quickly along the path to the car park.
Kevin was waiting by the car, leaning his arms on its roof, bored, smoking a cigarette.
 "What d'you think of her, then?" 
Lyn blinked at him.
He seemed curiously unreal.
 "I'm sorry?" she said.
"Jo.
I said what d'you think of her?"
"She seems okay.
How would I know?"
He got into the car beside her, gangling, long-legged, with big hands and feet.
She realized for the first time fully consciously that she was ill at ease with, even afraid of, very tall men.
Nick and she, they were proportioned to each other, they seemed to belong to the same tribe.
 "Okay if we pick up Trev?" 
Kevin's twin worked in some factory or mill in North Hilderbridge where he did the maximum overtime.
He was waiting on the Jackley Road outside a pub called the Ostrich, Kevin's double in every particular until he had grown a moustache.
 "Where's old Steve got to, Lyn?" 
 "Where d'you think?" said Kevin.
 "I tell her she's a moor widow." 
"Yeah, but what's he escaping from, Lyn?
What's with him he can't adjust to reality?"
 "The moor's real enough, I should think." 
She didn't want to discuss Stephen.
 "It's either an acute case of claustrophobia or his super ego could be compelling him to confront agoraphobia." 
 "Why don't you apply for a grant and go and do a psychology degree at the tech?" said Lyn.
Trevor began to explain why not, about the pointlessness of formal education in an area where knowledge depended so much upon intuition, and also about how much he earned with his overtime at Batsby Ball Bearings.
She didn't listen.
She thought of Nick and then of Stephen.
But what difference could this make to Stephen?
She was depriving him of nothing, taking from him nothing he wanted or could possess.
A flock of sheep were in Goughdale, cropping the turf, dark-wooled, long-horned sheep of the breed called Big Allen Black.
The outward signs of the disused mine workings beneath, the old windlass, the boundary stones, the ruined coes, rose out of the plain and showed black against the setting sun.
Would he, seventeen years afterwards, be able to rediscover the mouth of the hole that led down into the Goughdale Mine?
He thought he could remember roughly where it was: on the side of Big Allen facing him, the northern face, almost at the foot and a little to the right of centre.
Somewhere among the crags of limestone that made a broad shelf along part of the foin's lowest slopes.
The hole was referred to by Tace as "Apsley Sough" , though "sough" in these parts meant a drain or channel.
He had sited it far from where it really was, half a mile down from where it was; he had obviously never seen it.
And it  couldn't have been a sough or drain, for there could have been no reason to drain water into a mine.
Joseph Usher, Tace's hero, had hidden himself in a chamber of the mine but had been driven out by hunger and thirst and, having given himself up, been taken away to trial and execution.
Stephen made his way across the dale towards the mountain by a path that ran to the west of the ruined engine house.
It was growing cool, even cold, with the departure of the sun.
The sheep lifted their heads and looked at him as he passed by but they made no sound.
The weather had been hot that August when he was twelve.
Peter Naulls and he, searching for the hole into the mine, had got as suntanned as if they had been on the kind of holiday they never had, on the beaches of Spain or Italy.
Peter had, literally, stumbled on the mouth of the hole.
Running in some ritual or phase of a game — for they didn't spend every minute of each day crawling and peering and prodding the ground — he had caught his foot in a root and fallen headlong.
He had found himself looking into the infinitely complex growth of stem and grass and leaf and tendril and fine twig that covered the moor in a thick springy upholstery, but also beyond this, through and beside this, into clear darkness.
Under his face, half overlaid by a crag shaped like a mushroom growth on a tree trunk, entirely obscured until his eyes were close up to it by the thick vegetation, was the open fissure which for thirty days they had searched for in vain.
He had sprung to his feet and thrown out his arms and cried, for he had just been doing Archimedes' Principle at school, "Eureka!" 
Where was Peter now?
The uncles and aunts presumably knew but Stephen himself hadn't heard a word of him since he went away to college in London when he was eighteen.
That departure to university of a man far less intelligent than himself had been a blow to Stephen.
And Dadda's comment — he occasionally deigned to recognize the existence of the Naulls clan — had done nothing to mitigate his sad resentment.
 "Bloody degree won't get the lad a living  in Naulls's shop." 
Peter hadn't been expected to work in the men's outfitters, never had and never would.
But even in their search, strictly speaking, it had been Peter who had succeeded and not he.
Peter, though fortuitously, had found Apsley Sough.
It had been he who, with truth, had cried out, "I have found it!" 
Next day they had gone back with ropes and a book on rock-climbing from the library to teach themselves about knots.
Dadda would have locked Stephen up if he had known what was going on.
Uncle Leonard and Auntie Midge, more appropriately to their characters, would have had nervous breakdowns.
The hole was not a vertical shaft.
If it had been they might not have dared penetrate it very far.
It had been bored or dug or had occurred naturally at an incline of about thirty degrees, so that all the way down into the mine, holding onto the rope, they had had purchase for their feet, had almost been able to walk don, though describing it thus made a dull and orthodox act of what had been the great adventure of their boyhood.
After a long descent the shaft widened a little, and the light of their torches showed them the interior of the mine, the southern end of the tunnellings.
They dropped down into a chamber, the roof of which must have been seven or eight feet high, and where the air seemed quite fresh.
It was cold, though, by contrast with the heat outside, and there was a cold, damp, metallic smell.
They lit the candles they had brought and made their way along a passage which led out of the chamber, gazing wordlessly — he couldn't remember that they had spoken at all while in there — at the arched limestone walls, at the tunnels that from time to time branched from this central artery, once into a wide gallery whose egress had been blocked by a fall of stone.
And then the flames of their candles had gone out.
They had noticed no difference in the quality of the atmosphere but the flames of their candles had gone out.
They had said nothing.
They had stood in the dark until  Peter had put his torch on, and then they had turned back, glad though, relieved, when they could light a match again.
Stephen had gone out first, scrambling up the shaft, putting all his weight this time on the rope and wondering what would happen, whether they would ever be found alive, if the rope came unfastened from the spur of rock to which they had tied it.
But not really frightened, buoyed up always by a child's invincible courage, the courage that comes from a sense of immortality.
When he came out into the bright white daylight he had a shock.
There was another boy there, standing by the mouth of the hole, looking down, looking at the twitching rope.
Adults in those circumstances would have spoken to each other, but not children.
Stephen didn't know who the boy was or what he was doing on Big Allen and he didn't speak to him.
Nor did the boy address him or Peter.
He stood a little apart from them, kicking at the scree, and then he walked off across Goughdale between the crumbling towers.
Stephen could remember how hot it had been, the sky a dazzling white-blue, the heat making the air wave and shiver above the dry yellowed turf.
Dusk now brought a stillness and its own grey translucent light.
He walked along the ridge of rock, trying to picture once more the place where Peter had run and fallen.
At one point he knelt down and parted the heather with his hands, so sure was he that he had found it, but there was nothing but the scree and the tiny plants which grew amongst it.
It had become too dark to search any more and it was cold.
He shivered a little as he set off for home.
They had meant to go out to lunch, or Nick had.
He said to come upstairs to the flat only to fetch his jacket, and then they would go and eat and talk and maybe sit by the river.
It was the first really warm day of summer.
Lyn went first up the stairs and into the set of big, shabby rooms with arched windows that seemed full of sky.
She turned to Nick as he came in.
He looked like a thin, young boy, much younger than he really was, his brown hair like a monk's without the tonsure.
His skin was brown and his eyes a light clear hazel.
One of his hands was on the door, the other extended to her.
She looked at his fine, thin hands, the turned wrists where there were fair hairs on the brown skin, and put her face up to his.
He kissed her.
He smoothed her hair back and held it and kissed her, tenderly, then harder, and this time when his mouth opened into hers she didn't pull away.
Her heart had been beating fast and her hands were shaking, but as he kissed her and his body pressed close against hers, the length of his body hard against hers, those signs of fear gradually ceased and she grew weak and curiously fluid in his arms.
He put his hands on her breasts and she made a little soft sound.
The sun on the river threw reflections across the bedroom ceiling, down the wall.
The ripple reflections moved in a continuous, tiny fluttering.
They danced over Lyn's body as she undressed, over lean, brown Nick, waiting for her.
Her arms felt languorous, her flesh soft and relaxed as if she had just awakened from sleep.
He felt with his hands the smooth, sleepy flesh and she took his mouth on hers, himself into her.
With pain.
She twisted her face away and kept herself from crying out.
Her body went as taut as a bowstring, and when she opened her eyes and looked into his face she saw there awestricken astonishment.
He lay still inside her.
And then, for his sake, she did what she had read should be done: raised her legs and arched her back and held him embraced and reached her mouth to his, and began to enjoy what she did.
To enjoy as much as she was going to for this time, she knew that, and she smiled and held him and kissed him when she felt the convulsion and heard his breath released.
The quivering net of light from the river seemed now to have set the whole room trembling.
Down in the Mootwalk a woman laughed and from the water a swan gave its harsh, grating cry.
Nick, holding her, said quietly, "That was the first time for you." 
 "Yes." 
 "I don't understand." 
 "I've never understood," she said,"but there it is.
Doctors are only of use if a — a person wants to be cured."
She was very near to crying.
She sat up and wrapped her arms round her knees, her hair falling round her like a cloak.
He said nothing.
She thought that if he said the wrong thing now everything would be over for her and him.
And she was so used to the wrong things being said, to her tactless family, a mother and sister who shouted where angels feared to whisper, to Stephen and his inept words.
If Nick made the mildest joke about virginity, about his luck, about impotence, about needing to eat after their exertions, she would dress and run away and it would all be over.
She turned to him in despair and the tears were running down her face.
He took no notice of them.
His eyes were half-closed and he was smiling a little.
 "Go to sleep with me for a while," he said, and he took her gently into his arms.
He didn't say he loved her but, "I think we're going to love each other, Lyn." 
From the pulled and sagging pockets of his jacket, his Sunday-go-to-meetings suit, his only suit, Dadda produced a cairngorm and silver ring for Lyn and a pearl-handled Stilton knife for Stephen.
Though they might have forgotten that the following day would be the sixth anniversary of their engagement, he with his prodigious memory had not.
 "It was me brought you together," he said as they thanked him.
 "But for me I don't reckon you'd ever have set eyes on each other." 
It was true.
He had more or less arranged their marriage, Lyn sometimes thought.
Her first job on leaving school had been at Whalbys'.
She had been a clerk-receptionist phone-answerer-teamaker and she had got the job through her uncle Bob who was as near to being a friend of Thomas Walby's as it was possible to be.
He had never employed a girl before or since and now it seemed to Lyn that Dadda had hand-picked her for Stephen without the knowledge of either of them.
Young, innocent, they had been malleable in those hands which were so practised in making something valuable out of raw or damaged material.
Dadda, having scrutinized his previous gift, the chestnut leaf table, for white rings, cigarette burns or dust in the carving, shambled about the room examining the legs of furniture.
Although he didn't say so, Lyn knew he was looking for the marks of Peach's claws.
Peach, who often sat on the chestnut leaf table, marking it no more than if he had been a fluffy cushion or a nightdress-case cat, watched gravely from the basket in which he was wise enough to sit when at home on Sundays.
Lyn put the ring on and said it was a perfect fit.
 "Ali, I had the size of your pretty fingers by heart," said Dadda who was adept at making one feel a heel.
Trevor Simpson came in later and Lyn's uncle Bob as well as the rest of them.
There were hardly enough chairs to go round.
Dadda withdrew into a corner, drawing up his spider legs.
Uncle Bob said he could remember, from when they were boys, Tom had never been keen on cats.
 "A mild form of ailurophobia," said Trevor.
 "Look, lad," said Dadda,"I don't have nothing mild.
I don't have nothing bloody mild."
Joanne, vast, out of hospital the day before, sat eating chocolate biscuits.
 "If you go on like that," said Kevin,"you'll be back in there before the week's out.
"It's not food, it's fluid.
If I've told you once I've told you five thousand times, it's all fluid."
"Chocolate's poison to horses, did you know that?
It's got some substance in it, theo-something.
Racehorses have been known to die of eating chocolate."
 "You mean me and racehorses have got something in common?" 
 "There was a woman lived in Hall cottages when you girls were little," said Mrs Newman,"used to feed her family on cat food.
Out of tins, I mean.
She used to give them Pedigree Chum too, but it was mostly cat food.
She liked the fishiness."
 "No thanks, Lyn," said her father, "I won't have another sandwich." 
 "And she had this baby and it had a birthmark like a cat's face on its stomach." 
 "Ours'll have a Mars bar." 
 "I've no doubt it's true," said Trevor.
 "Could be a rare form of imprinting, could even be stigmata." 
Peach jumped up onto Lyn's lap.
He lay there, purring.
His pale golden, ringed tail hung down and sometimes the tip of it twitched.
Dadda was the first to leave.
He hadn't come in the van.
Bob Newman offered him a lift but he wouldn't accept it, he said he would get the bus.
Joanne and her mother lingered, gossiping, by their adjoining gates  as if they wouldn't see each other again for half a year.
Lyn washed the dishes.
She got out the mower to cut the back lawn.
 "I say, darling," Stephen said, "I think I'll go out for a bit, blow the cobwebs away." 
 "Would you like me to come with you?" 
His eyes became opaque.
She could see he didn't want her.
"That wouldn't be much fun for you.
You have a rest, put your feet up."
Was she still trying to retrieve something?
Still hoping for something from him?
 "I'm twenty-five," she said, with the edge to her voice that was the nearest she got to temper.
"Sorry.
Shouldn't have said that.
I only meant you look tired.
Why don't you go out somewhere?
Take the car."
 "Perhaps I will." 
She seemed to hear Nick's voice saying, We are going to love each other.
 "All right if I'm not back till late, then?" 
Stephen said, eager for her approval.
 "Of course it's all right, of course ." 
He set off jauntily, whistling.
Golden eyes looked at him from among the leaves of the yellow maple tree where Peach sat cleverly camouflaged.
Stephen walked along the Jackley road, past the crossroads and up to the Vale of Allen.
It had been a white day, white blank sky, white thin sun, warmish and dull.
The sky was white and still, unmarked by cloud or blue.
A car was parked by the roadside, on the left hand side and facing north.
Stephen thought it a curious place to leave one's car, blocking, or partly blocking, the northbound roadway, while taking it a farther ten yards on would have enabled its driver to pull in onto the bridlepath that traversed the Vale as far as the Reeve's way.
The car was a small yellow Volkswagen.
Stephen couldn't see a sign of its owner.
The land here was dotted about with gorse bushes and he half-expected a dog to come bounding out from among them.
But apart from the gentle, almost mesmeric, hum of the bees, all was silent and still.
He climbed up on to the Reeve's Way and followed it northwards into Goughdale.
The owner of the car was nowhere to be seen, nowhere in all these wide plains that lay about him, though the car was still there, a bright yellow dot on the distant road.
The causeway commanded a view of all this region of the moor, but once he had jumped down and was in the shallow bowl of Goughdale, he could see nothing except the remains of surface workings and the louring slopes of Big Allen.
It took him nearly two hours to find the hole into the mine.
His memory had played him false.
He thought he could remember that he and Peter had fastened their rope to a spur or spike of rock and accordingly it was for such a feature that he searched.
But the limestone took no such jagged form in the area where he knew the sough must be located, it was smooth and curved.
He found instead the only possible protuberance to which they could safely have anchored their rope.
This was in the slope of the mountainside above the shelf and below the scree on which Peter had slipped.
He crawled along the shelf, peering, feeling with his hands.
And there it was — a long way from where he remembered it, quite differently sited, but there beyond a doubt, a cleft into the foot of the mountain under a pendulous lip of stone.
He lay down and looked in.
There was nothing more interesting to be seen than if this had been the entrance to a rabbit warren, nothing but a tunnel that led down into darkness.
It smelt of earth.
He got to his feet again and walked back across Goughdale, pausing at each ruin of a mine building to check if any more entrances to the underground workings remained unblocked.
The George Crane Mine, the Duke of Kelsey's, the Goughdale.
He had looked before, of course, he and Peter had looked, and years later he had once more investigated the rough hillocky ground, but then and now he found nothing.
The mines were dangerous, the mines were not to be left open as an invitation to any foolhardy visitor.
He had found, and  rediscovered, what was almost certainly the only inlet remaining accessible to that network of subterranean passages, galleries and chambers, that other world beneath the moor.
The sun had set and dusk was closing in.
Stephen would have preferred to walk back across the Vale of Allen and Foinmen's Plain but he had no torch and tonight there would only be a thin, new moon.
So he made for the Jackley road from which nearly all the traffic had now disappeared.
He was surprised to see the yellow car still there.
It had been parked on that spot for at least three hours, probably much longer, for whoever had parked it had very likely done so before the evening traffic build-up.
People who wanted to get rid of old cars sometimes dumped them on the moor, the kind of behaviour that maddened Stephen.
But this car wasn't of that sort.
From its registration number it was only three years old, and it looked well-kept, the front tyres were new.
He looked through the windscreen and then through the driver's window.
A knitted sweater of cream wool hung across the back of the passenger seat and there was a striped silk scarf, cream, red and black, on the dashboard shelf.
The driver's window was partly open.
He tried the driver's door.
It wasn't locked.
Once he had opened the door, though, there seemed nothing to do but close it again.
The owner must be somewhere about.
It could only be someone who had gone for a marathon walk or a solitary picnicker who had lain down and fallen asleep.
But as he passed the crossroads and came to that part of the road that wound down into Chesney he couldn't help recalling the man he had seen skipping among the trees.
He looked long and searchingly at the Banks of Knamber that tonight were as they had been then before the moon rose, grey and pale as a sky dotted with tiny black clouds.
But tonight there was no one among the trees.
In the morning he picked up the van in Hilderbridge  and drove to Jackley the long way round through Byss, having a newly upholstered chaise longue to deliver before he made the Jackley collection.
His last call would be in Trinity Road, Hilderbridge, so he stopped at a confectioners and bought a box of fruit jellies.
It was a day of white sky, ground mist, chilly, an expectant day, waiting for the sun to come through.
The soft, thin mist gave to the foins a mysterious air.
Their peaks seemed to float above the ground.
Stephen drove south by the main road and as he came through Goughdale it occurred to him that the yellow Volkswagen might still be there.
It was.
He saw the spot of bright buttercup colour as he rounded the last curve before the crossroads.
But the car was no longer the only vehicle parked there.
It had gathered to itself, in the still white mist, on the verge of the Vale of Allen, half a dozen more cars and a large van.
Stephen slowed down.
Two of the cars were police cars, marked Police and with blue lamps.
A man in a raincoat was standing by the rear of the Volkswagen while another was squatting down, peering underneath it.
Stephen pulled in on the opposite side of the road.
He got down from the cab.
He could see now that there was a driver in each of the police cars.
He went across the road.
Immediately the standing man called out to him,"Nothing for you to bother about, sir, thank you very much.
This is a police matter."
It was Detective Sergeant Troth.
He appeared to recognize Stephen as quickly as Stephen recognized him, but the dark wedge face registered this only in a tightening of the mouth and a jerk of the chin.
It was the other man, who rose now from his squatting position to be identified as Inspector Manciple, who spoke to him.
"Good morning.
It's Mr Whalby, isn't it?"
Stephen nodded.
 "There hasn't been another — any trouble, has there?" 
Troth said gruffly, "What d'you mean, trouble?" 
 "To be frank with you," said Manciple,"there's a young woman missing from Jackley.
A married woman.
This is her car."
 "And you think…?" 
 "We don't think anything," said Troth in his flat Three Towns accent.
His face, Stephen noticed, was badly marked with acne as if he were still in his teens, though he was years older than that.
 "Not yet we don't," he said.
 "We don't jump to conclusions." 
 "In the normal course of things we'd not treat such a disappearance seriously." 
Manciple sounded as if he were apologizing for the other man's rudeness.
He had a conciliatory air and he looked uneasy when Troth turned his back.
"Only after what you found back in April, things aren't normal.
There's a couple of search parties organized.
I daresay you can make out one of them up across the Vale there."
Stephen got back into the van and drove down into Hilderbridge.
At Sunningdale the same collection of old people, arranged in much the same order, was watching television in the day room.
On the screen a woman with bright blonde hair and red-rimmed glasses was teaching her audience how to make profiteroles.
One of the old men was reading the Daily Minor, the knitter was knitting, Helena Naulls was asleep, her mouth open and her dentures slipped out of alignment.
She was wearing a pink cotton dress which evidently belonged, not to her, but to the fattest resident, a mountain of a woman who was also asleep, whom Stephen had never seen other than asleep in all his visits.
Mrs Naulls awoke as easily as she slept.
The knitter pushed her shoulder and she sat up and opened her eyes.
Stephen kissed her.
 "How's tricks then, Grandmother?" 
 "Just the same," said Mrs Naulls.
 "Have you brought me my jellies?" 
 "What do you think?" 
He put the box on her lap.
 "Whoa  there, go easy!" 
She grunted as her fingers scrabbled with the cellophane wrapping.
 "I reckon I'll have one myself, I'm feeling a bit peckish, and what about this lady?" 
 "Go on," said the knitter, "it's a shame to tease her." 
 "Leonard was always a tease," said Mrs Naulls, putting a purple jelly into her mouth.
 "His dad tried to knock it out of him but it never made no difference." 
 "Knock one devil out and another in, I always say," said the knitter.
 "How's Midge getting on, Peter?" 
 "If you mean Lyn, she's okay, and I'm Stephen." 
He lowered his voice.
 "It looks as if there's been another murder on the moor." 
 "Pardon?" said Mrs Naulls, her mouth full.
 "We're most of us a bit hard of hearing in here, dear," said the knitter.
 "Another murder on the moor," Stephen repeated more loudly.
The old man put his paper down.
The fat woman opened her eyes and closed them again.
Helena Naulls hesitated between a red jelly and a yellow one and finally chose the yellow.
Round-eyed, the knitter said,"It turns you cold all over to think of it.
Was it another young girl, dear?"
 "It looks like it." 
Stephen jumped up.
"Actually, I'm off to join the search party.
They're looking for the body now."
In that moment he had made up his mind.
It was what, half-consciously, he had been longing to do since he had got out of the van and talked to Manciple.
He'd go back and explain to Dadda.
Anyway, Dadda owed him a day off for working the Spring Holiday Monday to get those Chippendale chair seats done.
 "They'll need someone like me, someone who knows the moor inside out." 
 "Mr Tace," said Mrs Naulls, smiling reminiscently,"he was a one for the moor.
He did love it.
He was a lovely man, one in a million.
Bye-bye, Stephen.
Mind you give my love to Lyn."
The sun had appeared as a brighter white puddle in the white sky and the mist had begun to move.
There was no sign of the search party.
Stephen always kept an anorak and a pair of walking boots in the car.
He parked in Loomlade and took the path that ran between Loomlade Foin and Big Allen, the direction in which Manciple had surely indicated the party was veering.
It was near here that he had found the little white orchid.
He came up to the Hilder at the point where the aqueduct pillars crossed it.
He could see the river winding away from its source in the springs of Pierce Foin.
The land was marshy here, tussocky with reeds, the black peat showing through the heather.
Distant Goughdale seemed deserted.
He crossed the river by the stepping stones, wondering if they had yet searched the mine ruins.
Mottle Foin, the only foin on which trees grew, little stunted pines making a black dappling on its surface, was the highest hill on the moor after Big Allen and now its rocky hump hid the Milder's northerly curves, Pierce Foin and all of Lustley Dale.
Stephen had another couple of miles to walk before the view was open to him again and he saw the men in the distance, deployed out across the ground on the river's right bank.
There must have been forty or fifty of them.
One man had done that, one man had had the power to call them all out here on to the moor, away from their homes, their jobs.
He had killed one girl and now, because another was missing, they had come as if he had called them, as if they were his slaves.
Stephen went back across the river again, clambering over the boulders.
Two or three of the men looked round, no one waved.
A burly figure, tall and heavy, came towards him.
It was Ian Stringer.
 "No luck yet?" called Stephen.
 "Luck, d'you call it?" 
"Oh Lord, you know what I mean.
I just thought I'd come up and lend a hand.
I'm by way of being a bit of an expert on the moor, you know."
Stringer shrugged.
His blue shirt, open at the neck and  showing a mat of black hair, was wet with sweat in the armpits and down the back.
"You see that chap in the green?
The little dark chap?
That's her husband, that's Roger Morgan.
We're hoping, there's just a chance, she left her car to pick wild flowers.
She was fond of wild flowers, he says, and well, she could have got lost or passed out or something."
 "In that case she wouldn't be all the way over here, would she?" 
 "There's a couple of policemen with us." 
Stringer pointed them out.
 "They're sort of directing operations." 
Stephen had rather expected he would do that.
But he joined the party as they tramped off towards Lustley Dale.
 "What was she dressed in?" he asked the husband.
 "I can't be absolutely sure." 
He had a middle-class, educated voice.
"A red shirt, I think.
Jeans."
His face was grey with fatigue.
 "We've been out looking for her since five," said another man.
 "She'd gone to see her parents in Hilderbridge and I was with mine in Jackley." 
Morgan managed a wry grin.
 "We didn't get on with our in-laws." 
Stringer said, low-voiced, as Morgan moved out of earshot, "We started at the Foinmen." 
"Of course you would.
Good Lord, yes.
 "We've been at it — He looked at the watch on his sinewy wrist with its furring of black hair" — like nine hours.
There's two other parties, one doing the south-east and one the Pertsey side."
By mid-afternoon they were on the lower slopes of Lustley Foin.
Stephen wasn't hungry.
He felt invigorated, exhilarated by the search.
It wasn't often that he had a whole day out on the moor.
As he clambered over the rocks, parting the scrub and the brambles to peer into crevices, he heard a droning throb overhead and looked up to see a helicopter.
It was circling slowly and very low  down, almost touching, it seemed at one point, the summit of Big Allen.
Stringer cocked a thumb in Morgan's direction.
"That copter belongs to some mater of his father-in-law.
Useful if she's out in the open."
A bramble whipped and clawed Stephen across the neck.
He put his hand up to it and saw the blood streaked on his fingers.
There was no point in climbing the foin, she wouldn't be up there.
They spread across the opening to the valley that was called Jackley Plain, and there Roger Morgan could go no further.
He didn't quite collapse.
He sat down on a stone and put his head in his hands.
Of all the members of the party he was the one from whom the most endurance was called, but of all the members of the party he was perhaps the only one unused to sustained walking or manual labour, and he was also the smallest.
Stephen felt a flicker of contempt for him.
 "Sorry," Morgan said gruffily.
"I'm dead beat.
I've had no sleep since the night before last."
He looked at Stephen with recognition.
"You're one of the Whalbys, aen't you?
You and your father came to our place to cover a settee."
Stephen didn't much like to be reminded of this in public.
"Oh yes.
Hackley.
St.Edmund's Avenue."
Morgan nodded.
 "Better get on, I suppose." 
 "I should sit there a bit longer," one of the policemen said.
"Then we'll get you down to the road.
We've got our vehicles at quarter mile intervals all the way from Hilderbridge to Jackley."
Stephen started off again and the others began to follow him.
He wasn't going to be left behind, nursing Morgan.
Overhead the helicopter circled once more, making a black locust-shaped shadow on the sunlit turf of the plain.
They stood admiring each other.
 "You're lovely," said Nick
 "So are you." 
 "I did make you happy, didn't I?" 
"You know you did.
Couldn't you tell?"
She reddened, for she wasn't yet used to this kind of talk.
 "I never knew it would be like that." 
"I get a strange feeling when you talk that way.
It's a strange situation, isn't it?
It makes you more mine than if there'd been others or if your marriage had been real."
She nodded.
 "And you more mine." 
"Stay with me, Lyn.
I don't mean all night, I know you can't, but stay with me for the evening."
 "No." 
She began to put her clothes on, blue denim jeans, white tee- shirt, shoulders thin and straight with bones like shell.
"It's seven now.
I ought to have been home two hours ago."
Nick said, but very gently to take the sting out of the words, "You're not his mother." 
 "I'll never be anyone else's." 
She hunted in the bed for the ribbon that had come of her hair while they were making love.
Nick combed her hair and tied the ribbon himself, badly, too loosely.
She had to do it again.
He dressed and went downstairs with her.
Where Peach's pen had been in the window was a cage with a snake in it, curled up on straw.
In the shop, in the dimness, she threw herself into Nick's arms and kissed him.
The snake's skin trembled at the movement in the air.
She got the 7.15 bus, feeling an anxious as a mother who isn't home in time for when her little boy comes back from school.
People on the bus were talking about the number of police cars on the road and someone said another girl was missing.
When she rushed into the house in Tace Way Stephen wasn't even there.
It looked as if no one had been there since she left in the afternoon to go to Nick.
Peach alone was in the house, having let himself in through the cat flap Stephen had fixed into the lower panel of the back door.
He was sitting on one of the kitchen counters, paws folded, tail tucked up, gazing with stately patience at the larger  door.
Lyn fed him.
She made herself a cup of tea, cut bread for toast, beat up eggs with grated cheese in a pan.
At nine she put the television on for the news.
The first item was the discovery of Ann Morgan's body.
She had been found at two that afternoon by a party searching the Pertsey and north-west region of Vangmoor.
The body was in a stone hut, formerly the powder magazine of the long-disused Duke of Kelsey's mine.
She had been strangled and her long fair hair shorn off at the scalp.
Lyn switched off the set as Stephen came in at the back door.
