INTRODUCTION
Our adaptation of Pamela is the latest in a long, international line of stage versions, most of which took even greater liberties with the original than we did.
We were particularly interested in Pamela's relationship with Mr. B- (whom we call Belville, as in Giffard's 1741 adaptation, which featured the up and coming David Garrick, still working under the soubriquet "A Gentleman" ), the effect it has on the people around them and the pressures put on the relationship by those people.
We drew from the four books (two double volumes) and took the occasional snippet from our fellow adaptors.
The French verse which Pamela recites to Mrs. Belville is from Voltaire's adaptation Nanine; the first scene between Lady Davers, Pamela, and Belville is from a contemporary translation of Goldoni's Pamela Nubile; the first scene between Mrs. Jewkes, Pamela and Mr. Williams is from Giffard's adaptation and the Italian dialogue is a translation of a Richardson scene between the Countess and Belville.
Contrary to the view expressed by some critics, one of the dialogue was written by us.
The picaresque vitality of Richardson's novel begins to wane early in the third volume (a frequent fate of follow-ups) and, as a theatre audience does not have the opportunity to plough through stodgy bits in their own time, we felt it made for better drama to kill Pamela (in the novel she comes near to death) before the dramatic conflict itself dies.
We were particularly interested in the quality of Pamela and Mr.B-'s love, and its "come here/go away" patterns.
This psychological phenomenon had been shown by John Dryden in 1676: Indamora: Force never yet a generous heart did gain.
We yield on parley but are stormed in vain.
Constraint in all things makes the pleasure less, Sweet is the love which comes with willingness.
Emperor: No, 'tis resistance that inflames desire, Sharpens the darts of love and blows his fire.
Love is disarmed that meets with too much ease; He languishes and does not care to please.
And therefore 'tis your golden fruit you guard With so much care to make possession hard.
(Aureng-Zebe) refined by Mrs Delarivier Manley (whose works seems to have influenced Richardson's) in her 1720 collection of novels.
The Power of Love: Of all those passions which may be said to tyrannize over the heart of man, love is not only the most violent, but the most persuasive.
It conducts us through storms, tempests, seas, mountains and precipices with as little terror to the mind and as much ease as though through beautiful gardens and delightful meadows.
A lover esteems nothing difficult in pursuit of his desires.
It is then that fame, honour, chastity and glory have no longer their due estimation, even in the most virtuous breast.
When love truly seizes the heart it is like a malignant fever which thence disperses itself through all the sensible parts.
The poison preys upon the vitals and is only extinguished by death or, by as fatal a cure, the accomplishment of its own desires.
and sharpened up with typical 20th-century cynicism by the American lyricist Stephen Sondheim: I've got those "God why don't you love me, oh you do I'll see you later" blues, That "long as you ignore me, you're the only thing that matters" feeling, That "if I'm good enough for you, you're not good enough" And "thank you for the present but what's wrong with it?" stuff.
Those "don't come any closer 'cause you know how much I love you" feelings, Those "tell me that you love me, oh you did I gotta run now" blues.
I've got those "whisper how I'm better than I think, but what do you know?" feelings, That "why do you keep telling me I stink when I adore you" feeling.
That "say I'm all the world to you, you're out of your mind"  "I know there's someone else and I could kiss your behind" , Those "you say I'm terrific but your taste was always rotten" feelings, "Go away, I need you" , "Come to me, I'll kill you" , "Darling, I'll do anything to keep you with me till you Tell me that you love, me, oh you did, now beat it will you" blues.
Pamela was not, in our view, the minx that Fielding thought her.
Although she fancies Belville from the start and repulses his sexual advances, this is not because she feels that marriage must be the outcome of such a strategy.
Rather, she more bravely assumes that by repulsing him, she will be dismissed from her position and never see him again.
When, after his assaults on her, she begs to be allowed to leave, her instinctive feeling for him makes her provide him with some hope of her return, or at least of their future communication.
After marriage, she has no wish to leave him but, as his wife, cannot accept her subservient role.
It is this mixture of compliance and argumentativeness which not only bores and irritates Belville but actually drives him back to his old pursuits — drinking and lechery.
Belville's obsession with Pamela, an obsession fired by her constant rejection of him, provides the main driving force of the play.
At first he wants nothing more than a quick lay with a pretty maid, then wants her to be his mistress, then is able to admit to himself that he loves her, but the idea of marriage across the social  barrier is impossible for him.
His abduction and imprisonment of Pamela, his over-riding jealousy of Mr. Williams and later of the child Pamela is about to bear him, his courage in deciding to make her "openly and publicly" his wife, are all testimonies to the power of his feeling for her.
However, although he can reject his class's accepted code of behaviour and marry a servant, he is unable to alter his view of a wife's role.
Thus, although the marriage crumbles, Belville's obsession with Pamela (or the unattainable Pamela of the first act) continues.
His protestations of devotion in the trial scene are, in our opinion, genuine, as is his confession that his affair with the Countess is platonic.
Other directors of the play and readers of the novel may come to different conclusions.
The dominant supporting character is Lady Davers, who supplies an analysis of society's reaction to such a misalliance.
She is obsessed with her brother in much the same autocratic and selfish way that he is obsessed with Pamela.
She is furious that he has married beneath him, but appalled when her vicious attack on him threatens to end their relationship for ever.
Mr. Williams should provide a real alternative to Belville.
We did not see him as the spineless vicar that Fielding turned him into in Shamela.
Mrs. Jewkes is the novel's most memorable character — comic, grotesque and frightening.
She is also a splendid contrast to the noble-minded and sanctimonious Mrs. Jervis.
Interestingly, in Giffard's adaptation, the part was played by Richard Yates while his wife played Mrs. Jervis.
Jackey is the most colourful in a lengthy list of aristocratic thugs, and the Countess provides an element of sophisticated sexuality.
But finally it is Pamela and Belville's play, a story and a relationship which we were happy to discover could hold the attention of an audience in the 1980's.
PRODUCTION NOTE
Pamela was commissioned by Shared Experience in 1984 and performed by the company from January to April 1985, in a production by Giles Havergal.
In the first production for Shared Experience in 1985 the play was presented with a cast of five actors: Ian Reddington played Barry who played Belville.
Charon Bourke played Becky who played Pamela.
Sian Thomas played Joyce who played Mrs Belville and Lady Davers.
Joyce also read in Lady Jones, the Breathless Servant and the Countess of Pembroke.
Robin Hooper played Neil, the Director, who played Sir Jacob Swynford.
Neil also read in Mrs. Jervis, Mrs. Jewkes, Lord Darnford an the Cardinal.
John Baxter played Gavin who played Mr. Williams and Jackey and read in the Visiting Lady, Lincolnshire Robin, the Gipsy, Mr. Hargreaves, the Fox and Servant to the Countess.
This adaptation of Samuel Richardson's novel can be presented in a variety of ways.
We include here some notes on the first production but subsequent directors may find many different ways of presenting the text.
The original production: 1985
The first production was played as a final run-through in a rehearsal room for a revival of a main-house production of Pamela.
The Director, Neil, explained to the company that many of the cast were involved that afternoon with a performance of Coriolanus downstairs on the main stage.
He stressed the importance of this final run-through for the revival of Pamela, particularly for Becky and Barry playing Pamela and Belville and asked the rest of the cast to "read in" for the absent actors.
Joyce agreed with the utmost reluctance.
Neil, Gavin and Joyce acted full out the parts  they actually played in the main stage performance and read in the other parts with scripts in their hands.
Costume
Becky and Barry wore the full 18th-century costume from the production and the others wore rehearsal clothes.
Props and furniture
The rehearsal room had stand-by props and furniture and changes of scene were created by the different positions of screens represented in the rehearsal room by wardrobe rails draped with sheets.
Sound
Music for the run-through of Pamela was provided by a tape recorder on the prompt table, operated by the Director, Neil, with assistance from Gavin and occasionally from Joyce.
Occasional sounds from the matinee of Coriolanus (stage management calls etc.) drifted in over the tannoy.
The offstage life
The original production counterpointed the main play (of which this is the script) with the offstage life and rehearsal room behaviour of the actors, Barry, Becky, Joyce and Gavin and the Director, Neil.
Each cast member created his or her offstage character, complete with name and detailed personality and background.
Because the characters and the dialogue of this offstage life were created by the original cast, we have not included it in this script.
To those who wish to do the play in this way, our advice is to start work on the Pamela script and let the offstage characters develop during the rehearsal process.
We found that towards the end of the rehearsal period the actors during run-throughs referred to each other and related to each other in the offstage character (Joyce, Neil, etc.).
Our thanks are due to the original cast for the creation of these offstage characters.
The advantage of presenting the play in this way is that it can be done with a small cast in modern dress with simple rehearsal props and furniture and limited sound and lighting.
However, it must be stressed that the play could be done entirely differently — for instance, with a large cast in full costume.
F.M.
&G.H. 
CHARACTERS
MR.
BELVILLE MRS.
BELVILLE: his mother LADY DAVERS: his sister JACKEY: her nephew MR.
WILLIAMS: Belville's Chaplin LORD DARNFORD LADY JONES A VISITING LADY SIR JACOB SWYNFORD MR.
HARGREAVES THE COUNTESS OF PEMBROKE
PAMELA ANDREWS: Maid to Mrs. Belville MRS.
JERVIS: Housekeeper to Mrs. Belville MRS.
JEWKES: Housekeeper to Belville LINCOLNSHIRE ROBIN: a servant A GIPSY A BREATHLESS SERVANT A SERVANT TO THE COUNTESS A CARDINAL AT THE MASQUERADE A FOX AT THE MASQUERADE
The action takes place in and around Mr. Belville's estates, first in Bedfordshire, later in Lincolnshire and then in his house in London.
ACT ONE
[Optional stage direction for small cast production.
As the audience take their seats for "Pamela" we can hear, from the onstage tannoy, stage management calls and, ultimately, an announcement: "Ladies and Gentlemen, please take your seats in the main auditorium; this afternoon's performance of" Coriolanus "is about to begin." 
As the music and dialogue of the offstage production begin, a member of the "Pamela" cast turns the volume off.]
BELVILLE is discovered kneeling, mourning over PAMELA's coffin, with MR.
WILLIAMS.
BELVILLE: To answer this black charge, I will give you a brief history of my passion for this dear girl; how it commenced and increased and my own struggles with it.
I began to take notice of her when she was hardly thirteen years old.
[PAMELA enters behind him as if in his imagination]
Her charms increased every day, not only in my eye but in the eyes of all who beheld her, for my mother took the greatest delight in her waiting maid.
[MRS.
BELVILLE enters with MRS.
JERVIS.
They instruct PAMELA in the art of writing.]
About this time I had, by a certain wicked attempt — for I had a bold heart which rather put me upon courting than avoiding danger — set a hornet's nest about my ears so I thought it better to remove myself to France and be a little more discreet in my armours.
When I returned I looked upon Pamela again with no small pleasure.
By the delicacy of her person and the brilliancy of her eye she had tinder enough in her constitution to catch a well struck spark and I trusted I should know how to set her ablaze in a few months more.
What a rakish figure did I cut.
I had a great opinion of my person and air, which had been remarked by many ladies whom my vanity  thought to be very good judges of these outward advantages.
My guilty passion made me admire her in everything she said or did.
Like a true libertine I supposed I wanted nothing but importunity and opportunity.
[PAMELA recites an Elocution Lesson to MRS.
BELVILLE and MRS.
JERVIS.]
PAMELA: When I did sit in Babylon, The rivers round about, Then in remembrance of Zion, The tears of grief burst out.
Then they to whom we prisoners were Said to us tauntingly, Now let us hear your Hebrew songs And pleasant melody.
[MRS.
BELVILLE and MRS.
JERVIS applaud.]
MRS.
BELVILLE: What can I do with the little baggage, Mrs. Jervis?
She has such a thirst after knowledge that the more she knows, I verily think the humbler she is, and I cannot help letting go as fast as she pulls as my son used to do to his kite.
To what height she'll soar I can't tell.
[PAMELA recites a French verse for MRS.
BELVILLE.]
PAMELA: Ah!
Cette nuit est une annee entiere!
Que le sommeil est loin de ma paupiere!
Tout dort ici; Nanine dort en paix; Un doux repos rafraichit ses attraits.
[MRS.
BELVILLE and MRS.
JERVIS applaud.
BELVILLE also applauds.]
BELVILLE:[sarcastically]What do you design, madam, to do with or for this Pamela of yours?
One would think you intended her for something more than your waiting maid.
MRS.
BELVILLE: Ah Billy, there is no fear of what you hint at — you know not the girl.
She has always in her thoughts her parents' mean condition and I shall do nothing for them, at least at present, because I will keep the girl humble.
I intended at first only to teach her needlework to qualify her for a  genteel position, for you see she has a delicacy in her person that makes it a pity ever to put her to hard work, but she masters everything so fast that now I am desirous to have to divert and entertain me in my thoughtful hours.
BELVILLE: If you, madam, are diverted with her that's enough.
To be sure, Pamela is a better companion for a lady than a monkey or a harlequin.
[aside]Go on, my dear mother, improving as fast as you will.
I'll engage to pull down in three hours what you'll be building up in as many years, in spite of all the lessons you can teach her.
[PAMELA dances and BELVILLE follows her with his eyes.]
MRS.
BELVILLE: My dear son, I don't like your eye following my girl so intently.
BELVILLE: I look after her madam!
No, indeed.
Her arms she knows not whether to swim with or to hold before her.
A little awkward piece of one or t'other I think her.
MRS.
BELVILLE: Only I know that sparkling lustre, or I should have some fear for my Pamela as she grows older.
BELVILLE: O, she may be your favourite as a waiting maid but I see nothing but clumsy curtseys and awkward airs about her.
A pretty, rustic affectation of innocence that, to such as cannot see into her, may pass well enough.
MRS.
BELVILLE: Nay, my dear, don't say that.
She has no affectation I am sure.
Would to God the dear girl had had the smallpox in a mortifying manner, then she'd be lovely in the excellencies of her mind only and out of dangers of suffering from the transient beauties of countenance.
BELVILLE: I'll tell you how it is: you have taught her to assume the airs of a gentlewoman.
Indeed, you'd do the girl more kindness to put her in your dairy, for she'll be utterly spoiled for any useful purpose.
[aside]I'll nip this bud by the time it begins to open and place it in my bosom for a year or two at least.
[BELVILLE absent-mindedly picks up the paper that PAMELA has been writing.]
MRS.
BELVILLE: Don't you think Pamela writes a pretty hand, son?
BELVILLE: This is her writing, is it?
 "The Lord's my shepherd, I'll not want." 
The girl is mighty pious.
MRS.
BELVILLE: I wish you were so, child.
BELVILLE: I fancy when I was of Pamela's age I was pretty near as good as she.
MRS.
BELVILLE: Never, never.
I am sure I took great pains with you, alas, but to very little purpose.
You had always a violent, headstrong will.
BELVILLE: Some allowances for boys and girls I hope, madam!
But you see I am as good for a man as my sister Barbara is for a woman.
MRS.
BELVILLE: No, indeed you are not, I do assure you.
BELVILLE: I am sorry for that, madam.
You give me a sad opinion of myself.
MRS.
BELVILLE: Pamela has a solidity of judgement above her years, a genteel air and a docility unequalled.
BELVILLE:[aside]I like "docility" .
[to MRS.
BELVILLE]The girl's well enough for what she is.
But let's see what she'll be a few years hence.
Then will be the trial.
MRS.
BELVILLE: She will always be good, I doubt not.
BELVILLE: Can't we talk of another subject?
You complain how seldom I attend you, and when you are always talking of matrimony or this low-born raw girl it must needs lessen the pleasure of approaching you.
MRS.
BELVILLE: Thou wast ever an impudent fellow and many a vile roguery have you kept from your mother — these late hours, these all-night works cannot be right and to come home so sober.
I should wish you were brought home in wine rather than to come in so sober and so late as you do.
[MRS.
BELVILLE]moves upstage.]
BELVILLE:[aside]The girl had good sense and I thought it  would be some pleasure to watch by what gradation she might be made to rise into love.
I began to think she would be worthy in time of being my mistress, which till now I had been a little scrupulous about.
[Upstage MRS.
BELVILLE has a heart attack, surrounded by MRS.
JERVIS and PAMELA, who help her to a chair.]
MRS.
BELVILLE: Ah Billy, I find my life and strength ebbing so fast.
Make Mrs. Jervis, my dear son, as happy as you can.
She is a gentlewoman born, as you know, let her always be treated as such.
As for Pamela, I don't know what to say for her.
Perhaps your sister will take her.
But I wish she was not so pretty.
She may be the bird for which some wicked fowler will spread his snares.
You are a young gentleman and I am sorry to say, not better than I wish you to be.
Though I hope young Pamela would not be in danger from her master who owes all his servants protection as much as the king does to his subjects.
Yet I don't know how to wish her to stay with you for your own reputation's sake, my dear son, for the world will censure as it lists.
But remember I depend upon you fitly to provide for her…
I have so much more important concerns on my mind that I am hardly fit for anything, or to wish for anything than to receive the last releasing stroke.
[She dies.]
[Mrs. JERVIS exits.]
[PAMELA moves forward.
She is reading a letter she has just written to her parents.]
PAMELA: "Don't wonder to see the paper so blotted for my good lady died of the illness I mentioned to you, and left us all much grieved for the loss of her.
O, how my eyes run!
Well, but God's will be done.
My master said: for my dear mother's sake I will be a friend to you and you shall take care of my linen — God bless him — and gave me four  golden guineas which were in my old lady's pocket when she died.
I send them to you now in a pill-box wrapped close in paper that they mayn't chink.
I always thought my young master a fine gentleman…"
[She continues writing.]
BELVILLE:[aside]The bewitching girl every day rose in her charms upon me and I could not help entertaining a jealousy that she was writing to somebody who stood well in her opinion, and my feelings for her made it a sweetheart, of course.
[to PAMELA]To whom are you writing, Pamela?
PAMELA: Pray your honour, forgive me, only my father and mother.
BELVILLE: Let me see how you are come on in your writing.
[reading] "I always thought my young master a fine gentleman as everybody says he is, but he gave these good things to us with such a graciousness that I thought he looked like an angel." 
You are a good girl, Pamela.
I am not angry with you for writing such innocent letters as these.
You write a very pretty hand and spell tolerably too.
I see my mother's care has not been thrown away upon you.
[He opens a chest and gives PAMELA jewellery, a dress and some underclothes belonging to his mother.]
These, Pamela, are for you.
Have them made fit for you when your mourning is laid by, and wear them for your good mistress's sake.
[PAMELA blushes.]
Don't blush, Pamela, dost think I don't know pretty maids should wear shoes and stockings?
[PAMELA, embarrassed, runs out.]
[LADY DAVERS enters.]
LADY DAVERS: Brother, dearest, have you determined as yet to let Pamela come and live with me?
My mother was fond of her and I shall be every whit as fond.
Besides, it does not become a girl to live with a master who has no lady for her to wait upon.
Whenever you marry, if you should have a fancy for her, I'll let you have her again.
What say you, my lord?
Shall Pamela come and live with me?
BELVILLE: Yes, Pamela shall go and live with you.
LADY DAVERS: May I then bid her to get ready to go along with me?
BELVILLE: Yes, do.
[BELVILLE exits.]
[PAMELA enters.]
LADY DAVERS: My brother at length has given his consent that you should come and live with me.
Therefore get yourself ready for I shall take you along with me now in my coach.
Shall you be glad to come?
PAMELA: I shall think myself fortunate in having the honour to wait upon our ladyship.
LADY DAVERS: Come then, Pamela, let us go.
PAMELA: I am ready to obey your ladyship.
[She cries.]
LADY DAVERS: What's the matter with you?
What do you cry for?
[MRS.
JERVIS enters.]
PAMELA: Mrs. Jervis, thank you for all your kindness.
Heaven reward you for the good you have done me.
MRS.
JERVIS: Heavens, my heart is ready to break, I can bear it no longer.
LADY DAVERS: Pamela, the longer you stay here the more you torment yourself.
Let us be gone from hence.
In my family you shall have reason to be merry.
My nephew is come home from his travels after having been abroad these five years.
He is full of life an has brought home with him a number of foreign servants so that my house seems to have been removed to Paris.
PAMELA: I hope your ladyship's nephew will not behave rudely to me.
LADY DAVERS: Come, let us be gone.
Do not lose time.
PAMELA: Pray, my lady, what will my master say if I go away to abruptly without paying my respects to him?
LADY DAVERS: Come along with me.
We shall go by his apartment.
[BELVILLE enters.]
MRS.
JERVIS: Here he is.
[MRS.
JERVIS exits.]
BELVILLE: Pray, Lady Davers, what are you doing?
LADY DAVERS: I am taking Pamela.
BELVILLE: Whither?
LADY DAVERS: To my house.
Did you not agree she should be my chambermaid?
BELVILLE: Pamela shall not stir out of my house.
LADY DAVERS: How so?
Will you break your word?
BELVILLE: I'll be under no subjection to a sister.
Pamela shall not stir from hence.
LADY DAVERS: Pamela is to go along with me.
BELVILLE: Go now, sister.
LADY DAVERS: Must I be made a witness to your follies, by heavens?
BELVILLE: And leave her here.
LADY DAVERS:[understanding at last]Ah, brother.
[LADY DAVERS exits.]
BELVILLE:[aside]To what numberless mean things did not this unmanly passion subject me?[to PAMELA]My sister Davers would have had you live with her, but she would not do for you what I am resolved to do if you continue faithful and obliging.
What say'st thou, my girl?
Hadst thou not rather stay with me than go to my sister?
PAMELA: Your honour will forgive me, but as you have no lady to wait upon, and my dear lady being dead these many months, I had rather, if it would not displease you, wait upon Lady Davers because…
BELVILLE: Because you are a little fool and know not what's good for yourself.
I tell you I will make a gentlewoman of you if you be obliging and don't stand in your own light.
[He kisses her violently.]
PAMELA:[aside]I would give my life for a farthing.
BELVILLE: I'll do you no harm, Pamela, don't be afraid of me.
PAMELA: I won't stay, sir.
BELVILLE: You won't, hussy!
Do you know to whom you speak?
PAMELA: Yes, I do, sir, too well.
Well may I forget that I am your servant when you forget what belongs to a master.
BELVILLE: What a foolish hussy you are.
Have I done you any harm?
PAMELA: Yes, sir, the greatest harm in the world.
You have taught me to forget myself by demeaning yourself to be free to a poor servant.
BELVILLE: Who would have you otherwise, you foolish slut?
Cease your crying.
I own I have demeaned myself but it was only to try you.
Here, to make amends for the fright I have put you in.
[He throws a coin at her.]
Go for a walk and I charge you say nothing of what has passed, and I'll forgive you.
PAMELA: I won't take the money, indeed, sir, poor as I am I won't.
And I will be bold to say I am honest, though poor, and if you was a prince it would not be otherwise.
[PAMELA, in tears, rushes off and meets MRS.
JERVIS.]
MRS.
JERVIS: Come, I see you are troubled at something.
Tell me what is the matter?
PAMELA: I, Mrs. Jervis, I have been so affrighted.
[PAMELA is seen to confide in MRS.
JERVIS.]
BELVILLE:[aside]That such a girl as this, cottage-born, who owes everything to my family and has an absolute dependence upon my pleasure should find me resistible.
Surely all this frost must be owing to the want of fire in my attempts to thaw it.
[MRS.
JERVIS comes forward.]
Well, Mrs. Jervis, I know Pamela has your good word.
But do you think her of any use in the family?
MRS.
JERVIS: Why, she is one of the most virtuous and industrious young creatures I ever knew.
BELVILLE: Why that word "virtuous" , I wonder?
Is there any  reason to suppose her otherwise, or has anybody taken it into his head to try her?
MRS.
JERVIS: I wonder, sir, you ask such a question.
Who dare offer anything to her in such an orderly and wellgoverned house as yours, and under a master of so good a character for virtue and honour?
BELVILLE: Your servant, Mrs. Jervis, for your good opinion, but pray if anybody did, do you think Pamela would let you know it?
MRS.
JERVIS: Why, sir, she is a poor, innocent, young creature and I believe has so much confidence in me that she would take my advice as soon as she would her mother's.
BELVILLE: I take her to an artful young baggage and had I a young handsome butler or steward she'd soon make her market of one of them and snap at him for a husband.
MRS.
JERVIS: I am not to dispute with your honour, but I dare say if the men will let her alone she'll never trouble herself about them.
BELVILLE: Why, Mrs. Jervis, are there any men that will not let her alone that you know of?
MRS.
JERVIS:[deeply embarrassed]No indeed, sir.
BELVILLE: Well, no more of this silly girl.
You may only advise her as your are her friend not to give herself too much licence upon the favours she meets with, if she stays here.
I tell you she is a subtle artful gypsy and time will show it.
[Exeunt severally MRS.
JERVIS and BELVILLE.]
PAMELA:[alone]After what has passed I must leave this house and go to the next town and wait for an opportunity to get home to my parents.
But I am at a loss to resolve whether to take away the things he has given me or no.
I will leave them behind me and go only with the clothes on my back, and then I have two miles and a half and a byway to the town, and bring pretty well dressed I may come to some harm almost as bad as what I ran away from, and then, perhaps, it will be reported I have stolen something, and to carry a bad name to my dear parents…
[BELVILLE enters.]
BELVILLE: Sit still, Pamela. don't run away, I tell you, I have a word or two to say to you.
When I was lately a little kind to you and you carried yourself so foolishly, did I not tell you you should say nothing of what passed to any creature, and yet you made a common talk of the matter?
PAMELA: I made common talk of it, sir!
I have nobody to talk to, hardly.
BELVILLE: "Hardly" , you little equivocator!
What do you mean by "hardly" ?
Let me ask you, have you not told Mrs. Jervis for one!
PAMELA: Pray, your honour, let me go down for it is not for me to hold an argument with your honour.
BELVILLE: Equivocator again!
What, do you talk of an argument?
Is it holding an argument with me to answer a plain question?
Answer me what I asked.
PAMELA: O, good sir, let me beg you will not urge me further for feat I forget myself again and be saucy.
BELVILLE: Answer me.
Have you not told Mrs. Jervis?
PAMELA: Sir, perhaps I should answer you by another question and that would not become me.
BELVILLE: What is it that you say?
Speak out!
PAMELA: Then, sir, why should your honour be so angry I should tell Mrs. Jervis what passed if you intended no harm?
BELVILLE: Is it thus you taunt and retort upon me?
I will be answered.
PAMELA: Well then, sir, I will not tell a lie for the world.
I did tell Mrs. Jervis for my heart was almost broken, but I opened not my mouth to any other.
BELVILLE: So I am to be exposed in my house by such a sauce-box as you.
PAMELA: For heaven's sake, pity a poor creature that knows nothing of her duty but how to cherish her virtue and honesty.
BELVILLE: Is it not one part of your honesty to be dutiful and grateful to your master?
PAMELA: Indeed, sir, it is impossible I should be ungrateful  to your honour or disobedient, but when your commands are contrary to that first duty which will ever be the principle of my life.
BELVILLE: Rise, Pamela, rise.
You are your own enemy.
I am very much displeased with the freedoms you have taken with my name, and you may as well have real cause to take these freedoms with me.
[BELVILLE pulls PAMELA onto his knee and tries to kiss her.]
PAMELA: Angels and saints and all the host of heaven defend me![aside]I read this in a book a night or two ago.
[to BELVILLE]May I never survive one moment that fatal one in which I shall forfeit my innocence.
BELVILLE:[still struggling with her]Pretty fool!
How will you forfeit your innocence if you are obliged to yield to a force you cannot withstand?
Let the worst happen that can, you'll have the merit and I the blame.
Who ever blamed Lucretia!
All the shame lay on the ravisher only.
PAMELA: May I, like Lucretia, justify myself with my death if I am used barbarously.
BELVILLE: You are well read, I see, and we shall make a pretty story in romance, I warrant ye.
[PAMELA's fierce struggles with BELVILLE lead into a hysterical fit at the end of which she swoons.]
PAMELA:[calling out.]
Mrs. Jervis, Mrs. Jervis!
[MRS.
JERVIS enters.
BELVILLE, deeply embarrassed, breaks away.]
BELVILLE: How is the girl?
I never saw such a fool in my life.
I did nothing to her.
She has told you that I was kind to her in the summerhouse, though I'll assure you I was quite innocent then as now, and I desire you to keep this matter to yourself.
MRS.
JERVIS: O sir, for your honour's sake, and for Christ's sake!
BELVILLE: Since she is apt to fall into fits or at least pretend to do so, prepare her to see me tomorrow after dinner in my mother's closet.
I have done her no harm and I won't have her stay in my house, prating perverse fool as she is.
[MRS.
JERVIS leads the recovering PAMELA off.]
[aside]Sometimes I admired her for her virtue, at other times, impetuous in my temper and unused to control, I could have beat her.
[MRS.
JERVIS and PAMELA enter.]
Come in, fool.
You may well be ashamed to see me after your noise and nonsense.
PAMELA:[aside]I ashamed to see him!
Very pretty indeed!
BELVILLE: Mrs Jervis, do you sit down, but let her stand.
Did you not think when you saw the girl in the way you found her that I had actually ruined her, as she calls it?
MRS.
JERVIS: Indeed I feared so, at first.
BELVILLE: Has she told you what I did to her, and all I did to her?
MRS.
JERVIS: Indeed, she told me you only pulled her on your knee and kissed her.
PAMELA: Only, Mrs. Jervis!
An was not that enough to show me what I had to fear?
Your honour knows you went too far for a master to a servant or even to his equal and I cannot bear it.
BELVILLE: I think her very pretty and I thought her humble.
I was bewitched by her, I think to be freer than became me, though I had no intention to carry the jest further.
PAMELA: Your honour may call this a jest or what you please, but, sir, it is not a jest that becomes you.
MRS.
JERVIS: Pamela, don't be so pert to his honour.
PAMELA: O, dear Mrs. Jervis, don't you blame me too.
MRS.
JERVIS: Good, your honour, pity and forgive the poor girl.
I will pawn my life for her, she will never be so pert to your honour if you will be so good as to molest her no more.
You saw, sir, by her fit, she was in terror, and although your honour intended her no harm, yet the apprehension was almost death to her.
BELVILLE: O, the little hypocrite.
She would represent herself as an angel of light and make her kind master and benefactor a devil incarnate.
PAMELA:[aside]O, how people will sometimes call themselves by their right names
BELVILLE: I am resolved she shall return to the distress and poverty she was taken from.
PAMELA: May your honour be forever blessed for your resolution.
Now I shall be happy!
God Almighty bless your honour for ever and ever, Amen!
[She kisses his hand.]
BELVILLE: Damn you for a little wretch.
I have no patience with you.
[PAMELA exits.]
Is she gone?
I intended to have said something else to her.
MRS.
JERVIS: Shall I call her again, your honour?
BELVILLE: Yes.
No, let her go.
It is best for her and me too.
I never met with the fellow of her in my life.
No, she shall go, but if I knew a lady of birth such as her in person and mind, I would marry her tomorrow.
[MRS.
JERVIS exits.]
[LORD DARNFORD, LADY JONES and a VISITING LADY enter.]
LADY JONES: Well, Mr. B., we understand you have a servant-maid who is the greatest beauty in the country and we promised ourselves to see her.
BELVILLE: The wrench is well enough, but no such beauty as you talk of, I'll assure ye.
She is young and everything is pretty that is young.
I have heard much more talk of her prettiness than I think it deserves.
Her greatest excellence is that she is humble and courteous.
Pamela, step hither.
[PAMELA enters and is shown off to the visiting aristocrats.]
LADY JONES: See that shape!
VISITING LADY: I never saw such a face and shape in my life.
L. DARNFORD: Why, she must be better descended than you have told me!
LADY JONES: Why indeed, report has not been too lavish, I assure you.
VISITING LADY: Don't be ashamed, child.
I wish I had such a face to be ashamed of.
PAMELA:[aside]O, how like a fool I look!
VISITING LADY: Well, Mistress Pamela, I can't say I like you so well as this lady does for I should never care, if you were my servant, to have you and your master in the same house together.
PAMELA:[aside.]
I know what I could say if I durst, but they are ladies and ladies may say anything.
L. DARNFORD: Can the pretty image speak?
I vow she has speaking eyes!
O you little rogue, you seem born to undo or to be undone!
PAMELA: God forbid an"please your lordship it should be either.
[She exits in a dignified manner.]
LADY JONES: Prettily said, I vow.
[LORD DARNFORD, LADY JONES and the VISITING LADY exit.]
BELVILLE:[aside]I find I cannot master my passion for her.
By God I must have her.
[BELVILLE exits.]
[PAMELA and Mrs. JERVIS are alone together in private, perhaps preparing for bed]
MRS.
JERVIS: My dear Pamela, I believe he loves you, though his servant, better than all the ladies in the land.
He has tried to overcome it because you are so much his inferior and it is my opinion that he finds he can't and that vexes his proud heart.
PAMELA: But Mrs. Jervis, let me ask you, if he can stoop to like such a poor girl as me, what can it be for?
He may condescend perhaps to think I may be good enough for his harlot and these things don't disgrace men that ruin poor women as the world goes.
And so, if I was wicked enough, he would keep me till I was undone and till his mind changed for even wicked men, I have read, soon grow weary of wickedness with the same person, and love variety.
Then poor Pamela must be turned off and looked upon as a vile abandoned creature, and everybody would despise her, and justly too, Mrs. Jervis.
For she that can't keep her virtue ought to live in disgrace.
I would wear rags  and live upon rye bread and water rather than be a harlot to the greatest man in the world.
MRS.
JERVIS: This love is the devil!
In how many shapes does it make people shew themselves!
And in some the farthest from their hearts.
PAMELA: Hush!
Did you hear something stir in the closet?
MRS.
JERVIS: No, silly girl.
PAMELA: I think I heard something rustle.
Maybe the cat got there.
MRS.
JERVIS: Prithee my girl, let us make haste to bed.
[PAMELA and MRS.
JERVIS say the Lord's Prayer together.
Half-way through BELVILLE bursts in from a closet or from behind a curtain.
PAMELA screams.]
BELVILLE:I'll do you no harm if you forbear this noise but otherwise take what follows.
Mrs. Jervis, step upstairs to keep the maids from coming down at this noise.
I'll do no harm to this rebel.
[He takes hold of PAMELA.]
PAMELA: O, for heaven's sake, for pity's sake, Mrs. Jervis, don't leave me.
MRS.
JERVIS: No, my dear lamb, I will not leave you.
I wonder at you, sir.
BELVILLE: Let me but say a word.
[PAMELA, hysterical, has another attack or fit and swoons.]
MRS.
JERVIS:[reprovingly]I could never have thought that the son of my dear good lady departed could have so forfeited his honour as to endeavour to destroy a virtue he ought to protect.
BELVILLE: I will not bear it.
She has a lucky knack of falling into fits when she pleases.
I intend no harm to her if she'd have left her squealings and I did no harm neither but to myself.
[He looks down at PAMELA.]
Let her go as soon as she will.
She is an ungrateful baggage…[pause]…but I think it would be a pity with those fair soft hands and that lovely skin that she should return again to hard work, as she must if she go to her old daddy's thatched  hovel and the comfortable diet of brown bread and rusty bacon.
[BELVILLE exits.]
PAMELA:[recovering; first to MRS.
JERVIS and then alone.]
What a sad plight I will be in when I return to my poor parents.
I have been brought up wrong.
For my good lady loved singing and dancing and made me learn both.
I had better as things are have learned to wash, scour, brew and bake.
But I hope to learn these soon if anybody will have the goodness to bear with me.
I have read of a good bishop that was to be burnt for his religion.
He tried how he could bear it by putting his fingers into the lighted candle, so I the other day tried if I could scour a pewter plate.
It only blistered my hands in two places.
I hope I can get plain sewing work enough where I need not spoil my fingers, but if I can't, I hope to mae my hands as red as blood pudding and as hard as a beechen trencher to accommodate them to my condition.
[BELVILLE reappears.]
BELVILLE: Pamela, I want a little serious talk with you.
PAMELA:[terrified]O pray sir, let me go out of your presence, I beseech you.
BELVILLE: By the God that made me, I'll do you no harm.
You have too much good sense not to discover that I, in spite of my heart and all the pride of it, cannot but love you and have put on a behaviour to you that was much against my heart, in hopes to frighten you from your reservedness.
You see I own it ingenuously.
I would have you stay a week only and behave yourself with kindness to me.
I stoop to beg it of you.
[He kneels].
PAMELA: I have withstood your anger, how shall I withstand your kindness?
[She suddenly realises this might be another ruse of the seducer.]
[aside]Here's a trap laid for poor Pamela.
I tremble to think of it.
Black-hearted wretch.
[to  BELVILLE]Honoured sir, your last proposal to me convinces me I ought not to stay, so, with a thousand thanks for all favours, I will set out for home tomorrow early.
Begging you will not take it amiss I shall ever be your dutiful servant.
BELVILLE: Ungrateful.
Go when you will.
My travelling chariot will be ready and Lincolnshire Robin shall drive you.
[PAMELA exits.]
[to LINCOLNSHIRE ROBIN]You perfectly well understand your instructions?
ROBIN: Yes, an't please your honour.
BELVILLE: Well, discharge"em properly and I'll reward you.
ROBIN: I shall, sir.
BELVILLE: Well, I believe she now only waits for you to drive her.
Begone!
[LINCOLNSHIRE ROBIN exits.]
[aside]This scheme I think can't but prove effectual; at my Lincolnshire house she'll be removed from the prying jealousy of my inquisitive sister and the impertinent observation of the sanctified Mrs. Jervis.
If I'm not mistaken, my friend, Mrs. Jewkes, has not altogether so many qualms.
Aye, I think"till do, but the pleasure of considering I shall so entirely have her in my power is not a little disturbed by reflecting how terribly the poor creature will be shocked at finding that innocence betrayed she has so long and worthily defended.
Ha!
Worthily!
And I am endeavouring to destroy that worth I cannot help admiring?
To what irrational lengths does this passion hurry us?
What is this medley of Honour and impetuous Inclination?
 "My heart's inflamed With love's alarms Which now so sharply stings And now so strongly charms." 
[PAMELA, with hands tied, is carried with her bundle round the stage by LINCOLNSHIRE ROBIN and dumped unceremoniously stage centre.]
[MRS.
JEWKES enters and tips LINCOLNSHIRE ROBIN.]
MRS.
JEWKES: Well, here's a delicate tender lambkin and a careful diligent shepherd I'll prove to't, I'll warrant me.
But alack, it does no bleat and bleat as if the little heart on it would burst.
Ah, the Squire loves a young tit-bit.
I warrant when the Squire comes she'll change her note.
Young girls are always squeamish and coy beforehand.
I remember I was so myself.
Good lack!
Good lack!
What a racket did I keep and to say truth I would I had been more chary than I was…for a faithless wretch I met with: well, he has a deal to answer for.
Would she not tempt the best lord in the land to run away with her?
You are very pretty, my dear.
[She kisses PAMELA.]
PAMELA: I don't like that sort of carriage, Mrs. Jewkes, it is not like two persons of one sex.
Mrs. Jewkes: That's prettily said, I vow.
Thou hadst rather be kissed by the other sex!
I"fackins I commend thee for that!
PAMELA:[aside]She seems to delight in filthiness!
MRS.
JEWKES: Why this, chicken, nothing but sighing and sobbing.
To which of the Bedfordshire boys hast thou disposed thy heart that thus it mopes and pants to be with him?
Never fear, I'll bolt and bar and lock to secure thee.
Thou shalt not stir a foot out of this house, nor the face of a stranger peep within the gates.
You may depend upon it I will observe my master's orders.
PAMELA: You will not, I hope, do an unlawful or wicked thing for any master in the world.
MRS.
JEWKES: He is my master and if he bids me do anything I can do I think I ought to do it and let him who has power to command me look to the lawfulness of it.
PAMELA: Why, suppose he should bid you cut my throat, would you do it?
MRS.
JEWKES: To be sure, I would not, for then I should be hanged, for that would be murder.
PAMELA: Well, suppose he should resolve to ensnare a poor young creature and ruin her, would you assist him in that?
For to rob a person of her virtue is worse than cutting her throat.
MRS.
JEWKES: How strangely you talk!
Are not the two sexes made for one another?
And is it not natural for a gentleman to love a pretty woman?
And suppose he can obtain his desire, is that so bad as cutting her throat?
PAMELA: I am a most miserable creature.
MRS.
JEWKES: Mighty miserable indeed to be well beloved by one of the finest gentlemen in England.
[MR.
WILLIAMS enters.]
MR.
WILLIAMS: Mrs. Jewkes, your servant.
MRS.
JEWKES: My young Levite, I'm glad to see thee.
Come, I'll present you to this pretty little stranger, anon I'll inform you who she is.
Mistress Pamela, the Squire's Lincolnshire chaplain, Mr. Williams.
MR.
WILLIAMS: Madam, you're welcome to Pleasant Hall.
PAMELA: I thank you, sir.
MR.
WILLIAMS:[to MRS.
JEWKES]Some melancholy hangs on her spirits; she seems affected by a grief that rises from no common cause.
MRS.
JEWKES: Common to all girls in Christendom of her age.
She's in love, my young chaplain.
MR.
WILLIAMS: Madam…
MRS.
JEWKES: I'll leave you to give her a little wholesome advice while I step to give some orders about the family.
Chicken, I'll be with thee again in a twinkling; in the meantime observe the parson's instructions, my little rosebud, observe"em I say.
[MRS.
JEWKES exits.]
PAMELA:[aside]Sure 'tis impossible he can be made an agent in this foul conspiracy.
MR.
WILLIAMS: Pardon me, fair one, if I'm deceived, but in your looks methinks there seems a kind of doubtful apprehension of some approaching danger.
PAMELA: Alas, too well you are acquainted, sir, with the distressed condition of my heart.
I am divided, torn from my parents, forced hither with an  impious black design to have my innocence and youth become the sacrifice of brutal violence.
MR.
WILLIAMS: There is an artless fervour in your grief that might awake compassion even in the cruel authors of your woe.
PAMELA: I perceive there is an open honest tender feeling in your eyes at the unfolding of my sorrows.
Is there some way to be found out for my escape, without danger to yourself?
Is there no gentleman or lady of virtue in this neighbourhood to whom I may fly only till I can find a way to get to my poor father and mother?
MR.
WILLIAMS: I am infinitely concerned for your distress.
I most heartily wish it may be in my power to serve and save so much innocence, beauty and merit.
My whole dependence is upon Mr. Belville, and I have a near view of being provided with a living by his favour but I will risk all things to serve you.
I will try either Lady Jones or Lord Darnford, if they'll permit you to take refuge with them, for I never saw sweetness and innocence like yours.
[MRS.
JEWKES enters.]
MRS.
JEWKES: Pamela!
Softly, my instructions are not to let you be so familiar with the minister.
[MR.
WILLIAMS exits.]
PAMELA: Are you afraid I should confederate with him to commit a robbery upon my master?
MS.
JEWKES: Maybe I am, for to rob him of yourself would be the worst thing that could happen to him.
PAMELA: And pray, how came I to be his property?
What right has he in me, but such as a thief may plead to stolen goods?
MRS.
JEWKES: Why, was ever the like heard?
This is downright rebellion.
I protest!
Well, well, lambkin, if I was in his place he should not have his property in you long questionable.
PAMELA: Why.
what would you do?
MRS.
JEWKES: Not stand shill-I-shall-I as he does, but put you and himself both out of your pain.
PAMELA: Why, Jezebel, would you ruin me by force?
[MRS.
JEWKES, furious, hits PAMELA.]
MRS.
JEWKES: Take that.
Whom do you call Jezebel!
PAMELA: Is this also in your instructions?
MRS.
JEWKES: I won't be called such names, I'll assure you.
I'll manage such little provoking things as you, I warrant ye!
I'll get Nan to lock you up, and you shall have no shoes nor anything else.
My master shall hear of it — for he'll be here shortly I believe.
Nan — Nan!
[MRS.
JEWKES exits, calling.]
[MR.
WILLIAMS is seen asking for assistance from LADY JONES and LORD DARNFORD.]
LADY JONES: 'TIS what all young gentlemen will do!
MR.
WILLIAMS: Suppose you give her shelter in your house with your spouse and niece till she can get to her friends?
LADY JONES: What!
And embroil myself with a man of Mr. B.'s power and fortune!
No, not I, I'll assure you!
And I would have you consider what you are about.
L. DARNFORD: What is this, my dear, but that our neighbour has a mind to his mother's waiting maid!
And I think, Mr. Williams, you of all men should not engage in this affair against your friend and patron.
[Exeunt LADY JONES and LORD DARNFORD.]
MR.
WILLIAMS:[turning to PAMELA]I am sorry to tell you I have had a repulse from Lady Jones.
I have hinted your case to Lord Darnford, but I am concerned to say that he imputes selfish views to me.
PAMELA: What would you have me do, Mr. Williams?
My dreadful apprehension is renewed of the expected near approach of Mr. Belville, who doubtless will be speedy to execute his impious purposes.
MR.
WILLIAMS: I know now how to express myself, but I really know but one effectual and honourable way to disengage yourself from the dangerous situation you are in.
It is that of marriage with some person that you can make happy in your approbation.
[MRS.
JEWKES enters unseen and overhears the conversation.]
PAMELA: That cannot be.
I neither desire nor expect it.
Besides, Mr. Williams, who would waste themselves on such a miserable wretch?
MR.
WILLIAMS: Do not think this a sudden resolution.
The moment I saw you I wished to serve so much excellence.
And although for my own part it would be my ruin, yet so great is my veneration for you, so entire my reliance on providence upon so just an occasion that I should think myself but too happy if I might be accepted.
MRS.
JEWKES: Humph!
[MRS.
JEWKES exits.]
PAMELA: You are much too generous.
I can't bear you should risk all your future prospects for so unworthy a creature.
I cannot think of your offer without equal concern and gratitude; however, I will rely wholly upon your goodness in assisting my escape.
[BELVILLE burst in with MRS.
JEWKES.]
BELVILLE: Well, perverse Pamela, ungrateful runaway!
[MR.
WILLIAMS is arrested and led off at BELVILLE's bidding.]
You do well, don't you, to give me all this trouble and vexation?
[BELVILLE strikes PAMELA and she falls to the ground.]
[to MRS JEWKES]Take up that fallen angel.
I shall not touch her.
No, let such fellows as Williams be taken in by her artful wiles!
I know her now and she is for my fool's turn that will be caught by her.
As to that college novice, Williams, I have ordered my attorney to throw him instantly into gaol on an action of debt for money he has borrowed from me.
MRS.
JEWKES: Come, Mistress Pamela, learn to know your best friend.
Confess your unworthy behaviour and beg his honour's forgiveness for all your faults.
PAMELA: Surely I am the wickedest creature that ever breathed.
BELVILLE: I had thought you should have sat at table with me, but when I find you cannot forget your  original but must prefer my menials to me, you shall wait on me while I sup.
[He sits at the table.]
Fill me a glass of burgundy.
[PAMELA fills his glass and stands beside him.]
Why, Mrs. Jewkes, you tell me she remains very sullen still and eats nothing, yet I think I never saw her look better in my life.
I suppose she lives on love.
The sweet Mr. Williams has kept her alive and well.
Come, saucy-face, give me another glass of wine.
[PAMELA weeps as she pours a further glass of wine.]
I suppose I shall have tears in my wine!
You have been told, I suppose, that you are most beautiful in your tears.
Did you ever see a more charming creature than this?
Is it to be wondered at that I demean myself thus to take notice of her?
What a shape, what a neck, what a hand, and what a bloom on that lovely face!
Well, Mrs. Jewkes, if it were not for the thought of that cursed parson I believe in my heart, so great is my weakness, that I could yet forgive this intriguing little slut and take her to my bosom.
MRS.
JEWKES: O, you are very good, sir, very forgiving indeed, but come, I hope you will be so good as to take her to your bosom and that my tomorrow morning you'll bring her to a better sense of her duty.
[MRS.
JEWKES exits.]
PAMELA:[aside]Can anything in womanhood be so vile!
[A total change of mood — BELVILLE and PAMELA sit at either end of the table.]
BELVILLE: If you can convince me that the hated parson has had no encouragement from you I will offer you the following proposals.
I will directly make you a present of five hundred guineas for your own use, which you may dispose of to any purpose you please.
PAMELA: I reject it with all my soul.
Money, sir, is not my chief good.
As for Mr. Williams, he never had the  least encouragement from me.
You may, sir, the rather believe me when I declare that the only man I could honour more than another is the gentleman who of all others seeks my everlasting dishonour.
BELVILLE: I will likewise make over to you a farm I lately purchased in Kent, which brings in two hundred and fifty pounds per annum clear of all deductions.
This shall be yours for life and for the lives of any children you may happen to have.
PAMELA: I reject this proposal for the same reason.
I would rather starve in a ditch than accept the fortune of a monarch upon such wicked terms.
BELVILLE: You shall be mistress of my person and fortune as much as if the foolish ceremony had passed, and I know not, but will engage for this, but I may, after a twelvemonth's cohabitation, marry you.
[Pause.]
PAMELA: This weights less with me than anything else you have said, for there is an end of all merit and all good behaviour on my side if I consent to your proposals, and what, sir, would the world say were you to marry your harlot?
That a gentleman of your rank in life should stoop not only to the baseborn PAMELA, but to a baseborn prostitute.
Sir, I am not to be caught by a bait so poorly covered as this!
BELVILLE: I will not sue meanly where I can command.
I cannot bear denial.
If the terms I have offered are not sufficient, I will augment them to two thirds of my estate.
I cannot live without you, and sine the thing is gone so far I will not!
[BELVILLE exits.]
PAMELA:[aside]Why can't I hate him?
Yet it is impossible I should love him for his vices all ugly him over.
[MRS.
JEWKES enters with bedclothes.
She and PAMELA prepare for bed.]
MRS.
JEWKES: Come wench, off with your clothes.
PAMELA:[unwillingly]I'll get undressed if you lock the door and let me have the keys in my own hand.
MRS.
JEWKES:[calling]Nan, what Nan I say.
Where is the lazy creature?
Undress my young lady.
If she won't let you I'll help you and if neither of us can do it quietly we'll call my master to do it for us.
PAMELA: Mrs. Jewkes, why do you call for poor Nan?
Am I to have two bedfellows again these warm nights?
MRS.
JEWKES: Nan, come now — where are you?
{MRS.
JEWKES reveals BELVILLE disguised as Nan, pretending to be asleep in a chair.]
There is that beast of a wench, fast asleep, instead of being abed!
Drunk!
I knew she had taken a fine dose.
PAMELA: I'll wake her.
MRS.
JEWKES: No don't, let her sleep on, we shall lie better without her.
[She forces PAMELA to lie down with her.]
PAMELA: Where are the keys?
MRS.
JEWKES: Here about my wrist as they used to be.
[MRS.
JEWKES blows out the candle.
BELVILLE rises from his chair.]
PAMELA: There's poor Nan stirring.
MRS.
JEWKES: Let us go to sleep and not mind her.
She'll come to bed when she's quite awake.
PAMELA: Poor soul.
[BELVILLE gropes his way to he bed and gets in beside PAMELA.]
Poor mistress Anne, I warrant her head aches most sadly.
How do you do?
[Suddenly BELVILLE throws himself on PAMELA.
MRS.
JEWKES helps to hold her down.]
BELVILLE: Now, Pamela, is the dreadful time of reckoning come that I have threatened.
PAMELA: Wicked man!
Wicked abominable woman!
O God!
Deliver me from this distress!
BELVILLE: One word with you, Pamela, hear me but one word.
MRS.
JEWKES: Don't stand dillydallying.
What you do, sir, do!
BELVILLE: Pamela, you are now in my power.
But if you comply with my proposals I will leave you; if not I will make the most of this opportunity.
PAMELA: Leave me and I will do anything I ought to do.
BELVILLE: Swear then to me that you will be my mistress.
[PAMELA's struggle with BELVILLE brings on another of her fits and once again she faints.]
MRS.
JEWKES: And will you, sir, for a fit or two give up such an opportunity as this?
PAMELA:[coming round]O tell me, yet tell me not, what I have suffered in this distress.
BELVILLE: I vow to God I have not offered any indecency to you.
As soon as I saw you fainted away, I quitted the bed.
PAMELA: Sir, it was too plain you had the worst designs.
BELVILLE: I did intend what you call the worst, but if I am master of myself and my own resolution, I find I love you beyond all your sex, and on my honour I will not attempt to force you to anything again.
PAMELA: Yes, sir, you honour is to destroy mine and your love is to ruin me; I see too plainly.
To be sure you are Lucifer himself in the shape of my master or you could not use me thus, and I beg you'll send me out of my way to my poor parents.
BELVILLE: 'TIS folly to talk of it.
You must not, shall not go.
[BELVILLE exits.
MRS.
JEWKES leads PAMELA off.
They re-enter, MRS.
JEWKES leading PAMELA, now with her hands bound as if taking a walk on the estate.
A GIPSY enters.]
GIPSY: Kind lady, give me some broken victuals and I will tell you both your fortunes.
MRS.
JEWKES: I don't like these sort of people, but we will hear what she'll say to us, however, I shan't fetch you any victuals, woman, but I will give you some pence.
GIPSY:[reading MRS.
JEWKES"hand]Why, madam, you will marry soon, I can tell you…
MRS.
JEWKES:[delighted]I am glad to hear that.
What sort of man shall I have, pray?
GIPSY: A man younger than yourself and a very good husband he'll prove.
MRS.
JEWKES: I am glad of that.
GIPSY: And then you'll be drowned.
MRS.
JEWKES: I don't like this.
Come, madam, let us hear your fortune.
GIPSY:[examining PAMELA's hand]O, I cannot tell, your hand is so white and fine I cannot see the lines.
But I have a way for that…
[She rubs PAMELA's palm with earth to make the lines stand out.]
Odd, my little mistress, you had best take care for you are hard beset.
I can see a marriage that is not a marriage and a parson who is not a parson, and you will die of your first child.
PAMELA: Out upon thee, woman, better thou hadst never come here.
MRS.
JEWKES: It looks like a cheat, pray you, Mistress Pamela, go in this moment.
[Exeunt MRS.
JEWKES and the GIPSY severally.]
PAMELA:[sadly]So I will for I have enough of fortunetelling
[BELVILLE enters.]
BELVILLE: I will not talk to you in a serious manner.
I cannot live without you and I would divide my estate with you to make you mine upon my own terms.
You know I am a very abandoned profligate.
I have hitherto been guilty of no very enormous or vile actions.
This of confining you thus may perhaps be one of the worst.
But what can I do?
I cannot endure the thought of marriage, even with a person of equal or superior degree to myself, and have declined several proposals of that kind.
How then, with the distance between us in the world's judgement, can I think of making you my wife?
Yet I must have you.
Pamela, judge for me, tell me what you think I ought to do.
PAMELA: I cannot say what you ought to do, but only beg you will not ruin me and if you think me virtuous let me go to my poor parents.
I will vow to you that I will never suffer myself to be engaged without your approbation.
BELVILLE: Charming creature!
Lovely Pamela!
PAMELA:[aside]Now I begin to know too well why all his hard trials of me and my black apprehensions would not let me hate him.
BELVILLE: Do you think it is possible for you to love me preferably to any other of my sex?
PAMELA: Don't bid me say how well I can…
BELVILLE: Your innocent freedoms charm me!
Come kiss me and tell me you forgive me for exposing you to so much danger and distress.
I will endeavour to make my Pamela amends by marriage.
[BELVILLE wonders if he has gone too far.
PAMELA is delighted for a moment and then suspicious.]
PAMELA:[aside]A marriage that is not a marriage, a parson that is not a parson…[to BELVILLE]Your poor servant is far unworthy of this great honour.
What will it be but to create envy to herself and discredit to you?
Therefore, sir, permit me to leave your service.
That is all I ask.
BELVILLE:[furious]And is it thus in my fond conceding moments that I am to be answered and despised?
Perverse unreasonable Pamela, begone from my sight and know as well how to behave in a hopeful prospect as in a distressful state.
Begone, I tell you.
I cannot bear this stupid romantic folly.
PAMELA: One word, but one word, I beseech you, sir…
BELVILLE: The carriage shall convey you where you will tomorrow morning.
[BELVILLE exits.]
[MRS.
JEWKES arrives with PAMELA's bundle, drops it and exits.]
PAMELA:[alone]Can you believe it?
I was loathe to leave the house.
I felt something so strange at my heart!
Surely I cannot be like the old murmuring Israelites, to long after the onions and garlic of Egypt when they had suffered there such heavy bondage?
[PAMELA makes another journey round the stage with her bundle.
She stops stage centre and finds a letter in it.]
[reading]"When you read this letter you will be far on your way to your father and mother where you have so long desired to be, and I hope I shall forbear thinking of you with the least shadow of that fondness my foolish heart had entertained for you.
I bear you no ill will, for well I found the tables entirely turned upon me, and that I was in far ore danger from you than you were from me for I was just upon resolving to defy all the censures of the world and to make you publicly and openly my wife."
 "publicly and openly" …
This wicked gipsy story is all forgery.
I found before that my heart was too partial in his favour and now with so much openness, affection and honour too, I am quite overcome.
Presumption, you will say.
So it is.
But love is not a voluntary thing.
Love did I say…
I know not how it came nor when it began, for it has crept like a thief upon me.
I have made an escape to be more a prisoner.
[A SERVANT enters, breathless.]
SERVANT: O, madam, madam, here is a letter from Squire Belville.
He woke me at two this morning and gave me his best horse and bid me not to stop till I had overtaken you on the way.
I verily believe the Squire would have come himself but since your departure he has been sick abed.
He has had a feverish complaint and has been blooded.
PAMELA:[taking the letter]O, how my heart goes pitapat.
[The SERVANT exits.
PAMELA opens the letter and we hear BELVILLE's voice.]
BELVILLE: In vain, my Pamela, do I struggle against my affection for you.
I began to repent my parting with you.
I went to bed but could not rest.
Let me beg of you on receipt of this to order the coachman to drive you back again to my house.
Postscriptum: I have had Mr. Williams released from prison though I could not wish to see him at present.
PAMELA: O, my exulting heart.
But take care thou art not too credulous neither.
This sham marriage is not yet cleared up.
His pride of heart and condition may again take place and a man who could in so little a space first love me, then hate, then banish me his house and now send for me again in such affectionate terms may still waver, may still deceive thee.
Therefore, I will not acquaint thee yet.
O credulous fluttering throbbing mischief!
Yet all this time this heart is Pamela.
[She turns towards his uncertainly.]
[When the tannoy's volume is switched up, sounds of the "Coriolanus" matin e e can be heard.]
END OF ACT ONE 
ACT TWO
[Until a member of the cast the sound down, "Coriolanus" continues.]
PAMELA is chasing BELVILLE and being caught by him.
BELVILLE: I hope that my Pamela's inclination for her persecutor was the strongest motive for her return.
PAMELA: 'TIS true, my dear, we have sufficiently tortured one another.
BELVILLE: When shall the nuptials be?
It shall be very private.
[PAMELA reacts.]
I hope you are not afraid of a sham marriage.
It shall be within two weeks and at this house.
PAMELA: But sir, did you say in the house?
BELVILLE: Aye, for it must be very public if we go to church.
PAMELA: It is a holy rite, sir, and would be better in a holy place.
BELVILLE: I ought to oblige you all I can.
Therefore my own chapel which has not been used for two generations but for a lumber room, because our family seldom resided here long together, shall be cleared and cleaned and got ready for the ceremony.
PAMELA: I hope it will never be lumbered again.
BELVILLE: But now my good girl, if I do not add to your sweet confusion, when shall it be?
In the first week or the second?
PAMELA: In the second, if you please, sir.
BELVILLE: Well, be it so, but don't defer till the last day of the second week.
PAMELA: I have a great desire that whenever the day is, it may be on a Thursday.
On a Thursday my dear father and mother were married, and on a Thursday was your poor Pamela born.
BELVILLE: But Thursday in next week is fourteen days hence.
PAMELA: I am a little superstitious, sir.
BELVILLE: I think you should now begin to make another  day in the week a happy one, as for example a Monday.
On Monday many years ago my mother was preparing to be brought to bed of me…on the Thursday following.
Thursday has reigned long enough of conscience.
Let us now set Monday in its place.
PAMELA: Indeed sir, I like Thursday best if I may choose.
[BELVILLE, thwarted, changes the subject.]
BELVILLE: Whom do you think I have met since I went out?
PAMELA: I don't know, sir.
BELVILLE: I stepped out of my chariot to walk across the meadow and whom should I spy but your humble servant, Mr. Williams.
Don't blush, Pamela.
PAMELA: Poor man.
BELVILLE: Not so much of your poor man, neither, Pamela.
[BELVILLE accosts MR.
WILLIAMS as in flashback.
In the Shared Experience Production Gavin (MR.
WILLIAMS) came in at a run from the "Coriolanus" matin e e, still in his toga, and just made his position in time.]
How do you do, old acquaintance?
I am sorry my voice is so startling to you.
What are you reading?
MR.
WILLIAMS: Sir, the French Telemachus, for I am about perfecting myself in the French tongue.
BELVILLE: I had rather so than perfecting my Pamela in it.
You do well.
MR.
WILLIAMS: I am sorry I have incurred your displeasure and the more as I have been told by Lady Jones that you had a more honourable view than at first was apprehended.
BELVILLE: We fellows of fortune, Mr. Williams, sometimes take too much liberty with the world, wantoning in the sunbeams of a dangerous affluence.
But I could not bear to be supplanted in a view that lay next to my heart by an old acquaintance.
MR.
WILLIAMS: I would only say, sir, that my first motive was entirely such as became my function, however inexcusable I might seem.
BELVILLE: I retain no malice.
When my jealousy put me upon such a vindictive conduct to you I took a  bond for the money I had caused you to be troubled for.
I'm really ashamed of the matter and therefore return to you the bond cancelled.
MR.
WILLIAMS:[taking the bond]Ten thousand thanks for your goodness.
Allow me to say, sir, that if you make Mistress Andrews your lady she will do credit to your choice.
[MR.
WILLIAMS exits.]
BELVILLE turns back to PAMELA: end of flash-back.]
BELVILLE: In this manner did the parson and I confabulate.
But he kept your secret, Pamela, and would not own that you gave any encouragement to his addresses.
PAMELA: Indeed, sir, he could not say that I did.
BELVILLE: It is still my opinion that if I had not discovered the parson as I did, you might have gone to a length that would have put your present situation out of both our powers.
PAMELA: Sir, when you consider that I had no prospect before me but dishonour, you will allow that I should have seemed very little in earnest in my profession of honesty not to endeavour to get away.
BELVILLE: Come, Pamela.
I would preface our nuptials with the good opinion of my neighbours.
My companions of the chase, the green and the assembly must know your excellence.
PAMELA: Must I then be shewn off?
BELVILLE: Indeed.
[LADY JONES, LORD DARNFORD and the VISITING LADY are revealed at cards.]
Here, ladies, is my pretty rustic.
LADY JONES: She is a charming creature, I see that at this distance.
VISITING LADY: A sweet girl.
LADY JONES: The pride of the county.
L. DARNFORD: Good neighbour, by your leave.
Now will I say that I have kissed the loveliest maiden in England.
[PAMELA begins to serve them with wine as if she were still a servant.]
VISITING LADY:[laughing condescendingly with LADY JONES]I was never served with such grace.
BELVILLE:[angrily]Pamela, pray sit down with these good neighbours.
PAMELA:[sitting in a dignified manner]Sir, I shall be proud to deserve their indulgence.
LADY JONES: Did you ever see such excellence, prudence and discretion?
VISITING LADY: Never in my life.
LADY JONES: But pray, sir, when is the happy time to be?
BELVILLE: I would have it tomorrow, being Monday, for on a Monday seven weeks ago, I planned to carry her off and on a Monday I wrote the letter which prevailed on her so kindly to return to me.
PAMELA:[interrupting]Aye, but on a Thursday was your poor Pamela baptised, on a Thursday my lady took me from my parents into her protection.
Let it, I pray you, be not tomorrow but next Thursday.
LADY JONES: Sure it will not be delayed by you, madam, more than needs.
BELVILLE: Now you are on my side I will leave you.
[BELVILLE withdraws.]
VISITING LADY:[to PAMELA]Well, as he now urges you in so gentlemanly a manner for tomorrow, I think if I was in your place I would agree to it.
LADY JONES: And I beg to be at the wedding and at the ball afterwards.
[The VISITING LADY and LORD DARNFORD agree enthusiastically.]
PAMELA:[seriously]I cannot promise that.
VISITING LADY: Why so?
PAMELA: Because I think one may with pleasure celebrate an anniversary of one's nuptials, but the day itself I think too solemn a matter for the parties of our sex to be very gay upon.
It is a serious and awful affair and I am sure in your own cases you would be of my mind.
L. DARNFORD: Well, I never heard of such grave folks in my life on such an occasion.
VISITING LADY: I hope you'll sing psalms all day and Miss will fast and pray!
LADY JONES: Such sackcloth and ashes doings for a wedding I never heard of!
[Exeunt VISITORS.]
PAMELA: She speaks a little spitefully, I wonder…
[BELVILLE comes forward.]
BELVILLE: Now, Pamela, tomorrow is your favourite — Thursday — the contract is drawn, pray let us be married.
PAMELA: Why sir, you have given me so many pleasant distinctions for a Monday — let it, I pray you, be Monday next.
BELVILLE:[amused and exasperated]Why girl,"twill be seven months to Monday next.
Let it if not tomorrow, be on Friday — I protest I will stay no longer.
PAMELA: You rally my folly very agreeably, but I like Monday best.
[MR.
WILLIAMS enters.]
BELVILLE: So old acquaintance.
Who are you now reading?
While you have been perfecting your French, I have been bettering my English.
MR.
WILLIAMS: Mine, sir, is a very beautiful piece of French but your English has no equal.
BELVILLE: You are very polite, Mr. Williams.
[to PAMELA, who is holding back slightly]Why so strange here, Pamela, where you were once so familiar?
PAMELA:[to MR.
WILLIAMS, formally]I am very glad to see you well and I am very glad of an opportunity to acknowledge your good intentions when you believed me in distress.
BELVILLE: I do not apprehend myself to be quite so much obliged for those intentions.
MR.
WILLIAMS: But, sir, I meant no harm.
I had no interest I am sure to incur your displeasure.
BELVILLE: I have done.
Nor did I meet you here to be angry with you, I hope I have not so offended you that you refuse to officiate and give us your instructions here tomorrow
[He glances at PAMELA.]
I mean Monday.
MR.
WILLIAMS: Most willingly and most gratefully will I obey you.
[MR.
WILLIAMS exits.]
PAMELA:[aside]O what a blessed thing to be matched to a man of sense and generosity.
BELVILLE:[calling]Mrs. Jewkes!
[MRS.
JEWKES enters.]
I am going to entrust you with a secret.
We intend tomorrow for our wedding day, and Mr. Williams shall officiate.
MRS.
JEWKES: Sir, I doubt it won't be long a secret.
BELVILLE: No, but I shall declare it publicly when we go to London.
MRS.
JEWKES: Do you know, sir, that Her Ladyship, your sister, intends to be down here with you in a few days?
BELVILLE: Well, let her come, I desire not to see her.
MRS.
JEWKES:[to PAMELA]Give me leave, madam, to wish you all manner of happiness but I am afraid I have too well obeyed his honour to be forgiven by you.
PAMELA:[generously]I must be highly unworthy not to forgo all my little resentments for the sake of so much goodness to myself.
BELVILLE: That's well said on both sides.
But Mrs. Jewkes, to assure you that my good girl here has no malice, she chooses you to be her attendant at the ceremony tomorrow.
[PAMELA looks far from pleased.]
You must keep up her spirits.
Have you now no pleasant tales to tell my Pamela to make her smile?
MRS.
JEWKES: I could tell twenty pleasant stories but my lady is too nice to hear them.
PAMELA:[aside]Her chastest stories would make a modest person blush if I know her.
MRS.
JEWKES: Why sir, I knew a bashful young lady of sweet sixteen, as madam may be, married to a young rascal with a…
PAMELA:[interrupting]Dear Mrs. Jewkes, no more of your  story, I beseech you.
I don't like the beginning of it.
BELVILLE: Go on, Mrs. Jewkes.
PAMELA: No, pray, sir I don't require it.
BELVILLE:[aware he has been put in his place]Then we'll have it another time, Mrs. Jewkes.
[BELVILLE withdraws.]
MRS.
JEWKES:[to the dejected PAMELA]I cannot wonder, madam, to see you so very low-spirited these two or three days past with so much happiness before you.
PAMELA: Why, Mrs. Jewkes, there can be only one reason, which is that I am a sad fool!
But my heart sinks within me.
[Wedding sequence: BELVILLE re-enters.
He kneels to PAMELA and offers her a bouquet of flowers.]
BELVILLE: O my dear, obliging, good girl, on my knees s you on yours, I vow to you my everlasting truth and fidelity.
PAMELA:[kneeling]I am poor indeed in everything compared to you, and how very far do you in every generous way leave me behind you.
[Both go up to MR.
WILLIAMS who marries them.]
MR.
WILLIAMS:[to BELVILLE]With this ring I thee wed.
BELVILLE:[repeating]With this ring I thee wed.
[BELVILLE places the ring on PAMELA's finger.]
PAMELA:[interrupting]Thank you, sir.
[BELVILLE, MR.
WILLIAMS and MRS.
JEWKES react to this interruption while PAMELA comes downstage and addresses the audience.]
Thus thrice-happy Pamela is at last married and to whom?
Why, to her beloved gracious master and thus the naughty assailer of her innocence is become the gracious protector and rewarder of it.
I wish I may not be too fond and make him indifferent.
[BELVILLE leads her offstage.
MRS.
JEWKES is interested to know what happens in the bedroom.
BELVILLE re-enters, followed by PAMELA.
The following scene is thought to take place perhaps on the evening of the day after the wedding.]
BELVILLE: I have often observed in married folks that the lady soon grows careless in her dress, which to me shows a slight to her husband that she had not to her lover.
I shall expect you always to be dressed by dinner time and whomsoever I bring home to my table you'll be in readiness to receive.
PAMELA: I have the harmony of the spheres all around me, and every word that drops from your lips is sweet as honey.
BELVILLE: I like to go to bed with my dearest by eleven.
I ordinarily rise by six; I will allow you to lie half an hour after me then you'll have some time you may call your own.
At two o'clock I should like to sit down at table.
I'd generally go to supper by eight, and when we stick to these old-fashioned rules we shall make our visitors conform to them too.
In all things I expect you to be a lady.
PAMELA: You oblige and improve me at the same time.
What a happy lot is mine.
BELVILLE:[getting a little bored with PAMELA's compliance]You are very obliging, Pamela, but now be so good as to find some fault with me and say what you would wish me to do to appear more agreeable to you.
PAMELA: O sir, I have not one single thing to wish for.
No, not one.
[BELVILLE, disappointed, changed the subject and touches PAMELA's stomach.]
BELVILLE: What a sweet shape is here.
It would make one regret to lose it and yet I shall think nothing but that loss wanting to complete my happiness.
PAMELA: Hush, hush, O fie, sir!
BELVILLE: Such an innocent wish, my dearest, may be permitted me because it is the end of the institution.
PAMELA: Your wishes in everything shall be mine, but pray, sir, say no more.
BELVILLE:[surprised at this prudery — and wishing to be off]My dear, I count every hour of absence from you a  day but you may believe I cannot help it.
My poor friend Mr. Carter is so very ill that I doubt he can't recover.
His desire to have me visit him is so strong that charity will not let me refuse.
[BELVILLE exits.]
PAMELA:[alone]God bless him and return him sage to my wishes.
[MRS.
JEWKES enters in a panic.]
MRS.
JEWKES: Good sirs!
How unlucky this is: here's Lady Davers come.
PAMELA: And my kind protector many miles off.
What shall I do?
MRS.
JEWKES: She asked, madam, if you were "whored" yet.
PAMELA: There's a word for a lady's mouth.
I will run away.
Mrs. Jewkes, let the chariot go to the bottom of the elm walk.
I will steal out of the door unperceived.
[She puts on gloves and picks up her fan.]
MRS.
JEWKES: But she sits cooling herself in the hall over against the staircase.
[A loud masculine oath is heard.]
PAMELA: Who has she with her?
MRS.
JEWKES: Her nephew, Sir John.
PAMELA: I wish they were all three hundred miles off.
I'll get out of the window.
MRS.
JEWKES: I wonder you so much disturb yourself.
You are the right side of the hedge, I'm sure.
PAMELA: Tell her I am sick-a-bed, I'm gone out, I'm dying, and must not be disturbed…anything!
How unlucky it is that my good master is not at hoe.
[LADY DAVERS and JACKEY appear.]
[curtsying]Your servant, my good lady.
LADY DAVERS: And your servant again, my lady, for I think you are dressed out like one.
JACKEY: A charming girl, though, dear aunt, forgive me but I must kiss her.
PAMELA: Forbear, uncivil gentleman, I won't be used freely.
LADY DAVERS: Jackey, sit down and don't touch the creature.
Well, child, how dost find thyself.
Thou'rt got  into a fool's paradise and wilt find thyself terribly mistaken if thou thinkest my brother will disgrace his family to humour thy baby-face.
PAMELA: I see your ladyship has no very important commands for me and I beg to withdraw.
LADY DAVERS: Jackey, shut the door, my young lady and I must not have done so soon.
Where's your wellmannered deceiver gone, child?
PAMELA: When your ladyship is pleased to speak intelligibly I shall know how to answer.
LADY DAVERS: My dear child, don't be too pert, I beseech thee.
A little of that modesty and humility that my mother's waiting maid used to show will become thee better.
PAMELA: I would beg one favour of your ladyship, that if you would have me keep my distance you will not forget your own degree.
LADY DAVERS: Did I not tell you, Jackey, that I should have a wit to talk to?
JACKEY: By the devil, I think you should know you are speaking to Lady Davers.
PAMELA: Sir, I hope there was no need of your information so I can't thank you for it.
JACKEY: "Ods blood!
PAMELA: I am sorry you seem to think it warrants an oath to convince me of the truth of it.
LADY DAVERS: How now, pert one, do you know whom you talk to?
[She strikes PAMELA.]
PAMELA: Pray, your ladyship, let me ask what I have done to be thus severely treated?
If you think I am deceived, I should be more entitled to your pity than your anger.
LADY DAVERS: Why, Pamela, I did indeed pity you while I thought you innocent and when my brother seized you and brought you down hither without your consent.
But when, as I fear, you have lost your innocence and added another to the number of fools he has ruined, I cannot help showing my displeasure to you.
PAMELA: Madam, I have not lost my innocence.
[She tries to leave but JACKEY blocks her path.]
What, sir, is your presence in this house to keep me a prisoner here?
JACKEY: Because I like it.
PAMELA: If that is the answer of a gentleman to such a one as I, it would not, I dare say, be the answer of a gentleman to a gentleman.
JACKEY: My lady, my lady, challenge, a challenge by God!
LADY DAVERS: Don't be surprised, nephew.
The wench could not talk thus if she had not been her master's bedfellow.
JACKEY: Tell me, Pamela, hast thou been in bed with thy master?
Ha, wench?
PAMELA: Bad you take me to be, madam, I am not used to such language or reflections as this gentleman bestows upon me.
LADY DAVERS: Well, Jackey, be silent.
Poor girl, what a sweet innocence is here destroyed.
A thousand pities.
Pull off your gloves, lay your fan by, you shall wait upon me at dinner…
[LADY DAVERS discards PAMELA's fan and pulls off her gloves and notices the wedding ring on PAMELA's finger.]
O my dear God, if the wench has not got a ring!
Well, this is a pretty piece of foolery indeed!
JACKEY: Dost know that thou art miserably tricked?
Thy honesty for this bauble?
LADY DAVERS: Child, prithee do us the favour of taking a turn or two across the room that we may arrive at some degree of certainty whether or no thou art the identical little Pammy formerly so famous for thy tarts and cheesecakes.
[PAMELA walks in a dignified way.]
I'm astonished, quite astonished.
I suppose you would have me conclude you are my brother's wife?
[PAMELA does not answer.]
JACKEY: Silence gives consent.
'TIS plain enough she does.
[He bows sarcastically.]
PAMELA: Sir, when my master comes to know your rude behaviour, you may have cause to repent it.
JACKEY: Another challenge, by gad, but I am glad she says her master!
You see, madam, she herself does not believe she is married.
My new aunt, your blessing or your curse, I care not which, but quickly give me one or the other that I may not lose my dinner.
PAMELA: Tinselled boy, twenty or thirty years hence when you are of age, I shall know how to answer you better.
Meantime, sport with your footman and not with me.
LADY DAVERS: Is my kinsman to be thus used by such a slut?
Tell me truly, dost thou think thyself really married?
PAMELA: If I should say I am not, then you will call me hard names and perhaps I shall tell a fib.
LADY DAVERS: He is no fool, child, and libertine enough of conscience, and thou art not the first in the list of his credulous harlots.
PAMELA: Good your ladyship, pity me.
Indeed I am honest.
LADY DAVERS: Thou liest, child.
PAMELA: So your ladyship told me.
[LADY DAVERS strikes PAMELA.]
I humbly thank your ladyship.
LADY DAVERS: God give me patience with thee.
PAMELA: Since I must not say what I think on one hand nor on the other, let me depart your presence.
JACKEY:[drawing his sword]By this sword thou shalt not leave till my aunt permits.
PAMELA: O, the sword, the sword.
Defend me, good your ladyship.
[PAMELA, terrified of the sword, takes refuge behind LADY DAVERS and begins to have another fit.]
LADY DAVERS: She will fall into fits.
Jackey, don't draw your sword.
You see as great as her spirit is, she can't bear that.
Come, be comforted, he shan't fright you.
Rise up, wench, and don't be foolish.
Leave Pamela and me by ourselves, Jackey, withdraw.
[JACKEY exits.]
[to PAMELA]Own that you have been very saucy and beg my pardon and I will try to pity you, for you are a sweet girl if you had but held out and been honest.
PAMELA: 'TIS injurious to me, madam, to imagine I am not honest.
LADY DAVERS: Have you not been a-bed with my brother?
Tell me that.
PAMELA: I must tell your ladyship I scorn your words and am as much married as your ladyship.
LADY DAVERS: As much married as I!
Is that to be borne?
[LADY DAVERS chases PAMELA round the room.
BELVILLE enters and PAMELA flies into his arms.]
Wicked abandoned wretch.
Vile brother to brave me thus.
I'll tear the creature out of your arms.
BELVILLE: Why must my retirements be invaded, my house insulted?
And if I have one person dearer to me than another, why must that person be singled out for an object of your violence?
LADY DAVERS: Aye, that one person is the thing.
Yet cannot I have the patience to look upon your wickedness with such a…
BELVILLE: Hush, I charge you, call not the dear girl by any name unworthy of her.
LADY DAVERS: God give me patience, so much tenderness to a vile…
BELVILLE: Be silent.
You know not the innocence you abuse so freely Would to God that instead of a woman and my sister, any man breathing had dared to give himself half the airs you have done.
LADY DAVERS: We all know that since your Italian duel you have commenced a bravo and all your airs breathe as strongly of the man-slayer as of the libertine.
BELVILLE: I have no reason to be ashamed of that duel you refer to since it was to save a friend, but suffer not your tongue to take too great a liberty with my Pamela.
[He kisses PAMELA.]
LADY DAVERS: If I bear this I can bear anything.
O, the little strumpet!
BELVILLE: Begone, rageful woman, this moment from my presence.
PAMELA: Dearest sir, let me beg that no act of unkindness for my sake pass between so worthy and so near relations.
LADY DAVERS: Creature, art thou to beg an excuse for me?
Begone to thy corner, wench, lest thy paramour kill me for trampling thee under my foot.
[to BELVILLE]Swear to me, thou bold wretch, that Pamela Andrews is really and truly thy lawful wife without sham, deceit or double meaning.
BELVILLE:[seriously]As I hope to be saved, 'tis true.
[Pause.]
LADY DAVERS: Who married you?
Tell me that.
Was it not a drunken pedlar in a parson's habit?
BELVILLE: Mr. Williams married us.
LADY DAVERS: Where was the ceremony performed?
BELVILLE: In my own little chapel, which you may see was put in order on purpose.
LADY DAVERS: Now I begin to fear there is something in it.
But who was present?
BELVILLE: I look like a fine puppy to suffer myself to be thus interrogated by an insolent sister.
But if you must know, Mrs. Jewkes was present.
LADY DAVERS: O, the procuress.
But nobody else?
BELVILLE:[indicating PAMELA]Yes, all my heart and soul.
[LADY DAVERS, almost convinced, tries another tack.]
LADY DAVERS: Suppose I had married my fathers groom, what would you have said to that?
BELVILLE: Does your pride let you see no difference in the case you put?
LADY DAVERS:Where can the difference be between a beggar's son married to a lady or a beggar's daughter made a gentleman's wife?
BELVILLE: The difference is a man ennobles the woman he takes and adopts her into his own rank.
Be he Duke or Earl, does not his consort immediately become ennobled by his choice?
And who scruples to call her Duchess, Lady or Countess?
But when a Duchess descends to mingle with a  person of obscure birth, does she not then degrade herself?
Now, Lady Davers, see you not a difference between my marrying my mother's beloved and deserving waiting maid and your marrying a sordid groom?
LADY DAVERS: No more, no more, I beseech you.
Thou hast made a graven image and Jeroboam-like wouldst have everyone else bow down before thy calf.
BELVILLE: Well said, Lady Davers, whenever your passion suffers you to descend to witticism, 'tis almost over with you.
LADY DAVERS: I shall after this very little interrupt your mutual happiness.
I thought you a gentleman one but I'll say now, with the burial service: "Ashes to ashes and dirt to dirt" .
BELVILLE: Aye, Lady Davers, and there we must all end, you with your pride and I with my plentiful fortune must come to it, and then where will be your distinction?
LADY DAVERS: Egregious preacher, my brother turned Puritan!
See what marriage and repentance may bring a man to.
Give me thy hand, Mistress Pamela, Mistress Shamela, Mistress…
What shall I call thee?
Thou hast done wonders in a little time, not only made a rake a husband but thou has made a rake a preacher.
BELVILLE: I hope, Lady Davers, she can make as great a convert of you from pride as she has of me from libertinism.
LADY DAVERS:[calling]Jackey, Jackey, lead me down, lead me down!
[JACKEY enters.]
Let us instantly quit this cursed house that once I took pleasure in.
JACKEY: Why, aunt, if they are actually married there's no help for't and we must not make mischief between man and wife.
Consider, 'tis done.
[JACKEY exits.]
LADY DAVERS: Aye, that's the thing that kills me,[calmly to PAMELA, a last, vicious attack]have no fear, wench, no fear.
Thou'lt hold him as long as anyone can, I  see that, but you must not expect to have him all to yourself.
Poor Sally Godfrey ever had half the interest in him.
I'll assure you.
[BELVILLE is enraged at this revelation of his past amours.]
BELVILLE: Let us never come near one another ore.
Never!
[BELVILLE exits.
LADY DAVERS is horrified by the strength of BELVILLE's reaction to her comment about Sally Godfrey.]
LADY DAVERS: Well, I have indeed gone too far.
I was bewitched!
And now he'll not forgive me for a twelvemonth.
I tell you, Pamela, if ever you offend, he will not easily forgive.
Will you venture to accompany me to him?
Dare you follow a lion in his retreats?
PAMELA: I'll attend your ladyship.
LADY DAVERS: Well, wench…
Pamela I mean, thou art very good in the main.
I should have loved thee as well as my mother did if…but 'tis all over now.
I should not have exasperated him for I always have the worst of it.
He knows I love him.
[LADY DAVERS and PAMELA approach BELVILLE.]
Brother, let me speak to you.
BELVILLE:[coldly]I desire you'll not oppress me more with your follies and your violence.
I will vow…
LADY DAVERS:[interrupting]Hush, don't vow, I beg you.
You see I ask Pamela to be my advocate.
[PAMELA nervously approaches BELVILLE.]
PAMELA: Dear sir…
BELVILLE:[shouting at her]Pamela, how dare you approach me without leave when you see me thus disturbed?
Never for the future come near me when I am in these tumults unless I send for you.
PAMELA:[bravely]May I, sir, beg all your anger on myself?
Pray be reconciled…
BELVILLE:[interrupting savagely]Presuming Pamela, art thou then so hardy, so well able to sustain my displeasure?
Begone from me and reflect upon what you have said.
PAMELA:[in tears]Forgive me, good sir, you see I am not so hardy.
I cannot bear your displeasure.
LADY DAVERS: You'll break her spirit quite, brother, you'll carry your passion as much too far as I have done.
BELVILLE: This last of Sally Godfrey is a piece of spite and meanness that I can renounce you my blood for.
LADY DAVERS: I am convinced it was wrong.
I am ashamed of it myself, and for this reason I stoop to beg your pardon.
BELVILLE:[still unforgiving]After the meanness you have been guilty of you have fallen very low with me.
Farewell.
LADY DAVERS:[humbly]I'll be gone.
And so brother, God bless you, and Pamela, God bless you!
[She kisses PAMELA.
BELVILLE notices the reconciliation between PAMELA and LADY DAVERS.]
BELVILLE: Your sex is the devil.
How strangely can you discompose, calm and turn us poor weathercocks of men.
Your last kind blessing to my Pamela has quite melted me.
Come sister, I forgive you.
Let us be friends.
[BELVILLE: and LADY DAVERS embrace warmly.]
PAMELA:[aside]So happily did this storm blow over.
But, foolish thing that I am, this poor Miss Sally Godfrey runs in my head!
I wonder what became of her?
Whether she be living, and whether anything came of it?
Maybe I shall hear full soon enough, but I dare not ask him about the poor lady.
[LADY DAVERS indicates to BELVILLE that he should apologise to PAMELA for his outburst.
LADY DAVERS exits.]
BELVILLE: Pamela, I am thoroughly satisfied with your conduct hitherto and you shall find that you have not a brutal or ungenerous husband.
But you must think my displeasure the heaviest thing that can befall you.
PAMELA: To be sure I shall.
BELVILLE: You must bear with me ever when you find me in the wrong.
PAMELA: Very good.
[aside]I wonder whether Miss Sally Godfrey be living or dead.
BELVILLE: You must be as flexible as the reed in the fable  lest by resisting the tempest like the oak you be torn up by the roots.
PAMELA: Well, I'll do the best I can.
[aside]Yet sure the tempest will not lay me quite level with the ground neither.
BELVILLE: If I be set upon a wrong thing you must not dispute with me but do it and expostulate afterwards.
PAMELA:[smiling, consent, aside]This would bear a small debate, I fancy, in a parliament of women.
BELVILLE: A wife should draw a sort of veil over her husband's faults.
PAMELA:[smiling acquiescence, aside]This last rule crowns the rest.
BELVILLE: To conclude, a husband who expects all this ought not to abridge his wife of any privileges of her sex.
PAMELA:[delighted]A generous man and a man of sense cannot be too much obliged.
[She kisses him.]
[aside]Yet after all, you see, I have not the easiest task in the world.
[addressing the audience]I pass the days swiftly.
Now and then neighbourly visits received and paid.
Needlework between whiles, music, cards sometimes, though I don't love them, one more benevolent round, improving conversations with y dear Mr. B., a lesson from him when alone either in French or Latin, a new pauper case or two, a visit from the good dean.
[PAMELA is now pregnant.
She sits at a tea table with MR.
WILLIAMS, a prayer book between them.]
O, what halcyon days are these.
God continue them.
A change now would kill me quite.
[BELVILLE breaks in on this little scene.
MR.
WILLIAMS, embarrassed, rises, bows and leaves.]
BELVILLE: As human life is uncertain I have disposed my affairs so as to secure to you the power of living as a person ought who is my widow.
I have but one request to make.
If it should please God for my sins to separate me from my dearest Pamela, you will only resolve not to marry one person.
That  person is Mr. Williams.
My motive is owing to no dislike I have for him but methinks it would reflect a little upon my Pamela if she had married a man for his estate when she had rather have had another.
And the world will say: now she is at liberty to pursue her inclination, the parson is the man.
I cannot bear even the most distant apprehension that I have not the preference with you of any man living.
[BELVILLE exits.]
PAMELA:[aside]I have a little tincture of jealousy too, which has made me more uneasy than I ought to be, particularly in the case of Miss Sally Godfrey and my fears of what might happen when we reach London.
[Total change of mood: BELVILLE and PAMELA are arguing.]
BELVILLE:[firmly]I will not permit it.
PAMELA:[aside]It is the first "will not" I have heard from him.
I am struck all of a heap.
[to BELVILLE]Is this fair, my dearest Mr. B?
Is it?
I believe it to be a natural duty, and if it be a natural duty it is a divine duty and how can a husband have power to discharge a divine duty?
BELVILLE: I don't like to speak my mind twice on the same subject.
PAMELA: But it was the custom of old, of all good wives to be nurse to their own children, so we read in the Scripture.
BELVILLE: My dear, times and fashions are much changed.
If you tell me of Sarah's or Rachel's or Rebecca's nursing their children I can answer that the one drew water at a well for her father's flocks, another baked cakes on a hearth, and another dressed savoury meat for her husband.
When our modern ladies shall follow such examples in everything their plea ought to be allowed in this.
Besides, my fondness for your personal graces and that genteel from which everyone admires…
I can by no means sacrifice these to the carelessness into which I have seen very nice ladies  sink when they become nurses.
I shan't care when I want to hear my Pamela read her French and Latin lessons to seek my beloved in the nursery or find her engrossed in baby offices.
Let it have your sole attention when I am abroad, but when I am at home, so jealous am I of your affections, I shall permit no rival in them even a son and heir.
Well, Pamela, what say you?
PAMELA: As it is your will and you have determined, it is my duty to yield up the point.
BELVILLE: But do you yield it up cheerfully, my dear?
PAMELA: I do, sir, and will never more dispute it.
[pause]But you know, sir, if one has scruples one should not yield implicitly till they are satisfied.
BELVILLE: You have already disputed this point with me five or six times.
PAMELA: I thought, sir, you would have distinguished between a command where my conscience was concerned an a common point.
BELVILLE: I will have no sullen reserves, my dearest.
I know that this is the time with your sex to watch over the changes of their temper.
For ladies in your way are apt to extend what they call their privileges and the husband never again recovers the ascendant.
PAMELA: You know these things better than I, Mr. B. Yet, I thought I had a right to a little Free Will.
BELVILLE: Why, so you have, my dear.
But you must not plead in behalf of your will and refuse to give due weight to mine.
Let me beat my beloved saucebox, are you not a little sullen?
Are you not?
PAMELA: I believe I am, but 'tis but very little sir.
BELVILLE: I forgive you heartily.
Give me one kiss and I will think of your saucy appeal against me no more.
PAMELA: I will comply with your condition.
But sir, I am not fully convinced whether it must be I that forgive you or you me.
For indeed I cannot think my fault so great in this matter that was a point of conscience with me as to stand in need of your forgiveness.
BELVILLE:[magnanimously]Then we will forgive one another.
[They kiss.]
PAMELA:[aside]WE are quite reconciled, although upon his terms.
[Complete change of mood: BELVILLE is entertaining raucous, drunken, aristocratic companions.]
BELVILLE: Mrs. Jewkes, bring us champagne.
Here is my old friend, Sir Jacob Swynford and Mr. Hargreaves come.
SIR JACOB: Let us have a whet.
PAMELA:[aside]Lewd rakes whose delight is drinking, hunting, cockfighting and wantonness.
[PAMELA withdraws.]
HARGREAVES:[drunk]We hear, Belville, you have made a fine kettle of it.
SIR JACOB:[drunk]Art thou really married indeed?
BELVILLE:[drunk]Indeed.
SIR JACOB: "Pamela" did you say?
A queer sort of name; linsey-woolsy, half one and half t'other, 'tis a very pagan name, upon my word.
BELVILLE: I defy you gentlemen to think so highly of her as she deserves.
SIR JACOB: Billy, how come you to be reconciled to her?
I heard you would never acknowledge her.
BELVILLE: "Ounds, I was never so managed in my life.
SIR JACOB: All your neighbours will rejoice to hear it for thou wast ever an unmanageable rake.
BELVILLE: Why, is that not one chimney-sweeper calling another a sooty rascal?
But I am quite cowed now as you shall see by and by.
Nay, for that matter, if you can set Mrs. Belville a-talking not one of you shall care to open you lips except to say as she says…
SIR JACOB: Never fear.
I never saw a woman yet you could hold her own with me in talk or love for six minutes together.
BELVILLE: I think I have one of the finest woman in England.
[PAMELA enters.]
Here, my lord, is my mother's Pamela.
Have I said too much in praise of her person?
SIR JACOB: "Twould have been strange indeed if someone had not translated this fine flower from the dunghill to the garden, Madam, let me tell you you are the first lady I have seen who has exceeded expectation.
HARGREAVES: You know if I have a mind to love her, Belville, I will, and I'm half in love with her already.
SIR JACOB: Lovelier and lovelier, by my life.
Let me observe you.
I see you will shortly do credit to my friend Belville as he has done you credit.
[to BELVILLE]Why do you lace her so tight?[to PAMELA]Ah, you may well look down.
See how like a pretty thief she looks.
Let me congratulate you.
BELVILLE: You should not be thus hard on my poor girl.
PAMELA:[aside]I feel so silly with my lord gazing at me from head to foot and Sir Jacob grinning and laughing like an oaf.
SIR JACOB: Why truly, Belville, the girl is well enough…considering.
A man might love her for a month or two.
HARGREAVES: Aye, she behaves very tolerably…for what she was.
SIR JACOB: It is right that she don't seem desirous to drown the remembrance of her original in her education.
HARGREAVES: I can't but say mighty pretty and passable genteel.
[He passes out.]
SIR JACOB: My dear Mrs. Belville, let me salute you.
All the rakes in the county will be converted when they know what reforms you have worked on our old friend.
For myself, emboldened by your example, I will set out to reform my family and household instantly.
[SIR JACOB exits, drunkenly.]
PAMELA: That poor gentleman has a great deal to mend in himself before he can begin such a practice in his family.
BELVILLE:[in a drunken rage.]
Pamela, take heed that you do not suffer the purity of your own mind to make you too rigorous a censurer of other people's  actions.
Don't be so puffed up with your own perfections as to imagine that because other people allow themselves liberties you cannot take, therefore they must be wicked.
PAMELA: O what happiness am I sunk fro and in so few days too.
BELVILLE:[desperately attempting to make amends for his outburst]Come, Pamela, 'twas poor, 'twas mean, 'twas unworthy to be so tyrannical a husband.
We have stayed too long within doors.
Your pleasing burden has made you melancholy.
Let me show you, as I promised, the diversions of London.
[He exits to collect masks and hats.]
PAMELA:[aside]Sure he cannot be so bad, sure he cannot.
[BELVILLE returns.]
BELVILLE: 'TIS y love to you that makes me more delicate than otherwise I would be.
[PAMELA and BELVILLE dress themselves for the Masquerade; PAMELA as a Puritan girl and BELVILLE as a Spanish nobleman.
The Masquerade starts.
Other characters include one masked as a CARDINAL and one as a FOX.
The COUNTESS OF PEMBROKE is masked as a nun.
PAMELA is separated from BELVILLE and dances with the CARDINAL and the FOX.
BELVILLE dances with the COUNTESS.
PAMELA overhears some of the ensuing scene but is prevented from interrupting by the CARDINAL and the FOX]
BELVILLE:[to the COUNTESS]Soffretemi di soccorrere una sorella alla pratica delle sue divozione?
COUNTESS: Ardentissimo Spagnol, mi sembra che questo mio abito dovesse proteggeri contro le fiducie di un cavaliere come Vassignoria.
BELVILLE: Pero non potremmo aspettare di loro un brano di carita?
COUNTESS: Forse udiremmo i suoi testioni nel sentiero allato.
Cathy [She runs off, pursued by BELVILLE.]
PAMELA:[aside]I wish I understood Italian.
[trying to refuse the CARDINAL]Quakers are not fit company for red-hats.
CARDINAL: They re, for a Quaker and a Jesuit is the same thing.
Art thou come hither, Friend, to make thy light shine before men or women?
PAMELA: Verily, Friend, neither, but out of mere curiosity to look into the minds of both sexes.
[The CARDINAL and the FOX laugh.]
CARDINAL: The fair Quaker will be too hard for half a dozen antagonists.
FOX: There is something in thy person that attracts everyone's notice, but if a sack had not been a profane thing it would have become thee almost as well.
[He attempts to kiss PAMELA.
She repulses him.]
PAMELA: I thank thee, Friend, for thy counsel.
CARDINAL: What is become of the nun?
FOX: Rather what is become of the Spaniard?
[They laugh.]
PAMELA:[aside]I have, I must confess, a little spice of jealousy.
Out upon these nasty masquerades!
[The CARDINAL and the FOX hold her in conversation against her will.
Enter the COUNTESS, pursued by BELVILLE.]
COUNTESS: Why are my retirements invaded, audacious Spaniard?
BELVILLE: Because, my dear nun, I hope you would have it so.
COUNTESS: I can no otherwise strike dead they bold presumption than to show thee my scorn and anger thus.
[She unmasks.]
BELVILLE: And I to show I can defy your resentment will show you a countenance as intrepid as yours is lovely.
[He unmasks.
They hear a sound and both hastily resume their masks.]
My good sister, how happy should I be if I might be admitted to a conversation with you at your grate.
COUNTESS: Answer me, thou bold Spaniard, is the fair lady here whose shackles thou wearest?
BELVILLE: Do I look like a man shackled, my fairest nun?
COUNTESS: No, no, not much like such a one.
But I fancy thy wife is the fair Quaker.
[A laugh from the CARDINAL and the FOX at some witticism of PAMELA's.]
Enough!
She is the wit of the assembly, and her person shows some intimacies have passed with somebody.
Is it with thee?
BELVILLE: It would be my glory if it was, were her face as fair as her person.
COUNTESS: Is it not?
BELVILLE: I long to know.
COUNTESS: I am glad thou dost not know.
Dost thou hate shackles?
Or is it that thy hour is not yet come?
BELVILLE: I wish this be not the hour, the very hour.
[The COUNTESS leaves but drops her handkerchief on which is her coat of arms and coronet.
BELVILLE picks it up.]
The Countess of Pembroke!
[Change of mood: the CARDINAL and the FOX leave and PAMELA takes off her mask.]
PAMELA [aside]These masquerades are abominable things.
[to BELVILLE]What, my lord, have you done with the nun?
BELVILLE: I found her to be a coquette, an told her so and she is offended.
[PAMELA is upset by this obvious lie.]
What's the matter with the little fool!
You are always in this way of late.
What ails you, Pamela?
PAMELA: Only a little vapourish, sir.
Don't be angry at me.
BELVILLE: Don't receive me in this manner, I charge you.
PAMELA: In what manner, sir?
I always receive you with a grateful heart.
See, I am all sunshine now you are come.
BELVILLE: Yet your sunshine of late is all through a cloud.
I know not, what's the matter with you.
Your temper will alter and then…
[BELVILLE exits.]
PAMELA:[calling after him]It shan't alter sir, it shan't if I can help it.
[She is left alone.]
[Change of mood and scene: A SERVANT enters with the COUNTESS.]
SERVANT: My lady, a gentleman calling himself the noble Spaniard waits to see you.
[BELVILLE enters, carrying the COUNTESS's handkerchief.
The SERVANT withdraws.]
BELVILLE: This happy estray thus restored begs leave by me to acknowledge its lovely owner!
COUNTESS: What mean you, sir?
Who are you, sir?
What mean you?
BELVILLE: Your ladyship, I am incapable of meaning anything but what is honourable.
This, madam, you left last night, and I take the liberty to restore it to you.
COUNTESS: 'Tiis true, sir, I see now it is one of mine.
But such a trifle was not worthy of being brought by such a gentleman as you seem to be.
Your servant might have delivered the bagatelle to mine.
BELVILLE: Nothing could be called so that belongs to the Countess of Pembroke.
It is impossible after having seen the finest lady in the world not to wish to see her again.
COUNTESS: Art thou not a married wretch?
Answer me quickly.
BELVILLE:[fingers crossed]No.
COUNTESS: Swear to me thou art not.
BELVILLE: By St. Ignatius, then.
[He kisses her.]
COUNTESS: Whence this insolence?
Now sir!
Begone!
[BELVILLE kisses her again.]
You told me, sir, last night of your intrepidness.
I think you are the boldest man I ever met with, but sir, surely you ought to know that you are not now in the Haymarket.
[Exeunt BELVILLE and the COUNTESS.]
[Change of mood: back at BELVILLE's house, MR.
WILLIAMS enters.]
MR.
WILLIAMS:[to PAMELA]Mrs. Belville, I hope you will excuse the temerity of my current address to you but following the masquerade I have discovered  news.
I hesitate to tell you further without your leave.
PAMELA: Pray, Mr. Williams, do not concern yourself.
My husband is on a pleasure party in Oxford.
He will soon return and perhaps we can hear your news then.
MR.
WILLIAMS: I know who the lady is who came to the masquerade as a nun.
PAMELA:[gallantly]It is very indifferent to me who the lady is.
MR.
WILLIAMS: It is with great reluctance that I speak and I beg you to forgive me, but I must tell you it is the Countess of Pembroke, a lady noted for her wit and beauty but of a wanton disposition.
Though I believe not yet culpable.
PAMELA: Sir, I am so well satisfied with Mr. Belville's affection for me and his well-known honour that I cannot think myself obliged to any gentleman who should endeavour to give me a less opinion of either.
MR.
WILLIAMS: The Countess is of the party with your husband in Oxford.
PAMELA: I am glad he is in such good company and I wish him joy.
MR.
WILLIAMS: I hope I may trust to your discretion not to let Mr. Belville know from whom you had the information.
PAMELA: I will never, sir, enter into a subject that is not proper to be communicates every tittle of it to Mr. Belville and this must be my excuse for withdrawing.
[MR.
WILLIAMS exits.
MRS.
JEWKES enters with a letter.]
[taking the letter]A lady's writing and the seal a coronet.
[BELVILLE enters.]
Here is a letter for you, sir, and from a lady too.
[BELVILLE takes the letter.]
BELVILLE:[coldly]What then, madam?
PAMELA: "Madam" , did you say, sir?
I won't take that  word.
Call me your girl, your rustic Pamela — call me anything but "Madam" !
BELVILLE:[sarcastically]My charmer then, my life, my soul.
Will any of these do?
PAMELA: If you speak short to me how shall I bear it?
BELVILLE: 'TIS my temper, my dear.
You know I mean nothing.
You should not mind it.
PAMELA: Then tell me who you were with at Oxford.
[BELVILLE, put on the spot by this direct question, prevaricates.]
BELVILLE: Mr. Howard and his daughter…
Mr. Herbert and his lady…
Lord Darnford…
Lady Jones…and I had a partner, my dear, to represent you.
[PAMELA sobs.]
Why, my dear, you are so engaged in your pretty event.
This was a sudden thing.
You know I told you.
PAMELA: Sir, sir, as you please, I can't…
I can't…be displeased…
BELVILLE: Displeased?
Why that word?
And why that hesitation?
PAMELA: Why should I hesitate?
What occasion is there for it?
BELVILLE: You are a little jealous rogue, I know you are.
PAMELA: Why do you impute jealousy to me on this score?
What a creature must I be if you could not be abroad with a lady but I must be jealous of you?
No, sir, I have reason to rely upon your honour, and I do rely upon it and…
BELVILLE: Take care, take care, Pamela!
You will drive me from you in spite of my own heart.
PAMELA: Sir!
Sir!
BELVILLE: I have had the mortification for some weeks past to come home to a very different Pamela than I used to.
But as you cannot see me at present with any advantage to yourself, I leave for Tunbridge, my dear, and hope we shall better understand one another on my return.
PAMELA: I will not ask you who is of your party…
[BELVILLE exits, slamming the door.]
I believe I have shed as many tears as would drown by baby.
MRS.
JEWKES: Everybody knows, I can assure you.
Her ladyship is gone with your spouse to Tunbridge and there they are to take lodgings or a house.
Mr. Belville is after to come to town to settle matters and then to go down to her where they are to live as man and wife.
[MRS.
JEWKES exits.]
PAMELA:[alone]I hope I shall not be deserted at the hour of my trial.
[She arranged a chair for BELVILLE as Judge and a line of chairs facing it as a Dock.]
[BELVILLE enters.]
BELVILLE: I know, my dear, I left you in great anxiety but 'tis an anxiety you have brought upon yourself, and I have not been easy ever since I parted from you.
[He gives her a pair of diamond earrings.]
PAMELA:[formally]I am sorry for it, sir.
BELVILLE: Why, my dear love, there is still a melancholy air in your countenance.
[He embraces her.]
PAMELA:[breaking from his embrace]When, sir, am I to come upon my trial?
BELVILLE: What means my dearest?
PAMELA:[coldly]I mean nothing but good.
I have been preparing myself to tell you all my mind.
I will be your judge and put home questions to you, and sometimes you shall be mine and at last pronounce sentence upon me.
BELVILLE:[excited by her cold unapproachable manner]Dear charmer of my heart, what a new Pamela have I in my arms.
Let us instantly go to my closet or yours and come upon our mutual trial for you have fired by soul with impatience.
PAMELA:[moving behind the line of chairs]Here is the bar at which I am to take my trial.
You must give me, sir, all my own way.
This is the first and perhaps the last time that I shall desire it.
I want not to move your passions but your reason.
BELVILLE: What means all this parade, my dear?
Let me perish if I know how to account for you or your humour.
PAMELA: You will presently, sir.
BELVILLE: My dear, I fear for your head in all this.
PAMELA: I fear only for my heart.
I beseech you say not one word but "yes" or "no" till I have said all I have to say.
BELVILLE:[sitting]Well, my strange dear, what is your question?
PAMELA: Whether sir, the nun who followed you at the masquerade is not the Countess of Pembroke?
BELVILLE:[prevaricating]What then, my dear, I thought the…
PAMELA:[interrupting]Nay, sir, only "yes" or "no" , if you please.
BELVILLE: Yes then.
PAMELA:Has not the Countess taken a house or lodgings at Tunbridge?
BELVILLE:[belligerently]She has, and what then?
PAMELA: And is Her Ladyship there or in town?
BELVILLE: There, and what then?
PAMELA: I doubt not you are soon to return to Tunbridge?
BELVILLE: I am, and what when?
Must the consequence be crime enough to warrant your jealousy?
PAMELA: Don't be so angry.
I don't do this in a spirit of recrimination.
'T is my misfortune that she is too lovely and too attractive.
Indeed, you have all the excuse, dear Mr. Belville, that a gentleman can have in the object of your preset passion.
BELVILLE: Present passion, Pamela!
PAMELA: Dear sir, hear me without interruption.
She has all those additional advantages as nobleness of birth and deportment which I want.
Could my fondness have kept you steady I should not now appear before you in this solemn manner.
I know the charms of my rival are too powerful for me to contend with.
I will therefore, sir, dear as you are to me, give up your person to the happier, to my worthier rival.
BELVILLE: Are you in earnest, Pamela?
Can you so easily part with me?
PAMELA: I can, sir, and I will, rather than divide my interest in you knowingly with any lady upon earth.
BELVILLE: You talk to me, my dearest life, as if all you had heard against me was true.
PAMELA: I want nothing to convince me, sir, that the Countess loves you.
BELVILLE: Be tender of a lady's reputation for your own sake.
No one is exempted from calumny.
PAMELA: I wish the lady would be as tender of her reputation as I would be.
But can you say, sir, that there is nothing between you that should not be?[pause]You answer me not and may I not fairly presume you cannot?
BELVILLE: I love you still with a passion as ardent as ever I loved you.
PAMELA: I see your difficulties.
You have gone too far to recede.
Satisfy me about your intention and my lady's to live at Tunbridge together.
BELVILLE: 'TIS absolute malice and falsehood.
Our intimacy has not proceeded so far.
PAMELA: Then, dear sir, there is nothing at all amiss in the correspondence between my lady and you?
BELVILLE:[cornered]Not on her side, I dare say.
PAMELA: Well, sir, this is very noble of you.
I love to hear the gentleman generous in points of honour where the honour of our sex is concerned.
BELVILLE:[desperately]Once the Countess discovered I was married she resolved we should enter into a system devoted to Platonic Love, in which sex was to have no manner of concern…
PAMELA:[finally losing control]Platonic Love!
'TIS the fly buzzing about the blaze till its wings are scorched.
It is a bait of the devil to catch the unexperienced and thoughtless.
Platonic Love is platonic nonsense.
[Her anger brings on an attack which in turn brings on the birth pangs.
She calls for MRS.
JEWKES.
MRS.
JEWKES leads her off.
BELVILLE paces impatiently.
A baby's cry is heard and MRS.
JEWKES appears with the baby and presents it to BELVILLE.
He is overjoyed but MR.
WILLIAMS enters and BELVILLE realises that PAMELA is dying.
Just as he is about to follow MR.
WILLIAMS to her bedside, the COUNTESS appears.
The COUNTESS goes to PAMELA's bedside, watched by BELVILLE.]
COUNTESS:[to PAMELA]I come to tell you all that has passed between Mr. Belville and myself that you may not think worse of either of us than we deserve.
I thought when I first saw Mr. Belville at the masquerade that he was the finest gentleman I had ever seen.
I respect him greatly, you must allow me to say that.
Except for permitting me to believe that he was a single gentleman — a fault he cannot be excused for — he has behaved to me with generosity and honour.
Since he had a lady so much more deserving than myself, I could have wished I had been of his sex and then there never would have been a more perfect friendship.
[The COUNTESS exits.
BELVILLE kneels beside PAMELA. who is finally convinced by the COUNTESS's confession.]
PAMELA: My first, my last and only love.
How shall I contain my joy?
To think that you are and will be mine and I yours through the mercies of God when this transitory life is past and gone, for all eternity!
Methinks I am already, dear sir, ceasing to be mortal…
[She dies.]
BELVILLE: How often have I prayed that I would be faithfully and only yours.
How often declared that I did not think I could possibly deserve my Pamela till I could show her a purity as nearly equal to hers.
[He realises PAMELA is dead.]
[in a frenzy of remorse]O, how heartily I now despise all my former pursuits and headstrong appetites.
What joys, what true joys flow from virtue — joys which the libertine can never know.
[He is joined by MR.
WILLIAMS.]
[more calmly]I am now convinced that nothing but religious considerations and a resolution to watch over the very first appearances of evil can be of sufficient weight to keep steady to his good purpose a vain young man.
[He kneels with MR.
WILLIAMS in the same position as at the beginning of Act One.]
[As the actors leave the stage and the tannoy is switched up, we hear the announcement: "Ladies and Gentlemen, please take your seats in the main auditorium.
Act Two of "Coriolanus" is about to begin."]
FINIS
