Sheila Rowbotham Revolt in Roundhay
At seventeen I liked Nescafe, sausages, cooking apples and Camus.
I fancied myself as an incipient existentialist.
I wore black stockings, tight skirts from Leeds C &A cheaper separates, the largest black sweater I could find and black high heels.
I put eye-liner round my eyes and green eyeshadow on my lids.
I made my face and lips as white as I could.
I aimed to get long straight hair — but it was really bouffant growing out.
Some social pressures were impossible to resist.
Indeed, getting kitted up like a beatnik represented a self-help endeavour, of which, if he could have made an imaginative leap, Samuel Smiles himself would have been proud.
It was me against the known world.
Nothing like it was seen in Roundhay in 1959.
 "You an art student?" people said on the shopping parade.
 "No," I'd say with a mysterious air.
If you knew the place in 1959 you'd realise that lectures on Camus and Same would have fallen completely flat.
Roundhay wasn't exactly the Left Bank.
I hadn't been there from the age of seven without learning what went down in Roundhay.
An enigma was all I could hope for.
Barmy was the more likely response.
But this was the thing with being an outsider — even in my  small way.
Look at Colin Wilson.
Really you needed a sleeping bag, didn't he sleep out in Hampstead Heath?
I'd never been there but there would have been a terrible fuss if I'd taken off to Roundhay Park or Woodhouse Moor or somewhere.
My father growled and my mother giggled.
You were only young once she said.
I can't remember much of what I wore when I arrived from Harehills in 1950.
There was a green taffeta party dress, white socks in summer and in the winter long grey socks with garters at the knee.
Every night my mother curled my hair with rags and my face was covered in freckles.
We had arrived from Harehills on the up and up with the booming coal industry.
My father was a salesman for an engineering firm selling pit motors.
First the old Morris I liked had been exchanged for a Jowett Javelin.
And now this new posh house with its cream urns outside.
When you are small the world you are born into simply is.
The forces which made your parents as they are, the making of what is assumed can take a whole lifetime to unravel.
But at first it is just what surrounds you.
The change from Harehills to Roundhay was in a sense part of the given.
People moved — it was taken for granted.
Yet the shift in surroundings was also an indication of hidden meanings.
Why did some people move and others stay?
And it was not only the walls and paint and curtains which differed, or that the garden was larger now; there were the people too.
Slowly, as I grew older, I began to move backwards, searching to place everyone.
I learned of my father's childhood, one of a family of fourteen on a South Yorkshire farm, his scholarship to grammar school and engineering classes at night.
He met my mother when he was in his early thirties and she must have been in her teens.
They ran away to India in the 1920s, and there he worked as a colliery engineer.
When they returned to Britain it was the Depression.
He could not get work and eventually went back to being an electrician in a colliery.
Even in the fifties my mother was still so relieved they were not poor anymore that she found spending money reassuring.
The move to Harehills in the 1940s and buying a Morris was a new-found stability which came to them only in middle age.
But to me, who had grown up without knowing want, the prosperity which accrued around them through the fifties and early sixties was of little account.
Years later I could observe their lives not just as the chance affairs of a family.
Our clump of existence was related to the fortunes of others after all and to the more remote circumstances of industries, coal, engineering, clothing, printing.
Even the economy beyond Leeds and Yorkshire pulled my parents and their friends and acquaintances, small to medium middle class.
They schemed and dreamed busily of mortgages and mistresses and new cars and  carpets and posh hotels and the South of France.
There was the glance over the shoulder now and again to make sure they kept some distance between them and the white proletariat which erupted in new housing estates, bringing property values down.
The new black immigrants at the bottom of the pile were hardly mentioned.
They threatened only the privileges of the poor.
The most passionate prejudice was reserved for the Jews.
Resentment of their success in the Leeds business world acted to explain anyone else's failure, without questioning individual acumen or the inherent virtue of capitalism.
My parents' steadfast refusal to countenance the anti-semitism common among many of the people they knew was my first lesson as a young child against accepting hearsay rather than the evidence of your own experience.
I still cannot hold that tension between the immediacy of the world of my childhood, the towering hugeness of my mother and father and my grown-up brother, back from Germany and the RAF with his rifle and a suntan, and the interconnecting pattern of the economy, their class and politics.
Even as I try to follow the interweaving, the world of childhood reasserts itself and Leeds and Yorkshire become again the centre of existence.
It is as if the years in between were inhabited by fragile observations, mere scratches and traces on the skin.
The stuff of it, how it came to be, how it was shaped and turned and moved, still evades me.
No such self-consciousness at seven.
I grinned out of photos with confidence.
I had been a gang leader in Harehills — first administering the lives of younger children, then by brass, bossiness and imagination extending judgement even over older boys.
It was partly an implicit class authority.
In Harehills I belonged to the upper crust of the lower middle classes who were getting out as fast as they could.
Physical ferocity and an eye for human responses — the latter fostered by my mother — did the rest.
True, I'd had the occasional setback, like proposing to Tony Kessler when I was four.
He was sorry, he said, but he wasn't allowed to marry me because I wasn't a Jew.
I recovered.
Three years is after all a long time.
We were just friends.
But there was big ginger George next door.
He was nine at least.
I think he was interested in watching once when I was peeing.
There was this mystery around taking your knickers down.
Once he congratulated me on my gang.
Such honour.
Roundhay was different.
I was somehow not right.
Being tough got me nowhere.
The kids wouldn't even fight.
They just bawled.
As little girls returned covered in dust and mud a parental boycott developed.
I was "common" they said.
 "What's common?" 
I asked my mother.
 "It's when you scream and play rough games and get dirty." 
I tried not to shout so loud.
But Anne next door was a bit tame.
She just wheeled her dolls around and played on her swing.
I learned to be alone.
I was in effect an only child — my brother was seventeen when I was born.
I was a mistake.
Years later I learned that my friend from Harehills, Jane, had walked to Roundhay and been turned away by my father.
I still feel a pang at the thought of her all pink and blonde and sticky and snotty nosed.
Next thing Dandy and Beano were banned.
I was learning bad language.
This "common" lodged inside me — the lost good times.
Cut adrift from nearly everything I'd known before seven, I turned inward and invented story games to play alone.
Three years went past.
In the summers I rode for hours on a white pedal car with a hooter and real spark plugs.
I went to feed the ducks at Roundhay Park, greeted the bluebells, presented bouquets to visiting dignitaries at my prep school, fought my enemy Nola Mote, had my front tooth knocked out by two large Bradshaw sisters.
Girls will be girls as they say.
I wore shorts, read about Queen Margaret of Scotland and a missionary heroine in Girl, listened to Dan Dare on Radio Luxemburg.
In the winter I constructed a bustling social existence of teddy bears, led by a ruling family of bears called the Cubbinses.
Complicated personal feuds, broken romances and diplomatic intrigue kept me and the bears pretty busy.
We extended into municipal services.
Me and the Cubbinses opened a library and my school friends came to borrow books.
It would be too extreme to say I was unhappy.
Extremes of any kind would have been unfitting in Roundhay.
But certainly some ebullience in me was checked, held in and turned inwards.
There were two continuities with before.
One was my fox terrier dog Simon, whom I loved passionately in my loneliness and shamefully deserted and neglected in my adolescence.
He had a lovely grin.
Simon and I were always in trouble because of the garden.
The garden was my father's pride and joy, the real expression of his creativity, perhaps some echo of his boyhood on a South Yorkshire farm.
The trouble came because it was also the place where Simon liked to pee — and on the newest plants from the market garden in Boston Spa.
 "That dog'll have to go," roared my father.
My mother shielded me and Simon as much as she was able.
So did a succession of home helps who were also the source of strange tales and occasional adventures.
One old lady from Wiltshire told me if the Germans had come they'd have killed off old people like her.
What a relief we'd won the war.
My favourite was Ivy who was blonde, buxom and fun and took me — oh what delight — to see Roy Rogers in Son of a Pale Face.
The other link with Harehills was an elderly couple called Fred and Ethel Thompson who had looked alter me when I was little.
I was not only a late mistake but my mother had just had her breast removed because she had cancer before I was born.
I lived quite a lot of my early childhood at the Thompsons' house behind a shop on Harehills Parade.
They had been country people and I was taken off to visit relatives and friends in Shepley and Harewood, sucking mintoes as a treat.
There were two worlds co-existing.
In this one you got Yorkshire pudding first and Uncle Fred ate his gravy with a knife and no one frowned upon it.
You had to eat your sausage skins: "Some children would be glad of them." 
There was a lovely mongrel dog Judy, a yard where the washing was laboriously done with much boiling, quidging and squelching, an oven lit by the fire, outings and picnics and dominoes with Uncle Fred in the park with his old cronies.
I became a demon domino player.
And once when I was very little I sat with him on his horse-drawn dray at the station with him in his bowler hat.
But after Roundhay the connection was more remote.
I did not visit so often.
Eventually I made a new friend around the corner.
Her mother  didn't bother about screaming.
Indeed normal conversation in their house was of such pitch and volume that a scream would hardly have been heard.
Here I was a veritable mouse.
Janina's father was a Polish Jew who had come over to Britain to fight in the war.
Her mother was from a Leeds Jewish family and her Granny lived with them.
Her father was only at, home for short times; he owned a button factory in India.
He wasn't very talkative, but he was an imposing man.
My mother said he had "influence" .
It was mainly the two women's voices, cascading with emotions which erupted with a startling suddenness and burst explosively into the surface of life.
Extraordinary in Yorkshire, where the most profound emotion slowly worked up and out, tightly wrapped into the cold air, channelled through flat vowels, into a word or at most a single sentence, while all the rest was conveyed only with the slightest movement of the body.
I was at once alarmed and relieved amidst the noise and the dark bright colours Janina's mother wore.
I took to Rakusen's matzos and chopped liver.
It was my first taste and glimpse of a world beyond potted meat from Perkins on Roundhay Parade and primula cheese and sardines and salmon for a treat and those fifties pastel colours.
For Janina's family Leeds was accidental.
Leeds, Manchester, New York, Vienna, even India and Poland were network extensions.
It was not so difficult to leave Roundhay.
You could come and go in the world.
My mother's stories also led me away from home.
I used to listen for hours about her girlhood in Sheffield: smoking out of the window; the young soldier she visited in hospital in the First World War, who gave her his rosary and went off and was killed; of her suitors; the fuss surrounding her affair with my father, who was much older than her (and already married, though this she never told me).
She described again and again how they went to India in the early 1920s and returned in the Depression, his work as an electrician in the mines, poverty, living in digs with the old soldier who polished the shoes and got my brother to put the finishing kaybosh on them.
Then came the war, the Nome Guard and the black market, and anti-Jewish feeling which she thought stupid.
 "Mr Kessler was very kind to me when Lance had his stroke." 
The war  was somehow left behind in Harehills with the browns and greens and the Home Guard helmet on the cellar door.
But India came with us.
The spoils of Empire, elephants, buddhas, screens and incense jars, sat in the lounge.
My mother had more stories of India than the war: my mother dancing with young men at the club, the cobra she saw on the veranda, the retired doctor in the Indian army who sent her his travelling rug before he died.
Everything exciting seemed to have happened before I was born.
I cursed my luck and began to invent adventures.
Diamond thieves used old shoes in the woods in North Lane to pass on the goods.
I told my friend Bridget it was up to us to keep watch.
They left messages in a hollow tree on Seacroft estate.
I led a desperate expedition.
We got lost, returning home at ten, trembling with terror at our own inventions.
I was banned from playing with Bridget.
I was over-excitable.
"Imaginative.
Shows promise", said my school reports.
I liked history and writing and reading.
I wrote a play and directed it on our garden lawn.
I had become a skinny, sickly, snuffly bronchial child.
I missed a lot of school.
A doctor told my parents of a children's holiday scheme in Switzerland.
He thought it would do me good.
I went for a month when I was ten.
The other children were from the south, all older than me and posher.
They imitated my voice.
I didn't realise I had a Yorkshire accent.
At first I was completely alone, reading or wandering around.
Then I became friendly with two boys, one eleven and the other twelve, and bashed my way to equality.
They stuck up for my right to walk as far up mountains as the older children.
The woman who organised the holiday lived in London.
She was a socialist.
When she corrected my accent one evening she said, "It's all right for other people to have regional accents but not for oneself" I puzzled over this.
I could make no sense of it.
Separate from my parents in another country, I came to a new knowledge of me as a self apart.
I was conscious of a kind of pause between beginnings and endings.
There I was in my shorts and T shirts, my hair straight, gripped back, the curling rags long  abandoned.
I could swim and run and walk and fight.
But in the pause there was an expectancy.
Why did all the grown-ups giggle so much when Richard (the younger of the two boys) and I went to the fancy dress party as Adam and Eve?
And there were those funny pouches in my swimsuit which flapped over my chest — "Until I grow busts" I told people, and they all laughed that laugh again.
I became very conscious that I must cover my chest.
I felt a painful modesty.
As for outside events, in these three years or so there was a cluster of royal funerals, weddings and the Coronation which I watched on Janina's new television.
I tired, even in the novelty of TV, of the interminable species of soldiers and what-not filing past.
I heard of Korea and the Festival of Britain, the A bomb and the N bomb.
I read through my brother's Readers Digest, where I learned that Stalin was a bad name.
I learned about St George and King Arthur.
Good men.
I read Our Island Story, The Famous Five books and Swallows and Amazons.
Little Women and Anne of Green Gables represented the far left of my reading.
But I got hold of All Quiet on the Western Front from my brother's bookshelves.
And then, most startling, a book called War, Wine and Women from which I learned of the existence of prostitutes and lice.
I was amazed.
Then at eleven off I went, trunk packed, inventory in order, labels on, to a Methodist boarding school in East Yorkshire, close to the sea.
 "Healthy air," my father said.
 "Good for the chest, bracing." 
There I was until I was seventeen, to emerge improbably as an existentialist.
For the first few years I romped to cover up the new loneliness.
This time I missed my mother.
But there was a lot going on at school.
You could play commandos in the grounds, learn tracking in the Guides, keep a garden, eat sticky buns and suet puddings and sweets.
There were complex power struggles of a desperate kind, for there were no grown-ups to appeal to.
There were intrigues and ambushes.
I fought but was never good at diplomacy.
One attack shook me.
It was not proper fighting but something more frightening.
One evening a girl jumped on me when I was lying on my bed in my cubicle.
Scratching at my eyes, she began to rub her cunt on top of me.
I fought her off shaking and bewildered.
But then such a fuss about who was wearing a bra, had slip-on shoes, heels, roll-ons.
I became an expert at putting my rollers on in the dark and listening to the Top Twenty under the sheets.
Thoroughly braced, desperately consuming carbohydrates against the howling winds of the North Sea, I changed shape.
No longer skinny, I be came awkwardly chubby in the wrong places.
Nome in the holidays, wretched at thirteen in my school coat.
Oh for a sling-back coat and high heels.
I gazed at Teds and my friend Pam's cousin Malcolm who had a Tony Curtis and a bootlace tie.
While I was still listening to "The Surrey with the Fringe on Top" and "Some Enchanted Evening" , rock and roll burst about my ears.
The first record I ever bought was "Love and Marriage" , the second was Lonnie Donegan "Diggin" My Potatoes'.
It was a sign of the times.
1956.
Elvis's "All Shook Up" , "Any Way You Want Me" , "Love Me Tender" , "Heartbreak Hotel" and "Teddy Bear" followed.
But Elvis was too scary.
My heart was given to Tommy Steele, "Rock with the Cavemen" and "Elevator Rock" .
When I won an essay competition in 1957 on "Why I was proud to be a citizen of Leeds" , organised by the Variety Club of Great Britain and the local evening paper, the big event in my London visit was not Buckingham Palace, nor having Norman Wisdom put his arm round me, but gazing at a skiffle group which had played in the 21's coffee bar with Tommy Steele.
The place had a sacred significance.
I fell in love with a boy with a crew cut who came to mend our roof with the window cleaner who grinned at me in my rollers and the boy in Vallance's record shop with a sport face.
The commando chief Rosemary lost interest in leading desperate missions.
Instead she read us letters from a boy she had met in the holidays.
Such sloppy letters.
I teetered between awe and scorn.
Then we discovered pen friends.
Pen friends were encouraged for learning French, but in English Digest there were advertisements from Burma and Mauritius and from servicemen.
The replies were extraordinarily amorous.
We started a lively correspondence with about five pen friends each, scribbling away under the desk in lessons.
It was very time consuming.
One English lesson I got detention.
Our punishment was to listen to the teacher read Keats's "Lamia" aloud.
Bored, sullen, resigned, I  listened.
Then suddenly the words wove within me, transporting me through another's imagination.
It was a delight more magical than the panto and the circus had held when I was little.
When I went to Roundhay first I could still see fairies.
If I pressed my eyes tight shut they came, gold and black and red and silver.
Once I even thought I saw one with my eyes open.
But I never was quite sure.
And then they had faded.
Words could open these strange worlds again.
Radiant, I walked out of detention and listened avidly in English lessons afterwards to Keats, Byron, Wordsworth and Shelley, then Milton and Shakespeare and Marlowe.
I discovered Rupert Brooke's poems in the school library.
Containing the headmistress's books in large numbers, it was weighted heavily with books from the inter-war years.
I thought he was very handsome, tragic and iconoclastic.
An angel coming to Mary — what a thought.
We all read True Romances, True Confessions.
I hoped my mother would be shocked into recognising my maturity by these.
In fact she didn't bat an eyelid.
They were expected of me.
Then I came across Rousseau's Confessions, which took a bit of reading but was more interesting than the love mags.
I found the Social Contract in the school library and was bewildered.
No one had told me there was a thing called political theory.
I read it doggedly in the hope that it would be some kind of follow-up.
Now could two such different books come out of one person?
I bought a cheap biography of William Godwin and learned about Mary Wollstonecraft, who became my heroine.
Byron was my hero and they've been slogging it out ever since.
Reading a lot made me a little odd but no one bothered much what I read.
I borrowed The Saint from my father and historical novels like Katherine from my mother at home.
At school I read Jane Austen, the Brontes, Thackeray and George Eliot, along with Russell Braddon, Douglas Bader, Winston Churchill and the life of John Wesley.
Books were a jumble and I had no notion of discriminating between them.
Religion was the first vehicle for general thoughts about existence.
I was brought up in oblivious paganism, but school  introduced two services a day, Scripture several times a week and Bible class with theological criticism and the occasional lecture on Pilgrims Progress as a special treat.
I read the Bible over and over, then theological commentaries and historical background, books about heretics, books about enthusiasts.
I knelt on the wooden floor in the East Yorkshire winter praying, "Dear God if you exist let me be warmed." 
Nothing happened.
The minister explained that this kind of frontal approach was the wrong way to go about it with God.
You were not to challenge God.
It was arrogant and his ways were mysterious.
Indeed, goodness itself was not enough.
Spiritual pride was a trap.
We had to receive grace.
I pondered all these things.
In Bible class we discussed whether the bread was indeed his body.
Surely remembrance was more probable.
Didn't the Anglicans try and have it both ways?
Either it was or it wasn't.
I decided I wanted to be received as a Methodist.
I went to chapel in the holidays and to the youth club.
Suddenly an enormous row blew up.
My father said I could not be received.
I was to be confirmed.
This made no sense.
He had never taken me to an Anglican church, he never read the Bible.
Yet chapel was banned; worse, my theological learning disregarded.
The religious fracas shook the house, our sleepy old house where no one debated principles.
I had already come into conflict over race and patriotism.
My father said Eden should have kept the troops in Suez and only the British had moral integrity.
My history teacher, who was a liberal, joked about such attitudes and I followed her cue.
But this time it exploded into violence.
He bashed me over the head and took out a knife to threaten me.
My mother got me out of the room.
Hysterically light with fear, I ran sobbing to my room.
Somehow a negotiated settlement was reached.
I could go to chapel if I agreed to be confirmed when I was older.
But I felt towards my father, with the clarity and ruthlessness of adolescence, not merely hostility, but contempt.
His sudden rush of Anglican devotion remained unexplained and incomprehensible.
My mother said that in his South Yorkshire village Methodists had been looked down upon.
On another level, perhaps he was fighting a wayward spirit he could not control.
It  was open battle from then on.
 "Time is on your side," my mother would say wearily, looking outwards, as if towards a hidden wall beyond immediate seeing.
She was unconcerned herself with my scholastic interest in theology.
I was indignant when one of her friends told me my mother had believed my Methodist conviction was because I had a crush on the minister.
In fact I did not.
But he was the first grown-up person who assumed I could discuss ideas.
He had been a railway worker and was called to the ministry.
Perhaps he felt sympathy towards someone struggling to hook ideas together.
My mother did not tackle the world through the intellect.
Neither politics nor organised religion affected her.
Yet without fuss she dwelt obstinately on the meaning behind surface meaning.
An inner reserve of spiritual strength was always there.
It was not spoken of but drawn upon when it was needful.
And I grew up respectful of the strength of her inner soul, superior in my school learning but knowing here was something beyond knowledge.
Where it came from goodness only knows, but it survived illness, unhappiness and the hum drum of Roundhay.
Her laughter and her stories teased the stuffy old pompous world of matter.
She mocked the lessons of her copybook.
 "The daily round, the common task is really all we need to ask." 
There must be a world of delight beyond Roundhay, where Victor Sylvester always plays and all the men are gentlemanly and such wonderful dancers and my mother spinturns for ever in their arms or elegantly allows them to light her cigarette.
Fred Astaire still twirls Ginger Rogers and Donald Peers croons Give me the moonlight, give me the girl and leave the rest to me.
 "If you were the only girl in the world and I was the only boy, nothing else would matter in the whole wide world," my mother would sing inappropriately.
She liked Eartha Kitt and Marilyn Monroe.
 "Diamonds are a girl's best friend," she'd tell me.
 "And every cloud has a silver lining." 
There were men that "passed like ships in the night" — the good ones and men like "your father" who snored in the night and roared in the day who it was best to put a pillow between.
 "Oh slave live for ever." 
She'd play even with her own destiny, smiling approvingly at Mitzi Gaynor in South Pacific.
 "I'm going to wash that man right out of my hair." 
Yet somehow delight and freedom could be found.
My mother's mischief and spiritual fortitude spun out into the fabric of the unknown.
Braver and deeper than the evangelical adventure the minister promised to the Christian.
The sticking point in faith for me was abnegation.
Was it stubborn pride or reason which defied surrender?
Unresolved, I clung to the nub of "I" , perhaps sensing that I needed "I" if was ever to hurtle to freedom.
I wanted to get out without any conception of where I was going.
Janina's father told me he had no faith in God.
He was not simply indifferent to religion.
He denied it.
I wondered at this.
Copying Janina's parents, I started to read the Sunday Times instead of the Sunday press.
It gave cultural shape to a world outside school and home.
Somewhere there was a great concourse of the high-minded who, in between the Sunday Times each week, spent their days pondering weighty ideas, discussing plays and foreign films.
I read a review of a biography of Havelock Ellis which described his mystical union with nature.
I found Olive Schreiner's Story of an African Farm.
I tried to become one with nature on the games-field, which made me unpopular with the enthusiastic cricketers.
At night when storms lashed from the North Sea I gazed in awe at the hill where the Hunmanby Dane had built his wooden castle and yearned to enter the past.
As I tussled with Christianity and to order the world in my head, I became conscious of an oscillation of temperament.
I was drawn to contrary poles.
I yearned towards the mystical earnestness which saw through the outer facing of existence in a oneness and blinding intensity which went direct to some essence of being.
But I could appreciate a countervailing vision of tolerant scepticism in which the surface texture of life was a source of amiability and pleasure.
Here reasoned choice between lesser evils was the course which brought the least ill on humanity.
They seemed to be wherever you turned, these two sources of enlightenment.
In Donne and Ben Jonson, Shelley and Jane Austen, in Methodism, in Protestantism, in the Reformation and Renaissance.
Even among my two favourite teachers.
Our English  teacher was a Northern Irish mystical Protestant who breathed Milton and explained the imagery of Dylan Thomas.
The history teacher was a Methodist from an East Yorkshire farming family who liked Baroque architecture, appreciated eighteenth century reason and read Vogue and Nova.
Despite these dashes of earnest high-mindedness, I had the outer appearance of normality.
Under our summer dresses we wore full petticoats with hoops and white high heels.
At fifteen I had a smart brown jersey skirt and a light green jersey dress and a Leslie Caron "Gigi" hair-do.
Thoughts buzzed around in my head and I might pursue the world of the spirit, but dressing up was equally important.
So was a labyrinthine knowledge of pop music, remnants of which have survived the years.
And there were boys.
In a sense it was true they had always been there.
You fought them, dared them, had adventures and special likings, thought they were daft or dirty minded.
But they appeared to vanish altogether  for several years to return mysteriously to look, to whistle and back chat.
I was tongue-tied and shy.
The proud fighter who took every challenge, was overcome with fear that they could mock me with their chat, but delighted to be noticed.
The worst of fates was to be a wallflower passed over and rejected.
A terrible song from a concert at Blackpool echoed back from when I was a tiny girl: "I don't want her you can have her she's too fat for me." 
The humiliation made me shudder.
I hid on bus seats, pressed myself into corners anything to evade the danger of being noticed and found wanting.
Pride made me disguise this.
I was above such things.
When the wolf whistles came though, I decided I wasn't after all.
There was an exhilaration in this strange new power.
They didn't even need to be shown how high you could climb, how bravely you could wrestle.
All you had to do was walk past in high heels and a tight skirt with your popper beads hanging down your button-up cardigan and a bra which shaped your breasts into sharply protruding cones and they exploded into admiring noises, gave you the eye, even followed you home.
But how did you ever meet them?
Janina's family, Methodism and history turned out to be the answers.
They were to he not only the routes to culture and the intellect but the means to romance and sort of sex.
Sort of sex because I was a bit slow on the uptake by modern standards.
Also information was exceedingly patchy and opportunity sparse.
Practical inexperience and rare encounters did not stop us talking about boys.
A school friend Joanna had lived in Trinidad and was American, worldly-wise about dating and "how far to go" .
At thirteen she had an extensive collection of Esther Williams photos in glamorous swimsuits and the most advanced information available about what to do with boys.
If "they" tried to kiss you with your mouth open you must keep your teeth tight shut.
(Well who could want such sloppy kisses anyway thought I) And if you lay full length with them on the beach it was a "sign" you would go all the way.
Joarna's moral purpose blurted at the edges.
Were you to fend them off or drive them crazy?
I ascertained that the aim was to achieve some ideal unity of the two.
I couldn't imagine quite how.
And anyway the problem was academic.
The strict controls over our life at school, our terrible school uniform and the climate of East Yorkshire conspired against either of these sexual eventualities, which had apparently been the common run of existence in Trinidad.
And as for Leeds, the only boys I met were at teenage dances.
They twirled you around in the Gay Gordons at Ilkley with clammy hands.
They showed no propensity towards sloppy kisses.
And there were no beaches in sight.
It was two years before I tested Joanna's theory in practice.
Janina's family took me to Switzerland for a holiday.
We went dancing in discos and an Italian boy, Giacomo, kissed me at the end of a dance.
On Joanna's instructions I set my teeth resolutely.
When I sat down I told Janina's mother, expecting her to tutut approvingly at my astute virtue.
Instead she threw back her head in laughter and said, "Next time he tries, open your mouth." 
It was exceedingly confusing.
Everyone seemed to have different ideas of what you should do.
But this was evidently the sophisticated thing.
I danced rigidly with Giacomo, kicking his shins and treading on his toes.
But I did open my teeth and the strange sloppy kiss was done.
Did he like doing this I wondered?
He certainly seemed very intent on it all.
My brain wandered off surveying the amorous absurdity of it.
Yorkshire me snorted inwardly, all this soppy stuff to look sophisticated.
But Janina was rather impressed at my catch.
Earnest me anyway slightly hankered alter another Italian boy, Joseph, who had invited me out for a walk.
Some walk!
It went on and on.
Joseph must have been a country boy.
He took mountains in his stride.
Up and up we went and when I could walk no longer he lay me down and covered me with kisses and love bites.
Joanna had missed out on love bites.
But my father had taught me how to make them on my arm, fox-bites.
So I thought they were all part of a jokey game.
But there was some funny feeling.
Joseph seemed to be curiously affected by the game.
I was convinced it was not a romantic passion.
I had rather formal notions of desire.
Boys fancied you when your make-up was just right and your freckles didn't show and your hair was tidy.
I was all scuffled and pink.
Then Joseph proposed.
I was alarmed.
I was alone on a mountain  with an unpredictable and completely un-Yorkshire person who appeared to have been touched by the sun.
I declined.
I didn't know him well enough, I mumbled.
I hoped it wouldn't hurt his feelings.
Undeterred he burst into song, serenading me in a loud baritone with Italian pop songs.
At this point Yorkshire won out.
Such a display of emotions was horrifying.
I stared at the path.
Oh if only the ground would proverbially open and swallow me.
If anyone should hear him.
Immolation rather than anyone hearing.
All those gushy words.
Yet also in some way I knew he was sincere.
Part of me was moved by his tribute.
Joseph was ridiculed for being serious.
Giacomo was okay because he was not.
This puzzled the earnest Protestant me.
Surely sincerity was better?
The orderly American "dating" we saw in films or heard about in pop songs never happened in my adolescence.
Instead there was simply a series of holiday encounters of a strange kind — nearly all of them away from Roundhay.
At a Methodist sixth formers course at Eastbourne in the winter holidays when I was fifteen I met David.
True romance this time.
When I came home and told my mother she sighed, "People write poems about this." 
I scampered off and wrote an obscurely pretentious verse.
David's family were Welsh but he was brought up in London.
He and his friend Keith took the mickey out of the rich.
They were working-class grammar school boys and they were going to university.
They said outright what I could not find words for.
I won the competition for being the girl with the dreamiest eyes.
Better than the knobbly knees one at any rate.
I came home pretty chuffed and in love.
We wrote for a term.
Arousal the following summer entwined with religious questing.
I went this time on a Methodist missionary course in Canterbury.
Well how else to get out of Roundhay?
A boy began talking with me.
He was from Sheffield and worked as a clerk, and was in a fundamentalist evangelical crusade.
They sang Jesus songs to a guitar and sought converts.
Conversion was overwhelming.
Physical transport and the release of emotion were integrated in worship.
Intense feeling erupted about everything.
He was angry about class, hypocrisy and the establishment.
He read John Osborne and Alan Sillitoe.
He liked wandering around as I did, exploring old churches and ruins.
After a witnessing session in which everyone opened their hearts and emerged exalted we walked out into the night and began to neck.
The exaltation brought a strange energy which slipped easily into desire.
 "Lust" as Lindsey would have said if she'd been there.
He drew back, saying it had nearly happened with another girl but she was a Catholic.
I was not certain whether it was Christian principle or a more cautious understanding of contraception than I had.
Nor was I sure whether I was relieved or disappointed, respected or rejected.
I suppose there are dilemmas at such moments in any decade.
But they seemed particularly so in the late fifties.
Where lay true morality?
Not in conventional respectability I decided fiercely.
Contradictory values surrounded us.
Freedom and smirks.
Honesty or making yourself cheap.
It felt painfully difficult to hew out another course.
Yet all my friends wanted to find another way of being.
We wanted reason and mischief, danger and trust, love and freedom.
We were all woefully ignorant of contraception.
For the next two years fear of getting pregnant was constantly producing panic, misery and confusion.
I had no idea what having a baby would mean, only that it would make escape from Roundhay impossible.
My friend Lindsey said I was consumed with earthy desires and unable to reach the higher planes.
My friend Bar, though, was an East Yorkshire farmer's daughter, and while she was cautious about my intellectual defiance of convention she had a country practical acceptance of the body and physical desire.
At root you went for what was good for you — why deny it?
She had a sensual certainty about her, though she experienced as many philosophical doubts and emotional woes as the rest of us.
If our culture was hard-won, the stalwart conservatism of her background made Roundhay a den of Bohemian anarchists in comparison.
Years later she reminded me of a forgotten and to me everyday  kind of question.
When we first became friends in our early teens I'd asked her if she fancied one of the young men in the village.
She said with a shock that she realised she had grown up among the men on her father's farm without seeing them as people you could conceivably fancy.
They were in some differing order of human being, for she was gentry.
Though the word was hardly used, the distinction was immutably there.
I had grown up with class but it was a shifting, unstable, changing force and you fancied across it regardless, for the world was open.
Even my father repeated "It's not what a man has but what he's going to make." 
My close women friends, like me, were all straining beyond our backgrounds.
Art school, university, we were going out of Yorkshire and nothing could stop us.
Life was what you made it.
Our teachers were the nearest guides because they had travelled these routes before us (though of course we wouldn't teach).
Their attitudes to literature, art, fashion, politics were seized upon, devoured, turned over, re-sited.
Ideas and culture were a way of life and education was never just about learning subjects for exams.
Socially mobile within the middle class we were going not so much up but sideways, heading towards sub-cultures, which as yet did not exist, and which we could envisage only hazily.
There were too many of us to be Bohemians.
We assumed we were going to change the world.
How, we were unclear.
Socialism was remote.
Though I tried to read Marx I couldn't connect what he said to the world I knew.
The anger of the outsider made purer sense.
Were we to live this permanent estrangement till the end of our days?
Or was the world to wake up renewed?
And what was it to be like?
Meanwhile, how was I to turn into Juliette Greco and Brigitte Bardot and Simone de Beauvoir all rolled into one?
Leeds C &A cheaper separates just did not stretch far enough.
Oh to get away so I could exhaust myself with intense experiences, where everyone spoke of intense subjects and never said "pass the bread and butter." 
It took several years to acknowledge that all this higher searching was based on my father's money.
And several more to note any similarity in pattern between the Yorkshire self-made businessman  and myself.
Though the connections were obvious to relations on my father's side.
 "She takes after our Lance," declared Rowbotham aunts and cousins, and I would scowl his scowl and confirm their verdict.
I preferred to resemble my mother, who had in my eyes, grace, wit, allure and dignity.
But she also concurred in the view that I was like my father.
 "You take after your father, liking sex," she'd say in the regretful tone you might use for a hereditary disease.
I think most fundamentally she transmitted her inner core of pride and I acquired from him both doggedness of purpose and the confidence to decide what was just and unjust in the world as I met it.
Such qualities have their disadvantages but on the whole I'm thankful.
But beyond this it is unclear.
It is still hard to say I am like him, like her, unlike her, unlike him, in this or that way.
Are your parents always rather too close for comfort?
Then they went.
Bar and Lindsey to university.
My friend Pam stayed in Halifax and became a secretary, but one of her boyfriends worked in advertising and went to London.
He left her his Champion Jack Dupree records.
But Pam had done with her radical phase.
Her new boyfriend was a young businessman and drove a Sprite and Pam thought he was a good catch.
One night he drank a lot of whisky and told me I was gone off.
He said that was what you called cars which had the wrong parts.
 "Huh," I thought.
 "Pam can have him." 
As I walked to get the bus in Leeds, stiletto heels clicking, the town night enclosing me, I mused on the pavement.
Walt Whitman would have merged with a kerb like that.
The kerb remained intact and external.
And this sex, perhaps individuality was a mistake.
Perhaps really it should be anonymous merging, at random, with all comers as you walked in the night.
But this was surely fantasy.
If I met Pam's bloke coming down Briggate I'd give him a wide berth.
How to be an existentialist intact and a Whitmanite continuously merging.
I was stumped and seventeen.
A young man in a black leather jacket jumped up at the bus window.
He was gesticulating wildly.
 "Who are you and where are you from?" 
I asked, all sangfroid, for the bus was anyway about to leave.
 "I'm a psychopath and I come from Bradford," he announced, matter-of-fact.
I grinned a welcome.
At least there were a few discerning spirits in Yorkshire.
It was 1960.
I did make my escape from Roundhay — by a route taken by many of my contemporaries: higher education.
I went to Oxford in 1961 with my beatnik uniform, sandals and black sweater.
I became a socialist there because while I did not agree with everything said by the Marxists I met and with whom I became friendly, they gave me a language for understanding the painful separations of class.
I also had excellent advice from one of my history tutors: "Don't read people on Marx; read Marx." 
I did — with admiration, though I never assumed he was to be taken without criticism.
When I left university in 1964 I went to live in Hackney in North East London.
I was doing a thesis on working-class education in the late nineteenth century at Chelsea College.
The bus journey alone is eloquent of class inequality.
I joined the Labour Party Young Socialists and received a basic Trotskyist education.
My knowledge of history and myself made me ask awkward questions.
The real learning came from the people in the group more than the talks.
I was involved in opposing the Vietnam War, began to write for a left newspaper, Black Dwarf and became part of the beginnings of the women's liberation movement.
I earned my living mainly from teaching.
Writing began out of the tremendous need to understand why those of us who formed the early groups were suddenly seeing our lives and the history we had learned through new eyes.
Women Resistance and Revolution, Women I Consciousness Man I World, Hidden from History and A new World for Women all came out of this preoccupation.
I also wanted to understand socialism and class in the light of the political indications of women's liberation.
The lessons of one political movement are vital to relate to many others.
Dutiful Daughters with Jean McCrindle, Socialism and the New Life with Jeff Weeks and Beyond the Fragments with Lynne Segal and Hilary Wainwright came from this concern.
The clarity of vision in those early years of women's liberation has gone.
It seemed possible then to order the past through the focus of feminism.
It is less one-dimensional for me now.
Feminism is a given — but I want more than the political outline.
I want a culture which you can tug and shape with complexity.
Perhaps it is this point of political reassessment; perhaps it is because I am mid-way through my life — the time when the past stretches widespread enough to contemplate, and the future is no longer infinite — which makes me want to catch memories.
Catch-as-catch can, for what is done has gone — and yet when you reenter memory it seems as if time is the dream.
