BY 1925 present-day Vietnam was divided into three parts under French colonial rule.
The southern region embracing Saigon and the Mekong delta was the colony of Cochin-China; the central area with its imperial capital at Hue was the protectorate of Annam; and the northern region, Tongking, was also a separate protectorate with its capital at Hanoi.
The Annamese emperor, Khai Dinh, in theory ruled the two northern regions from Hue with the benefit of French protection, while Cochin-China was governed directly from Paris — but in effect all three territories were ruled as colonies.
Some backward tribes inhabited the remoter mountains and jungles but the main population was of the same race; today they are known as Vietnamese but then the outside world knew them as Annamites or Annamese.
They had detached themselves from the torrent of peoples that in prehistory had poured out of China onto the countless islands of the Pacific and, settling the eastern coastal strip of the Indochina peninsula, they had named their country Nam Viet — Land of the Southern Viet People.
This was changed to An Nam — The Pacified South — by the Chinese who conquered them, occupied their territory for eleven centuries, and called them Annamese.
During this time they absorbed the Chinese imperial system and Confucian philosophy, but after winning their freedom on the collapse of  the Tang dynasty they flourished as an independent nation.
Called at different times Dai Nam — The Great South — and Dai Viet — Country of the Great Viet People — they repulsed an invasion by Mongol hordes and successfully resisted new attempts by the Sung, Ming and Manchu emperors of China to reconquer them.
Late in the nineteenth century, however, they were not strong enough to resist European troops.
It was then that France, after two centuries of increasing penetration by its missionaries and traders, decided to establish dominion over the Annamese lands and the separate kingdoms of Laos and Cambodia by force of arms and set up the French Indochinese Union.
About sixteen thousand Frenchmen ruled the fifteen million Annamese, and their government was harsh and uncompromising.
They appointed their own French administrators down to the lowest levels, leaving the Annamese powerless and humiliated in their own land.
Rice, coal and rubber were sold abroad for the exclusive benefit of French shareholders in Europe, and Annamese coolies were driven hard in the mines and on the rubber plantations for paltry pay; peasant rice growers, too, were frequently robbed of their lands on flimsy pretexts so that bigger holdings could be granted to French colons and the few rich Annamese who collaborated with France.
While exploiting the conquered territories France constantly proclaimed in public that it had come to Indochina on a "mission civilisatrice" to help the backward nation into the light of the twentieth century.
Leading Annamese scholars and mandarins, aware of the French hypocrisy from the start, had always refused to cooperate wholeheartedly with their colonial masters and held those of their countrymen who did in contempt.
Some tried to organize patriotic resistance groups without much success.
Like other colonial nations of the day France believed its subject peoples were inferior to the white European races, and this belief conditioned all areas of daily life in 1925 — whether they were political, economic, social or sexual.
Crinkled quiffs of white foam spurted from the steel bows of the five-thousand-ton French passenger freighter Avignon as they parted the warm, tropic-blue waters of the South China Sea.
The ship which had left Hong Kong two days earlier was heading south towards the equator under a fierce afternoon sun, and in the sweltering darkness between decks, three hundred Chinese coolies and their families jostled together in silence, straining up towards the fresh air currents playing beyond the iron grilles that confined them.
On the upper deck outside the half-dozen first-class cabins, green-and-white-striped awnings fluttered gently in the breeze of the ship's movement, and in their shade Senator Nathaniel Sherman sprawled at ease in a canvas deck chair, his long legs splayed comfortably in front of him.
Tall, ruddy-faced and tending to corpulence in his early forties, he had about him the self-satisfied air of a man who has already achieved some measure of public acclaim; he wore his thick shock of fair hair brushed across his forehead from a centre parting in two matching wings, and his upper lip was thatched with a fashionably luxuriant mustache.
He had removed the jacket of his white linen suit but the sense of decorum bred into him by his aristocratic Virginian upbringing compelled him to retain its matching vest and a cravat of maroon silk held in place with a small diamond pin.
The same ostentatious pride in Southern good manners also prompted him to sit up immediately when one of the ship's white-uniformed junior officers appeared at his side bearing a tray of iced drinks for him, his wife and two sons.
 "This sure is mighty civilized of you, m'sieur, to look after us like this," he drawled, letting a gracious smile play across his face.
 "Especially when you've already got your hands full running this tidy little ship." 
"Please don't mention it, senator.
The captain sends you these refreshments with his compliments."
The young Frenchman inclined his head deferentially, speaking his English with the caution of one unused to employing it.
 "We have never before had the honour to carry such an important representative of the United States of America to Saigon." 
"Please thank your captain most kindly for his consideration.
Your legendary French hospitality promises to make our stay in your colony a memorable one."
The boyishly handsome officer inclined his head once more, then  turned his back on the senator to offer the tray to his wife, Flavia, a strikingly beautiful woman in her late thirties.
Her pale, oval face framed with raven-dark hair and her slender, high-breasted figure betrayed the Louisiana French blood in her veins, and the officer smiled directly into her eyes as she lifted a glass of fresh lime juice and glace pilee from his tray with a white-gloved hand.
 "Merci beaucoup, monsieur," she murmured, smiling back at him for a fraction longer than necessary.
 "Vous etes trop gentil." 
The Frenchman, before turning to her sons, let his glance fall pointedly for a moment to the swell of her breasts tightly bodiced beneath a new Fifth Avenue day dress of sheer white silk chiffon; then he smiled secretly at her again and this undisguised expression of passionate interest brought a faint flush to her face.
Across the table her younger son, Joseph, saw her cheeks burn, and she looked up to find him gazing at her in mystification.
To hide her embarrassment she fumbled in her handbag for a little mirrored compact backed with tortoiseshell and turned away to repowder her face.
Joseph took a glass from the officer's tray but didn't drink; instead he continued looking in his mother's direction, ready to smile in sympathy.
To his puzzlement, however, she kept her eyes averted and wouldn't look at him.
 "I wonder what he would have said, Chuck, if I'd told him he'd just served a drink to someone who's probably going to be much more important one day than a run-of-the-mill Democratic senator from Virginia?" 
Nathaniel Sherman chuckled and leaned confidentially towards his elder son's chair as the Frenchman departed.
 "What if I'd told him that the Avignon was carrying a young man named Charles Sherman who's destined one day maybe to become the President of the United States?" 
He squeezed Chuck's forearm then glanced across at his younger son.
 "That would've made him sit up and take notice, Joey, wouldn't it?" 
Joseph nodded and picked up his drink.
 "I guess it would, Daddy," he replied shortly and drained the glass without looking up.
Six years separated the two brothers, and although both were fair-haired, Charles Sherman at twenty-one bore the strongest resemblance to the senator.
As tall as his father and with the slender, broad-shouldered build of a natural athlete, he had regular features of that open, well-chiselled handsomeness that also suggests unusual strength of character.
Already he sported a blond mustache that was a passable imitation of the older man's, and he twisted a strand or two of it between finger and thumb as he shot a comic grimace of pain in Joseph's direction to convey his  discomfort at the extravagant declaration of faith in him.
Joseph grinned ruefully back at him for a moment, then sensing the senator was warming to a familiar theme, he picked up a history of French Indochina that lay open on the table before him and sank down in his chair behind it.
Of slighter build than his brother, at fifteen Joseph still had the unfinished face of a growing boy, but his features were already set in a more thoughtful, reflective cast than Chuck's and there was a hint of his mother's sensitivity in his smile.
When his father began talking again, a little irritated frown wrinkled his smooth young brow, but although he made a great play of concentrating fiercely on his reading, he still listened carefully from behind the book to what was being said.
 "I know you come over a little shy when I talk about you this way, Chuck, but I do it for a good reason," continued the senator, lighting a Havana cigar with elaborate care.
Its never too soon to get a big idea planted in a young head.
I believe there's nothing a man can't do once he's made up his mind.
If you start early enough, there isn't a thing on this earth that can stand in the way of real determination — remember that.
The Commonwealth of Virginia is famous as the birthplace of American presidents, isn't it?
Washington, Jefferson and six other Virginians besides have led our nation; so why shouldn't President Charles Sherman in about thirty-five years' time — say round about nineteen sixty — be sitting in the White House?
I've told you before — you've got to set your sights high.
He paused and pointed his cigar at his elder boy in friendly admonition.
 "If you do, the impossible will start to seem probable." 
Chuck Sherman squirmed in his deckchair and frowned humorously at his mother.
 "Oh boy, here we go again — you will come and visit me in the White House sometimes, Mother, won't you, so I don't get too lonely there?" 
 "Nothing would give your mother greater pleasure I'm sure, Chuck, than to see you bring distinction to yourself and your family," cut in the senator reprovingly before his wife could reply.
 "She wants to see you succeed as much as I do." 
Flavia Sherman smiled sympathetically at Chuck for a moment then turned to her husband with an ill-concealed sigh of exasperation.
Wouldn't It be better, Nathaniel, to let us all relax and enjoy our expedition for a few weeks?
Can't we leave Washington and Virginia politics at home just this once?
 "I certainly want us all to enjoy this rare journey, my dear," replied her husband, smiling and waving his cigar in front of his face in an expansive gesture.
"Particularly you.
You look most  delightful this afternoon in that new frock.
I think the trip's been a tonic for you already.
It was lucky for us all, wasn't it, boys, that fancy new Saks store opened up on Fifth Avenue just before we came away?"
He directed an exaggerated wink at his two sons, then dropped his voice and reached out to pat his wife's hand on the arm of her chair.
 "I hear there's a rumour going around Manhattan that they had to close down again the day after you shopped there because they'd run out of Paris fashions; is that true?" 
Flavia Sherman forced herself to smile while recoiling inwardly from his touch.
During the past three days of the voyage her first contact for many years with French life had begun to stir long-forgotten feelings in her.
The gallant compliments of the captain and his officers particularly had reminded her that the beauty so widely admired in her youth had not yet faded.
The many deadening years spent bringing up a family in the narrow society of Tidewater Virginia seemed to be evaporating rapidly from her memory in the heat and excitement of the tropics.
She had been lonely from the start of her marriage, despite the presence of a small army of black servants in the Queen Anne plantation house overlooking the James River, and several years had passed before she understood fully that her husband had used his frequent absences, at first on plantation business, then in Washington, to conceal an almost total lack of physical interest in her.
Eventually she had become resigned to a dull, passionless existence; her husband had masked his indifference to her real feelings with elaborate public courtesies, and her only role outside of motherhood had been to act as a decorative hostess at his political functions.
In the end she had become so used to living the lie of marital contentment that she bad perhaps come to believe it herself.
But now that her once-passionate nature was reawakening and she was beginning to feel vibrantly alive again, the cold perfunctory touch of her husband's fingers seemed suddenly more repugnant than ever before, and she withdrew her hand hastily from his and picked up her glass to conceal the real reason for breaking the contact.
 "I shall be much happier, Nathaniel, if you don't bother Chuck every few minutes about his future," she said quietly without looking at her husband.
"I'm sure he's very excited about the hunting.
Who not just let him enjoy himself?"
Nathaniel Sherman removed his cigar from his mouth and patted her hand patronizingly once more.
"You're right in one way of course, my dear.
We certainly intend to enjoy the hunting and bag ourselves some of Cochin-China's rare game animals.
But we  are travelling to a little-known corner of the glove, remember.
Life in a French colony in Asia will be very different from anything we've seen back home.
Every journey, wherever you go, is a new education — that's what my father taught me!
Chuck — and Joseph too, of course— might learn something here that will be useful to them later.
I aim to help them learn to look at things right, that's all."
He paused to smile at Chuck.
"Even a Harvard man has still got an awful lot to learn from life.
You don't get all the wisdom of the world from a library, no matter how good a scholar you might be…"
The sudden snap of Joseph's history book closing caused the senator to glance up briefly but he didn't pause in his monologue; his abstracted gaze followed the younger boy for only a moment as he sauntered away along the deck.
 "The fact is, Chuck," he said turning back to his older son,"Just seeing what's happening around you isn't enough.
Whether in Indochina or Washington you've got to learn to interpret events correctly."
Joseph kept walking until the slow drawl of his father's voice became inaudible to him.
Then he stopped and leaned on the rail at the top of the companionway, staring with unseeing eyes at the deck below.
He found he was angry with himself for leaving his seat; he had badly wanted to hear what his father was about to say, but the all-too-familiar sound of him praising his brother had produced its usual feeling of agitation.
Not for the first time he wondered why it should affect him like that, when he himself was fond of Chuck and admired him, too.
No answer suggested itself, however, and after a minute or two he became aware that as these thoughts whirled through his mind he had been staring down at the grilles confining the Chinese coolie families.
They seemed to come into focus only slowly, a silent mass of tightly packed yellow faces glistening with perspiration; scores of dark eyes had been watching him unwaveringly all the time, but their expressions remained uniformly blank.
He realized with a shock that they reminded him of steers he had once seen in a railroad siding back home in Richmond, Virginia, crowded uncomprehendingly in trucks bound for the slaughterhouse.
He was wondering whether the slaves who had been shipped to America had looked like this, when he felt his mother's gentle touch on his shoulder and turned to find her smiling fondly at him.
 "Don't brood about it, Joseph," she said softly.
"You know your father gets a hornet in his hat every now and then about Chuck.
But I'm expecting great things of you, too."
Joseph nodded and managed to smile back at her, relieved that they were communicating again.
 "It's nothing," he said quickly.
 "There's no need to worry about me." 
At that moment the French captain of the Avignon, a stocky, spade-bearded man, appeared beside them smiling and holding a pith helmet in his hands.
 "You must always be careful, Monsieur Joseph, not to expose yourself unduly to the sun in the tropics." 
He placed the helmet squarely on the American boy's head and glanced at Flavia Sherman, who had put on a wide-brimmed sun hat of white felt decorated with coloured ribbons.
 "Your chapeau doesn't look as pretty as your mother's but it will save you from sunstroke just as effectively." 
Because the captain had spoken French, Joseph thanked him haltingly in that language, then motioned towards the lower deck.
"But what about those people down there, monsieur?
They must be feeling the heat worse than any of us — and there are women and children among them."
 "They're potential troublemakers, young Joey, that's why they're kept under lock and key." 
The French officer half turned at the sound of Nathaniel Sherman's voice as he came up behind them with Chuck, and nodded in agreement.
 "You are perfectly correct, senator," he said switching to English.
"There are three hundred Chinese on board and only a handful of us.
They are illiterate coolies from Canton mostly, emigrating to Cochin-China.
But there may be pirates hiding among them.
The waters of the China coast are full of pirates.
Only last week a gang boarded a British ship disguised as steerage passengers.
They attacked the bridge in the dead of night and when the crew barricaded themselves in, they set fire to the decks."
Joseph's innocent eyes widened in alarm.
"What happened?
Were they all burned alive?"
 "Fortunately not." 
The captain smiled at the eager intensity of Joseph's inquiry.
"The British master of the ship turned her to windward and the fire was blown back towards the pirate mob.
They all had to jump overboard and a lot of them drowned."
 "Wow, that was a smart trick," breathed Joseph, his face alight with excitement at the thought of the drama.
Then his expression clouded again.
"But all the Chinese down there can't be pirates, can they?
Isn't it a bit unfair on them?"
 "It's only for the voyage, remember," said the captain smoothly.
"There is no other way.
Certain things have to be done differently in the colonies."
He lifted his shoulders in a little Gallic shrug of  helplessness and smiled.
"C'est la vie coloniale, Monsieur Joseph.
You will soon get accustomed to it."
Joseph's expression remained dubious for a moments then his face lit up again and he pointed westward over the captain's shoulder.
 "Isn't that land over there?" he exclaimed excitedly.
The Frenchman peered through his binoculars for a moment.
"Yes, Monsieur Joseph, you are right.
That is the coast of the most beautiful and prosperous French colony in the world."
He glanced at his watch and offered the glasses to the American boy.
"Would you like to look?
We shall probably be landing in Saigon sometime after lunch tomorrow."
With his naked eye Joseph had glimpsed only a faint smudge of coastline, but through the glasses he was able to see more clearly some of the rocky peaks of the thousand-mile-long mountain spine that linked the rich southern rice lands of the Mekong delta and Saigon with the fertile plain of the Red River around Hanoi in the north.
From the book he'd just put down he knew that vast tracts of virgin tropical forest covered those mountainsides and large areas of the lowlands too; in the book there w.ere sepia-tinted photographs of primitive tribesmen who still hunted with stone-tipped arrows and poison darts in those same forests that also teemed with elephant herds, tiger, buffalo, black bears and countless other rare species of animal life that had been left undisturbed by the march of civilization.
Joseph had devoured the contents of the book avidly during the long Pacific crossing and had begun reading it again after they left Hong Kong.
As he peered through the binoculars he felt a tremor of excitement course through him at the prospect of seeing the printed images come to life.
For a moment he let himself imagine he was some great explorer about to enter a hostile, unknown land on which his name would later be stamped for all history.
Then he wondered if great explorers ever felt as he did — excited, yes, but more than a little frightened too!
Remembering suddenly that Chuck and his father were standing behind him, he blushed inwardly at the thought.
Could they detect the excitement he felt?
Could they read the apprehension of his expression?
The last thing he wanted them to think was that, at fifteen, he was immature.
As he turned and handed the binoculars to his elder brother he frowned in what he hoped was a manly, intent manner and tried to make his voice sound casual.
 "Looks a bit like Virginia Beach in a heavy haze, if you ask me," he said and attempted to shrug like the French captain.
Chuck Sherman, who had noticed the excited gleam in his  young brother's eyes, grinned and punched him affectionately on the arm as he took the binoculars, but before he could lift them to his eyes a tumult of shouting and screaming broke out suddenly among the throng of Chinese pressing up against the iron grille below them.
All the Shermans turned to watch in alarm as the captain dashed away down the companionway, dragging a revolver from inside his white uniform tunic.
Beside the grille he dropped to one knee and fired three quick shots into the air.
The sound of the gun silenced the Chinese for a few seconds, then a lone woman's voice began wailing again and the Shermans saw a thin ragged body forced up against the underside of the grille.
After a muttered exchange through the bars, the captain ordered two of his officers to stand by with pistols drawn while he unfastened the padlocks.
When the grille swung open he called two or three seamen to his side and ordered them to haul the corpse out onto the deck.
He allowed a thin, ill-clad woman to scramble out behind it, and immediately she fell to her knees beside the body and began wailing once more.
Ignoring her, the captain ordered his men to carry the body aft, and the woman eventually rose and hobbled after them, still sobbing piteously.
Flavia Sherman turned her back to the rail and closed her eyes; her ce was pale and she was trembling.
 "How dreadful," she said at last It s a wonder any of them survive in there.
 "I shouldn't lose too much sleep over it, my dear," said the senator in a soothing voice.
"Chinese coolies are tough.
They live hard lives.
They don't crave the same bodily comforts as we do.
Life is cheap to them."
He leaned over the rail to peer down onto the lower deck.
The captain's party had disappeared, and the Chinese beneath the grilles had grown quiet again.
 "You might say, Chuck," he said over his shoulder, that you've just witnessed a very clear demonstration of the principle on which every empire in history's ever been built.
Julius Caesar and Alexander the Great knew it, and so did Britain's Queen Victoria — "might is right." 
Here and now the French have the power, so the Asians on their ship and throughout Indochina do as they tell them.
That's the way of the world.
The rich and the powerful call the tune.
If you can muster superior strength, you can impose your way of thinking on others — even if they don't like-what you do or the way you do it.
If you've got bigger muscles and the will to use them, the others have to go along with you.
Nothing's ever going to change that."
He paused and glanced about him to check that no French crew members were within earshot.
The French have a heavy hand.
They like to use an elephant gun to stun a flea.
You'll see that  when we get ashore.
I'm told they behave here as if they expect their empire to last forever.
We know different in America.
The French way isn't the American way.
We do things different, boys — and do things better.
The Senator took his elder son by the elbow and, still talking, motioned him to stroll with him along the deck.
Joseph watched them go, then he glanced back at his mother with a troubled expression in his eyes.
 "Do you think those people down there are really so different from us, Momma?" he asked, keeping his voice low so that it wouldn't carry to his father's ears.
Flavia Sherman brushed away a strand of hair that had fallen across his eyes and smiled fondly at him.
"Life is full of impossible questions like that, Joseph.
They're very different in many ways, no doubt.
But we're all still made of flesh and blood, aren't we?"
His face remained creased with thought and she could see that the answer hadn't satisfied him.
To distract him she put an arm around his shoulders and moved away from the rail.
"Don't worry about it any more for the moment.
Let's go back and sit together in the shade, shall we?
Then you can tell me some more about that book you've been buried in for the past week."
 "Oh boy," breathed Chuck Sherman, gazing longingly at the impenetrable green wall of tropical foliage slipping past only a few yards from the ship's rail,"this is going to make the mountains of West Virginia seem a bit tame.
How d'you think you're going to feel, Joey, when we come face to face with a herd of elephant or a tawny tiger out there?"
 "I thought we weren't out to shoot elephants or tigers," replied Joseph absently.
"We're not going looking for them, genius — but they don't know that, do they?
If they come looking for us with tusk and fang you'd better be ready with that Winchester peashooter of yours."
 "I suppose so." 
Joseph nodded automatically.
They had left their cabins early to enjoy the fresh morning breeze, and Joseph had perched himself on a coil of rope beside Chuck at the rail to finish his reading.
The clear, blue water of the river mouth had given way to a brown muddy flow as the ship moved inland, and both banks were now lined with natural  stockades of tall, fleshy-leaved trees that trailed tangled creepers over the water.
In occasional clearings the American boys caught sight of slender natives in conical, palm-leaf hats bending over fishing lines or snares for river fowl, but they rarely looked up; only the naked, potbellied children paid any attention, staring at the Avignon with brown, expressionless eyes as it swung past the low banks on which they stood.
Sometimes the sudden screech of an unseen bird startled the brothers, but otherwise the brilliant green tropical forest through which they were gliding remaIned eerily silent.
 "I'll bet you don't know, Chuck, how Saigon got its name, do you?" exclaimed Joseph at last, closing the book and jumping to his feet.
 "Its really quite interesting." 
 "I don't know how it got its name, no," replied the older boy smiling patiently, "but no doubt some book-reading bore is about to inform me." 
In old Annamese it means Village of the Boxwoods, after the trees that originally grew there.
It wasn't much more than a fishing village until the eighteenth century when French Jesuits and a few merchants demanded the right to build a city.
But its name could also be based on the Chinese characters "Tsai Con," which mean "Tribute paid to the West." 
 "Fascinating," said Chuck facetiously.
 "You're still king of the useless-information department." 
The Avignon's captain, strolling down from the bridge in a crisp, freshly starched uniform, smiled on hearing their banter and approached to greet them both with a formal French handshake.
No matter what the Annamese named it, my dear young sirs, you'll find that we French call the city you are about to visit "the Pearl of the Orient" or sometimes even "the Paris of the East." 
And it won't take you long to see why.
 "But why are all these Chinese going there?" asked Joseph, dropping his voice and nodding towards the sea of silent yellow faces still pressed against the underside of the grilles in the deck below.
"Saigon has a twin city, Cholon, a mile or two away across the plain — that's where they're making for.
 "Cho Lon" in Annamese means "Great Market," and they hope to make their fortune there as many Cantonese emigrants have done, by exploiting the lazy Annamese.
There are already two hundred thousand Chinese living in Cholon and you can buy everything there from a pipe of opium to a slant-eyed "singing girl." "
He paused and winked surreptitiously at Chuck to emphasize his innuendo.
"Your father  will have to go to Cholon to buy all your hunting supplies, too.
Warn him to be careful.
Bargain hard!
The Chinese are the Jews of Asia."
 "How much longer will it take us to get there, captain?" asked Chuck impatiently.
 "This jungle seems to go on forever." 
"The journey from the river mouth to the city takes six or seven hours normally, Monsieur Charles.
It's about sixty miles.
All too soon, I regret, we shall be forced to say adieu to you and your distinguished father."
 "It can't come too soon for me, captain." 
Senator Sherman advanced smiling affably across the deck, still getting into his jacket.
"I mean no disrespect, of course.
We've been greatly flattered by your generous hospitality on board.
But we're mighty anxious now we've come all this way to get out into that jungle just as soon as we can and start hunting."
"What will you be going for, senator?
A tiger skin for your floor?
A pair of tusks for the wall?"
"Neither, captain.
We're not souvenir hunters.
Before he died my father set up a trust to endow the Sherman Field Museum of Natural History in Washington.
Natural history was a special interest of his, you see.
He died five years ago but the museum's only just been finished on the Mall below Capitol Hill.
It's really a pretty sight, captain, built of Tennessee marble like one of those old palaces in Florence.
So we want to put only the best wild animals in it, and here in these jungles of yours you've got some of the rarest animals in the world.
The senator paused to light his first Havana of the day and as he got it going he studied the matted vegetation of the riverbank through its smoke.
From the corner of his eye Joseph saw his mother emerge from her cabin.
As she walked down the companionway to the lower deck the breeze moulded her couture suit of cream silk bouquet against the contours of her body.
On the bridge he saw the third officer raise his hand to his cap in a debonair salute, and she waved gaily back.
Joseph noticed that she avoided passing close to the iron grilles closing off the between-deck areas of the ship and when she reached the stern she gazed into the jungle for a moment, then closed her eyes and lifted her face to the gentle warmth of the morning sun.
We're going mainly for wild water buffalo, banteng and seladang,"said the senator, his resonant Southern drawl sounding loud in the stillness that lay over the river.
And we don't just want the big bulls.
We need a pair of each — and calves, too, where we can.
That will require some fancy shooting.
We'll skin them right  here and preserve their hides so they can be shipped home and stuffed.
Then they'll be put on show in what we call habitat displays' so that all the people of America who won't ever come here will be able to see them iii our nation's capital just as they once lived in these jungles.
We'll send other expeditions to India and Africa for tiger and elephant later.
You see, captain, I want to make the Sherman Field Museum the finest of its kind in the United States, maybe even the finest in the world.
 "And who is the family's leading marksman?" asked the captain, glancing inquiringly at Chuck and Joseph in turn.
 "Chuck here is a deadeye," replied the senator, ruffling the hair of his elder son.
"He's learned-everything that I can teach him.
We hunt in the mountains of West Virginia every fall and he shoots now nearly as well as his daddy."
 "And Monsieur Joseph is a budding" deadeye "too?" asked the captain rolling the unfamiliar expression off his tongue with a grin.
"Well Joseph isn't too sure yet what he's going to be.
He can shoot well enough if he wants, I think, but just can t seem to make up his mind whether he likes the idea that much."
The senators smile faded and he leaned over the rail to let the ash that had formed on his cigar fall into the muddy river.
"His mother isn't that keen on hunting, and he maybe sides with her a little.
I guess we'll find out for sure what Joseph's made of here in Cochin-China."
The captain saw the corners of Joseph's mouth tighten momentarily, then the American boy's eyes widened and he pointed excitedly over the starboard rail.
"Captain, what's that out there?
Is it a native temple?
It looks enormous."
Two pointed spires of stone had become visible, seeming to sprout from the middle of the jungle, and the captain laughed again.
Its a native temple of sorts, I suppose, Monsieur Joseph.
Dedicated, you will find, to the main religion of my own native country.
Those are the steeples of Saigon Cathedral — the first sight any traveller ever sees of "the Pearl of the Orient." 
 "But we aren't going towards them, captain," protested Joseph, standing on the bottom rail and craning his neck to get a better view.
That s right — not at the moment.
The Saigon River now begins to wind like a serpent.
It's like sailing through a maze.
Every time I come here I begin to worry that I have somehow crossed into another stream and am sailing back in the opposite direction.
The Avignon's bows had begun to swing rapidly through all the  points of the compass as the river meandered on through the jungle, and the tips of the cathedral spires seemed to dart around the ship, popping up first in one quarter then another like the ears of an inquisitive rabbit trying to follow its progress.
Joseph saw them one minute to port, then the next minute to starboard, and once they even appeared dead astern as the river turned back on itself.
After an hour the ship emerged from the jungle, and the Shermans found themselves gazing across an open alluvial plain dotted with isolated clumps of palm.
Rice paddies stretched away endlessly on either side of the ship, and they saw crowds of Annamese in cone-shaped hats of palm leaf already at work, sometimes wading waist-deep in the muddy water.
For a while Flavia Sherman joined them at the rail and stood with her hand resting on Joseph's shoulder; but she seemed restless and soon tired of watching the peasants at work in the fields.
As the sun climbed higher in the sky, the heat grew gradually more oppressive, and Chuck and his father also retreated to the shade of their cabins.
Joseph joined them briefly to gobble down his lunch then rushed back on deck alone, wearing his sun helmet, and stood at the rail-eagerly devouring with his eyes each new detail of the ever-changing scene.
The Avignon sailed in and out of thick belts of marshy, deserted jungle, and sometimes he caught sight of villages of stilted houses with matting walls built in the clearings.
He waved his helmet in greeting at several groups of Annamese squatting in the dirt before their doors, but they gazed back at him unmoving.
When the river broadened, the Avignon began to encounter other craft that had started downstream from Saigon on the favourable tide, and Joseph wondered why the battered-looking Chinese junks, with their shabby, patched sails, didn't sink as they lumbered past among a succession of grimy workhorse freighters from Europe and Latin America.
A long French liner slipped majestically by with a mixture of European and Asian faces staring curiously from its rails, then the Arid was pushing its way through a swarm of sampans moving downriver on local errands, most of them rowed, to Joseph's surprise, by women.
Gradually the water emptied of departing traffic and the Avignon glided on along the muddy river in the deep silence of a blistering noontide.
The white stone wharf when it appeared, took him by surprise.
It ran beside a broad, shaded boulevard of feathery pepper trees, and the sudden sight of European-style buildings made him reflect that the jungles, fields and villages through which they'd been moving for the past few hours had remained unchanging  throughout many centuries.
But there without doubt were the elusive twin spires of Saigon's cathedral that he'd seen from far off, stationary now and clearly visible, standing sentinel over the wide, tree-lined avenues.
They had really arrived at last at their destination!
Then Joseph realized why they had come upon the city so completely by surprise; it was the uncanny silence.
No sound of any kind rose from the hot deserted streets — no traffic noise, no hustle of people, no children, no animals.
There was no movement either, along the quay in front of long rows of deserted customs sheds.
It was with a sickening sense of shock that his eyes fell at last on the heaps of bodies lying in the shadows of the dock buildings and beneath the pepper trees.
He grabbed his binoculars with trembling hands and swept the long quay as the Avignon drew nearer, scrutinizing each pile of bodies in turn.
There was no doubt about it!
The men lay crumpled and motionless, open-mouthed, their thin legs tangled together.
Through the lenses he could see clearly that their faces and clothing were covered with blood.
 "Captain, captain!" he called frantically, running towards the bridge.
 "Come quick, there's been a terrible massacre in Saigon." 
The captain, to his horror, emerged from the wheelhouse smiling.
 "A massacre, Monsieur Joseph?" 
"Yes.
Yes.
You can see the blood — look!
On their faces!
Everywhere!"
His own face had turned pale.
The captain followed the direction of the American boy's pointing finger for a moment, then lifted his left wrist and showed him the dial of his watch.
"Look.
Monsieur Joseph, it's almost two o'clock.
It's still siesta time.
Nobody in the tropics moves between eleven-thirty and two in the afternoon.
Their very lives would have to be at stake first.
My countrymen are all dozing at home by their electric fans, but the natives aren't so fortunate."
He waved his hand along the dock.
 "They have only the shade of the trees." 
 "But why have they got blood all over them?" 
The captain laughed.
"That isn't blood, Monsieur Joseph.
The Annamese all chew betel nut.
It's a mild drug.
It dulls the senses but the juice stains their mouth and their clothes — even the street when they spit."
Joseph stared at him in disbelief.
Then he looked back again at the blinding quayside.
In the shade beneath the trees he saw that the "massacred" Annamite coolies were beginning to come to life; they untangled themselves from one another with painful slowness and staggered to their feet.
The ship's engines ceased and the  crew began throwing down ropes to a white man in a pith helmet who had emerged from one of the quayside offices.
Like sleep-walkers in a dream the coolies began advancing out of the shade towards the ship.
As they came, many of them spat repeatedly, leaving behind them a trail of crimson, betel-stained saliva on the burning concrete of the wharf.
"Pousse-pousse!
Pousse-pousse!"yelled Chuck Sherman and sprang down the steps of the Continental Palace Hotel into the Rue Catinat with his arm raised in the manner of a French colon.
Immediately a swarm of coolies rushed towards him, dragging their wire-wheeled rickshaws behind them, and he leaped into the nearest one with a loud whoop.
"Allez!
Allez!
Vite!
Vite!"he yelled, clapping his hands, and the coolie set off instantly at a frantic gallop along the boulevard.
Joseph clambered aboard his pousse-pousse more tentatively.
Both brothers were dressed in neatly tailored white tuxedos and black ties in preparation for the formal reception being given in their father's honour at the palace of the governor of Cochin-China, and it was Chuck who had insisted that they travel separately by pousse-pousse rather than in the official Citron sent for their parents.
 "This way we'll get to see more of the real Saigon," he said loudly for the benefit of their father — then he winked confidentially at Joseph and whispered in his ear: "And the last one there is a horse's ass.
It's a race, okay?"
Before Joseph could agree or disagree, his brother had mounted up and was laughing loudly as he urged his coolie along the boulevard at top speed.
Joseph could see tufts of grizzled hair protruding from beneath the sweat-soaked turban wrapped around the head of his aged coolie and he didn't have the heart to order him to gallop.
He was stripped to the waist and as he jogged along between the shafts a few coins — obviously his meagre earnings for the day — jingled pathetically in a leather pouch fastened to the back of his belt.
Before he'd gone a hundred yards Joseph saw a burly French colon cuff an Annamite coolie roughly about the head at the curbside after descending from his pousse-pousse.
The American boy turned in his seat and stared, expecting to see a fight, but the  cowering Annamite accepted his beating meekly and none of the European passersby spared the man a second glance.
Half a minute later another Frenchman sent his pousse-pousse puller staggering in the gutter with a blow to the head after an apparent argument about the fare, and Joseph realized with a shock that such beatings were merely routine.
Outside the hotel he had fought down misgivings at the idea of allowing an old man to drag him through the streets when he could easily have walked, and he began to wonder if he should dismount.
But when he caught up with Chuck, who had at last relented and allowed his breathless coolie to slow to a trot, he found the older boy grinning and lolling casually in his seat, obviously suffering no such pangs of conscience.
 "I don't find these little oriental chariots altogether unpleasant as a mode of transport, Joey," he said, affecting an exaggerated Harvard drawl.
 "How about you?" 
 "Not bad — not bad at all," replied Joseph hurriedly and he tried to lean back against the cushions in the same careless fashion as his brother while the two rickshaws rolled on together side by side through the light traffic.
The approach of evening and release from the heat had transformed the city through which they rode, and the tree-lined streets that had been scorched and deserted on their arrival were coming rapidly to life.
Saigon's main boulevard, the Rue Catinat, linked the docks and the cathedral, symbols of the twin goals of commerce and religion which had led France to colonize the land, and in its fashionable sidewalk cafe's they saw deferential Annamese waiters in black turbans and linen gowns darting among the marble-topped tables, serving aperitifs to languid groups of their European colonizers.
Beneath the tamarind trees white-suited Frenchmen and their women strolled with an indolent confidence through the native throng goateed mandarins in Chinese long gowns, younger Annamese wearing round caps and black knee-length silk jackets and occasional groups of shabby peasants arrayed in dark calico, cartwheel-sized straw hats and wooden sandals.
Bright red bete]juice, the brothers noticed, stained the lips of all the Annamese, low and high born alike.
But evidence of the betel habit was no longer the most striking sight for the two Americans.
Among the slow-moving crowds slender, graceful Annamese girls wearing traditional skilken ao dai caught their eye again and again.
The pastel-coloured costumes were at once demure and provocative; fitted tight from throat to hip, they clung to every line of the delicate, high-breasted figures, heightening the allure of slender shoulders, tiny waists and the swell of young Ranks; below the waist, however, the gossamer-light, side-split skirts and billowing trousers of white silk shrouded legs and thighs in secrecy, and to Chuck and Joseph the exotic girls of Saigon seemed not to walk but to float gently beneath the tamarinds on the evening breeze.
Chuck peered intently at each girl they passed, but without exception they avoided his gaze.
 "The local flappers appear most agreeable, if unduly maidenly, don't you think, Joey?" he called, grinning wolfishly across at his brother from his moving rickshaw.
 "Indeed they do, Charles!" 
Joseph laughed and smacked his lips loudly, feeling very grown up.
He had felt sure when he left his hotel room that every eye in Saigon would be on him that evening because he was wearing a white tuxedo for the very first time in his young life.
The Continental Palace orchestra had been playing the new popular melody "Tea for Two" as he came out onto the terrace, and he had been faintly surprised in the event that nobody had turned to stare at him.
He had noticed the eyes of one or two French matrons stray wistfully to the tall, spectacularly handsome figure of his brother, and as the rickshaws bowled on side by side he darted a glance at him and decided it must be his new blond mustache that set him apart.
Enviously he raised his fingers to his own top lip but could still detect only the finest thistledown there.
 "You look just great in that new white tux, Joey," called Chuck suddenly, as though reading his mind.
The rickshaws moved together and he leaned across and punched his brother affectionately on the biceps.
 "I'm sure you're going to be the belle of the Saigon ball tonight." 
Joseph leaned outwards and aimed a violent retaliatory blow at his brother's midriff, but at that moment both rickshaws swerved apart and skidded to a halt.
Joseph looked ahead and saw that their side of the boulevard was blocked by two carts with big, iron-rimmed wheels.
One had overturned and they stared in amazement as a swarthy-featured European lashed out with a thick bamboo cane at what they first thought was a small animal collapsed between the shafts.
When they looked closer they saw that he was whipping, not a fallen beast, but a spindly-legged Annamese; both carts, they could see, contained refuse and had shafts front and back that terminated in cane, big wooden halters that were locked around the necks of four sweating Annamese.
These human beasts of burden also wore heavy leg-irons chained to thick steel bands clamped around their waists.
The Americans watched the bamboo rod rise and fall and heard  the sickening thud of wood on flesh and bone; as the fallen Annamese struggled to raise himself from the dusty road they saw blood welling from the crimson weals on his back.
His eyes were squeezed tight in agony, and he and the other three men locked in the shafts grunted loudly with exertion as they strove to get the heavy carts rolling again.
Gradually they began to move and the colon flayed each of them in turn once more to increase their speed.
As the carts came abreast of the Americans seated in their stationary rickshaws, the Annamese who had fallen opened his eyes, and his pain-clouded gaze locked for a moment with Joseph's.
Then his lids fell closed again and the veins in his neck and forehead bulged as he strained afresh against the neck halter.
When the carts had moved on Joseph turned a horrified face to his brother.
 "Those poor devils looked nearly dead, Chuck." 
The elder boy nodded grimly.
 "That certainly wasn't betel juice on their backs this time." 
A thin, stoop-shouldered Frenchman wearing a pince-nez who had been watching and listening from the curbside, stepped into the road suddenly and leaned close enough to Chuck for the American boy to smell the garlic on his breath.
"They are prisoners!
Convicted criminals!
They deserve nothing better.
Don't feel sorry for them.
All outsiders make that mistake."
He spoke heavily accented English, screwing up his pinched sallow face in disgust.
He carried a silver-topped malacca cane and he waved this vaguely in the direction of the strolling crowds all around them.
"These people are not like the white races.
Don't think that.
Most of them are idle, work-shy, good-for-nothing.
Don't waste your sympathy on them."
He peered belligerently through his pincenez from one brother to the other, then turned and stumped off, shouldering his way roughly through the oncoming crowds of Annamese.
The Sherman brothers looked at each other in silence.
Then Chuck shrugged dismissively and raised his eyebrows.
 "Like the captain of the Avignon said, it's another world — different from ours." 
When his coolie picked up the shafts and broke into his loping stride, Joseph found he couldn't look at the narrow, sweat-streaked shoulders bobbing in front of him without seeing the bleeding welts caused by the French colon's cane.
A sudden surge of compassion washed through him, and when they reached the governor's palace Joseph rashly thrust two piasters into the coolie's cupped hands, thanking him over and over again in French.
This was more than three times the normal fare, and the astonished  Annamese stood between the shafts of his vehicle staring after Joseph in amazement until he and Chuck disappeared inside the palace.
The white stone palais of the governor of Cochin-China was built in the grandiloquent, neoclassical style favoured by those fervently patriotic Frenchmen who had erected the great public buildings of Paris in the late nineteenth century.
Surrounded by formal gardens in a square off the Rue de la Grandiere, its imposing facade of fluted Doric columns and carved balustrades had been designed to serve as an enduring testament in stone to the colonial nation's confident pride in itself.
A high-domed cupola of glass and wrought-iron crowned its roof, and from a flagstaff on its summit the French tricolour fluttered in the faint evening breeze as Chuck and Joseph Sherman arrived.
They found their parents waiting for them at the top of a wide terrace of marble steps, and the governor's aide-de-camp conducted them to the reception through a series of lofty, marble-floored chambers forty feet high.
In the grand salon white-robed Annamese servants glided silently among the potted palms with silver trays, serving chilled champagne to a big crowd of colons already gathered there.
The French men were identically garbed in black trousers and "le smoking" — a white dinner jacket cut away at the waist — while the women wore dresses from shops in the Rue Catinat fashionable enough to allow them to forget that the Rue de la Paix was a twelve-thousand-mile sea journey away.
The governor himself stood waiting to greet them beneath a large, gilt-framed portrait of the Emperor Napoleon.
A tall, haughty man with luxuriant black whiskers and beard, he wore a formal uniform of horizon blue trimmed elaborately with gold.
On the left breast of his tunic the insignia of the Legion d'Honneur glimmered among a broad cluster of medals, and his plumed tricorn had been placed ostentatiously on a table at his side.
He didn't smile as the Shermans approached but waited with his left hand resting on the hilt of his ceremonial sword, his aloof expression suggesting that he estimated the dignity of his person to be at least equal to that of the fabled hero of France looking down from the wall behind him.
 "Bienvenu a la plus belle colonie de la France!" 
The governor  offered a formal, white-gloved hand to each member of the Sherman family in turn, but when the affably smiling senator began to say how pleased they were to be there, the aide-de-camp immediately cut him short and motioned the family aside so that the governor could begin a formal speech.
 "Senator and Madame Sherman, I am highly honoured to welcome such a distinguished family as yours to French Indochina," he said, speaking sonorously in his own language.
"You have come here chiefly to hunt the rare wild animals in our jungles so that the people of America will be able to see them on display in the Sherman Museum in Washington.
We wish you good fortune and good hunting while you are in our colony — but of course that is not all."
He lifted his head and gazed unseeing towards the ceiling while his aide read a translation of his remarks from a sheet of paper.
Then he resumed in the same imperious tone.
"We are all very proud of the progress that has been made by France in Cochin-China and the other lands of the French Indochinese Union in recent years.
Here I hope you will see some evidence of the high moral purpose with which the government of France is endeavouring to fulfil its civilizing mission."
He slowed his delivery to linger emphatically on each syllable of the French expression "mission civilisatrice," gazing proudly around at the assembled gathering as he did so.
"We have brought new roads, railways and the telegraph to this backward corner of the globe that would otherwise have continued to languish in the toils of an unprogressive past.
We have developed rubber plantations, coal mines and other modern industrial amenities in cooperation with the hard-working Annamese, and all these ventures serve the best interests of both the French and the Annamese peoples.
We hope our American visitors will have an opportunity to appreciate some of these achievements during their journeys here.
We wish them all a pleasant and successful stay."
While the aide translated these remarks Joseph Sherman took the opportunity to glance around the room and noticed for the first time that groups of diminutive Annamese were standing quietly with their wives among the taller European men and women.
Some wore brightly coloured Chinese long gowns and black mandarin bonnets, others, shorter black silk coats and white trousers.
Only a few were dressed in European suits, but each of them cultivated a wispy goatee, the mark of the Annamite man of consequence.
All, in differing degrees, Joseph noticed, appeared ill-at-ease, looking neither at the governor nor at each other but directing their eyes most frequently towards the floor.
 "If the lovely boulevards of Saigon are anything to judge by, Monsieur le Gouverneur, you have already brought great civilizing benefits to this tropical colony of yours," Nathaniel Sherman was saying.
His public voice was richer in its Southern tones than normal and he was delivering his words in the slow, measured cadences that he normally employed on the floor of the Senate.
Your fine capital fully justifies its appellation, the Pearl of the Orient, and the people in its streets seem content and happy and are obviously at ease under your benevolent governance.
Joseph frowned, then looked at Chuck in puzzlement.
He had told his father about the pousse-pousse coolies being beaten by their passengers, and he had seemed to listen.
 "Do you think he didn't believe me?" whispered Joseph, but Chuck merely shrugged in reply.
 "Our two nations, monsieur, hold many beliefs in common," the senator continued smoothly.
We both are ready and willing to shoulder the responsibilities and duties which fall upon the rich and powerful nations of the world.
Once the United States was itself a colony and fought hard for its freedom and independence.
I'm sure your enlightened civilizing mission which is bringing modern communications and industry so unselfishly to the Annamese people will make sure that no such conflict will ever be necessary here.
The aide-de-camp was quietly providing a running translation of the senator's remarks and the governor looked up sharply at the mention of the word "independence." 
But he found the American rocking on his heels and smiling back at him engagingly, and the slow drawl of his address continued without pause.
 "I think I should point out too, monsieur, that there are other closer links between our family and France." 
He flourished his hand in the direction of his wife like a showman introducing his star attraction of the evening.
"My lovely wife, Flavia, was born in an old French colony that the great man in that picture on the wall behind you, Monsieur le Gouverneur, sold to the United States for fifteen million dollars in the year 1803.
The Emperor Napoleon got a good deal because France would have had to give it up sooner or later anyway, and I got a good deal because Louisiana gave me a lovely companion for life with all the legendary charms of your people."
He turned a dazzling smile on Flavia and she smiled back, her cheeks flushing faintly.
She already knew from the sour expressions of the French wives among the gathering and the open admiration in the eyes of their sallow, perspiring spouses that she had achieved an outstanding success with her greatest  extravagance, a simple couture gown of lilac organza.
She had dressed her hair daringly with ivory combs, sweeping it straight back from her face to emphasize her high cheekbones, then letting it fall behind her in a dark torrent that contrasted sharply with the pale silk of her gown.
Her cheeks were already aglow from a combination of the heat and the exhilaration of being the centre of attention, and this had lent an extra, youthful radiance to her beauty.
 "She gave up on me a long time ago, but she made sure that my two sons, Charles and Joseph, speak the language of her forebears, and that will stand us in good stead in your colony." 
He paused and beamed affably at his host once more.
 "We thank you most heartily, Monsieur le Gouverneur, for your kind and hospitable welcome." 
When the aide finished translating the senator's remarks the assembled colons applauded politely and an Annamese servant hovering nearby offered champagne to the group.
The governor immediately raised his glass in Flavia Sherman's direction and complimented her elaborately on her French ancestry and the "astonishing combination" of her beauty and her two fine sons.
 "I trust you will not spend all your time hunting, Madame Sherman," he added, smiling for the first time.
 "Your presence would greatly enhance the dull routine of colonial life if you chose to attend any of our social occasions." 
She returned his smile, then darted a quick glance at her husband; seeing he was engaged in conversation with the governor's aide, she allowed a confiding note to enter her voice.
"Life in Virginia is very limited, monsieur.
The social and cultural horizons are very narrow.
I've been looking forward to this visit for a long time for that reason.
My youngest son, Joseph, is very interested in history, and we are going to Hue to look at the Imperial City and watch the emperor perform the traditional ceremonies of Tet."
 "Then I will hope to have the pleasure of meeting you again in the ancient city of the Annamese emperors," said the governor, smiling again.
 "I too shall be attending the ceremonies prior to a few days' relaxation at the hill station of Dalat." 
At that moment the senators wife sensed the eyes of another man upon her and turned her head quickly to find a tall, leanfaced Frenchman in a white dinner jacket standing beside the governor's aide, watching her intently.
Because she turned unexpectedly she surprised him in an unguarded moment of frank sexual appraisal, but his dark, unsmiling gaze continued to hold  hers steadily until she looked away again.
The governor's aide, who had noticed her turn, saw his chance and ushered the silent Frenchman into the circle.
"Senator and Madame Sherman, may I present the man who will be your guide and mentor in the jungle, Monsieur Jacques Devraux.
Monsieur Devraux was formerly an officer of the Infanterie Coloniale but he is now our most accomplished hunter of big game."
Jacques Devraux pressed her fingers briefly and bent his dark head for an instant over her hand.
She felt his lips brush against her skin and heard his murmured "Enchante," but he didn't look at her again before greeting the senator.
 "I'm glad to meet you, Monsieur Devraux," cried Nathaniel Sherman, treating the Frenchman to warm, vigorous handshake.
"We've got a lot to talk over.
How soon do you think we can get our supplies together?
When might we think of making a start?"
The governor raised his shaggy brows at Flavia Sherman in a theatrical expression of sympathy as her husband launched into a detailed discussion of his hunting plans, and taking her by the elbow, he guided her away towards the waiting throng to begin introducing her.
As they departed an Annamese servant appeared soundlessly at Joseph Sherman's elbow, offering him another glass of champagne.
The American boy stared at his empty glass, which he had drained nervously at a gulp, and looked uncertainly towards the figure of his mother fast disappearing among the crowd.
She had admonished him before they left the hotel to drink no more than one glass, and his brother, Chuck, who was sipping his own wine confidently without the restraint of any such embargo, looked down and laughed good-naturedly at his indecision.
"It looks like Momma's upstaged you — she's the real belle of the ball after all, not you.
So take another one and drown your sorrows — I'll be responsible."
Joseph scowled back with mock ferocity at his brother as he picked up another glass and he was sipping it more circumspectly when a grinning dark-haired French youth of about eighteen approached them, holding out his hand.
"Bonsoir, messieurs, I'm Paul Devraux.
I help my father and I was very glad to hear that you speak good French.
The only English phrases I have learned so far are: "You have a beautiful figure" …
"
Will you go to bed with me?"…
"
I love you."…
And I don't think these expressions would be much use between us."
Both brothers laughed out loud at the deliberately comic  delivery of his English phrases as they shook hands.
Paul Devraux's features bore a strong resemblance to his father's, but his dark eyes twinkled mischievously in his sunburned face and he affected a droll, cynical expression.
 "I hope you enjoyed our governor's speech," he said, leaning confidently towards them.
"But don't believe everything he says.
Some people claim it is not really a mission civilisatrice at all that the French are conducting here.
There were no brothels in the colony you see before we came — but every town now has a fair selection.
So perhaps it should really be called a mission syphilisatrice — in English a mission of syphilization,"yes?
Chuck guffawed uncontrollably and Joseph laughed too, but a little uncertainly, wondering whether he correctly understood the French boy's irreverent humour.
 "It's really true then, Paul, is it, what we hear about Frenchmen?" inquired Chuck in a low voice.
 "That they are all sex maniacs?" 
 "It certainly is not true!" 
Paul Devraux allowed himself to look outraged from a moment.
 "Only most of us are sex maniacs." 
He smiled and twirled one end of his black mustache in a little gesture of bravado, and the Americans laughed again.
 "I must say from what we saw on our way here tonight the local female population seems fairly unapproachable," said Chuck, "even though they look good in those snazzy little silk dresses." 
 "You're absolutely right, mon vieux," said the French boy, gravely twirling his mustache again.
They are very unforthcoming.
The mandarin classes, you see, have very strict morals.
When an Annamese girl gets married, her husband spreads a square of snowy white silk on the bed on the first night of their honeymoon.
If she fails this test he's allowed to send her packing and make a public announcement saying why.
 "So how do all you French sex maniacs manage to preserve your sanity then?" 
 "Ah," said Paul, raising a didactic finger.
 "You obviously haven't heard of the noble institution of the congaie?" 
 "No," admitted Chuck,"I haven't.
What is the congaie?"
"The congaie is the house girl, the houseboy's sister — or sometimes even his wife.
Peasant girls from the countryside mostly."
He flourished his hand around the rest of the gathering.
"See how few wives there are in the colony.
Most French colons come here alone — for the congaie.
That's why there are forty thousand mentis in the colony."
"Mentis?
What are they?"asked Joseph quickly, anxious not to be left out of the intriguingly adult discussion.
"People of mixed race, mon ami — half French, half Annamite.
In French they are called poules-canards, you understand?
 "Chicken-ducks," neither one thing nor the other.
They get left behind when the French colon goes home to France.
If she is lucky, the congaie and her mentis children are passed on with the furniture to the next occupant of the house.
If not, too bad.
Nobody worries.
 "C'est la vie coloniale," they say and shrug their shoulders."
 "But your mother makes sure you keep clear of the congaie, I'll bet," added Chuck, laughing again.
 "My mother is unfortunately dead," said the French boy quietly.
 "She drowned in an accident four years ago." 
 "I'm very sorry," said Chuck hastily.
The French boy dismissed his apology with a little motion of his hand.
"But in any event I don't admire those of my countrymen who treat the Annamese congaie so badly.
I came to Saigon eight years ago when my father was in the army.
After my mother died he decided to stay on and make a living hunting, so I've grown up here with Annamese boys and girls of my own age.
Perhaps I have a different point of view from the older generation."
He glanced up for a moment towards the senator and Jacques Devraux.
 "I don't always see eye to eye with my father for instance about the way things are done here." 
Joseph tugged at his brother's sleeve suddenly and nodded across the room.
 "Look, Chuck, there's the man we met on the boulevard tonight." 
Chuck followed his gaze and saw the stoop-shouldered Frenchman, dressed now like all the others, conversing with a smaller, pallid man with dark-ringed eyes like his own.
 "We saw some prisoners being beaten," explained Joseph, turning to Paul Devraux,"but he told us not to feel sorry for them.
He said all Annamese were idle and good-for-nothing."
The French boy glanced at the man for a moment, then shrugged.
"He and his friend are typical representatives of the old guard.
See the dark half-moons beneath their eyes?
That's the sure sign of the habitual opium smoker.
I have met your "friend" once — his clothes always smell musty from the fumes.
I believe he's an inspector of mines or some such."
Paul Devraux lowered his voice and leaned closer to the two Americans.
"And as it happens opium.
is not the only vice of that particular pair.
When they leave here they will probably stroll down the Rue Catinat to the riverside.
On the quay opposite the Cafe de la Rotonde you'll see poor Annamese boys parading there for such men, with rice powder on  their faces.
Or they will pick a young rickshaw coolie and ride around all night watching his little golden rump bobbing in front of their eyes — and beat him if he refuses their advances."
The French boy pursed his lips suddenly in an expression of disgust.
"Those types are far too common.
The men who come to the colonies from France are not always of the best quality.
Let's not talk anymore about them."
 "Then tell us a bit more about the natives," said Chuck lightly, sipping his champagne and glancing around at the little groups of Annamese who were tending to draw closer together as the babble of noise from the French around them grew louder.
 "Who exactly are the slant-eyed oriental gentlemen who've come among us in their gaudy silk dressing gowns and funny hats?" 
We call them "collaborators" but the Annamese who don't want anything to do with the French call them the "licensed pirates." 
Who licensed pirates'? asked Joseph with a mystified smile.
"When our mighty French warships sailed in here sixty years ago the old Annamese scholars kept their distance.
But we were very cunning — we bought loyalty.
The lower-ranking mandarins who agreed to work as interpreters were rewarded with big tracts of good rice-growing land in the Mekong delta, and the idea soon began to catch on that collaborating paid.
Over the years collaborator families have become very rich.
Because they've been good boys we've helped them extend their landholdings and they lease it back to their own peasants at exorbitant rates — that's why their own people call them pirates."
Paul Devraux paused and nodded across the room.
"Take the Tran family over there who've just been introduced to your father, for instance.
They're very big landowners — probably worth quite a few million piasters."
The Sherman brothers looked up to see the governor and their father talking to an old Annamese with a long gray goatee, who was wearing a black-winged Ming dynasty mandarin's bonnet and a long embroidered gown of brilliant sea-green silk.
They noticed that he kept his hands clasped inside the voluminous sleeves of his gown and rarely raised his eyes to the face of the governor or the senator.
At his side a middle-aged Annamese dressed in a darker mandarin's gown followed the conversation with a watchful expression.
 "The venerable-looking Annamese with the beard is unusually shrewd." 
said Paul.
He has retained his post at the imperial court in Hue.
The family comes from the central region of Annam, I believe.
But his son, Tran Van Hieu — that's him in the darker gown — lives here in Saigon as the court's Imperial Delegate.
This  allows him to supervise all the family's vast landholdings in the delta.
That way the family keeps a foot in both camps.
 "They don't look much like American millionaires," said Chuck facetiously.
 "Our tycoons back home tend to look a mite less submissive." 
Paul Devraux laughed humourlessly.
"It's not surprising, is it, in the presence of dignitaries of the master race?
The French government allows the Annamese almost no say at all in running their affairs.
There's a lot of discontent beneath the surface."
 "But what happened to all that famous French liberte, egalite and fraternite that you fought your revolution for?" asked Joseph in astonishment.
 "Doesn't that apply at all out here?" 
Paul Devraux gave a little hollow laugh but didn't reply.
Glancing up he saw the senator beckoning for his sons to join him.
 "I think your father wants you to meet the mandarins," he said.
 "You'd better go." 
 "But what's the answer to my question?" 
Paul Devraux grinned at him for a moment, then raised a cynical eyebrow.
"Unfortunately, Joseph, the egalite and the fraternite get left at home.
But in her colonies France reserves the right to take whatever liberties she chooses."
Nathaniel Sherman looked at his sons and beamed proudly as they joined the group around the governor.
May I have the pleasure, monsieur, of introducing my two sons, boomed the senator, smiling into the wizened face of the Annamese mandarin while the governor's aide translated for him.
"My elder boy, Charles, and his young brother, Joseph…
Monsieur Tran Van Lung is a high official in the Ministry of Rites at the imperial court of Hue,"he added for his sons' benefit.
Joseph reached forward eagerly to shake hands, but the mandarin, after a moment's embarrassed hesitation, closed his right hand over his left fist, clasped them to his gown and bowed his head towards Chuck and Joseph in turn.
Only then did the American boy notice his extraordinarily long curling fingernails, the mark of a high-ranking courtier that would have made a Western-style handshake awkward and discomfiting for both parties.
Flushing to the roots of his hair, Joseph dipped his head in  greeting as he realized the more circumspect Chuck had done.
 "The Annamese never shake hands among themselves," declared the governor as if the mandarin and his son were not listening.
"Equals simply how from the waist with their arms at their sides.
And the traditional form of greeting you've just seen "—he paused and grasped his left hand loosely in his right fist in imitation of the Annamese —" is employed to denote respect from an inferior to a superior."
The casual offensiveness of the governor's remarks was evident to the senator even before his aide finished his translation; he glanced sharply at the Annamese, but it was impossible to gauge their reactions from their impassive faces.
 "The American South where I come from is mighty proud of its good manners, messieurs," said the senator, flashing them a smile of exaggerated charm.
 "But I think all of us here still have a lot to learn about civility and courteousness from your own ancient world." 
The old mandarin allowed his eyelids to droop fractionally in acknowledgment of the American's compliment when it was translated but otherwise held his face expressionless.
The governor, who had only half listened to the senators response, failed to notice the barb in the remark.
Nodding absently he opened the palm of his hand to gesture towards Tran Van Lung's sea-green gown.
"You might be interested, senator, to note that this robe is a unique piece of silk.
Its pattern and hues are both very rare indeed.
It was given as a personal gift to Tran Van Lung by the father of the present emperor, Khai Dinh."
The governor gestured towards the Annamese as if he were a museum exhibit.
"Near the hem you can see the delicately embroidered imperial dragon in gold.
Beautifully worked.
The world has much to thank the Chinese ancients for, don't you agree?"
"Indeed I do, governor.
And we also have Monsieur Tran Van Lung here to thank, do we not, for reminding us of the great and unshakable dignity of the Orient."
The governor looked keenly at the American for a moment, but encountered only the senators disarming smile and turned away again.
 "Speaking of rare things of the Orient, senator, let me show you my most treasured piece of chinoiserie." 
He touched the American's elbow and moved off in the direction of a single Ming vase standing on a pedestal nearby.
 "It is from the Lung Ching period, and I'm fairly confident that it is one of only two perfect examples of its kind left anywhere in the world." 
It was clear from the governor's demeanour that his invitation did not extend beyond the Americans, and the elderly mandarin  remained standing apart with his son and his son's wife.
Chuck followed his father towards the pedestal where the wide-necked Ming vase, decorated with blue phoenixes and lotus sprays, glowed under a direct light, but Joseph hesitated.
Seeing that the Annamese would otherwise be left abandoned, he remained beside them, shifting uncomfortably from one foot to another, searching his mind frantically for something to say.
The face of the elderly mandarin above the long gray wispy goatee remained dauntingly blank, and Joseph turned in desperation to the younger Annamese, realizing that no formal introduction had been made with them.
"I'm Joseph Sherman.
I'm fifteen, six years younger than my brother Chuck, you know.
He's twenty-one.
I have a sister at home.
Her name is Susannah — but she's only nine."
Relieved at having thought of something to say, Joseph gabbled his small talk in a rush of unpractised French, stumbling here and there over his pronunciation.
"Susannah is much too young of course for a big journey like this.
She had to stay behind with one of my aunts."
The old Annamese, possibly hard of hearing, gazed unblinkingly into the distance above his head for a moment then turned and shuffled away, but his son nodded gravely.
"My name is Tran Van Hieu, and it is indeed a pity for your sister, Monsieur Sherman, that she couldn't accompany you.
I hope she speaks the language of France as well as you do?"
Joseph laughed.
 "Nobody could speak it worse!" 
Infected by his laughter the wife of the younger mandarin smiled, and Joseph looked at her for the first time.
Slender and demure, she wore a simple ao dai of brown silk, and the serene beauty of her delicate golden face belied her years.
 "Do you have sons and daughters, madame?" he inquired politely to draw her into the conversation.
 "Yes, monsieur, two sons and a daughter." 
Joseph glanced hopefully around the room.
 "Are they here?" 
Tran Van Hieu shook his head.
 "They are still too young for such an occasion." 
He waved behind him towards one of the French windows that led out to the formal gardens surrounding the palace.
 "They asked if they might come to see the palais, but they had of course to remain outside in the gardens with their nurse where they can do no damage." 
Joseph looked out through the windows and saw three small Annamese children dressed in traditional silk tunics like their parents walking on the lawns below the terrace in the company of a plainly garbed Annamese servant.
 "Would it be possible for me to meet them, monsieur?" 
Joseph  hesitated, then laughed.
"You see, I'm not allowed to drink any more champagne.
My mother made me promise to have only one glass — and I've had two already."
The Annamese mandarin looked at Joseph's eager face for a moment, then his eyes lost their watchful look for the first time and he smiled.
 "Pourquoi pas?" 
He turned to his wife, who was smiling too.
 "Why not?" he repeated and led the way to the French windows.
Outside on the terrace he waved and called to the children, and a moment later they arrived panting and breathless at the top of the broad flight of marble steps.
"This is Joseph Sherman.
His father is an important visitor from the United States of America,"Tran Van Hieu told them in French.
 "That is an important country far away across the sea." 
Remembering the earlier misunderstanding, Joseph kept his hands pressed to his sides.
Smiling broadly he bowed stiffly from the waist and greeted each of the children in turn.
 "Je suis enchante de faire votre connaissance." 
 "Tam is twelve," said the Annamese, pointing to the taller boy.
 "Kim is eleven, and my daughter, Lana, is just ten years old." 
The girl's serious little face was delicate, rounded, promising that she would soon flower into at least as striking a beauty as her mother; in an attempt to make her smile Joseph winked theatrically at her, but this made her draw closer to her mother and she continued to gaze gravely back at him with the curious, unselfconscious eyes of childhood.
Her brothers had intelligent, mischievous faces, and they giggled and jostled one another constantly, refusing to stand still.
The younger of the pair, Joseph noticed, held his arms unnaturally high across his tiny chest, and looking closer he saw a little bulge rumpling and moving beneath his silk tunic.
 "Are you hiding something interesting under your jacket, Kim?" asked the American, dropping playfully to his knees and pointing to the moving lump.
Both boys immediately burst into peals of embarrassed laughter, and Tam ran shamefaced to his father's side and whispered loudly in his ear in French: "Kim has brought Lan's gibbon, Papa!
I told him he shouldn't, but he wouldn't listen to me."
The mandarin chided his younger son in rapid Annamese and immediately the giggling stopped.
Kim unbuttoned his jacket, and when the head of the frightened baby gibbon appeared, Lan let out a little cry of protest and gathered the tiny animal tenderly into her arms.
 "May I stroke him please, Lan?" 
Joseph spoke softly and leaned towards her.
Not fully understanding his intent, she shrank  away from him protectively and the animal, sensing her unease, began snickering and struggling in her arms.
Joseph started back immediately, anxious to cause no offense, but the nervous gibbon, taking fright at his sudden movement, tore itself free and bounded from her grasp.
The two boys, shrieking excitedly, chased it around the terrace, panicking it further, and to escape them it darted through the open doors into the palais.
Tran Van Hieu and his wife stared after it aghast, and the boys, halting on the threshold, stopped shouting and fell silent.
Lan's face had turned pale with apprehension and she stood open-mouthed, one tiny hand raised to her check, her face trembling on the brink of tears.
Their anxiety rooted Joseph to the spot for a moment; then, desperate to make amends for his clumsiness, he flung himself through the doorway in pursuit.
Inside, the tiny creature skidded to a halt on the marble floor, terrified by the sudden din of the gathering.
Joseph lunged toward it, but the sight of him terrorized the gibbon further, and it set off frantically towards the only visible refuge.
The governor had moved his guests back from the illuminated pedestal to show the line and glazing of the Ming vase to its best advantage, and because he had turned his head in their direction to explain a point, he didn't see the gibbon streak across the marble floor on all fours.
His eye fell on it for the first time as it sprang onto the marble plinth and clutched at the neck of the vase to steady itself.
The governor's white-gloved hand froze in mid-flourish and for a second he stared horror-struck at the chattering animal.
Then he started towards the plinth with a cry of alarm, and the gibbon, sensing a threat, leaped two feet into the air and disappeared inside the vase.
The darkness of the interior only increased the animal's terror, and immediately it began to struggle frantically to free itself.
The vase rocked back and forth on its base for an instant, then toppled towards the floor.
Realizing he was too far away to save his prized possession, the governor could only stand and watch it fall, speechless with anger.
Several nearby Frenchmen started belatedly to the rescue, but the guilty knowledge of his responsibility for the impending disaster had lent Joseph's legs extra speed.
He sprinted desperately towards the plinth and, as the vase fell, launched himself towards it in a lunging dive.
His shoulder hit the floor with a thud that knocked the wind out of him but he managed to get one hand under the vase at full stretch and slithered across the marble floor juggling the smooth-glazed porcelain above his head.
He almost  lost it as he came to rest, but at the last moment he twisted onto his back and with both hands pressed his prize thankfully against his frilled inside shirt front.
In the hushed silence that followed he scrambled to his feet, his face and neck flushing scarlet.
Reaching inside, he hauled the monkey out by the scurf of its neck and replaced the vase carefully on its pedestal.
Then without a backward glance he fled towards the French windows, clutching the offending animal under his arm.
The moment Joseph stepped out onto the terrace the worried faces of Tran Van Hieu and his wife relaxed with relief.
Their two small sons stood apart with their nurse, already contrite and tearful, but Lan clapped her hands delightedly and ran towards Joseph.
The American boy apologized haltingly in French as he knelt to return the shivering pet to her, but once the animal was safely in her arms again she turned and fled shyly back to her father's side without speaking.
When the governor's uniformed aide appeared silently in the doorway behind Joseph, he took in the scene at a glance and his face darkened with reproof.
 "The governor is ready to take dinner with his invited guests, Monsieur Joseph," he said, pointedly ignoring the Annamese.
Joseph smiled and apologized once more and watched as Tran Van Hieu shepherded his family off the terrace.
At the foot of the steps Lan stopped for a moment to turn and stare back at Joseph.
She was still whispering to the gibbon to soothe it, but her innocent face was puzzled, as though she could not quite grasp everything that had happened.
Joseph smiled hesitantly and waved, but this embarrassed the little Annamese girl and she turned and ran as fast as she could to catch up with her parents.
The main living room of the Imperial Delegate's official residence on a tree-shaded street north of the Saigon Cathedral betrayed little evidence of the great wealth aniseed by the Tran family, through three generations of collaboration with the French.
Sparsely furnished in keeping with the austere, scholarly traditions of the Annamese mandarinate, it was dominated by the family's ancestral altar, which consisted of three tables of different heights  lacquered in red and gold.
Beyond the windows, tropical trees and shrubs that bore guava, papaw, mangosteen and pomegranate sprouted in profusion from the moist earth of a walled garden, and heaped bowls of fruits picked from their branches were clustered on the altar, along with tiny dishes of spiced meats, fish, lotus seeds, vegetables and porcelain beakers of tea and rice alcohol.
A gilt-framed portrait of a venerable-looking mandarin attired in court robes occupied the place of honour on the highest level of the altar, and as the light began to fade, the wizened Annamese to whom Senator Sherman had spoken an hour earlier entered the room and bowed solemnly before it.
He was dressed in a wide-sleeved ceremonial gown of dark silk and a soft hat embroidered with coloured threads partly hid his face from Lan and her brothers as they followed him through the doorway, walking barefoot between their father and mother.
A stream of other relatives followed, and from the shadows they watched the old man touch each of the tall red candles surrounding the portrait with a lighted taper; when four tiny buds of flames bloomed above the altar he sank to his knees and pressed his palms together.
 "In lighting these candles," he murmured in a reverent voice "we extend an invitation to the spirit of my greatly esteemed father to come among us and bless us." 
For a moment he remained motionless, his eyes closed, then he lifted his joined hands in front of him in a graceful arc and bent to press his forehead against the floor in silent prayer.
Because she had spent much of that day watching her mother supervise preparations for the traditional Gio ceremony observed by the family on each anniversary of her great-grandfather's death, Lan knew the altar held all the favourite foods and beverages that the high-ranking courtier had enjoyed during his lifetime.
The little girl had been allowed to help with the setting out of the banquet, and noticing suddenly that there were six dishes of each delicacy and six pairs of chopsticks, she had asked her mother why this was so.
 "We provide extra food and drink so that your great-grandfather can bring the spirits of other famous patriots and scholars to join our celebration," her mother had explained in a whisper, and Lan, remembering this, found herself peering apprehensively at the spare chopsticks to see if any of them showed signs of moving.
She and her brothers had always found the idea of ancestral spirits appearing during the Cia ceremony an awesome prospect, but her sense of unease had been greatly  heightened on this occasion by the fear of unknown punishments that seemed certain to follow the incident involving her baby gibbon at the governor's palace.
Already their father had given an indication of his deep displeasure by ordering all three of them to remain in the room throughout the ceremony.
It would last, they knew, about half an hour — until the single joss stick planted in a bowl of white rice on the altar burned down to the level of the cereal.
Normally after offering their silent prayers all three children were dismissed to play in the garden and were not recalled until the offertory food was removed from the altar at the end of the ceremony and eaten along with other dishes at a festive family supper.
In addition their father had told them that he wanted to speak to them in his study afterwards, and although he had given no indication what chastisement he planned, they knew from the severity of his expression that he was angrier than they had ever seen him before.
Their mother had warned them to beg for forgiveness when their turn came to pray to their great-grandfather's spirit before the altar, and it seemed certain to Lan's ten-year-old mind that if she and her brothers had angered their father so deeply they must also have offended the spirits of their illustrious ancestors too.
Beside her Kim was struggling to hide his feelings, but Lan could tell from the paleness of his face that he was apprehensive and on edge.
In Annamese families of their rank supervision of the home and the children was left largely to the mother; like most Annamese fathers, however, Tran Van Hieu kept a sturdy bamboo cane locked in a lacquered cabinet in his study to reinforce where necessary the Confucian notion of filial piety.
He had never used the cane before, only the threat of it, but all three children were well aware that Kim's flagrant disobedience earlier that evening had caused him acute public embarrassment.
On Lan's other side Tam shot an accusing look at Kim from time to time as if to make unmistakably clear to his father that he had done everything possible to dissuade Kim from his folly.
Lan, for her part, hoped fervently that her innocence would be self-evident, and as she watched her prostrate grandfather's lips moving soundlessly she began to phrase in her own mind the plea for leniency she intended to submit to the ancestral spirit.
Three times in all her grandfather prostrated himself on the altar mat, then he rose slowly and stepped aside to make way for his son.
In his turn, Tran Van Hieu knelt to perform the same silent acts of obeisance as the older man, but after prostrating  himself for the third time, he remained on his knees and to his children's surprise began to pray aloud.
"Above all, help us never to forget the teachings of the great sage.
Confucius, which remind us of our daily obligations towards our parents, our ancestors, our emperor and all those set in authority over us,"he said, speaking in a firm voice that carried clearly to his children's ears.
"Help us, too, to live in closer harmony with the great forces of nature and the world of spirits so that you and all our ancestors may continue to dwell restfully and happily in our midst.
If we fail in these duties we know that we risk forfeiting the protection of your spirit and all the spirits of our nation's past heroes.
Kim bit his lip and stared at the floor as his father rose to look meaningfully in their direction; Tam and Lan also shifted uncomfortably under his gaze, which remained on them unwaveringly throughout their mother's act of devotion.
When she had finished, he motioned Tam forward first because he was the oldest, and the twelve-year-old boy rushed eagerly across the room to fling himself down on the altar mat."
 "Great-grandfather, you must know already that I did all I could to stop Kim taking the gibbon," he said, whispering aloud in the hope that his fervent words might be audible to his father and grandfather standing a few feet away.
 "I always obey my father without question as I did today, and all I ask is that you help me to continue to do that." 
He pressed his forehead fiercely to the floor and hurried obediently back to his place, taking care not to look at Kim.
To Lan's astonishment her father signalled for her to approach the altar next; as she was the youngest she had expected to go last, but her father was clearly singling Kim out for special treatment by allowing her to precede him.
Her bare feet made no sound on the polished wood floor as she approached the altar with her head bowed devoutly over her clasped hands.
 "Please, Great-grandfather, don't let my father be angry with me for what Kim did," she prayed silently, closing her eyes as tightly as she could in an effort to add force to her thoughts.
"I only ever wish to please him and I'm very sorry my pet gibbon was taken to the palace.
But because I am a girl I can't stop my brothers from doing wrong, so please help Kim to behave better so that there is no more trouble."
She remained bent towards the portrait of the dead mandarin for several seconds to show the spirits how deeply repentant she was, and when she rose to return to her place she kept her head bowed so that her dark  hair fell across her face and hid the tears of remorse in her eyes.
When his father motioned him forward, Kim approached the altar more slowly, his lips pursed in a determined line.
For a long time he remained bent over his hands without uttering any form of prayer.
Then a moment before rising to rejoin his brother and sister, he clenched his teeth together hard.
 "If my father decides to beat me for what I did," he whispered fiercely to himself,"please help me to endure the pain and not to cry.
That is all I ask."
From the back of the room where they were made to stand apart from the family for the rest of the ceremony, the three children were able to hear only snatches of their grandfather's words as he conducted a long discourse praising the virtues of his dead parent.
When at last the joss stick on the altar burned down, their mother ushered them to their father's study and arranged them in a line before his writing-table on which the bamboo cane had already been laid out.
 "You all know how disrespectful your behaviour was this evening," Tran Van Hieu said severely when he had seated himself"both to the French governor and to your parents.
And though I am well aware that you, Kim, are the main cause of the trouble I have no alternative but to punish all three of you."
Tam's face fell and Lan felt tears start to her eyes again, but Kim received the news without showing any visible sign of emotion.
"Tam, because your responsibility for what happened is not so great as Kim's, you and your sister will kneel in the corner of this room for one hour with your faces to the wall.
If you remain perfectly still and keep your backs straight, you won't be punished further.
Use the time to reflect on your disgraceful behaviour — and resolve never to disobey me again."
As the elder boy and Lan turned away in relief, the mandarin let his hand fall on the bamboo cane; he rolled it between his fingers for a moment before glancing up at his younger son again.
 "Your punishment, Kim, will depend on the quality of your answers," he said, speaking in a quiet voice.
"And I want you first tell me why you took the gibbon to the palace when you knew it was wrong.
For a long time the boy maintained a defiant silence and didn't look at his father.
 "If you don't tell me, I will beat you without mercy," said the mandarin at last and rose from his chair with the cane in his hand.
Still the boy didn't speak, but when his father advanced around the table and stood over him, he looked up into his face.
I did it because some of the older boys at school dared me!
They said I was too frightened of our long-nosed French masters to do  such a thing.
I wanted to show them I wasn't afraid!
Tran Van Hieu's eyes glittered and the muscles of his jaw tightened.
"Why should you need to show you are not afraid?
You know very well you should accord the French governor and his officials the same respect you show to me and your grandfather.
They are the ruling authority.
Our position and our wealth depend on their goodwill."
 "Some of the older boys at school say we are nothing more than dancing puppets of the French!" 
The boy blurted his words in a rush, his pale face flushing suddenly.
"They say we've sold our souls to France in return for rice fields over which the crane might fly all morning without encountering barriers.
They call us "licensed pirates" behind our backs!"
In the tense silence that followed, Tam and Lan, who had their faces to the wall, heard their father draw a long shuddering breath; then the first crack of the bamboo cane rang through the quiet room like a pistol shot.
As the sound was repeated again and again the tears that had been brimming in Lan's eyes spurted down her cheeks, and beside her Tam listened rigid with horror, waiting for the sound of his brother's wailing to begin.
But although the cane continued to rise and fall with a terrible regularity, and they continued to hear the awful blows landing, no sound came from their brother.
Once Tam darted a terrified glance over his shoulder and saw Kim sprawled across the writing-table; white faced and trembling from head to toe, he had his eyes closed and his fists were clenched tight as he summoned up every last ounce of courage in his eleven-year-old body to endure his father's beating without weeping or crying out.
In the bright, clear sunlight of the morning that followed the governor's reception, the three-mile highway linking Saigon with Cholon was aswarm with almost every form of land transport that had ever served mankind.
Drawn by light-stepping ponies, lowing bullocks, sweating, yellow-skinned men or smoking petrol and steam engines, unending processions of carriages, carts, rickshaws, trams, trains, cars, and motor buses were plying urgently back and forth across the drab plain of treeless rice fields, hurrying to complete their business before the heat of  noon drove their passengers to seek shelter and shade.
Perched on the tailboard of a tiny wooden malabar pulled by two short-legged Cambodian ponies, Senator Nathaniel Sherman was puffing reflectively on a Havana cigar as he surveyed the early morning scene.
"It's worth remembering, Chuck, that without the white man's know-how this road would be nothing more than a dusty cart track today.
And the only vehicles on it would be those native ox carts.
Maybe even this quaint little matchbox on wheels wouldn't be here."
Chuck and Joseph were hunched on facing seats in the covered interior, their sun helmets touching the underside of the curved wooden roof.
As they jolted along they grinned at each other, letting out little exaggerated groans of pain every time the unsprung wheels hit a bump in the road.
A line of the malabars, named after the Indian immigrants who had brought them to the colony, had been drawn up under the trees in the square outside the Continental Palace Hotel when they emerged to go to Cholon with Jacques and Paul Devraux to buy the last of their hunting supplies.
On learning that the French called them disparagingly "boites d'allumettes" — matchboxes and that they were usually only used by poor Annamese, the senator had suddenly elected to ride in one with his sons and meet the Frenchman at the market.
 "I'm saying this, Chuck, to remind you that it's the rich and powerful nations that call the tune around the world," continued the senator through a burgeoning cloud of pale blue cigar smoke.
"And I thought that maybe a few bruises under the seat of your pants might make sure you remember something else that's important.
Wealth and power go hand in hand, at home too, as well as in the big wide world.
Men from families like ours have always governed America — and the great countries of Europe.
But I don't want you to make the same mistakes the French make here.
High-handedness and arrogance are their trademarks, as you saw last night at the governor's palace.
But no American politician, especially a wealthy one, is going to last two minutes if he's caught looking down his nose at folk the way the French do.
It's the ordinary folks at home who vote you into office, remember — and out of it.
So first and foremost let everyone see that you make common cause with the common people.
And never be too proud to be seen riding in a little buggy like this, instead of a limousine.
The people like it — especially in the South.
That's how they want it there.
It makes them feel close to you and they like that."
 "I don't think I'll ever feel anything ever again with the region I  sit on," grinned Chuck as he continued to bounce up and down on the plank bench.
 "I sure won't forget this malabar ride in a long while." 
The Senator drew hard on his cigar and studied the glowing end.
 "I guess you saw through the governor's speech last night, Chuck, did you — all that hypocritical talk about the civilizing mission?" 
The Senator glanced up inquiringly at his elder son.
 "Yes," said Chuck uncertainly,"I think so.
He did paint a kind of rosy picture, didn't he?
But I guess they have got something to point to if they've built good roads and railways and so on."
 "But what's the point of building all those roads and railways?" 
Chuck hesitated and peered out at the teeming streets of Cholon, which they were entering.
Beneath the shady colonnades built out over the pavements, fat Chinese stripped to the waist like living Buddhas sat flicking their abaci behind high mounds of fruits, foodstuffs, silks, porcelains, hardware and a dozen other commodities.
Wooden-wheeled ox carts trundled through the dense throng and the air was heavy with the pungent reek of salted fish, oriental teas and spices.
Reluctantly Chuck turned his eyes back to his father.
"To improve their communications, I guess said Chuck, his voice trailing off without conviction.
 "Isn't it to help them transport the rubber and coal and rice and all the things that they export from the colony?" 
Joseph made his suggestion diffidently in the uncomfortable silence.
 "Don't the French really get more benefit from having roads and railways than the Annamese?" 
The senator nodded at Joseph.
"Exactly.
And all that talk about the hardworking Annamese people was a mite misleading.
The American consul told me they still force the peasants to do corvee.
Every man jack has to work ten days each year for nothing as a kind of tax.
They build those roads and railways or canals — working like the serfs did for their feudal lords in Europe in the Middle
Ages."
 "Why did you say, Daddy, last night, that the people in the streets seemed content and happy?" asked Joseph eagerly.
 "After I told you what we'd seen." 
 "Perhaps you've figured that one out, Chuck?" said the senator, turning to his elder son with a self-satisfied smile.
"A little bit of wide-eyed innocence is good for lulling your opponents into a false sense of security.
If you listened carefully to what I said, though, most of it could be taken two ways.
A lot of folks drop their guard when they think they're dealing with a man of simple mind — and  if behind that kind of pose you hide the steely determination I've been trying to drum into you, son, you'll do just fine."
He leaned forward and patted Chuck's arm encouragingly as the suit brought the malabar ponies to a halt outside Cholon's biggest covered market.
Jacques Devraux and his son were waiting beside a baggage truck that was already loaded with the rest of their hunting equipment, and leaving their sons to stand watch, the two men disappeared into the shadowy interior of the market to haggle over a purchase of several hundred pounds of salt and arsenical soap that would be used for drying and preserving the hides of animals they hoped to shoot.
At the pavement's edge Joseph stood surveying the crowd with fascinated eyes; in Cholon's narrower streets, Europeans were far rarer than on the boulevards of Saigon, and the vast majority of the faces were Chinese.
Gleaming French cars nosed along the cluttered roadway bearing corpulent Chinese and their bejewelled wives or concubines in their curtained interiors, and the staccato, unmelodious babble of the Cantonese dialect had entirely replaced the softer, sibilant tones of the Annamese language.
 "Look there," whispered Paul, draping his arms around the shoulders of both American boys and turning them to face across the street.
 "Do you see the Chinese beauty with her little mu tsai?" 
He pointed to the straight-backed figure of a striking Chinese girl in an embroidered silk dress before whom the crowds were parting as she made her way slowly along the opposite pavement.
Her face was powdered and rouged, and beside her trotted a younger, plainly dressed girl holding a parasol above the delicate head of her mistress.
 "What is a mu tsai?" asked Joseph, staring.
 "She's a little slave girl," said Paul, a lascivious note creeping into his voice.
"But she can still be very important.
In an arranged marriage the husband often insists that his wife brings a pretty little mu tsai along as part of her dowry.
Then if the wife displeases him he can distract himself with her little slave."
 "And have you got a little mu trai tucked away somewhere, Paul?" inquired Chuck, grinning broadly.
 "Unfortunately not," sighed the French boy.
 "What, no congaie, no mu tsai?" asked Joseph precociously, straining to bridge the gap of those few years that seemed to separate him from the world of adult banter inhabited so effortlessly by Paul and his brother.
"And the Annamese girls are all virgins?
How on earth do you manage?"
The French boy turned on one of his fierce expressions of shock and outrage and leaned back from the waist to subject the American boy's now-blushing face to pantomime scrutiny.
 "There are ways, my dear young Joseph," he said at last, his eyes twinkling merrily, that even your audacious mind has not yet dared to conceive.
Since you're obviously a young man of ardent passions, perhaps I'll have a chance to show you personally what I mean — and sooner than you think.
The incandescent flowers of roadside flame trees blazed like orange candles overhead as Jacques Devraux's gleaming black Citron B-2 landaulet slid through the shadows they cast on the road leading northeast out of Saigon.
Devraux himself was sitting in the front beside his Annamese driver while Senator Sherman shared the rear seats with his sons and Paul Devraux.
Flavia Sherman had elected to spend the day shopping on the Rue Catinat and was to join them for the first hunt next morning.
With their baggage truck trundling fifty yards behind they were heading towards the junction of the Dong Nai and La Nga rivers sixty miles from Saigon, where wild water buffalo and other rare animals of Southern Asia roamed freely through a low-lying region of jungle and plain.
Outside the city the road passed through a broad expanse of flooded paddy fields where swarms of Annamese nha que were bending and straightening, belly-deep in the sludge.
To tend the rice shoots all wore broad, mollusk-shaped hats and identical trousers and tunics of black cloth that made men and women indistinguishable to the eyes of the Americans in the car.
Domesticated buffaloes lumbered through the flooded fields, too, hauling tiny wooden plows, or wallowed at rest in deeper hollows with only their scimitar-shaped horns and noses showing above the water.
Endless streams of similarly clad peasants hurried barefoot along the dikes and roadsides, moving with the same tireless rhythm as those workers in the fields.
In baskets slung from shoulder poles they carried paddy seedlings, husked rice, fruit, vegetables, matting and even, as Joseph once delightedly pointed out, two live piglets squealing and squirming in separate nets at the pole ends.
As in Saigon the mouths of the men and women alike  oozed with beteljuice and the roadsides there too were stained with red saliva blotches.
 "This is the other side of the coin," said Jacques Devraux in English and gestured peremptorily toward the windshield.
"In Cholon you saw the fat Chinese millionaires taking their ease.
They set up the mills to husk the rice and charter the ships to transport it to the best markets — then sit back.
These gullible Annamese peasants are the ones who do all the hard, dirty work to make them rich.
Sometimes to me Indochina looks like a Chinese colony run for the fat men of Cholon by courtesy of France."
The Frenchman's voice betrayed no trace of humour, and his tanned, leathery face remained set in unsmiling lines as he spoke.
The hardness of his tone produced an uncomfortable silence in the car, and Paul Devraux, sensing this, hastened to lighten the atmosphere.
 "We say in French, senator, that the Annamese are the" rizicultivateurs "— the rice growers — and that the Chinese are the" usuricultivateurs "— the cultivators of usury," he said with a laugh.
 "That's neat, isn't it?" 
The senator laughed and patted the French boy on the arm.
 "Whatever you call them, Paul, I wouldn't mind having a hundred or two of these peasants come over to Virginia to work my plantation." 
He gazed out of the window at the jog-trotting crowds of peasants moving in both directions along the road.
"They seem to have fancy little engines driving them, don't they?
They never seem to stop running."
 "They're a very hardworking people," said Paul earnestly.
 "They have a surprising amount of energy in those frail-looking bodies." 
 "Then how come they don't make anything for themselves out of all this hard labor?" inquired the senator politely.
"However much they earn seems to make no difference.
They constantly get themselves in debt."
Jacques Devraux spoke quietly without turning around.
"Then they have to go to the Chinese to borrow money at highwaymen's rates.
Sometimes the Chinese charge thirty-six percent and the peasants are foolish enough to agree.
Often they lend as little as ten piasters knowing they will be able to take the borrower's scrap of land, his house — and his wife and daughters too probably — when he fails to repay."
 "But that's not the whole story, Papa," protested Paul hotly.
"The peasants have a hard time of it all round, it seems to me.
We robbed them of their land in the first place to reward the Annamese who collaborated with us.
Now those landowners have become greedy and demand high rents — and we help to exploit  the peasants by levying crippling taxes.
Who can they turn to if the native landowners and the French are against them?"
Jacques Devraux did not reply immediately.
Joseph, who was watching him closely, saw the muscles of his jaw tighten as he continued looking ahead through the windshield, and when he spoke there was a new undertone of coldness in his voice.
The Annamese were part of the Chinese empire for a thousand years, Paul, remember.
They're a people who succumb easily to exploitation.
It's in their nature.
They seem to need it.
If we hadn't colonized this country when we did somebody else would have.
The landaulet jolted suddenly as the Annamese driver trod on the brake, and Joseph, who was sitting directly behind him, heard Jacques Devraux curse softly under his breath.
Glancing up the American boy saw a peasant pole-carrier, who had skipped across the road close in front of the Citron, grinning triumphantly from a roadside ditch.
As they accelerated away Joseph turned to stare out of the window and saw the peasant jump up and break into a little celebratory caper in the middle of the road.
 "You will have to get used to that, I'm afraid," said Paul Devraux in an apologetic voice.
 "It happens all the time." 
 "Why do they do it?" asked Joseph in alarm.
 "Are they trying to kill themselves?" 
"Not quite.
They're trying to kill their ma-qui.
But unfortunately they sometimes do kill themselves, too."
 "What are their ma-qui?" 
"Their evil spirits.
All Annamese peasants — and that's about eighty percent of the population worship invisible spirits.
House spirits, hearth spirits, river spirits, tree spirits — in the jungle you'll sometimes see little offerings of food in the fork of a tree.
Their ma-qui are the two spirits which they believe live in their shadows.
One is good and one is bad.
The bad one leads them into temptation and they believe that the only way that they can get rid of it is to drag it close to danger.
If they narrowly miss death themselves and their shadow is "hit" by a car, or "gored" by a buffalo, they believe the evil spirit living in it will be destroyed.
That's why the peasant was dancing in the road — we'd killed his bad shadow.
It happens a lot at this time of year — it's Tet soon, the festival of the lunar new year, and they like to start afresh without any evil following them around."
The car slowed again more gently as the Annamese driver spotted another group of peasants gathering themselves at the roadside fifty yards ahead.
From the back seats the Shermans  heard Jacques suck in a long irritable breath.
"Don't slow down every time, Loc, he told his driver curtly in French.
Otherwise we shall never get there."
The Annamese pressed the accelerator and the landaulet gathered speed again; it didn't falter as three more young peasants darted white-faced into the road, and Joseph found himself holding his breath until they got clear.
As the Citron began to climb away from the crowded rice paddies into the red-soiled rubber plantation region, Joseph studied the face of the driver in the rearview mirror, trying to guess his feelings.
He wondered if he'd understood what Jacques Devraux had said earlier in English about his country.
But from his impassive, narrow-eyed face it was impossible to gauge his thoughts; like many Annamese he had the kind of boyish appearance that made it difficult for an American to estimate his age.
He could have been anything between twenty and forty years old, thought Joseph.
Jacques Devraux had not troubled to make him known to the senator, but while his father made a final check of the baggage truck, Paul Devraux had patted him affectionately on the shoulder and introduced him to them as "the great all-purpose Annamese genie Ngo Van Loc, who's houseboy, camp boy, chauffeur and indispensable general assistant to the humble Devraux family." 
Loc had giggled with embarrassment then shook hands and greeted them hurriedly in French before Devraux returned to the car.
There seemed no reason why he should have known any English, Joseph reflected as they drove on and concluded in his own mind that the wary-eyed Annamese probably hadn't understood the earlier conversation.
For mile after mile the car ran on through the shadowy rubber groves where the straight-trunked trees with herringbone scars and metal latex cups stretched unendingly into the distance on either side of the road.
The repetitive, uniform appearance of the soldier-like trees made it seem as if the car was scarcely moving, and their silent, gloomy shade gradually eased the tension created inside the Citron by the earlier near-accident.
But then as the car sped out of the rubber groves and down a steep hill towards another village Joseph stiffened in his seat again.
A big crowd of peasants had gathered-around the slimy village pond to wash their clothes and themselves in the gray, brackish water.
They had spilled halfway across the road, and although most of them shuffled quickly aside when they saw the car approaching, four boys gathered themselves quickly into a group and remained standing defiantly in its path.
Ngo Van Loc instinctively eased his foot from  the accelerator again, but Jacques Devraux lifted his open hand in a gesture of admonishment and leaned across to press the horn in the canter of the steering wheel.
 "They will never learn to get out of the way if you slow down every time," he said sharply.
 "Keep going." 
As they drew nearer Joseph could see the flat peasant faces of the four Annamese boys clearly; they were wide-eyed with apprehension, but obviously determined to remain rooted to the spot until the last moment.
Jacques Devraux's face was visible in the rearview mirror and his cold expression did not flicker as he held his hand firmly on the blaring horn.
When the large chromium headlamps of the Citron were only five feet from them, the first boy flung himself into the roadside ditch and let out a yell of triumph as he tumbled into the filthy water.
Two of the others stumbled but managed to leap awkwardly over the offside fender of the car.
The fourth boy, however, slipped and fell to his knees and was only beginning to scramble upright again when the fender caught his chest with a thud that shook the vehicle.
His arms and legs flew wide as he cartwheeled over the hood and fell in a motionless heap in the dusty road behind them.
Ngo Van Loc started to slow the car, but to the surprise of the Americans Jacques Devraux motioned him to keep driving.
The Frenchman studied the scene behind them in the rearview mirror for a second or two but did not turn his head.
Joseph and the other occupants in the landaulet twisted in their seats and watched the rest of the villagers rush to surround the fallen boy.
The baggage truck that was following slowed as the crowd in the road thickened, then stopped, unable to pass.
 "Won't you turn back, Monsieur Devraux, to see at least if he's alive?" asked Nathaniel Sherman in a quiet voice.
 "There is really no need to inconvenience yourself, Senator," replied Devraux calmly.
 "I assure you this is a very common occurrence here." 
 "But shouldn't the accident be reported to your police?" 
"There is no need.
The most a French judge will fine you is the cost of the funeral expenses — twenty-five piasters if in fact the boy has died.
And the judge will only do that if he really has to.
Repeated warnings are given to the peasants to stay away from passing traffic.
They ignore these warnings completely."
He glanced briefly in the mirror again.
"The baggage truck driver will take care of it.
He is Annamese."
The Frenchman spoke the final words in a tone that suggested  he would find it disagreeable to discuss the subject further, and the senator lapsed into silence.
Joseph glanced at Ngo Van Loc, but although his knuckles were white on the steering wheel he made no comment, and nobody else spoke for the rest of the journey.
 "You will never argue with me again in front of clients, French or foreign, is that clear?" 
Jacques Devraux held himself ramrod straight on the back of his stocky saddle pony and delivered his order to his son in a vehement undertone.
"Your behaviour was unpardonable!
It's astonishing to me that a boy whose father and grandfather have both been soldiers before him should have such a poorly developed sense of loyalty arid duty."
Paul bit his lip as he jogged at his father's shoulder along a trail that wound through fringes of jungle beside the La Nga River.
His face had grown pale at the harshness of the rebuke and he drew a long breath before replying.
 "You can't expect me to agree with you on every single thing, Papa," he said, keeping his voice low so that it did not carry to Senator Sherman and his sons, who were strung out in single file on their ponies behind them.
 "But that doesn't mean I'm disloyal to you." 
"Perhaps you will learn the meaning of obedience and respect at St. Cyr.
I hope so.
If you don't, you won't remain an officer cadet for long."
Devraux didn't look at his son as he spoke, but stared straight ahead along the track, his face set in harsh lines.
"After the Americans leave I must travel to Canton again.
You will have to conduct on your own the party of French officials who want to shoot muntjac.
I don't wish to hear from them on my return that you've been airing the kind of sentiments I heard from you today."
Paul rode without speaking for a minute or two, listening absently to the strident cries of unseen birds in the tangled roof of the tropical forest.
He sensed that his father was silently demanding some expression of regret, but whenever he glanced at his grim, unsmiling face he found it impossible to summon an apology to his lips.
 "Are you going on Surete General business?" he asked at last in a low voice after glancing around again to see if they could be overheard.
 "Is it to do with the bomb that was thrown at the governor general?" 
 "You know I can't discuss my work for the Surete with you," replied his father brusquely.
Then he turned his head and eyed his son coldly.
 "But perhaps holding the views you do makes you feel no action should be taken against the enemies of France." 
A faint flush rose to the French boy's face.
 "I'm as proud of our country as you are, Papa," he said softly.
"But if we did things differently here there wouldn't be any need for resistance movements.
And the Surete wouldn't need to spy on anybody."
 "Life is not that simple," replied the older man sarcastically.
 "There are outside forces in Russia and China trying to stir up trouble for us here." 
Then he paused and looked more thoughtfully at his son for a moment.
"But don't think there's any pleasure or satisfaction in such work, Paul.
Many hours are wasted watching and waiting.
And often there's nothing to show for it at the end.
I do it from a sense of duty for my country.
For myself I would much rather be hunting — or even back in the army again."
Paul detected a faint note of weariness in his father's voice and for a fleeting instant his mask of grim detachment had seemed to soften.
 "I'm sorry, Papa," he said quickly.
 "It wasn't that clever of me." 
Jacques Devraux continued to ride straight-backed in his saddle without acknowledging the grudging apology, and Paul was beginning to wish he had left it unsaid when his father spoke again in a softer tone.
"Your mother's death caused me great pain, Paul, you already know that.
But having his only son turn against him is painful for a man too."
The French boy looked up sharply at his father, but the familiar expressionless mask had already settled back on his face.
 "You'd better ride back now and check the baggage carts," he said sharply.
"Make sure the Moi haven't lost anything.
And stay in the rear till we get to the camp."
Joseph Sherman saw Paul turn his pony and begin trotting back towards him.
He had been riding in front of Chuck and his father, watching with admiration the erect, narrow-backed figure of Jacques Devraux jogging easily at the head of the column; the fierce-eyed Frenchman had quickly made a deep impression on Joseph's fifteen-year-old mind and he was trying to hold his own shoulders high and square in the same fashion.
The Frenchman's dark aquiline features and unsmiling silences made him think of history-book pictures he'd seen of the warrior heroes of ancient Greece and Rome, and the dismay he had felt at first when their car had struck the Annamese villager had increased his sense of awe.
He had forgotten the incident, however, the moment they  entered the jungle for the first time, riding on the little saddle ponies which Devraux's Moi bearers had brought to the road from the hunting camp.
One moment they had been crossing a burning glade of shoulder-high grass in the full glare of the sun and the next they descended abruptly into a dark, silent, mysterious world where the air was cool and moist, the earth soft and spongy underfoot, and dazzling orchids blazed suddenly among the deep green undergrowth.
The change had been so abrupt that Joseph had been moved to speak only in hushed whispers of the thrilling sights and sounds that unfolded all around them.
They had disturbed alligators in the shallows of the river, listened to unseen deer bark in the riverside thickets, and a herd of wild pigs had fled snuffling and grunting from a stagnant pool at their approach.
He and Chuck vied to identify the exotic birds they saw: ibis, kingfishers, herons, white pheasants and once a peacock darted frantically across their path.
A wide grin of delight had become a permanent fixture on his face, and Paul smiled at him in return as he cantered back to check the ox carts.
 "Regarde, Joseph," said the French boy suddenly reining in his pony beside him and pointing to the far edge of the plain that they were crossing.
 "Do you see the elephants?" 
Joseph turned in his saddle in time to see a score of shuffling gray humps slip silently into the distant trees.
 "Those are the first wild elephants I've ever seen in my life," he whispered reverently, and his grin of delight spread front ear to ear.
He was still grinning when they rode into the camp which had been built by the Moi in a bend of the slow-flowing river.
Four huts of palm thatch laid over jointed poles had been constructed, and cooking and storage tents were pitched nearby.
Immediately the little mountain tribesmen, who seemed to have stepped straight out of the sepia photographs in his history book, began unloading the baggage, and Joseph saw them take their crossbows and arrows from the carts and carry them to their own huts a hundred yards away along the riverbank…
"
Moi, "he knew from his reading, was an Annamese term derived from the Chinese word for" savage,"and looking at the dark-skinned, low-browed men, he could see they were of a different racial stock from the Annamese; they wore only breechclouts that left their haunches naked and they grinned and chattered animatedly in their own language as they moved quickly about their work.
Some of them had plaited scraps of cloth in their long black hair and all wore beads around their necks.
The women who waited to greet them outside their huts wore bracelets of tin on their wrists and ankles, but otherwise their only  other garment was a long dark cloth wrapped round the hips, which left their jutting, dark-nippled breasts uncovered.
Seeing Joseph staring at the women, Paul walked over to him and put an arm around his shoulder.
 "You like our Moi women then, young Joseph, do you?" he asked, grinning broadly.
The American boy coloured and laughed.
 "They're okay, I guess." 
"They're a branch of the Rhade tribe — but a bit ancient, wouldn't you say, for your youthful tastes?
The chief in the next village has a dozen wives and a lot of juicy young daughters who would better suit a passionate young man like you."
He slapped Joseph on the back and laughed again.
Then he nodded towards the senator and Chuck who were helping his father and Ngo Van Loc supervise the unloading of supplies.
"Everyone else is busy at the moment, so why don't we try to get something fresh for the pot.
Nice little muntjac for supper, say."
He winked broadly.
 "And if we have time I'll show you the Moi village, too." 
Joseph looked doubtfully towards his father.
 "Hadn't we better ask?" 
"Fetch your rifle.
I'll go and check if it's okay."
He ran across to talk to the senator and his father while Joseph collected his light Winchester carbine from the hut he was to share with his brother.
A moment later the French boy returned carrying a Mauser .350 slung carelessly over his shoulder.
"It's all right.
I've promised we'll bring back a young hog deer."
He leaned close to Joseph and whispered, "That means we've got to shoot two, okay?" 
Two of the Moi carrying short poles followed them to a dugout canoe moored by the camp, and they paddled across the river to the plain on the other side.
When they landed Paul crept forward to peer out into the grassland from behind a tree.
Then he waved Joseph forward.
"See over there, look!
There are about a dozen deer grazing."
The late afternoon sun was beginning to lose its heat, but under its fading glare the waving grass of the plain still shimmered in a gray-green haze and Joseph's unpractised eye could detect no movement.
"There!
Half a mile away; the red blotches close to the trees."
Paul turned Joseph's head gently in both hands until he saw the deer.
"And we're in luck, the wind's blowing straight towards us.
We'll just walk quietly down behind the tree cover and bag two of those beauties.
One for us, and one for the chiefs daughters, eh?"
He chuckled quietly and set off towards the feeding animals.
When they were only fifty yards from the herd the French boy came back to Joseph and raised a mischievous eyebrow.
 "Have you ever." 
He nodded and winked exaggeratedly.
"Before, Joseph?
Have you?"
The American boy looked away, his cheeks burning suddenly.
 "I thought not." 
Paul laughed and took his arm confidentially.
"You know, at your age I had…well, never mind.
Let's shoot the muntjac first."
He led them to within thirty yards of the unsuspecting deer, then motioned for Joseph to sit down on the ground at the edge of the plain.
He squatted beside him and demonstrated how to prop his elbows on his knees to steady the rifle.
 "Take the little fawn nearest to us," he whispered, pointing to one of the young.
Joseph fingered his rifle and gazed at the pretty little muntjac.
Its red flanks were flecked with white, and it stood broadside on to him, a perfect target.
 "Go on, take aim," urged the French boy.
But Joseph didn't raise his rifle.
"You shoot, Paul.
I might miss and scare them,"he said softly, his cheeks colouring again with embarrassment.
The French boy gave a grunt of exasperation and fired almost casually from a standing position.
The fawn bounded forward instantly in a reflex action, then fell dead in the grass.
He shot a larger doe on the run as the little herd began dashing for cover, and the Moi bearers ran out into the plain to hoist the two dead animals on their shoulder poles.
Grinning broadly the French boy led the way into the forest, and for a quarter of an hour they threaded through the trees following a narrow trail.
The village when they reached it consisted of three dozen palm-thatched huts raised on poles ten feet above the ground.
In the shade beneath them pigs, dogs, domestic fowls, horses and even a few ancient buffalos swarmed in a stinking congregation.
Moi children who had heard the noise of their approach came running helter-skelter to surround them and began shouting excitedly when they saw the dead deer.
Paul pulled several cubes of sugar from his pocket and tossed them among the children, and they squealed and fought among themselves, passing the prizes eventually from hand to hand.
"Ah, at last!
Here comes the pholy."
The French boy nudged Joseph as a tall, white-haired Moi who was obviously the village chieftain slowly descended the stepped tree trunk that led from his hut to the ground.
Paul gestured towards the biggest muntjac  suspended from the carrying pole and made an elaborate gesture of donation.
The old man, who wore a cloth bow in his long gray hair, looked at the French boy for a moment, then his weather-beaten face cracked in a slow smile and he raised his arm above his head.
From inside the hut behind him came the sudden sound of gongs and drums being beaten and immediately a bare-breasted woman appeared in the doorway at the top of the stepped log, holding aloft a tall earthenware jar.
"A sigh of satisfaction escaped the French boy's lips.
That s the ternum,"he whispered.
 "The what?" 
"Ternum — the Mois' own special rice alcohol.
Fermented for three years — very potent.
Think you can take it?"
 "I don't know." 
 "For a man who can catch a gibbon in a Ming vase it will be child's play." 
The French boy laughed loudly and followed the pholy up the log staircase into the gloomy interior of the long hut.
The moment Joseph stepped through the doorway he began coughing uncontrollably.
Several fires were burning inside and their smoke stung his throat and eyes.
The floor was made of bamboo strips laid haphazardly side by side, and he staggered several times as his feet slipped between the round poles.
Maize had been hung to dry beneath the thatch, and he knocked his head against a bunch as he straightened up, bringing a shower of husks and crawling insects cascading down upon himself.
By the light of the fires he could see Paul already sitting cross-legged on a buffalo skin by the pholy, and he sank gratefully down on the other side of him.
He heard the French boy whispering urgently, then the chief grunted and plunged a long hollow bamboo rod into the ternum jar and drank a deep draught.
When he'd finished he wiped his mouth and passed the jar to Joseph.
The American boy hesitated, then sucked hard on the bamboo.
The harshness of the alcohol took his breath away and made him choke again, and Paul collapsed in a fit of laughter as he expelled half of it in a further bout of coughing.
It took several minutes for Joseph to recover his composure and only then was he able to see by the light of the fires that the rear of the communal hut was divided up into tiny stall-like compartments for the pholy's wives and daughters.
They were all empty, but rows of Moi females were seated along the other walls, banging the gongs and drums.
All were naked to the waist, and their bodies quivered and trembled rhythmically to the beat of  their instruments.
The pholy passed the rice alcohol again, and this time Joseph gritted his teeth as the spirit burned a fiery track into his stomach.
His eyes watered so fiercely that tears ran down his cheeks, but he fought down the choking sensation and his self-esteem soared.
They continued drinking from the jar in turn, but gradually the effects of the smoke, the alcohol and the clamour of the gongs made his senses swim.
Only dimly, when the jar began to return to him more rapidly, did he realize he had been left alone with the mute pholy, and by then the women had begun striking their gongs and drums in a faster rhythm.
One of them, her naked upper body glowing like bronze in the flickering firelight, advanced and leaned down beside him to replenish the alcohol jar.
Her bare flesh came close enough to his face for him to inhale its pungent female odour and he peered around desperately into the gloom for some sign of his French companion.
He thought he heard him chuckle from the shadows once, but his eyes could not penetrate the gloom.
When the woman standing over him returned to her place, Joseph rose to his feet and made his way unsteadily towards the back of the hut, calling Paul by name.
But no response came from the darkness, and after swaying precariously back and forth for a minute or two, his feet slipped on the twisting bamboo rods and he fell to his knees.
He felt unseen hands help him into one of the partitioned stalls and there he stretched out and closed his stinging eyes.
His head was swimming and he began to drift into a drunken doze but the sense of a new presence in the stall made him open his eyes again.
In the reflected light of the fire he saw the silhouette of an entirely naked Moi female kneeling at his side, and as he watched, her hands began working rhythmically at some unseen task.
Was she, he wondered, trying to make another fire in the fashion of the ancients?
He heard the tin bracelets jangling on her wrists and from time to time she bent her head close over her fists as though blowing on reluctant embers; but it was some time before he realized that he, too, was naked, and that the hands of the Moi girl were stroking and chafing his own body.
He followed all her movements with dreamlike detachment; an all-engulfing numbness seemed to have removed every trace of feeling from him.
All the time her face remained in shadow, the attitude of her head intent and concentrated; no eyes ever sought his face.
Only gradually did he become conscious of a commotion in the darkness beside him.
Then to his astonishment he heard the voice of the French boy, grunting like an animal in distress.
A  moment later he heard his laugh, a low guttural sound released from deep in the throat.
"Ca va, Joseph, heh?
Ca marche bien?"
The words spoken softly close to the American boy's ear made him start.
He heard what sounded like a stifled cry of pain from a shriller voice; then the commotion beside him resumed once more.
Joseph tried to rise, but the female crouching over him leaned closer and shifted her body clumsily onto his.
It was then that he sensed her extreme youth; the twin globes of her dark breasts with their sharp, neat points were hard and solid, her skin, a deep indigo in the near-blackness, was velvet-smooth, entirely without hair.
To the feral reek of buffalo, horse and fowl and the sour remains of human nourishment was added suddenly a smoky, faintly ammoniac odour of female flesh, entirely new to him.
The bracelets on her ankles and wrists danced and rattled again more urgently and her pungent breath began blowing softly against his face as she spread her thighs and forced her smooth dark belly downward again his own.
The sublime memory of that first descent into the moist, mossy darkness of the jungle earlier in the day blazed again suddenly in his mind's eye for a moment, but then his numbness left him in a furious rush and a piercing surge of purity and sweetness flashed through the rank darkness of the hut.
He cried aloud in agitation and tried to twist free, but the sturdy thighs of the anonymous Moi girl held him fast.
Only when his struggling became more violent did she fall from him, and then with frantic hands he untangled himself from her and rose to crouch against the wall, his eyes closed, his breath rasping in his throat.
From the darkness beside him came a sudden wild shout of laughter.
It rose and fell in time with the drums and gongs which continued to fill the hut with their relentless clamour.
After a moment, Joseph Sherman, his fifteen-year-old heart pumping with a sudden new elation, began laughing uproariously too.
 "Okay, gentlemen, today we hunt buffalo!" 
Senator Nathaniel Sherman stood in the middle of the camp clearing, his booted feet astride, clutching a hand-crafted Purdey .450 double-barrelled rifle in one fist.
He had jammed a solar topee squarely on his head and a  broad confident grin creased his face.
 "This beauty here or its 375 twin will be firing hard-nosed bullets at any Annamese buffalo who comes within sniffing range of the Sherman family." 
He slapped his rifle butt against his leather boot and nodded to Chuck Sherman, who held a similar rifle easily in the crook of his arm.
"And in the rare event that I should miss, young Mister Deadeye here will be raring to let fly with a deadly Holland and Holland cannon of the same calibre.
Right, Chuck?"
His elder son grinned easily back at him.
 "Sure thing, Dad." 
"In the unlikely event of us both firing wide — and that's about a million-to-one chance, I'd say young Joseph here with his Winchester peashooter will be a big favourite to pick off the stragglers.
Right, young Joey?"
Joseph looked up with a start and nodded vigorously although he hadn't heard a word his father had said.
He was standing on the edge of the group that included Flavia Sherman, Jacques and Paul Devraux and half-a-dozen Moi trackers, but his mind was only half on the hunt to come.
Since waking that morning his thoughts had returned constantly to the encounter with the unknown Moi girl, and every time he recalled what had happened he felt a surge of exhilaration course through him.
The fetid stench of the darkened hut, the mind-dizzying rice alcohol, even Paul's mocking laughter had all fused into a delicious composite memory now.
He had really done it!
How many young fellows of fifteen in Charles County, Virginia, could say that?
Whenever he thought of that first blind delicious sensation, as he had a hundred times that morning, he had to close his eyes.
It had hardly seemed possible before: but now he knew for sure.
He'd done it.
And he could do it again!
That is, if he's got over his "ternum" sickness.
The ripple of laughter that greeted his father's jocular reference to the previous night's adventure broke into his train of thought.
He looked up guiltily to find his mother, his brother and Paul smiling broadly at him.
There had been plenty of leg-pulling already about his return to the camp the previous evening slightly the worse for wear from the ternum.
Paul had laughingly explained that they had taken one small pull only at the bamboo rod, purely out of courtesy to the Moi chief, but it had gone straight to Joseph's head.
He had distracted attention from the incident by crediting Joseph with the killing of the fawn arid therefore the capture of the expedition's first prize, since the senator had decided they should collect a group of muntjac.
Joseph himself had attracted more laughter by excusing himself before dinner and going directly to  horses; there he had fallen immediately into a deep, peaceful sleep that lasted until the dawn cries of the jungle birds roused him, and when he rose he had felt clear-headed and exultant.
Jacques Devraux had ridden out to the road before it was light with a spare horse to meet the car that brought Flavia Sherman from Saigon.
They had arrived back at camp before breakfast and when he greeted his mother, Joseph had wondered with a sudden stab of alarm if she could tell.
He had blushed at the thought and turned quickly away, but as time passed he found that he desperately wanted to share his secret with her; until then he'd always confided in her unhesitatingly and it seemed strange that something should now make him hold back.
But perhaps, he thought to himself, adults could detect such things without being told.
Just by looking maybe they could pick out those who had, or hadn't.
He noticed in himself a definite tendency to swagger as he walked around the camp that morning and he had tried consciously to suppress it.
But at least if his mother could tell, he reflected, she had not made any sign.
In fact Flavia Sherman had paid less attention than usual to her two sons since her arrival at the camp.
The dawn ride alone with Jacques Devraux through the breathtaking natural beauty of the tropical forest had first heightened the pleasurable feeling of pent-up excitement that had been growing within her in recent days, then eventually left her feeling tense and on edge.
Since the evening of the reception at the governor's palais when she had turned her head to find him looking at her, the memory of the naked desire she had seen in Jacques Devraux's eyes had smouldered in her mind.
Because she knew he would be meeting her at the road alone, she had risen very early and bathed and scented herself with special care in her suite at the Continental Palace that morning.
She had dressed her hair with a dark, crocheted net beneath her sun helmet and put on new, snug-fitting breeches and a tailored bush shirt that flattered her slender, shapely figure.
When she stepped from the car he had greeted her with careful formality and his manner had remained stiff and impersonal as they began the ride; but she sensed a tension in him too and knew intuitively that it was not a lack of interest that kept his gaze averted from her.
Inside her she had felt a little sense of triumph begin to grow as they rode side by side through the cool bright jungle glades; sometimes she had allowed her horse to drift towards his on the narrow trail, perhaps hoping he might give voice to the  passion his expression had seemed to promise at the palais.
But as they made their way towards the camp he had spoken only to point out signs of bird and animal life that he thought might interest her; in the mud at the riverside, he showed her the pug mark of a tiger that had drunk there the previous evening and at another point on the trail he drew her attention to torn-up grasses and leafless trees that marked the passing of a herd of elephant.
Her eyes sparkled afresh at each new revelation and she hung on his every word, but his lean face remained expressionless, his eyes unchangingly distant.
 "My sons told me you lost your wife in a swimming accident four years ago, Monsieur Devraux," she had said at last, speaking quietly in French.
 "I was very sorry to hear that." 
She had chosen her words with calculation in an attempt to break the impersonal barrier the Frenchman seemed determined to keep between them.
But if her words had any effect on him, he hadn't revealed it; instead he had continued to avoid her glance, riding at her side with his features frozen in the same expressionless mask.
 "Do you still feel her absence keenly?" she had asked, determined to extract a response of some kind.
 "I've chosen to keep myself to myself!" 
The vehemence of his reply had taken her aback, and suddenly she heard the throb of her own heartbeat loud in her ears.
A flush of embarrassment rose to her cheeks at her own uncharacteristic forwardness and she lapsed into an unhappy silence, which to her surprise the Frenchman broke a minute later.
"My work fills all my time.
Colonial life is very predictable.
French colons love only to gossip.
I prefer to hunt and keep myself apart."
He had spoken his words with his habitual grim-faced detachment and still didn't turn to look at her.
 "When I first saw you at the governor's reception I thought you seemed…unhappy." 
He had abruptly spurred ahead of her then without replying, and they had ridden without speaking further for a long while.
The coldness of his manner had convinced her they wouldn't speak again, but in the middle of a clearing he had reined in his horse and turned to wait for her.
He had looked directly into her face for the first time and she saw his dark eyes blaze with a mixture of anger and pain.
"We took our car on a river ferry during a monsoon storm.
My wife was reluctant to go, but I had crossed often before in bad weather.
The ferry sank.
I dived many times.
Once I felt my hand touch her sleeve on the river bottom  but I couldn't find her."
The muscles in his face had flexed tight as he spoke and his breathing had become uneven.
 "Now perhaps you will be kind enough, Madame Sherman, to ask me no more questions." 
He had ridden on ahead again, ignoring her apology, and remained in front until they reached the camp.
Around the huts he had avoided all contact with her and although they stood side by side listening to her husband, he did nothing to acknowledge her existence.
 "On the question of conduct, who does what, who goes where in the jungle," the senator was saying,"the word of Monsieur Jacques Devraux will be law.
He knows the terrain and the animals.
But I don't need to remind you that we're here to collect for display groups in the Sherman Museum.
So it will be me who decides who shoots what, and when."
The senator smiled broadly at all of them and lifted his hand towards the Frenchman, gesturing for him to lead the way.
 "If that's clearly understood, let's make a start, Monsieur Devraux." 
They followed him out of the camp in single file and headed along the riverbank, making for watering places where buffalo liked to wallow in the heat of the day.
Although they moved stealthily on Devraux's instructions, great flocks of black parrots rose from the tops of the trees as they passed below, darkening the sky and filling the air with the sustained applause of their flapping wings.
Armies of monkeys marching through the jungle roof on swinging arms took fright, too, when they saw the little file of humans and they fled chattering through the upper branches almost as speedily as the birds.
Every few minutes Jacques Devraux sent his trackers up the taller trees to scan the plain on the other side of the river, but each time they descended shaking their heads.
None of the watering places they visited showed any signs of fresh tracks, and no animals were sighted in the first hour.
As the sun rose higher in the pale sky the temperature climbed steeply and patches of perspiration began to appear on the backs of the men's shirts.
The jungle birds fell silent in the growing heat, and Jacques Devraux eventually called a halt and distributed flasks of cold tea that had been carried in satchels by the Moi bearers.
 "I will go quickly ahead on my own to search for new tracks, senator," he said brusquely.
 "The animals don't seem to be heading for their usual haunts today." 
A few minutes after they started again a movement out on the plain caught Nathaniel Sherman's eye.
He motioned his family and Paul to halt and pointed silently across the river to a herd of  muntjac grazing in the long grass.
 "Okay, Joseph, here's your big chance," he said in a hushed whisper.
"Since we're not being led to any buffalo, take one of those muntjac does.
Then that little fawn you shot last night won't feel lonely in the museum."
Joseph hesitated for a moment then sank to his knees.
Pulling his rifle to his shoulder he squinted along the barrel, aiming at the broadest part of the deer's neck.
He tightened his finger on the trigger but again the fragile, defenceless beauty of the deer prevented him from firing and he lowered his rifle immediately.
"I can't shoot it, Daddy — even for our museum.
It looks too helpless."
He stood up and let his rifle butt slip to the ground.
 "And you might as well know that it was Paul who shot the fawn last night too, not me." 
His father looked at him with a disappointed expression, shaking his head slowly from side to side.
 "Okay, Chuck," he said at last in a resigned voice, "show Momma's boy here how to shoot muntjac!" 
Chuck fired from a standing position, and the deer sprang into the air then fell and lay still.
 "Nice going, son," said the senator quietly and sent one of the Moi trackers across the river to retrieve the fallen doe.
Joseph hung back walking slowly as the others moved on again, and his mother, noticing his discomfited expression, waited for him at the side of the track.
 "There's nothing to be ashamed of, Joseph, in not wanting to kill a beautiful animal," she said softly.
 "I'm really rather proud of you." 
He smiled back at his mother in gratitude, but when she made to put a consoling arm around his shoulders he moved aside.
 "We'd better catch up with the others, hadn't we?" he said quickly, gesturing along the track.
Inside his head he could still hear his father's slighting reference to a "Momma's boy" and because this rankled more than his inability to shoot the doe, he hurried on ahead of her in case his father should turn and see them close together.
As Joseph caught up with the senator and Chuck, Jacques Devraux appeared on the track ahead, walking quickly back towards them.
 "What was that shot?" he asked in a sharp tone of reproof.
 "Since we weren't being shown any buffalo," replied the senator, smiling easily, "we bagged a muntjac that I spotted on the plain — for one of our smaller groups." 
 "Your shot will make sure we see no big game for at least another hour," countered the Frenchman tersely.
"It's better not to shoot  smaller animals until you have the bigger prizes you seek.
We'll have to cross to the other side of the plain now to find anything."
He led them to a dugout canoe half a mile downstream, and they poled slowly across to the other bank.
There the grass was almost chest-high, and by the time they reached the far side of the plain the clothes of all of them were drenched in perspiration.
While they rested, Devraux again sent his trackers to climb lookout trees.
Joseph found he couldn't sit still and he rose to pace back and forth at a distance from the others.
The incident with the muntjac doe had distracted him for a while but gradually the sense of exultation in his deeds of the previous evening returned and blotted everything else from his mind.
While crossing the grassy plain, the intoxicating heat of the sun had made him a little light-headed, and intense feelings of tenderness for the unknown Moi girl had begun to sweep through him.
He realized with a stab of regret he had never once seen her face clearly, and if he went back to seek her out he wouldn't know her for sure among the many daughters of the chief.
While watching the Moi trackers scurrying up the trees, he began to daydream of how he would return alone to compete with all the youths of her village in feats of strength and athleticism.
There would be running races, mock duels with spears and shields, tree-climbing contests.
He would win them all, and by demonstrating his great prowess he would force the anonymous Moi princess to step forward and offer him her hand…
When the Moi trackers again descended from the lookout trees shaking their heads, Joseph on an impulse asked Jacques Devraux if he might climb to take a look with Chuck's binoculars.
The Frenchman nodded his assent without displaying any interest in the request, and Joseph bounded immediately into the lower branches of the tree nearest him.
Thirty feet above the ground its boughs became too slender to support his weight, and he stopped and raised the binoculars to his eyes.
For several minutes he saw nothing in the shimmering haze of the plain.
Then he thought his eyes must be playing tricks; a mirage of round-backed whales seemed to be sporting amid the waves of golden grass.
He kept the glasses trained, and as he watched they turned into a herd of about seven buffalo filing slowly in their direction.
They were still a mile off, but their gray-black humps were unmistakable.
Joseph called softly to those below and pointed.
The Moi immediately climbed other trees and peered in the direction of his finger; then they began chattering excitedly to Devraux in their own language.
The breeze was blowing from behind the buffalo, and if they remained quiet the animals would have no inkling of their presence.
The track of the animals seemed likely to take them within two hundred yards of their hiding place, so they should crawl out onto the plain to try to get a shot from half that range.
Nathaniel Sherman nodded his agreement and motioned to Chuck, and together they moved bent double into the tall grass.
Joseph, although he had not been invited, followed, keeping low, is Winchester clutched in both hands.
Crawling through the thick grass with heavy rifles in the heat of the day left all three of them gasping for breath.
Chuck was the first to recover, and when he pulled himself to his knees to peer across the plain, the closeness of the leading herd bull surprised him.
It was no more than three hundred yards distant, and he could see the great flattened scimitars of its horns swaying above the grass as it advanced, scenting the breeze at every step.
Its small herd included two sturdy calves, and he ducked down excitedly to report to his father what he had seen.
Nathaniel Sherman peered at his watch, his face puckering in concentration as he calculated the time necessary to allow the buffalo to move into the most favourable range.
When two minutes had passed he motioned Joseph to stay flat, then nodded at Chuck, and they both stood up simultaneously, their rifles at their shoulders.
The herd bull stopped in astonishment on seeing two men rise abruptly from the grass only eighty yards away.
It lifted its great horned head as though to bellow a warning, but in that moment Chuck Sherman's rifle roared and he let out a yell of delight as he heard the thud of the bullet strike home into the buffalo's broad chest.
He fired again as the wounded bull turned and began galloping clumsily towards the safety of the trees, but this second shot went wide.
Beside him his father's rifle recoiled, and they saw one of the two calves stagger, then begin stumbling after the bull.
 "I think we've got the big boy and his calf, Chuck," breathed Nathaniel Sherman.
 "Now for a cow!" 
He took careful aim with his second barrel at a smaller buffalo that had begun circling in dismay, and they heard the dull thud of his successful shot echo clearly across the plain.
The wounded cow, however, dashed frantically towards the jungle along with the other terrified animals of the herd and disappeared with them into the shade.
Only the dying bull stopped before it reached the trees.
Staggering slightly, it turned to stare balefully back at them, standing  broadside on.
Chuck glanced around inquiringly at Jacques Devraux, who had moved out into the plain with his son and Flavia Sherman.
 "Shall I shoot again, Monsieur?" 
The Frenchman shook his head and lifted a silent hand in a gesture that implied "Wait!" 
For a minute or two they all watched the wounded bull swaying on its legs.
 "That was great shooting, Chuck," said the senator at last, growing impatient.
 "But I think we have to go forward and finish him off." 
Once more Devraux raised his hand.
"No.
Shoot again from here."
Chuck reloaded and fired off both barrels with great care, and again he had the satisfaction of hearing his bullets slam into the stationary animal.
But although it staggered once more, it still didn't drop.
Instead it stood staring bemusedly at its assailants while blood dribbled from its jaws onto the grass.
Only when Chuck reloaded and shot a third time did the animal slowly crumple to the ground and roll onto its side, leaving one great horn curving majestically upward above the tall grass.
Nathaniel Sherman slapped Chuck heartily on the back and, taking his arm, hurried him away toward his kill.
Jacques Devraux followed more slowly with his son, Flavia Sherman and Joseph.
Paul Devraux pointed to the fringes of the thicket into which the remnants of the herd had disappeared: the bulk of the small black calf was clearly visible lying dead on its side a dozen paces short of the trees.
As they approached the curved horn of the dead bull, Nathaniel Sherman began pumping the hand of his eldest son in congratulation.
Jacques Devraux followed them, holding his rifle at the ready until he was certain the big animal was dead.
Joseph and his mother, after watching them for a moment, turned and strolled away to inspect the dead calf.
Nobody was looking at the thicket at the moment the wounded cow broke cover.
Bellowing with pain and leaving a bright trail of blood on the grass, the crazed animal galloped frantically towards its dead calf, over which Joseph and his mother were bending.
When he looked up and saw the charging buffalo, Joseph raised his Winchester in an instinctive reflex action and dropped to his knees.
Peering along its barrel he saw blood foaming around the cow's mouth and heard clearly the tortured rasp of its breath between each anguished bellow.
At the moment of firing he closed his eyes tight, but he never heard the crack of the Winchester discharging because it was  drowned in the roar of Jacques Devraux's Mauser.
The Frenchman's bullet pierced the brain of the buffalo just behind its left ear, and the impact twisted its neck and threw the animal down in a swirl of dust only ten yards from where Joseph was kneeling beside his terrified mother.
A long shudder ran the length of its body, then after one last explosive and bloody exhalation of breath, it lay still.
In the ensuing rush of silence that gripped the plain and its fringe of jungle, nobody moved; for several seconds the tableau of scattered human figures stood as though spellbound among the black and bloody bodies of the dead animals.
They didn't loosen and begin converging around the dead buffalo cow until the first flock of ragged black vultures flopped clumsily onto an outcrop of rock on the grassland fifty yards away.
Flavia Sherman was white-faced with shock but she managed to smile at her younger son as he stood up.
 "You were very brave, Joseph," she said quietly before the others arrived within earshot.
 "Thank you for what you did." 
Joseph's face was pale and his hands were trembling, but he tried to hide this by gripping his rifle tightly as the others gathered around them.
In an uncomfortable silence Nathaniel Sherman and the others gazed down at the dead buffalo cow.
Only then did they see the great livid gashes that no man could have inflicted raked along both Ranks.
 "A tiger must have savaged her recently," said Devraux quietly.
"She was already half-crazed with pain.
We've all had a lucky escape."
 "She is no damned good for display like that." 
Nathaniel Sherman frowned down resentfully at the dead animal.
 "Not with her hide all lacerated." 
He lifted his foot and touched the buffalo's curved horns with the toe of his boot.
 "Still, I guess her head will make us an unusual little trophy." 
He turned and smiled at his white-faced wife.
 "A little souvenir for you and the plantation house perhaps, my dear — of a moment we won't forget in a hurry?" 
Each of the Moi carried a long-bladed machete which had been dubbed a coupe-code in Annam, and taking one from the nearest tribesman, the Senator bent over the dead buffalo.
When she saw what he intended to do, Flavia Sherman turned her head quickly.
Holding onto one horn, he hacked off the buffalo's head and handed it, still dripping blood, to one of the Moi.
Then he grinned and looked at Jacques Devraux.
"I guess we ought to get the ox carts here as quickly as possible, Monsieur Devraux, to take our bull and the calf back for  skinning.
Otherwise their hides won't last long in this heat, will they?"
Later in the afternoon Chuck Sherman ran excitedly into the hut he shared with his brother.
Joseph was sitting quietly on his cot, his chin in his hands, staring out thoughtfully at the jungle.
 "The skinners found two bullets in your buffalo's head, Joey," he said excitedly.
 "Monsieur Devraux's went through her left ear, but she had another one — yours — right between the eyes!" 
He shook his brother's shoulder delightedly.
"How about that?
Now we know, don't we?
When it really matters you shoot straight."
 "Thanks for letting me know." 
Joseph looked up and smiled, but his expression betrayed no sign of real pleasure.
Chuck stared down at him in puzzlement for a moment.
Then he shrugged and turned away.
A moment later he was running eagerly back across the camp to help the Moi with the skinning of the massive bull he himself had killed, unaided.
At sunset, darkness enveloped the hunting camp in a sudden rush.
The fading light gave way in a matter of seconds to a moist, velvet blackness, as if a curtain had been drawn swiftly across the sky, and the shadows beyond the glow of the hurricane lamps immediately began to come alive with the shrill vibrations of the jungle night.
On the riverbank a small army of frogs croaked a hoarse descant to the incessant, high-pitched whine of unseen cicadas and from somewhere far off a bird screamed intermittently as though in agony.
In a shadowy corner of the cook tent, Ngo Van Loc crouched beside an upturned packing case that he was using as a makeshift writing-table.
His face was clenched tight with concentration and lie wrote quoc ngu, the phonetic rendering of Annamese into the roman alphabet, in a large, ungainly hand.
Every now and then he stopped to peer out through a slit in the tent wall arid check that Jacques Devraux was still seated with the American hunting party at the table in the canter of the clearing.
He had seized the opportunity while they dined to make another copy of a revolutionary tract calling for an end to French rule.
It had been prepared originally by the secret society he had joined two years  earlier after being forced off his own rice lands for nonpayment of taxes, and he had copied it out dozens of times already in trying to win new recruits for the society in remote jungle villages far from Saigon.
He had been hurrying to finish this latest copy before the meal ended, and seeing through the slit that his wife was heading out across the clearing with his two small sons to begin collecting the dishes, he put aside his pencil and hastily read over what he'd written.
0 Brothers! 0 Brothers!
For seventy years we have been slaves to the tyrannical French.
They beat us down with duties and taxes and pitilessly steal the fruits of our labours.
We are treated like buffaloes and horses in our own land.
Under the pretext of accomplishing a civilizing mission, the red-bearded French barbarians have stolen our rice fields, our mines, our seas, our press, our commerce.
All power, all profits, all our sources of livelihood are in their hands — but the one thing they leave behind will destroy them — the hatred of a million coolies!
The time is coming, Brothers, for us to take the destiny of our nation into our own hands!
United we are a vast army against a few thousand Frenchmen! 0 Brothers and compatriots, join our society today!
Unite with all those who hate the French and revolt against their despotic rule.
At the sound of footsteps outside the tent Loc quickly folded the copy and its master and hid them inside the packing case.
Peering through the eye-slit he saw his wife, Mai, approaching, carrying the dishes from the supper table.
Not yet thirty, she wore a long dark skirt and a pale scrap of cheap cloth above the waist that left her arms and shoulders bare.
The sensuality of her broad, peasant face was heightened by her modestly downcast eyes and the long swathe of glossy black hair that reached to her waist.
Barefoot, she moved with the natural sinuousness of her race, and looking beyond her, Loc saw Jacques Devraux lift his eyes momentarily from his plate to follow the swaying movement of her hips as she walked away from the table.
For a second or two the expression of the Annamese.camp "boy" hardened as he stared at his employer, then he moved away from the peephole and began to busy himself cleaning the pots and pans that had been used to prepare the meal.
 "Devraux told me today he is going to Canton again soon," he said in an excited whisper when his wife came to plunge her arms in the suds beside him.
 "And he wants me to go with him this time — as his driver." 
Her impassive face showed no sign of reaction and he leaned closer to emphasize the importance of his news.
"Don't you realize what this means?
I'll be able to meet other revolutionaries in exile  there.
We're very lucky to have positions of trust with Devraux."
He glanced briefly towards the Frenchman, who was still seated at the table.
 "We must be very careful not to jeopardize them." 
His wife nodded at his side but continued to clean the pans without replying or looking at him.
 "Why aren't you interested in this good news?" he asked at last in an exasperated voice.
 "Don't you understand what I'm saying?" 
 "Yes, I understand," she said quietly.
 "Then what's the matter?" 
She scraped away at a pan in silence for a while.
 "He has been behaving differently today." 
She hesitated, seeming uncertain of what she wanted to say.
"Normally he ignores me.
But today he has looked at me two or three times in a certain way."
Loc stared hard at her for a moment then glanced out across the clearing again, remembering suddenly the expression he'd seen a few minutes before on the Frenchman's face.
 "I think the American woman has upset him in some way," she continued in a quiet voice.
He never talks to her at the table — but she stares at him strangely sometimes.
 "You're probably imagining it," he said quickly.
 "I'm sure there's nothing to worry about." 
From the corner of his eye Loc noticed Flavia Sherman rise from the table and begin sauntering back towards her hut.
Although she walked slowly, he saw there was a noticeable agitation in her manner; she tossed her head frequently, as if finding the heat oppressive, and ran her fingers repeatedly through her long black hair.
He watched her, frowning, for a moment but then a squeal of high-pitched laughter rang across the camp, distracting him, and he turned to see his two sons, Dong and Hoc, squatting at the side of the clearing beside Paul and Joseph.
The far-off cries of the lone bird they'd been hearing since sunset had recently seemed to double in intensity, and Loc realized that Paul Devraux had been echoing its call by blowing on blades of jungle grass between his thumbs.
The American boy, he saw, was puffing out his cheeks and making loud trumpeting noises in an attempt to emulate these feats, and it was this comic performance that was causing the Annamese boys to shake with laughter.
Fearing suddenly that their behaviour might upset Jacques Devraux, Loc ran quickly across the clearing towards them.
 "Monsieur Paul, please don't excite them any more," he called in French.
 "It is time they both were in bed." 
Before he reached them Paul and Joseph had hoisted the two boys, aged eleven and thirteen, onto their shoulders and were  encouraging them to joust at one another with chopsticks from the table.
When Loc, with another worried glance in Jacques Devraux's direction, insisted it was time for them to go to bed, Paul galloped across the clearing with little Hoc on his shoulders and dumped the boy squealing with laughter on his sleeping mat.
Joseph followed Suit with Dong, and when the commotion died own and they had bidden the Annamese boys goodnight, he and Paul stripped off their shirts and walked over to the bamboo skinning platform where Chuck was already back at work on his buffalo hide.
In her hut Flavia Sherman, distracted by the sounds of merriment, gave up trying to read by the light of a hurricane lamp and walked restlessly to the front opening.
Her bush shirt was sticking to the small of her back and she could feel tiny rivulets of perspiration trickling between her breasts.
In the distance thunder rumbled across the dark sky, and she suddenly raked her hands through her hair, holding both palms tight against her temples until the noise ceased.
In the canter of the camp Senator Nathaniel Sherman was still seated at the table on his own, savouring his third post-prandial cognac.
He had drunk a lot of wine during supper "to celebrate Chuck's mighty fine bull," and she had noticed that his manner had been louder and more expansive as a result.
On the far side of the camp, she saw Jacques Devraux stripping to the waist in order to resume work at the skinning platform, and suddenly unable to remain in the hut any longer, she strolled out across the clearing again.
By the ox cart that had been used to haul the dead buffalo in from the plain, she paused to watch the men working on its hide.
The curly-haired Moi were wearing only breechclouts, and their naked haunches gleamed in the lamplight as they moved vigorously around the platform; beside her pale-skinned sons, their glistening bodies looked almost black.
Chuck's broad back was bowed over his task, his pride in his kill visible in every movement, but the slighter figure of Joseph bent and straightened at his side with less enthusiasm.
Once Chuck turned and grinned delightedly at her as he paused to mop his brow, and she smiled warmly back.
Against her will, however, she found her gaze straying repeatedly to Jacques Devraux.
Without a shirt the Frenchman's body looked lean and hard, and she guessed he must be a man of her own age.
The muscles of his arms and shoulders were tight and sinewy, flexing like knotted cords beneath a sheen of perspiration, and in the flickering light of  the lamps she could see a livid white hunting or battle scar running down the base of his throat and across his ribs.
The American woman watched him intently for several minutes, a commotion of half-forgotten sensations stirring within her, but if he had noticed her presence he gave no sign.
When they had scraped and gouged all the fat from the buffalo's hide, Jacques Devraux showed the others how to rub in arsenical soap to repel the hordes of flies that would otherwise blow on it, and gradually the pungent reek of arsenic mingled with the other rank odours of human sweat and animal fat hanging in the saturated air.
Another distant roll of thunder added a bass note to the orchestrated shrillness of the tropical night, and Devraux lifted his head for a second to listen.
Anticipating rain, he ordered the Moi to sling the hide on poles and move it into a canvas tent set up nearby.
There he broke open some of the salt sacks and instructed the tribesmen to begin drying the skin.
When he was satisfied they were doing it correctly he picked up the head of the dead buffalo and carried it to the river.
Wading knee-deep into the warm, muddy water he drew a broad-bladed hunting knife from his belt and began hacking the flesh from it.
The American woman strolled over to the riverbank to watch him, and as the fragments of the raw flesh floated away down-stream she saw the water churned to a white froth by shoals of ravenous fish fighting to devour them.
Fascinated and repelled in the same moment she continued to watch the macabre spectacle despite herself, her lips parted, her eyes bright.
Then she turned to look at the Frenchman and spoke softly in his language.
 "You honour us, Monsieur Devraux, by working so late into the night for our expedition." 
 "If we don't start drying the hides now, dampness and the heat will destroy all our efforts within a few hours." 
He stopped work long enough to look up directly into her face, then bent his head once more and continued cleaning the skull with neat, precise movements of the knife.
 "I also wanted to thank you for what you did this afternoon," she said quietly.
 "It was a fine shot that killed the wounded buffalo." 
The Frenchman scrambled out of the river and stopped in front of her.
She had been standing on the bank above him with her booted feet apart, her hands jammed into the pockets of her tight-fitting breeches, and for a fleeting instant he looked at her appraisingly as he had done at the reception.
Then he thrust his knife back into its sheath and spoke towards the gleaming skull he still held in his left hand.
"I think, Madame Sherman, it might be  more diplomatic if you were to return to your quarters now.
We're about to rid ourselves of the blood and fat of the buffalo."
When he glanced up at her again his thin mouth had returned to its habitual unsmiling lines and she turned away immediately.
From her hut she heard him call to the Moi and her sons, and a moment later they all plunged naked into the river.
For several minutes she heard them splashing and laughing in the water, then gradually quiet returned to the camp.
Chuck and Joseph, flushed and tousle-haired from their dip, looked in to bid her goodnight, and after they had returned to their hut she tried to resume her book by the lamp.
But the words on the page didn't have the power to blot out the crack of hunting guns she was beginning to hear again inside her head, nor make her forget the sight of the blood trails on the hot plain.
She saw too, in her mind's eye, the heaving bulk of the buffalo bull struggling in the grass in its death throes, saw once more the blindly charging cow and the ragged black vultures flopping down out of the sky, and all these images crowding through her mind heightened the vague sense of turbulence that was growing inside her with the gathering storm.
When she heard Jacques Devraux join her husband for a final drink at the table in the canter of the clearing, she tried to listen to their conversation.
What they said remained inaudible, but it was clear that the Frenchman was offering only an occasional monosyllable to punctuate her husband's rambling drawl.
They talked in this desultory fashion for a few minutes, then when she heard them bid one another goodnight she ducked quickly under her mosquito net and lay down without undressing.
Inside his hut on the other side of the camp Ngo Van Loc also heard the two men take their leave of one another.
He had been keeping a wary eye on Jacques Devraux while he made another laborious copy of the revolutionary tract and he stopped writing to watch the Frenchman walk back to his own quarters.
In the rear of their hut his wife was bending over a bowl of water, naked to the waist, washing herself, and she snatched up a towel to cover her bare breasts when she heard Loc hiss a sudden warning.
Glancing over her shoulder she saw him fumbling frantically to hide the pencil and paper he had been using, and a moment later Jacques Devraux ducked under the hut's front flap.
Blushing furiously she turned away but still she felt the eyes of the Frenchman on her naked back.
 "Send Mai to my hut in two minutes," she heard him say at last in a curt voice.
"I wish to give her instructions for tomorrow's meals.
Ask her also to bring needle and thread."
When he'd gone the Annamese woman turned to stare apprehensively at her husband.
 "He has never asked me to go at this time of night before," she whispered.
Ngo Van Loc avoided her gaze.
 "If we disobey him I may lose the opportunity to go to Canton," he said shortly.
"And that's important for our movement.
Get dressed and go quickly.
I will find the needle and thread for you."
Taking care not to wake her sons, who were curled up together on their sleeping mats, she dressed and combed her hair then slipped out of the hut without looking at her husband.
Nathaniel Sherman stumbled slightly at the entrance of his hut, and his wife heard him cursing and fumbling for a long time with the flap fastenings.
Once inside he removed his shoes and trousers very slowly then drew back her mosquito net and smiled lopsidedly at her before lowering himself unsteadily onto her cot.
Outside, the thunder rolled more loudly, and a few drops of rain began to plop against the thatch above their heads.
 "You're still a mighty beautiful woman, my dear," he said, slurring his words slightly.
 "I know I haven't always been what a husband should be to you — but that doesn't mean I don't appreciate and admire your beauty." 
He bent his head towards her until she could smell the cognac fumes on his breath.
 "You know that, don't you?" 
She closed her eyes to hide her revulsion as he pressed his open mouth against hers and began fumbling with the buttons of her bush shirt.
Eventually he pushed his hand inside her brassiere and began kneading one of her breasts, but instead of responding she lay motionless and waited as she always did; gradually the movements of his hand grew slower, the rhythm of his breathing more regular, and when at last he lay still she disentangled his hand from her twisted clothing and slipped out from underneath him.
Immediately he sprawled sideways across the cot in a loose posture of sleep and began snoring loudly.
The rain at that moment became torrential, drumming noisily on the thatch above her head, blotting out all other sounds of the night.
She hesitated for only a second or two, then without looking around, she ripped the ties from the front flaps and stepped outside.
The rain was driving down with great force, swamping the dry ground, and within moments her hair was plastered flat against her cheeks.
Lightning forked overhead, illuminating the  camp like day, and thunder crashed deafeningly through the deep darkness that followed.
In the glare of the lightning flashes she rushed across the flooded clearing and didn't stop until she reached Jacques Devraux's hut.
Inside, a lamp hanging from the apex of the roof was still lit, and because he hadn't closed his mosquito curtain, her eyes fell at once on the slender golden body of Ngo Van Loc's wife spread-eagled beneath him on his cot.
Devraux was staring towards the front flaps as she entered and he froze when he saw her.
She gazed back mutely into his eyes, horrified and deeply aroused in the same instant, and when she didn't turn away he began to move once more, slowly at first , and then with gathering force and swiftness.
Again and again he bore down on the Annamese woman and as his movements quickened he kept his gaze fixed challengingly on Flavia Sherman's face.
She stood rooted to the spot, staring back at him as though hypnotized, watching the skin of his face slowly tauten across his cheekbones.
Gradually the downward thrust of his naked loins became more urgent and uncontrolled, and in a final moment of spasm, his features spread and widened suddenly into a flattened mask.
For a long time he remained motionless like this, his body arched backward, his teeth clenched, his lips drawn back in a silent rictus of ecstatic agony.
Then the Annamite woman began to sob and he relented at last and raised himself from her; still moaning quietly to herself she scrambled from the cot onto the dirt floor, gathered her scraps of clothing together and fled past the American woman into the rain.
As soon as she'd gone, Flavia Sherman began to fumble with the buckle of her belt; but her hands shook uncontrollably and it took her a long time to undress.
Jacques Devraux watched in silence as she stepped out of her sodden clothing.
In the light of the lamp her naked body was glistening with rain and perspiration and when she saw the desire in his eyes she fell to her knees beside him.
With a tenderness that surprised her the Frenchman put his arms around her and lifted her onto the cot beside him.
For a moment he held her head in his hands, searching her face with a strange expression in his eyes.
Then he drew her against himself and kissed her roughly.
She began to moan as he caressed her trembling body, and when he entered her she cried aloud as though in great pain.
With the roar of the jungle storm filling their ears they abandoned their bodies to the hunger of many lonely years, driving in blind, frantic rhythms towards one furious ecstasy after another.
Sometimes Flavia Sherman wept as though with grief, and although the storm drowned most of her cries Joseph heard the faint sounds of his mother sobbing as he stood outside the hut in the torrential downpour.
Unable to sleep he had drawn back the front flaps of his hut to watch the spectacular storm and had been startled to see her dashing across the flooded clearing in the glare of the lightning flashes.
Thinking that she might need his help, he had dressed quickly and hurried after her, but outside the hut of Jacques Devraux he had stopped, suddenly afraid.
When he first heard her voice she seemed to be in agony, and imagining she was ill, he had started impulsively forward again; then with a deep sense of shock he had sensed the awful intimacy of the strangled cries.
For several minutes he stood outside the hut, drenched to the skin, listening to the muffled sounds with a growing sense of desolation.
Then he turned away and splashed numbly back across the flooded camp to his own hut.
A vista of paradisiacal tranquillity opened up beyond the windows of Jacques Devraux's Citroen B-2 landaulet as the motor car swung over the summit of another of the many rolling hills along the Mandarin Way.
On one side of the ancient north-south coastal highway linking Saigon and Hanoi steep cliffs fell away to a dazzling beach of white sand fringed with coconut palms, and on the mirror-flat surface of the South China Sea far below, bat-winged Chinese junks floated at rest like toys on a turquoise pond.
Inland, the Annamite Cordillera thrust its purple peaks towards the afternoon sky, but neither Joseph Sherman nor his mother gave more than a passing glance to the spectacular mountain and ocean scenery outside the car.
They had remained wrapped in their own separate thoughts ever since leaving the hunting camp earlier in the day and had barely spoken to one another.
Flavia Sherman was still wrestling with the turmoil of emotions that had kept her awake long after she returned to her own hut through the stormy jungle night.
There she had found her husband still snoring on her cot, and she had stretched out on his; but sleep hadn't come, and long before dawn she had decided she must leave the camp at once.
When Nathaniel Sherman awoke and saw where he was, he had looked at  his wife shamefacedly and agreed immediately to her request to be driven to the imperial capital at Hue where the emperor of Annam was due to celebrate the Tet festival the following day.
Joseph had accompanied her willingly, but she had soon noticed that his manner was subdued and cool towards her, and this had added a vague new dimension to her unease.
As Ngo Van Loc drove them northwards, her thoughts against her will returned constantly to the frenzy of that midnight jungle storm and the gnawing fear that she might not have emerged from her folly unscathed.
A breathless, pervasive sense of heat possessed her body at every return of the memory and she was unable to remain settled and at ease in her seat for more than a few minutes at a time.
She found herself searching back to her youth for reasons to explain the blind and selfish obsessions which had taken hold of her since they arrived in the French tropics and she wondered if her father's ruin and death by his own hand in the Louisiana cotton slump of 1989, when she was only two years old, was the root cause.
If he had lived, her hard-pressed mother might not have insisted that she accept the advances of the heir to the Sherman tobacco fortune.
Perhaps the suffocating conventions of the Shermans' Queen Anne plantation house would not have been forced on an unknowing seventeen-year-old if her ailing mother had not been so shamed by their straitened conditions in a rented house on the borders of the Creole quarter of New Orleans.
The first of a series of world hunting trips to collect animals for the newly endowed Sherman Field Museum of Natural History — the latest public shrine to celebrate the force and virility of the male Sherman line — had seemed to promise her a refreshing diversion from the dull routine of Tidewater Virginia and the house of political convenience in Georgetown.
But the strangeness of the tropics and the sophistication of the almost-forgotten culture from which she had sprung had greatly exaggerated her sense of release from the frustrations of the past.
The sudden disturbing plunge into the jungle in the cloying heat of the Saigon River had made her more intensely aware of her body than at any time since the fevered days of adolescence.
Perhaps too the journey had reminded her of the dreadful certainty that within a few years her beauty would fade, and all these inflated hopes and fears had combined to produce a mood of abandon utterly foreign to her that had found its culmination in that jungle storm.
She closed her eyes as the memory rushed back vividly into her mind again, and a feeling of panic rose through her at the thought that a fierce spark of that madness might be living on within her as she  approached the middle of her life.
She shifted restlessly in her seat once more, imagining she could actually feel the angry pinpoint of fire burning deep inside her womb.
In his corner Joseph found himself grappling with an overwhelming sense of bewilderment.
He couldn't reconcile those terrible uncontrolled cries he had heard in the night with anything he already knew of his mother.
To him until then she had always been a safe comforting haven; complete and seemingly self-sufficient in herself, she had always been an unfailing source of reassurance, ever ready to pour unquestioning love and affection on him in his moments of need.
His father's favouring of Chuck had forced him to turn to her increasingly for solace, and that some unimaginable selfishness should have driven her to commit her dreadful act of desertion baffled and disturbed him deeply for reasons he didn't begin to understand.
Although she was sitting only a foot or two away from him in the opposite corner of the seat and had frequently tried to smile at him, he felt inexplicably betrayed.
He didn't really understand what had happened or why, but he sensed things would never be quite the same again.
Something alien had come between them, something that could never be removed.
He felt irretrievably alone and the woman beside him seemed suddenly to be a total stranger.
Sometimes, as they encountered new crowds of pole-carrying Annamese peasants jogging ceaselessly between market and rice field, or spilling out of their tiny village temples and pagodas, he felt that what had happened was somehow inextricably bound up with the torrid, exotic country that was so totally unfamiliar to him in all its ways, and other distressing images of the recent past began to flood through his mind; he saw again the brutal French colon lashing the fallen prisoners between the shafts of the cart in Saigon, remembered the horror he had felt at the sight of what he thought were many massacred coolies on the river wharf on their arrival, and he heard once more the thud of the Citron striking the peasant boy on the way to the hunting camp.
The elation he'd felt the day before at his own breathtaking adventure with the Moi girl now also seemed suddenly shameful to him, and he began to wonder if his exaggerated pride in the deed hadn't been the direct cause of the danger in which he and his mother had suddenly found themselves on the plain.
It had, he decided, certainly brought about the death of the unfortunate buffaloes.
Before they left the camp he had seen the hides of the bull and its calf scraped clean of all life, suspended like limp black rags in the drying tent; their white, eyeless skulls were hanging close by, and he felt a sense  of desolation suddenly at the thought that he was responsible.
Only the day before, those noble, horned beasts had been filing unsuspectingly through the long grass of the plain, intending to wallow harmlessly in some cool place through the heat of the day.
Then in his foolish exhilaration he had leaped into a tree and spotted them with his binoculars.
If he hadn't been so puffed up with conceit, the buffalo that had not been noticed by the Moi might now be basking contentedly in the shallows of the river.
 "Joseph, is something wrong?" 
The voice of his mother broke into his thoughts unexpectedly and he started inwardly.
Because he knew he couldn't speak of what was in his mind, he pretended he hadn't heard her and continued to stare out of the window.
"Is it because you couldn't shoot the deer?
Are you still upset because your father called you "Momma's boy" ?"
 "Perhaps, a little." 
He kept his face turned away from her so that she wouldn't see that he wasn't telling the whole truth.
I was thinking too, about the buffalo.
I feel like I sentenced them to death because I spotted them.
Those skins are going to be shipped home and stuffed with sawdust and put in a glass case in our museum.
But nobody would really care if they weren't.
It would have been better if we'd let them live.
His mother leaned across the seat to squeeze his hand, but he felt an inner coldness towards her and didn't respond.
Studying his profile she noticed that he looked pale and red-eyed, and a new fear made her temples throb suddenly.
"Did you sleep well last night, Joseph?
The storm didn't keep you awake, did it?"
"No.
I slept very well,"he said quickly.
 "I was really tired after everything that happened yesterday." 
She sat watching him for a moment, hoping he would look around and smile; but he kept his back turned to her and continued to gaze abstractedly out the window.
 "We believe that living in harmony with natural forces of life is of the highest importance," said Tran Van Hieu gently, waving his hand towards the golden-roofed temples and palaces of the Imperial City inside the Hue citadel.
That is why the location for  the Thai Hoa, the Palace of Perfect Concord, was chosen with such care.
Joseph gazed up wide-eyed at the snarling ceramic dragons that writhed along the ridges and cornices of the Thai Hoa; in the bright sunlight of the first morning of the Year of the Buffalo they glittered and shimmered like real gold.
 "It's very beautiful," said Joseph in a hushed voice.
 "But why was this particular spot found to be so favourable?" 
They were crossing the Bridge of the Golden Waters and entering the ornamental esplanade in front of the palace where shaded, tree-lined walks led past lotus pools and balustraded flower gardens.
Joseph was dressed in a formal gray knicker-bocker suit and the Annamese at his side was already wearing the stepped Ming dynasty bonnet, curly-toed boots and embroidered silk gown in which he would pay homage to the emperor of Annam along with hundreds of other mandarins at the annual Tet ceremony.
 "This was where the strongest forces of all were found to meet in perfect union," said Tran Van Hieu quietly.
 "The white tiger and the blue dragon, which are often in conflict, rest peacefully with one another on the precise spot where the emperor's throne stands inside the palace." 
 "What are the white tiger and the blue dragon?" 
The mandarin hesitated, then smiled at the American boy.
"We believe they are the male and female principles of existence.
The white tiger is the female principle, which is negative and threatening, but the blue dragon, the male principle, is positive and benign.
They also symbolize East and West."
 "But how exactly can you tell that they are in harmony right here?" asked Joseph, glancing curiously about him.
Other mandarins in bright silk gowns, booted and bonneted like Tran Van Hieu, were hurrying through the ornamental gardens towards the palace.
Around the inner walls the Annamese soldiers of the imperial guard, who looked as if they'd stepped out of the pages of one of his adventure-story books, stood sentinel with their muskets.
They wore mushroom-shaped hats topped with glittering brass spikes, and white cloths fluttered at their necks to protect them from the sun; all of them were barefoot, but Joseph noticed that their leg wrappings were yellow — the colour, as Tran Van Hieu had already pointed out, which was worn only by the emperor and his immediate entourage.
 "It is very difficult to explain quickly, Monsieur Joseph," said the mandarin.
"Some wise Annamese sages devote their whole lives to  the study of feng-shui.
Those are the Chinese characters meaning wind "and" water."
A dwelling for the living or a tomb for one's ancestors should be sited only where it harmonizes completely with the forces of nature.
He smiled again.
"Let us start with something easy.
You have already seen the serene beauty of the River of Perfumes that flows past the citadel walls.
The scents of its rare grasses and reeds drift gently on the wind bringing calm and tranquillity to its banks.
And many lotus flowers grow in our waters.
The lotus is the symbol of purity, the symbol of Hue.
Although it grows from mud, it turns into a thing of great beauty and smells very sweet.
Under its influence we believe good men can resist evil.
And see there!"
He paused and pointed above the vermilion walls of the citadel to the dark bulk of an isolated mountain rising to the south.
"That peak is called the Ngu Binh.
It means the "Emperor's Screen." 
All bad spirits travel in straight lines from the south, and that mountain prevents them from entering the Imperial City."
He paused again and waved his hand in several directions in succession.
 "But there are many other good signs all around us a maiden holding a spray of blossoms…a serpent entwined around the root of a lotus a phoenix in a prayerful attitude." 
Joseph peered in the directions indicated by the mandarin but saw only the scented shrubs and trees of the formal gardens.
 "I can't see anything, Monsieur Hieu," he said smiling delightedly.
"But it is very beautiful here.
I'm sure what you say is true."
The American boy had begun to fall under the spell of the old Annamese city soon after crossing the lotus-choked moat into the Kinh Thanh, or Capital City, the first of three concentric "cities" within the citadel modeled on the ancient walled quarters of Peking.
Although the citadel had been rebuilt by the Emperor Gia Long in 1802, its palaces and temples had been designed and constructed faithfully in the style favoured by China's Ming emperors and at the entrance to the Dai Noi, the Imperial City itself, Tran Van Hieu had been waiting for him in the shadow of the Ngo Mon, the "Bull Gate" roofed in gold tiles like the Gate of Heavenly Peace in Peking.
The governor of Cochin-China had arranged the meeting; on hearing of Mrs. Sherman's arrival in Hue he had invited them to join his official entourage for the imperial New Year ceremony and had also arranged for Tran Van Hieu to show Joseph the palaces beforehand.
Joseph's melancholy had begun to evaporate for the first time since leaving the hunting camp as the goateed mandarin, walking ponderously beside him in ceremonial boots, reeled off the  mystical-sounding names of the shimmering buildings: the Can-Chanh, the Great Mansion the Palace of the Spirits of the Six Emperors…the Temple of Generations…the Halls of the Splendours and the Moon and the Glory of the Sun — and most mysterious of all to his young impressionable mind, the guarded heart of the citadel, the Tu Cam Thanh, the Purple Forbidden City named after the Purple or Pole Star, the symbolic ruler of the heavens.
As had been the case in Peking, Tran Van Hieu explained, the emperor dwelled in utter seclusion behind the walls of the Forbidden City, and no European ever entered those precincts.
Bronze griffins and gilded chimera stood guard outside the palace doors, and life-sized stone mandarins appeared silently among the scented trees as they walked.
In a temple courtyard they came unexpectedly upon a troupe of imperial singers and dancers rehearsing a performance; garbed in dazzling costumes of gold, red, green and turquoise, the expressionless boys and girls were indistinguishable from one another in their close-fitting bonnets as they performed the mannered steps of a delicate oriental dance to the plaintive.
accompaniment of gongs and ancient stone lithophones.
All these sights and sounds alone would have fascinated Joseph's young mind, but the murmured talk of deities and devils beyond his imaginings coming from the grave-faced little mandarin pacing at his side established the walled city of palaces lastingly in his mind as a place of deep mystery and enchantment, and by the time Tran Van Hieu delivered him to the governor's aide outside the Palace of Perfect Concord he was almost ready to believe he would see a live white tiger curled up contentedly with a blue dragon around the emperor's feet.
His mother and the governor of Cochin-China were already waiting by the entrance with the Resident Superior of Annam and his official suite of guests.
The military officers among them wore full dress uniform of horizon blue while civilians wore frocked coats and chapeau hauts de forme — top hats.
The rule that normally barred women from the ceremony had been waived after representations on her behalf by the governor, and in response Flavia Sherman had chosen her most sober clothes for the occasion.
The full-length skirt of her modest navy blue suit brushed the ground and a veil and matching, narrow-brimmed hat of the same colour partly hid her face.
She was relieved to see that her son's tour of the palaces had left his eyes shining and he greeted her with something approaching his normal smile.
 "Its all a little bit like a fairy tale, isn't it?" she whispered as they filed into the throne room with the other guests, and he nodded eagerly in reply.
To Joseph's delight the Resident Superior led his entourage to the very front of the audience chamber and the American boy found himself standing only a few feet away from the throne where the Emperor Khai Dinh, a slender, almost feminine figure, sat swathed in a golden robe of richly embroidered silk.
His feet, shod in the long black leather boots of China's Ming rulers, rested in the embrace of two reclining golden dogs carved in the throne's base and in his hands he held an ivory wand bearing a tiny mirror, which, Tran Van Hieu had explained, he used to shield his face and demonstrate his symbolic humility before the spirits of his ancestors.
On either side of the throne two liveried Annamese eunuchs stood at attention holding long-handled fans of decorated feathers which they waved in slow, synchronized strokes above the emperor's head to cool the air that he breathed.
In the wall opposite the throne, screen doors had been drawn back and a blaze of early morning sunlight flooded into the chamber from the flagstoned courtyard, causing the emperor's gem-encrusted crown of beaten gold to flash and glitter with every movement of his head.
Outside, all the foremost mandarins of the court were already assembled in lines that reflected their rank.
In the first row Joseph spotted Tran Van Hieu's father standing just behind the two red-robed royal princes who were to lead the annual act of homage.
 "You'll notice that we are standing to the left of the throne," said the governor, addressing Joseph and his mother in a stage whisper.
 "The heart side of the emperor, you see, is the place of honour in the Orient." 
Joseph glanced quickly at the emperor to see if he'd heard and was surprised to find his expression uneasy beneath the bonnet-like crown that fitted close around his face.
Once or twice as they waited for the ceremonial to begin he saw the eyes of the Annamese sovereign shift anxiously in their direction and he dabbed occasionally at his pale perspiring face with a silken handkerchief that he held concealed in one of his voluminous sleeves.
When the Resident Superior finally stepped forward to face the throne, the Annamese emperor dropped his gaze to his brightly polished boots and listened without looking at him directly.
 "Your imperial majesty," boomed the Frenchman in his own language, it is my singular honour as representative of the Nation  Protectrice to extend the felicitations of the president of France to your highly esteemed imperial person and all your court on this auspicious and sacred occasion.
The Resident Superior, a tall, barrel-chested man who wore a monocle in his left eye, was an imposing figure in his official blue and gold uniform.
A ceremonial sword hung at his left side in a gilded scabbard and clusters of beribboned medals and star-pointed orders festooned both sides of his tunic.
As he spoke, he let one hand rest on the hilt of his sword as though to emphasize subtly the ever-present might of French arms.
In the nine years since your majesty ascended the throne of Annam in 1916, your kingdom has continued to enjoy the unselfish and benevolent protection of France and it is our sincere hope that this mutually rewarding state of affairs will continue far into the distant future to the benefit of both our peoples.
From time to time as he read his salutation from a sheet of paper held before him in a white-gloved hand, the Resident Superior squinted at the emperor through his monocle; his voice was loud and confident and betrayed little outward sign of the extreme deference implied in his spoken words.
In contrast, the Annamese monarch seemed to shrink deeper into the embrace of his gilded throne as though he was only too well aware that the diplomatic niceties of the Frenchman's address did nothing to alter the fact that he and his people were irretrievably beholden to the will and whim of France.
These subtleties, however, were lost on Joseph because the dryness of the speech had caused his attention to wander and he gazed round the richly furnished audience chamber with awestruck eyes.
A forest of scarlet, lim-wood pillars supported the roof, and the five-clawed golden dragons entwined around the length of each of them seemed to snarl fiercely at their reflections in the floor of polished ceramic tiles.
Delicately wrought Ming urns and vases stood on tables at the foot of every pillar and to Joseph's surprise an impassive young mandarin appeared silently from a place of concealment behind one of them as the Resident Superior finished speaking.
In a singsong tone he translated the address into Annamese for his emperor.
When he had finished the mandarin disappeared again as silently as he had come, and Joseph saw the emperor take a rolled Chinese scroll from one of his sleeves.
In a sibilant, fluttering voice he read his reply from the throne in Annamese, but his delivery, unlike the Frenchman's, was hesitant and nervous and once or twice he stopped to swallow in  mid-sentence.
The moment he finished, an elderly mandarin with a white, wispy goatee appeared from behind another pillar beside the throne and translated the emperor's brief address into melodiously accented French: Several times the Resident Superior dipped his chin an inch and lowered his eyes in acknowledgment of a dutiful reference to "the great protecting nation of France," and when the translation ended he inclined his head more formally without bowing.
He watched closely as the emperor rose from his throne, and when he saw him bow low in his direction, he allowed a little smile of polite acknowledgment to play across his face before he turned and strode majestically back to join his entourage.
With a little wave of his hand he indicated that his officials and guests should take a pace or two backward into the aisle between the adjoining rows of pillars to clear the way between the throne and the open doors, and the next moment the ranks of singers and musicians drawn up around the walls of the courtyard outside burst into a plaintive musical chant.
On hearing this, the two royal princes prostrated themselves in the doorway of the throne room and pressed their foreheads to the floor tiles in a reverent attitude.
The mandarins behind them, who all carried mirror wands like the emperor's, followed their lead and stretched themselves full length on the flagstones of the courtyard.
Joseph saw Tran Van Hieu and his father make their obeisance gravely beside other high-ranking Annamese.
Three times they lowered themselves to the ground in response to commands chanted by the minister of rites and all the time the musicians and singers banged gongs and drums and continued their strangely discordant chanting.
On his throne Khai Dinh remained unmoving, accepting their abject demonstrations of loyalty without a flicker of expression.
 "The Chinese call it" kowtow "but the Annamese term is" I am"said the governor deprecatingly at Joseph's shoulder.
"But whatever you call it, it doesn't come easy to some of the older members of the fraternity.
I sometimes wonder if some of them are going to get up again."
He laughed unpleasantly at his own jest, and a number of Frenchmen around them smiled.
Joseph watched Tran Van Hieu's father lower himself to the ground with difficulty for the third time.
He might have looked comic if his proud, wrinkled face had not remained set in a devout and dignified expression as he went through what was clearly a considerable exertion to his failing strength.
As each group of mandarins finished their performance of the ritual they backed  slowly to the edge of the courtyard to be replaced by others, and wave after wave of courtiers in silks of all hues flowed across the gray flagstones under the yellow glare of the early sun.
When the last group had backed from the emperor's presence, the chant of the court musicians suddenly changed to a faster rhythm and the gateways filled immediately, to Joseph's astonishment, with the gray, swaying bulk of elephants.
Decked in tasselled yellow howdah cloths and ridden by straw-hatted Annamese mahouts perched straddle-legged behind their ears, a dozen elephants lumbered slowly across the flagstones and lined up before the open doors.
Urged on by their riders with short metal-tipped bamboo rods, the elephants lowered themselves slowly to their knees, facing towards the throne, and remained kneeling for a minute or two, their trunks curling and swaying in front of them in time with the cacophonous music.
Then, with a lazy dignity, they rose one by one and backed out of the courtyard again.
The explosions started as soon as the last elephant had shuffled out of sight.
To Joseph's startled ears they sounded like a simultaneous volley of a thousand rifle shots.
Without pause the explosions became a continuous bombardment, and thick, white smoke engulfed the courtyard, blotting out the sun.
Joseph looked wildly round the throne room, expecting to see the emperor and the Resident Superior bolting for cover.
But the emperor remained impassive on his dais and the Resident Superior merely raised an amused eyebrow in the direction of one of his colleagues.
"Don't look so worried.
It's only the traditional Annamese way of welcoming Tet."
The governor had to shout into Joseph's ear above the din to make himself heard.
 "They believe that these very loud explosions will frighten away all evil spirits and make sure they have good fortune for the coming twelve months." 
Looking outside again Joseph saw then that the smoke and explosions were emanating from tall bamboo poles set up around the courtyard.
Topped by a few sprouting leaves the poles were festooned to the ground with garlands of paper-wrapped firecrackers, which were all now detonating deafeningly.
He let out a long breath and raised his hands to cover both ears.
"That's a relief!
I thought the Great War had begun all over again."
The celebratory boom of cannon echoing from another part of the citadel marked the end of the ceremony and the emperor descended slowly from his throne to shake hands in European fashion with the Resident Superior, and side by side they led the way into an antechamber.
A band outside began to play the "Marseillaise" and iced champagne was served for the guests to  toast the emperor and the New Year.
Jewelled caskets of areca nut, betel leaves and little jars of lime were served by court servants to mandarins who wished to chew betel, and gem-studded boxes of cigarettes and cigars were offered to the French.
As Joseph sipped his champagne, Tran Van Hieu appeared silently beside his mother with a younger Annamese man and bowed gravely.
 "It gives me great pleasure, Madame Sherman, to welcome you and your son to the imperial court of Annam," he said politely.
 "I hope that you found our New Year ceremony of some interest." 
 "I am very honoured to have been present," replied the American woman, smiling in her turn.
 "Especially as I believe ladies are not normally permitted to observe the rites." 
"Tradition is most important, but it is not good to live entirely in the past.
The French have brought many advantages to our country as you no doubt have already seen."
The mandarin turned and motioned the younger Annamese forward to introduce him.
"May I present to you, Madame Sherman, a member of my wife's family, Monsieur Dao Van Lat.
He is my wife's brother and he works as a journalist with a newspaper in Hue.
He was educated in Paris, and when he heard that some Americans had been present at today's ceremonies he expressed a wish to meet you."
The handsome young Annamese in his early twenties who offered his hand promptly to Joseph and his mother had the piercing gaze and broad forehead of a scholar.
Unlike the other Annamese present who wore court robes, he was dressed in the conventional short black gown and white trousers of an ordinary civilian and on his head he wore the traditional black turban of the region.
 "Are you writing about today's ceremonies for your newspaper, Monsieur Lat?" asked Joseph eagerly.
 "I shall write only that which was written last year and the year before that," said the Annamese with a sarcastic smile.
The traditional rites of homage to the emperor were performed in the Palace of Perfect Concord.
 "I shan't be allowed to say that we were really saluting the Resident Superior of France." 
My brother-in-law was educated in Paris but he is an idealist whose unorthodox views are not shared by myself or many of our countrymen, cut in Tran Van Hieu hastily.
 "You should not take what he says too seriously." 
The mandarin excused himself with a nervous smile and moved quickly away across the antechamber to talk with a group of French officials.
 "What the Imperial Delegate says is not strictly true." 
said Dao Van Lat quietly.
 "Many people in this country do not share his affection for France." 
 "But why can't you write about the ceremonies the way that you want?" inquired Flavia Sherman politely.
The Annamese glanced over his shoulder for a moment to see if they were overheard.
 "You are not French, madame, so perhaps I may be honest, yes?" 
The American woman nodded.
"We have no freedom of press here.
Newspapers are closed and journalists are sent to jail if they displease our foreign masters."
Lat's eyes glittered suddenly with the fervour of his words.
"We aren't free either to pursue our political beliefs.
We can't hold meetings or travel freely.
We can't even send mail without its being intercepted!"
 "But what would you write in your newspaper about the ceremonies if you were free to say what you liked?" asked Joseph.
"I thought they were fascinating.
The "I am lay" is a very old ritual that in other countries you can only read about in history books."
 "Exactly, Monsieur Joseph," He glanced quickly around the room again.
"The ceremonies taught us by the Chinese emperors ceased to be celebrated fourteen years ago in China itself when the revolution of Sun Yat-sen put an end to the Manchu dynasty.
The precepts of Confucius only make sense if the Son of Heaven to whom we offer loyalty and allegiance represents the power and dignity of the people.
The French have long ago destroyed the authority of Confucius in our old society.
Today you have watched our mandarins banging their foreheads on the flagstones — but not for our emperor!
That's what I would write today if I were free to choose.
But instead I say only: "The traditional rites were performed." 
 "Lat paused and smiled another glittering smile." 
The firecrackers were still exploding intermittently in the courtyard and occasional salvos of cannon fire boomed out from beyond the walls of the Imperial City.
Joseph noticed out of the corner of his eye that Khai Dinh had risen from his seat and was walking slowly in his ponderous Ming boots towards the door.
Once he seemed to sway slightly and one of the red-robed princes moved quickly to his side and took his elbow.
 "Our Son of Heaven unfortunately is a sick man," said Lat, seeing Joseph turn to watch the emperor.
"Did you notice how often he mops his face with a handkerchief?
He is only forty-two but it is feared he may have tuberculosis.
We are not allowed to write about that in our newspapers, either."
All conversation ceased and the firecrackers quietened suddenly by some invisible command as the emperor took his leave of the Resident Superior and the governor of Cochin-China; the other French officials and guests immediately began lining up to file past and shake the sovereign's hand in farewell.
 "If you go now, Madame and Monsieur Sherman, you too will be able to shake the hand of the emperor of Annam," said Lat in a low voice.
"Although it is not our custom to shake hands, he likes to please his foreign overlords.
But make the most of your chance, because soon our emperors will exist like those of China — only in the dusty pages of history books.
Au revoir."
Dao Van Lat hurried out of the antechamber by a side door, leaving Joseph and his mother to join the line of departing guests.
When the Emperor Khai Dinh offered his slim, feminine hand to Joseph it felt limp and damp, and although the American boy murmured his farewell politely in French, the sovereign didn't raise his head to look at him.
Because Joseph was already slightly taller than him, his last memory of the Annamese Son of Heaven was a closeup view of the shimmering jewels in the top of his golden crown.
The raucous cries of wild jungle fowl welcoming the pale light of another dawn roused Chuck Sherman from a deep, refreshing sleep.
He sat up immediately on his cot, feeling a surge of pleasurable anticipation course through him at the prospect of one more day stalking the great game animals of southern Asia through the beautiful tropical forest where he now felt almost at home.
He pulled aside the mosquito net and in the gray light caught sight of his gleaming double-barrelled Holland and Holland 450 propped against the wall of the hut.
For a brief moment he experienced again the exhilaration he had felt on the plain late the previous day when he dropped a big red banteng bull with a single shot from nearly two hundred yards.
The animal had been plunging towards the shelter of a riverside bamboo grove when he fired and it had probably been the best shot of his life.
His father had wounded another bull in the same herd, but not mortally, and although they had tracked it by a faint blood trail for an hour, in the end, to the senator's ill-concealed  irritation, they had been forced to abandon the search.
Chuck drew his hunting knife from its sheath before picking up his boots.
He upended each of them in turn and allowed himself a grim little smile of satisfaction when a squirming scorpion tumbled from one of them.
After killing it with the knife he dressed quickly.
He had already learned his lesson by painful experience; the burn-like swelling on his left calf still throbbed occasionally to remind him of the morning a week ago when he had drawn on his trousers carelessly, to discover that a scorpion had spent the night nestling in one of the legs.
In his shaving mirror he saw a face burned a deep brown by two weeks of fierce tropical sunshine.
His blue eyes were bright and clear and the frequent pump of adrenaline through his veins as he tracked and shot for fourteen successive days had left his senses sharpened, on a high edge of alertness.
He felt fit and hardened by the spartan life of the jungle camp and he contemplated exercising the skills of stealth and lightning-sharp reaction again for one last day with a fierce relish.
As he finished shaving he found he was grinning broadly at his reflection in the mirror; in that jungle dawn he knew he was as happy as he had ever been in his life.
On the other side of the camp he saw Jacques Devraux, already dressed, checking the hides the Moi had finished cleaning late the previous night.
He had become accustomed to the grim silences that surrounded the Frenchman but he admired greatly his harsh efficiency in the jungle and had learned through him to identify the spoor of all the larger animals.
Senator Sherman had shot marginally less well than his son and was openly disgruntled about this.
But in the two weeks, as they moved slowly north into the forested hills and grassy uplands close to the hill station of Dalat, they had killed between them prime specimens of almost all the groups required for the museum.
Paul Devraux had returned to Saigon the previous evening with the hides of buffalo, banteng, seladang cows and calves and a dozen smaller deer, to organize their shipment to the United States.
Only a bull seladang, the giant wild ox of Asia, had so far eluded them.
When Chuck crossed to the cook tent, carrying his rifle for the early start they planned for the final day, his father was already sitting at a table in the open, sipping a steaming mug of black coffee.
Torrential rains had fallen each afternoon in the past week, and three days before in the steaming jungle he had contracted a fever which he had kept at bay since with frequent doses of quinine.
His face was still taut and sallow, and he looked as though he had not slept well.
While the wife of Ngo Van Loc served his breakfast and poured coffee the American boy peered anxiously at his father.
"How are you feeling this morning, Dad?
Got that fever beat now?"
 "Fever and the jungle go together like a carriage and pair, Chuck," said the senator lightly.
"It doesn't do to get too excited about it.
I've been feeding it a goodly amount of quinine and aspirin in the night to keep it from going hungry."
Although his face was damp with perspiration he winked over the rim of his coffee mug, and Chuck, reassured, smiled back.
As he bolted down his breakfast Chuck gazed around the clearing with delighted eyes.
The first rays of the sun were gilding the grassy hillsides visible through the trees, and all around them the thick green roof of the jungle was gradually coming alive with the cries of darting, bright-hued birds.
 "I guess, Dad, this must be some of the finest hunting country in the world, isn't it?" 
The senator nodded.
"It's a hunter's paradise, Chuck.
It makes a man feel like a real man.
Makes you remember all men were hunters once and only the fittest of them survived.
It's a real pity it's so far away from America."
"It sure is.
I haven't enjoyed anything more in my whole life than the shooting we've had here."
Chuck watched Jacques Devraux enviously for a moment as he moved briskly about the camp, giving orders to the Moi.
 "You know, Dad, I'm not so sure that I'm cut out for what you want me to be," he said, and sipped his coffee with a pensive expression on his face.
"I am not sure I could do as well as you say in politics.
I love the outdoors.
I'd just as soon be doing what Monsieur Devraux does.
That wouldn't seem like work at all to me."
The senator looked up at him sharply.
"You're young yet, Chuck.
You'll come around to my way of thinking before you're much older.
I just know you will."
Chuck smiled at his father again, but without enthusiasm.
"Maybe Joseph is a better candidate for the tricky world of politics, Dad.
He's already got an old head on his young shoulders, you know."
The senator waved a dismissive hand and stood up.
"I don't want to hear any more of this talk, Chuck.
Let's keep our mind on the job at hand.
I'm going to prove to you today what I've often told you before — that all you need in this life to succeed is real cast-iron determination."
He turned away to swallow another handful of pills that he shook from a bottle, then picked up his rifle.
 "Come on; the sooner we make a start, the sooner you'll see what I mean." 
Jacques Devraux and half-a-dozen Moi trackers were waiting beside the narrow river that flowed past the camp, and the senator put his arm lightly around his son's shoulders as they walked over to join them.
"All we've got to do is convince ourselves that no matter what happens today we're going to kill a seladang bull for the Sherman Field Museum.
Then it's as good as done, isn't it?"
 "If you say so," agreed Chuck with a happy laugh.
When they reached the bank of the river Nathaniel Sherman motioned his son ahead into the waiting dugout canoe and laid a hand on Devraux's shoulder.
"Chuck and me just want you to know, Jacques, that we don't aim to leave this jungle today without the hide and horns of the biggest bull seladang in all Asia.
We're going to match up that cow and her little calf we got last week with a daddy — or go bust in the attempt."
The Frenchman peered intently into his face for a moment without replying.
 "Are you sure, senator," he said at last, "that you wouldn't be better taking that fever to your cot for the day?" 
"No sir!
Like I told you, we're determined to crown our collection with that seladang bull.
So just lead us to him, if you please!"
Devraux shrugged and climbed into the dugout behind him.
The tall grass on the other side of the river was still wet with dew and before they had gone fifty yards all the men were drenched to the waist.
They trekked in single file for more than an hour, holding their rifles high in front of their chests, without sighting any animals at all.
When they entered the jungle again, the Moi several times spotted banteng, but what few traces of seladang they found proved to be cold trails.
By nine o'clock Nathaniel Sherman was flagging.
Beside a muddy pool in a shadow-dappled patch of jungle where faint feeding tracks had finally petered out, he lowered himself onto a fallen log.
He was shivering again and he swallowed another handful of tablets from his waist pouch.
Chuck noticed that instead of drinking the usual cold tea like the others he surreptitiously raised a hip flask to his lips a couple of times when he thought he was unobserved.
 "Are you sure you're well enough to go on hunting, Dad?" he asked anxiously.
 "It sure looks to me as though that fever might be beginning to take hold." 
 "I can take my fever to bed for a couple of days back in Saigon," snapped the senator irritably.
 "There's no point wasting our last day." 
He rubbed the back of his hand across his eyes, then stood up impatiently as two of the Moi who had been scouting the region while they rested rushed into the clearing and began chatting  excitedly to Devraux, pointing back the way they had come.
 "They have spotted a group of seladang cows and calves grazing a half mile away," said Devraux when they had finished.
"The bulls may not be far off.
They're probably making for the cool thickets on this side of the river to avoid the heat.
We must go carefully.
There's no more dangerous animal in the jungle if you surprise him at close quarters."
 "Okay, I'm ready," said the senator, picking up his rifle.
As Chuck followed Devraux into the trees he hung back, pulled out his flask again and drank deeply from it.
Then, treading carefully, he followed on behind the last Moi trackers.
The tall bamboo thickets fringing the narrow river rattled and groaned in the faint breeze as the file of men moved cautiously through the half-light beneath the dense overhead foliage.
Every few paces they paused to peer ahead into the gloom, and when they reached a gap in the trees Devraux stopped and pointed.
Two hundred yards away a group of about fifteen seladang were visible, the calves frisking and sporting around the cows that had borne them.
 "The Moi were wrong!" breathed Nathaniel Sherman in an awed whisper, as he peered through his field glasses.
"There is a big old hump-necked herd bull right in the middle of his wives and children.
And he's mine!"
Without waiting for the others he plunged down the bank into the stream, slipping and slithering heedlessly over the protruding roots and rocks.
He waded across, scrambled up the other side and pushed through the undergrowth on the edge of the plain.
Devraux, his face stolid, looked at Chuck Sherman.
 "From here the wind is wrong." 
he said curtly.
 "You will see." 
By the time they had splashed up the far bank Nathaniel Sherman was fifty yards away, moving erratically, breasting the grass, preparing to risk a standing shot at two hundred yards.
But the swirling breeze was at the hunters' backs, and the big bull suddenly lifted his muzzle to scent in their direction, and a moment later the whole herd was running towards the shelter of the trees.
Cursing obscenely in his exasperation, Sherman set himself and fired.
The crack of his first shot succeeded only in raising a screeching flock of parrots from the trees behind him and the heard ran on unharmed.
The American cursed loudly again, then planted his feet more firmly and fired his second barrel — but still none of the seladang faltered.
When his son and Devraux arrived at his side, however, he was still squinting through the sights of his  raised rifle, watching the herd break up to enter the jungle.
 "Would you believe it, boy," he whispered softly, "I hit him with my second." 
Without waiting for Chuck he strode off in the direction taken by the herd, and halfway across the grassland he let out a roar and dropped to his knees.
When he turned towards them, his son and Jacques Devraux saw that his fingers were bright with blood.
"I told you I hit him!
Nigh on two hundred yards and running away and I hit him!"
He stood up breathing fast.
"Come on, Chuck.
Let's go and get him."
Devraux placed a restraining hand on the American's shoulder.
Above the grasslands the air shimmered in the midday heat.
"The blood trail is light.
The animal is not badly wounded.
To go on you must hunt through the hottest part of the day.
It would be better to return to camp and resume when the sun begins to cool."
 "If the rains come again today, hunting will be impossible later!" 
"It would be dangerous for a fit man to pursue this animal now.
In your condition "— Devraux shrugged —" it would be madness."
Perspiration was streaming down the senator's face and his eyes were bleary with too much quinine.
"I've made up my mind to finish that bull, Jacques.
I've hit him and I'm going to kill him!"
 "Then I will take no further responsibility for this day's hunting," said the Frenchman with quiet finality.
Nathaniel Sherman jabbed a thumb against his own chest and his words came out in a fierce undertone.
"That's just fine by me, Jacques.
I will take the damned responsibility myself."
Peering down at the faint blood trail staining the grass, he strode angrily away towards the jungle with his son at his heels.
After a moment's hesitation Jacques Devraux followed at a distance with his trackers.
For half an hour they followed the telltale red blotches until finally they petered out in a glade surrounded by dense thickets of thorn and bamboo.
"I'd guess we must be getting pretty close, Chuck.
He's holed up somewhere around here licking that wound of his."
Nathaniel Sherman removed his helmet to mop his streaming face and as he did so a movement caught his eye in the tangled undergrowth.
 "Did you see that, Chuck?" he asked in a fierce whisper, pointing to a thicket of thorns.
 "I think we've found him." 
Although the denseness of the bushes prevented a clear view, Chuck saw a patch of brown-black shadow move unmistakably and he immediately raised his rifle.
 "Wait — it's mine!" 
His father motioned the weapon aside with a peremptory gesture.
His eyes gleamed and he breathed noisily through his nose as he lifted his own rifle to his shoulder then fired both barrels at the shadow in quick succession.
A loud bellow rang out as the bullets struck home, then they heard a heavy body plunging wildly among the restraining toils of the thorn bushes.
After a few seconds all movement ceased and silence returned to the glade.
Grinning triumphantly at his son, the senator dropped two fresh shells into the magazine of his rifle.
"Didn't I tell you, Chuck, that all you need is determination?
Come and take a look at him with me."
Chuck hesitated as his father moved off unsteadily towards the thicket, and at that moment Devraux and the Moi trackers entered the glade.
When the Frenchman saw what was happening, he shouted angrily for the senator to stop.
But if he heard, he paid no heed.
 "Wouldn't it be better to wait some, Dad?" yelled Chuck as his father reached a narrow defile between the thorns.
The older man stopped and turned.
"It was me that shot the bull, son.
You wait there with the trackers, if you're feeling nervous."
Without waiting for a response he stepped into the thicket.
Stung by his father's words, Chuck dashed forward across the clearing.
Immediately inside the tangle of bushes Nathaniel Sherman was astonished to find himself face to face with the massive standing bulk of the black seladang bull.
More than six feet high at the shoulder, the enormous, blue-eyed animal towered above him, swaying slightly on its legs.
All around it the bloodstained undergrowth lay broken and flattened by its struggles, and as soon as it saw him, the animal lowered its needle-sharp horns that had grown in its prime to a length of nearly three feet.
Although he had set his loaded rifle at his shoulder in readiness as he entered the thicket, before he could squeeze the trigger the wounded seladang was upon him.
The bony excrescence between its horns knocked the wind from him and he collapsed onto its great hump-muscled neck.
He hung there for a second before slithering sideways, and as he slipped towards the ground the seladang hooked blindly at his body, knocking it this way and that, until one of its long horns caught and held.
Entering from under the pit of his arm it pierced and split his left shoulder joint, and his body  swivelled slowly into an upright position, suspended on the horn.
Bellowing and rearing on its hind legs, the massive bull lifted him bodily off the ground and shook him repeatedly like a rag-doll.
When Chuck Sherman ran into the thicket, his father seemed to be bending over the great bull's lowered head in an attitude of extreme tenderness.
The animal, sensing a new danger, shook its horns furiously to free itself from the encumbrance, and the already unconscious senator was catapulted into the thorns, where he lay without moving.
Chuck raised his rifle coolly and fired just as the bull launched itself on him.
He had aimed carefully between its eyes, but its movement changed the attitude of its head and his first bullet merely grooved the glossy hide of its neck.
It was an arm's length away and raising its head to hook at him with the horn that was already dark with his father's blood when he discharged his second barrel.
The hard-nosed bullet struck home into the bull's chest, wounding it fatally, but it could not stop the lunging charge nor ward off the twin crescents of bone thrust upwards into his body with all the force of the seladang's powerful neck.
He fell gored through the abdomen, and the bull attacked"him again as he writhed in agony on the ground.
On the second thrust, one horn pierced his lung high in the left side of his chest and its tip reached his heart.
As the animal roared and twisted above him, he saw close before his eyes the gray hairs of its broad black muzzle and felt the heat of its sour and bloodied breath.
From below he could see that its skin was strangely pale and pink between its wide-straddled hind legs and the tight black bag of its scrotum, he thought, seemed incongruously small and toylike for such a massive, murderous animal.
Distantly he heard the report of another gun and felt the impact of other bullets shudder the bull's body, but by this time its heavy black bulk was already sinking down upon him, lifeless from his own second shot.
Curiously, the last sensation of his own life was not the pain of the terrible wounds inflicted by the horns of the seladang.
For a final moment the inflamed bruise on his left calf where the scorpion had stung him a week before seemed to blaze with new agonizing fire.
He tried to move one of his hands to touch and soothe it but a great weariness engulfed him suddenly and his hand never reached its destination.
The foundations of the colonial era, during which white European nations dominated vast areas of Asia, Africa and Latin America, were fatally undermined for the first time during the turbulent second decade of the twentieth century.
Revolutions toppled first the Chinese emperor in 1911, then the tsar of Russia in 1917; the Great War of 1914–1918 also weakened the European powers drastically and at the same time showed the colonized peoples that their seemingly invincible white masters were capable of enormous self-destructive folly.
This undermining of the colonial system was accelerated further by the formation in 1919 of the Communist International.
The organization was dedicated to the overthrow of capitalism worldwide, and in the latter years of the 1920s Comintern agents began working secretly in the vulnerable, far-flung colonial territories of the capitalist nations to exploit the native discontent.
In the Annamese lands political dissatisfaction had intensified following the premature death of the Emperor Khai Dinh in November 1925.
He was only forty-three when he died, arid the French, seizing the opportunity to reinforce their influence, insisted that he should be succeeded by his son, Bao Dai, then a boy of twelve still at school in Paris.
They ensured that the infant emperor continued to study in Paris for another seven years and meantime the French Resident Superior in  Hue arrogated to himself the few remaining vestiges of imperial authority.
This quickened anti-French feeling, and encouraged by the successes of Sun Yat-sen and Mao Tse-tung in neighbouring China, Annamese nationalists and Communists began to organize themselves more coherently.
The Great Depression of 1929 sharpened the mood of rebellion when a catastrophic fall in the price of rice spread hardship and even starvation to many parts of Indochina.
As a result of these mixed forces the resistance movements that had previously been the exclusive domain of irresolute Annamese intellectuals began, as the decade drew to a close, to stir the mass of the people toiling in the rice fields, the mines arid the rubber plantations.
With its customary fury the northeast monsoon flung its nightly torrent of rain onto the close-packed ranks of rubber trees sprouting from the red-brown jungle soils of the Vi An plantation a hundred kilometres north of Saigon.
In the midnight blackness the glossy-leaved trees stood silent, each with a beggar's cup of tin wedged against its straight trunk to catch the milky latex that oozed slowly from within.
On the earth floors of the leaking, palm-thatched barrack huts dotted around the vast plantation, fifteen hundred Annamite coolies who would resume the unending toil of emptying the little tin cups in the gray light of the coming dawn shivered and drowsed fitfully in the downpour.
To their untutored peasant minds it seemed that the endless rows of alien rubber trees marching with unnatural precision across great tracts of their wild ancestral jungles provoked the storm each night to new extremes of savagery.
In Village Number Three, where five hundred coolies were quartered, the men were packed so tight in their barracks that many of them slept and dozed seated upright.
Ngo Van Dong and his younger brother, Hoc, huddled close together in the darkness in one of the long huts, their ragged clothes already saturated with the rain that streamed in through the inadequate thatch.
Close beside them an older coolie, stretched full-length on the earth, was shaking and moaning uncontrollably with malarial fever.
Although they were still only in their teens, the two young Annamese had undergone a drastic change in appearance in the four years since the Sherman family had watched them gambolling around the cooking tent of their father, Ngo Van Loc, the hunting camp "boy" of Jacques Devraux.
Woefully undernourished, their bodies were emaciated, pocked with sores, and eighteen months of unremitting labor in the dark, fever-ridden alleys of the rubber plantation had left their faces pinched and haggard.
By day their sunken, listless eyes reflected the depth of an inner misery that would have been unthinkable to the exuberant youths of 1925.
In a lull of comparative quiet in the wind-driven roar of the rain, Hoc leaned towards his elder brother and put his lips close to his ear.
He s stopped shivering, he said in a horrified whisper.
 "Do you think he's died?" 
In the near-total darkness Dong could not see the old coolie stretched out on the muddy floor beside them.
He had been  trembling violently for several hours but now no sound came from the place where he lay.
Noticing that his younger brother himself was shivering, Dong, who was taller than the average Annamese, inched his long, thin body closer to him and put his arm around his shoulders.
"Don't think about it.
Maybe he's sleeping now.
Let us try to get some sleep!"
The younger boy closed his eyes, but the sudden familiar gnaw of hunger pains drove all thought of sleep from his mind.
It was six hours since they had shared their meagre ration of black rice, boiled as usual in a rusting can on the communal fire inside the barrack hut.
For cooking and drinking all the coolies had to use brackish water from the mosquito-infested streams that flowed sluggishly through the plantation, and Hoc wondered, as he did every time he found himself shivering, whether he too might have contracted the dreaded fever.
Dong, sensing his brother's fear, reached quietly behind him in the darkness with his free hand until his fingers brushed against the face of the malaria victim; the clammy flesh, already growing cold, was slippery with rain and the sweat of the fatal climatic fever, and in the moment that his hand recoiled from the contact Dong knew that they would not be able to avoid the horror of a burial this time.
During their stay on the plantation more than a hundred coolies in Village Number Three had died of fever and malnutrition, or had committed suicide but there had never been a death among their immediate neighbours.
Fleetingly Dong wondered whether the excursion into the jungle with the corpse might present them with another opportunity to escape.
Then immediately he dismissed the thought.
They had tried twice before, and on each occasion they had been pursued relentlessly through the forests by hostile Moi tribesmen who had stripped them naked, lashed their hands behind them and led them back to the plantation roped together at the neck with twisted creepers.
The glowering Moi had been rewarded by the French plantation director with five piasters for each of them, and he and his brother had been publicly beaten on the soles of their feet by a group of overseers wielding heavy staves.
Their swollen feet had bled profusely and they had hobbled painfully among the rubber trees for more than a month before they recovered.
After the second escape attempt they were beaten again and flung into the blackness of stone-floored isolation cells in the nearby fort at An Dap.
There they had spent fourteen days in solitary confinement, chained in heavy leg irons and fed only on dry rice.
Never once during that time had they seen the light of day.
"Dong!
We will have to bury him, won't we?"
His brother spoke in a quavering voice close to his ear as though he had read his thoughts.
The younger boy was trembling more violently now, and Dong feared he, too, was becoming feverish.
"Try to sleep, Hoc.
I will make the grave.
Don't worry."
A half-mile away in the plantation director's house a scratchy rendition of "Muskrat Ramble" played by Louis Armstrong and Kid Ory was struggling to make itself heard over the roar of the monsoon rains.
Gauze screens fitted to the doors and windows were tightly closed as always to deny the plantation's malaria bearing mosquitoes access to the presence of Claude Duclos, a heavily built Corsican in his early forties who was sprawled in a wickerwork chair under the cooling breeze of an electric fan.
A glass of iced cognac and soda dangled from his right hand and he listened to the jazz with an expression of seraphic contentment on his face.
When the record ended he sat up and drained the last drop of his drink, then banged the empty tumbler loudly on the low, glass-topped table beside him.
While he waited for a response he got up and moved ponderously to the wind-up gramophone housed in a carved oaken cabinet in a cornet of the room.
He lifted the chromium-plated playing arm and with some difficulty replaced the worn needle with a fresh sliver of sharpened steel from a tiny tin.
As he restarted the record, the door of the room opened and a young Annamese peasant girl entered.
He turned and watched blearily as she walked to the table, picked up the empty glass and departed again without once raising her eyes to look at him.
Her bare feet made no sound on the polished pine floor, and she moved with the smooth, unbobbing grace of the peasant pole carrier.
She wore the "uniform" of a house congaie — a long black skirt and a white blouse-cloth tied in the small of her back to leave her arms and shoulders bare; on her dark hair she wore a scrap of cloth, also of white.
Swaying slightly and humming tunelessly in time with the tinny notes of the recording, Duclos waited until the door closed quietly behind her, then made his way unsteadily back to his seat.
In the kitchen his congaie began preparing him another drink without hesitation, although she had noticed he was swaying on his feet.
He had banged his glass on the table and it was not for her to disobey.
He had indicated already he wished her to stay in the house for the night, and she knew well enough that the continued presence of her widowed mother and four brothers in the servants' quarters in the rear compound depended on her strict  obedience to all the wishes of the plantation director in his house.
Even so, a little frown of apprehension clouded her face as her thoughts strayed to the hours ahead.
Normally, although his massive body dwarfed her own, he showed her consideration in his bed, but she knew from the rare occasions when it had happened before that drinking heavily coarsened his sexual appetites.
She had already refilled his glass five or six times but she had no idea why he was drinking so much.
In the sudden hope that he might fall asleep without calling her, she poured a large extra measure of cognac into the glass before adding the soda.
In the main room of the house Duclos sat up suddenly in his chair, wondering why his drink was taking so long.
As he looked about him his eye fell again on the telegraph message from Paris lying on the table beside him.
Snorting angrily, he picked it up and read it aloud in a contemptuous voice: "Shareholders demand immediate explanation why production tonnage down last month.
Essential you increase output at once to fill projected quota by year end."
He stared at the paper for a moment then crumpled it angrily into a ball and tossed it into a corner.
Were the damned shareholders never satisfied?
Average monthly production figures were higher than ever.
Ten new vats had been installed since Christmas, there was a new dryer, the warehouse had been extended — and all this had been achieved despite the fact that twenty of the feeble "yellows" were still dying every month from malaria!
Now because the output tonnage had fallen slightly for once, they wanted his blood!
How did they think he could get more production from his work force if they allowed so little cash for its upkeep?
If draft horses weren't fed sufficiently, they couldn't pull heavy loads, didn't they know that?
If machinery wasn't serviced it broke down!
He cursed the shareholders again, then looked up as the Annamese congaie appeared soundlessly beside him.
She avoided his eyes as she placed the fresh drink on the table by his elbow, and the unchanging passivity of her face enraged him suddenly without reason.
A European woman might at least chastise him about his drinking!
as if the jungle and the heat and the blasted "yellows" were not enough to endure in the godforsaken tropics!
His intense irritation with his distant superiors transferred itself with an illogical rush to the silent girl, and he caught her by the arm.
She halted, helpless in the grip of his massive fist, but still she kept her eyes downcast.
In his irrational anger he wanted to snap the lotus-stemmed wrist, and he tightened his grip until she winced.
Then as soon as it had come, his anger subsided and he smiled.
With his free hand he pulled at the cheap cloth of her blouse until it slipped from her shoulders and bared her breasts.
He stared at her for a moment, then motioned with his head towards the door.
 "Va te coucher," he said quietly.
 "Et deshabille-toi!" 
Holding her arms modestly across her chest to cover her nakedness, she hurried obediently from the room.
After she had gone he switched off the gramophone, drained his drink in a single gulp, then stooped to pick up the offending telegraph message.
Smoothing out the paper he stood staring at it, reading it over and over again, all the while drumming his fingers agitatedly on the grams phone top.
Then at last he straightened and squared his shoulders in resolution.
 "All right!" he said vehemently, speaking aloud.
"If Paris wants higher production this month at all costs, they shall have it!
Let them learn the lessons of capitalism the hard way.
The "yellows" will have to start half an hour earlier from tomorrow and treat five hundred trees each — instead of three hundred and fifty!
If they die faster, whose fault is it?"
He strode angrily from the room, slamming the door behind him, and when he reached the bedroom he found his lamp already lit.
In blurred outline through the fine mesh of his muslin mosquito net he could see the dark shape of the Annamese peasant girl stretched naked on his bed.
He pulled the net aside and looked down on her with greedy eyes.
She had drawn one leg up so that her thigh hid the base of her bellA from his view.
Her head was turned away from him and she held her left arm across her face.
Because she was reclining on her back, her small breasts lay flat on her boyish chest; only the nipples, purple shadows in the dull glow of the lamp, stood tautly erect, through fear.
Already distended in his excitement he had difficulty in removing his clothes.
When he finally lowered the heavy bulk of his sweating body onto the bed beside her, his roughened hands pressed her small thighs wide and he forced himself into her immediately, ignoring her repeated cries of pain.
For a few brief moments he reared and plunged on the bed, grunting like an animal, until his lust emptied itself into her.
Then his corpulent body collapsed and gradually the noise of his drunken snoring drowned out the quiet sobbing of the Annamese girl.
A black mantle of pre-dawn darkness still cloaked the jungle and the rubber plantation villages when the Annamese cai who assisted the French plantation director and his European staff began sounding clamorous gongs outside the barrack huts.
The coolies inside the fetid dens immediately began to stretch their stiffened limbs and drag themselves off their sodden mats, knowing that within minutes the cai would be among them flailing heavy staves to rouse the laggards.
Ngo Van Dong stumbled to his feet and helped his brother up quickly at the approach of the squat figure of Phat, the overseer of their barrack.
He was one of a caste of brutish Annamese of low intelligence widely cultivated by the French colonizers to serve them as jailers, labor foremen and police.
Phat was Duclos' particular favourite among the cai because the ruthless sadism with which he disciplined his fellow coolies was matched by the utter servility he showed to Duclos to ensure he retained both his approval and the necessary stamp of his authority.
It was barely four o'clock when he entered the hut of the Ngo brothers and he waddled threateningly down the canter of the earth floor towards them, shining his flashlight right and left, looking for any excuse to employ his cane.
As he drew near they heard the sickening crack of the rod striking flesh; once, twice they heard it fall but it brought no anguished shout of pain in response.
Phat struck the motionless corpse of the coolie who had died beside Hoc a third time before he realized that the wretched man had passed forever beyond pain and productive labor.
Without pause or sign of remorse he swung his flashlight on the brothers and raised his rod again.
"Fetch rope and a spade and dispose of this stinking carcass in the jungle!
And be quick."
The brutal face bulged as he yelled his order and he swung the rod again in a threatening arc.
When they had gone Phat pulled a small notebook from his shirt pocket and with a little grunt of irritation, made a mark in it beneath the number of the barrack hut.
Outside in the darkness Dong stopped and pressed his shivering brother against the flimsy wall of the barrack.
"Stay here and hide!
I will do the burial with Old Trung.
Prepare our tools and take my dose of quinine at roll call as well as your own."
He pressed into Hoc's hand the little ball of cold rice wrapped in a palm leaf that each of them always saved front the night before to give them strength to start the new day.
 "Eat my rice too — I'm not hungry this morning." 
Hoc nodded dumbly as his brother sped away to fetch a spade and rope from the cat's quarters.
When Dong returned he found the dead man was not heavy.
An emaciated rice cropper from the Red River delta who had been forced south like many others because typhoons had recently inundated the rice lands, he had worked in the rubber plantation for less than a month before succumbing to the fever.
Shocked and exhausted by the severity of the work and his illness, he had spoken little of himself or the family he had left behind in the north.
Old Trung a toughened three-year contract coolie compelled to stay on in the plantation beyond the term because he had no money or clothes to leave, knotted the cord Dong had fetched around the neck of the cadaver with a deftness that betrayed his familiarity with the task.
He picked up the dead man's only possession, a straw mat, and together he and Dong dragged the body out of the barrack and through the mud towards the jungle half a mile away.
Phat escorted them, scowling and flailing their shoulders with his cane from time to time to speed their progress.
 "Take him at least a hundred meters into the jungle," he yelled as he swung the cane across their shoulders one last time to urge them in among the trees.
Only the faintest streaks of light were brightening the sky to the east, and by the time the two coolies had gone thirty or forty yards into the jungle, the overseer was lost to sight.
Trung stopped immediately and motioned Dong to dig.
"Work quickly.
The tigers are always hungry at this hour."
Dong dug frantically with the shovel, lifting the heavy rain-soaked clods of earth with difficulty.
It tool him several minutes to make a hole only two to three feet deep.
When he stopped for a moment to wipe the sweat from his brow, Trung laid a cautionary hand on his arm.
 "Listen!" 
They stood with rigid tension listening to the brooding silence of the jungle all around them.
 "I'm sure I heard the rustle of an animal." 
Trung cocked his head for a moment longer.
Then he looked back at the hole in the ground.
"That's enough!
Take his feet."
Dong looked doubtfully at the inadequate grave.
 "But it isn't deep enough." 
From behind Trung the distinct sound of movement in the underbrush reached their ears.
"Take his feet I say!
And quickly."
Dong did as he was told, and they dropped the lifeless body into the shallow impression in the ground.
Trung untied the cord and wound it around his waist to return later to the overseer.
Then he covered the dead coolie with his mat and helped Dong fling clods  of earth rapidly on top of it with his hands.
When they had finished, one foot of the dead man still protruded above the surface.
Seeing this, Dong picked up the shovel and made to dig again.
"No!
Come; it's enough!"
Trung grabbed him by the shoulders and turned him bodily in the direction of the village.
"You are too conscientious.
It's a better and deeper grave than any I've seen.
Let's run now or we will wind up alongside him."
Dong took one last look back and shuddered at the sight of the disembodied foot poking from the red jungle earth.
He closed his eyes and offered an anguished prayer to his own ancestors and those of the dead man, begging their forgiveness.
Then he turned and ran as fast as he could to catch up with Trung.
By the time they had run the half-mile back to their barracks the tiger that had been stalking them in the penumbra had emerged from his cover.
Without difficulty the animal unearthed the dead coolie by dragging at the protruding leg and disappeared again into the undergrowth.
In the comfort of its lair its powerful jaws were soon mangling the puny chest and shoulders of the dead Annamese into a bloody pulp.
When Dong anti Old Trung fell into the roll call line on either side of Hoc outside their barrack hut, names had already been checked and the morning doses of quinine had been handed out.
Hoc was pale, but shivering less violently.
All five hundred coolies from Number Three Village were drawn up outside their barracks in long ranks; silent and apprehensive, they were wondering why they had been roused half an hour earlier and why the burly, intimidating figure of the plantation director, Duclos, was waiting to address the massed roll call beneath the single lightpole in the barrack compound.
Their bruised shoulders and backs reminded them that the cai and the French assistants had been particularly vicious that morning.
Had there been another mass breakout attempt in the night for which they were all to be punished?
Or perhaps another of the cai living quarters had again been burned down by coolies in one of the other villages?
Clutching their coupe-coupes, their tapping tools and their collecting cans, they waited dumbly, their eyes flicking  from Duclos to the cane of the overseer nearest to them.
The plantation director was standing on an upturned crate that had been placed in position for him beneath the light, and despite the early hour he was already wearing his customary pitch helmet, the sleeves of his bush shirt were rolled high on his brown muscular arms and he was bare-legged in shorts, heavy jungle boots and short thick socks.
Around his waist he wore a broad leather belt with a bone-handled knife clasped in a sheath and as usual in the presence of the coolies his right hand rested on its hilt as if it were a ceremonial sword.
Filling his barrel chest with a deep breath, he glared around at the assembled crowd.
 "Twenty years ago there was not a single rubber tree in all Indochina," he roared.
"Do you hear?
Fifteen years ago this plantation where we live and work today was virgin jungle inhabited only by savage herds of elephants!
We, the French, came twelve thousand miles across the sea.
We built roads and villages and brought rubber trees and planted them for mile after mile through your wild land.
We produced an oasis of civilized industry in this fever-ridden wilderness!"
He stopped, jammed his hands on his hips and leaned forward from the waist in a belligerent posture.
"And we worked for many years before we collected a single cup of rubber, do you hear?
Storms blew down the trees, fires ravaged the plantation, dry years killed our saplings — but we did not give up, we laboured on!"
He paused and drew himself up proudly to his full height again.
 "Today our plantations here have become the finest in all the Far East!" 
The coolies shifted uneasily, their gaze never leaving the Corsican's face.
The older ones among them who had heard similar harangues before had already sensed they were about to experience some harshening of their conditions.
I, Duclos, am responsible for the plantation of Vi An and I will not tolerate lazy, idle, work-shy "yellows" here.
His lips curled contemptuously as he used the abusive French term jaunes.
"Last month our production fell because of your contemptible idleness.
The shareholders in Paris are displeased.
They expect 1929 to be the best year ever for rubber production.
We have less than three months of the year left now, so from today the daily quota of trees to be treated by each one of you will be raised from three hundred and fifty to five hundred!"
He stopped again and glared aggressively along the ranks of silent Annamese.
"That is why you have been roused early.
Five hundred trees each and every day you will treat from now on— or  you will be punished with fines, you will be beaten and you will be clapped in irons in An Dap."
A young French assistant, who had been holding the white horse on which Duclos ranged the plantation each day, stepped forward at a signal from him and steadied the animal while he mounted.
Swinging the horse's head to face the massed coolies again, Duclos drew a long solid wood truncheon from a leather saddle scabbard and stood up in the stirrups.
"Go now!
And don't return until you have completed your quota."
As he shouted his order he spurred the horse forward suddenly the front ranks of the coolies, scattering them in the direction of the rubber groves.
It was still not yet five o'clock, and the trees themselves were scarcely distinguishable in the semidarkness.
Dong and Hoc ran panting along the adjacent ranks allotted to them, calling out frequently to encourage one another and to check each other 's progress.
They had to run constantly to complete the first tapping of their three hundred and fifty trees in the five hours before ten o'clock.
They spent only a minute or so at each tree, cleaning off dried latex, adjusting the collecting supports and making new incisions through which the day's latex could escape.
They had to work fast but with care since poor incisions invariably brought a beating from the cai or the French.
At precisely ten o'clock a siren split the burning air above the plantation to indicate that collection of the latex was to begin.
On hearing this, the brothers ran the two thousand meters back to the start of their rows and began visiting each tree in turn again to empty the cups into their carrying cans.
When the cans were full they ran with them to one of the many collecting stations from which trucks transported the latex to the central warehouses.
By the time they had finished collecting it was midday: the sun was directly overhead and the rubber groves steamed with suffocating heat.
Exhausted front seven hours of nonstop toil, the brothers flung themselves down on the red soil in the shade along with the other fifteen hundred coolies of the plantation and lay like dead men.
When they had recovered they hurriedly cooked and ate the ration of cold rice they had brought with them from the barracks and swallowed a mouthful or two of water.
Usually they cleared underbrush and weeds from the rubber groves from one o'clock until sunset, but the new quotas ordered by Duclos that morning meant they had to tap and collect from more than a hundred extra trees through the hot afternoon although their energies were largely spent.
Hoc's fever began to  return halfway through the task, and Dong ran frantically back and forth between their adjoining rows, working his own and his brother's trees while Hoc rested.
This saved Hoc from the beating that would inevitably have followed discovery of his shortcomings when the scowling overseers dipped their yardsticks into the cans at the collecting station.
It was nearly seven in the evening and the sun was setting behind their backs before the two weary, footsore brothers were able to limp back to their barracks in Number Three Village with their joint quota fulfilled.
At the gates they found the cai assembling the whole labor force before the barrack huts to witness the public punishment of those who had failed to meet the new demands.
The exhausted coolies stumbled against one another in panic as the overseers marshalled them into a circle with blows about the head and shoulders.
A group of thirty or forty downcast men stood apart in the canter of thin ring, their heads and arms hanging slack in attitudes of despair.
Dong put a supportive arm around his brother and pulled him deeper into the crowd.
There at least they would not have to see and hear the effect of the blows as clearly as those in front.
Duclos was watching grimly from astride his horse, and a hush fell on the compound when he rose in his stirrups and lifted his own stave from its leather scabbard as a signal to the cai to begin.
The first batch of five coolies were flung face downward in the red dirt, and under the direction of the burly figure of Phat, half a dozen of his subordinates began lashing at the exposed soles of their bare feet.
Their staves rose and fell steadily, the men swinging them high above their heads with a measured and deliberate rhythm born of long practice.
Each coolie received a hundred blows, and only their muffled cries of pain punctuated the regular thud of the staves.
Phat counted the strokes, darting an occasional glance at Duclos to ensure he retained his approval.
On the hundredth blow he motioned his subordinates to cease and haul the moaning coolies upright.
 "Nhanh nhu tho!" yelled Duclos, brandishing his own stave.
 "Now run like hares!" 
The cai prodded the five men until they began hobbling on their swollen, bleeding feet around the edge of the circle formed by their fellows.
One who fell was beaten again before being dragged upright and pushed on his way.
The five Annamese, grunting with pain continued stumbling and staggering around the circle in grotesque imitation of bounding hares while the next  group of victims were thrown down in the dirt.
As the punishments resumed, the sound of revving engines broke upon the scene and three open trucks crowded with new coolie labourers swung into the compound in a swirl of dust.
A brightly polished black Citron followed them in and drew up beside Duclos' horse.
Phat looked inquiringly towards his master, wondering if the procedures should be halted, but the Corsican waved him on, gesturing peremptorily for the crowd to he moved back so that the new recruits could see what was happening.
Dong, because of his unusual height, had a clear view of the new arrivals above the heads of the crowd — and within a matter of seconds his startled eyes fell on two familiar faces that he had not seen for well over a year.
The tall stoop-shouldered European in a white suit and felt hat who climbed from the gleaming car and offered a languid hand in greeting to Duclos he recognized first as Auguste Lepine, the director of the Indigenous Labor Recruitment Agency.
Lepine had accompanied the cai who had lured him and his brother to the plantation eighteen months earlier, but despite the feeling of hatred the sight of him inspired Dong scarcely gave the recruiter a second glance.
His astonished gaze was fixed on the second familiar face staring out at the public floggings from amid the crowd of frightened coolies on the first truck, a face he hadn't seen for even longer — that of his own father!
 "Where on earth do you keep finding them, Auguste?" 
Claude Duclos wiped the champagne froth from his mustache with the back of his hand and refilled their glasses.
 "I heard a rumour you were deliberately smashing dikes in the north and flooding the paddies to drive the starving" yellows"to our rubber trees.
Is that right?"
Lepine's sallow features twitched and a sardonic smile flickered across his face, but he didn't reply.
Instead he took a sheaf of glossy photographs from his portmanteau and pushed them across the table towards the Corsican.
Duclos rattled the empty champagne bottle impatiently against the table-top as he picked them up.
The oppressive heat was making both men sweat despite the breeze from the electric fan, and distant thunder presaged the early  approach of the nightly storm.
Duclos mopped his forehead with a handkerchief already soaked in perspiration before looking at the photographs.
Some showed neatly dressed Annamese families smiling from the doorways of houses set in small gardens beside groves of rubber trees.
In other well-fed, well-clad workers were tapping trees while friendly, attentive Frenchmen in sun helmets looked indulgently over their shoulders.
Duclos smiled grimly as he flicked through them.
"Marvellous, mon vieux.
Marvellous!
You show them these, and then you have to put up barriers to stop them volunteering in their thousands, yes?"
 "It's not quite as easy as that, Duclos," replied the recruiter testily.
"It's very hard work.
Last year I supplied the plantations of Cochin-China and Annam with thirty-five thousand northern coolies — and shipped another ten thousand to the New Hebrides."
The Corsican whistled approvingly.
Forty-five thousand bodies!
And you make a fifteen-piastre profit on each one, don't you?
That's nearly seven hundred thousand piasters.
He closed his eyes to calculate then opened them and whistled softly again.
 "About seven million francs — not a bad profit for the year, Auguste." 
He smiled and made a little admiring gesture with his hand that took in Lepine's well-cut linen suit, his handmade shoes and silk shirt.
 "No wonder, Auguste, you can afford to dress now like an English lord." 
 "If your wastage rate on these plantations wasn't so high, there would be no need for me to supply you with new coolies all the time," said Lepine sourly.
 "If you treated them better, they wouldn't be mutilating their hands and feet at the rate they are, to escape your clutches." 
He glanced at another sheaf of papers.
 "Your fever deaths too are high again — or are they mostly concealed suicides?" 
Duclos, taken aback by Lepine's hostility, sat up indignantly in his seat.
"The fashion for voluntary mutilation is being stamped out, Auguste.
They know that we send them straight to the cells at An Dap now, no matter how badly they injure themselves.
And can I help it if so many "yellows" die of fever in their own country?"
He shrugged helplessly.
"I have to drive them hard.
Always the shareholders in Paris want higher production.
Already they've had six million francs' profit from an investment of twelve million — but always they want more."
Lepine yawned and passed a hand wearily across his face.
 "You talk of the shareholders in Paris as though you yourself owned no  shares in the plantation," he said slightingly.
 "Perhaps it is most convenient to imagine you are doing all that you do here at the behest of some distant ogre." 
 "My holding is very small, Auguste," protested Duclos with a little laugh of embarrassment.
 "Compared with the major shareholdings, it is nothing." 
He looked at the stiff unbending features of the recruiter for a moment: the dark hollows around his eyes and his dry, parchment-like skin betrayed a long addiction to opium, and Duclos guessed that hid irritability stemmed for this.
 "But why should we endure the hell of life in the colonies, mon vieux, if we don't enjoy ourselves a little and try to put something by for our old age at the same time, heh?" 
The Corsican, straining to inspire conviviality in his guest, picked up his champagne glass and held it towards him, inviting him to drink to the idea.
But the recruiter steadfastly ignored him.
At that moment a clap of thunder exploded directly overhead as the storm burst and rain began beating noisily against the outside of the house.
Both men listened to it for a moment, then Duclos stood up restlessly and walked over to his gramophone.
 "Perhaps we need a little jazz, Auguste," he said, winding the mechanism vigorously.
"I find it is the only thing which will keep the cafard at bay when I'm alone.
I try not to drink too much when nobody's here.
Without my jazz I don't think I would survive the tropics.
What would you prefer?
Sidney Bechet's saxophone?
I have "Wild Cat Blues" or "Kansas City Man." 
Lepine shrugged indifferently, and the plantation director put on a record of his own choice.
He stood listening attentively for a moment as the saxophone vied with the noise of the storm outside; then he returned to his seat, picked up his champagne glass and drained it.
 "Another fashion we are stamping out on the plantation, Auguste, is Bolshevism," he said, leaning earnestly towards the recruiter.
 "Did you hear about the trouble the big Michelin plantation as Phu Rieng has been having with" red peril "agitators?" 
 "I've been in the Pacific islands for a month looking at the plantations there," replied Lepine in an uninterested voice.
The jazz coming from the gramophone was irritating him and in his limbs the uneasiness familiar to smokers of opium was beginning to take hold.
"There was a mass breakout two weeks ago and the cai uncovered an attempt to organize a strike.
Half-a-dozen coolies have been clapped in irons — assorted Bolsheviks and members of something called the "Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang" — the Nationalist Party."
He snorted with contempt.
"My overseers keep their eyes  peeled here, I can tell you.
The slightest suspicion of trouble and we run them into An Dap so fast their yellow feet don't touch the ground."
He laughed mirthlessly, hoping to persuade Lepine to share his black humour.
 "You didn't bring any Comintern infiltrators with that load today, did you, Auguste?" 
 "Just getting coolie labor to you here is difficult enough, Duclos," snapped the recruiter.
 "I can't give you guarantees about their political purity." 
At that moment the door opened to admit the barefoot Annamese congaie carrying a fresh bottle of chilled Perrier-Jouet champagne.
She filled Duclos' empty glass unobtrusively and retreated silently towards the door.
As he picked up his drink Duclos looked meaningfully at Lepine and raised an inquiring eyebrow in her direction.
Lepine dropped his gaze.
 "Can she prepare a pipe?" 
 "Of course." 
 "Then for that alone, I will require her." 
The recruiter spoke his words with careful deliberation, peering intently into the froth of his champagne.
Then he added: "And do I understand correctly that you don't keep a" boy "in your house?" 
Duclos looked puzzled for a second.
Then comprehension dawned and he bristled.
 "I have no need of" boys "in my house," he said brusquely.
 "That's not one of my vices." 
 "Really, Duclos, you surprise me." 
The tone of the recruiter remained confident, unabashed.
"It might perhaps be worth considering who controls your supply of coolie labor now.
I tend to remember first the requirements of those plantations that care to provide the best hospitality when I pay a visit."
Duclos' eyes narrowed as he registered the undisguised threat in the recruiter's words; then he forced a laugh to his lips.
"I am a man of the world Auguste, mon ami.
I'm sure we can find a pretty young thing for you."
A hundred yards away across the rain-drowned compound Dong and Hoc were weeping openly as they embraced their father in the blackness of their leaking barrack hut.
Huddled together on the muddy earth floor they were content for a long time to embrace one another without speaking.
 "How did you find us, Father?" sobbed Dong at last.
He strained his eyes but could make out no more than the vague outline of Ngo Van Loc's face in the darkness.
"The party helped me trace you — the Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dang.
It's a new secret organization of nationalists and patriots  working to free us from the French!"
The older man paused and his voice took on a faint note of censure.
 "But how did you come to be here?" 
Dong and his younger brother moved closer together.
 "After we ran away from you we travelled as far as Quang Nam — that's where we met the French recruiter who arrived here tonight with your truck," said Dong hesitantly.
"He and his Annamese cat tricked us.
They gave us six piasters and told us it was advance pay for work on a rubber plantation not far away.
They said we'd receive eighty cents a day for six hours work and promised us good food, good houses to live in.
They then put us on trucks to bring us here and anyone who tried to escape was beaten senseless."
Dong's voice became tearful at the memory.
We tried to escape but every time they caught us and beat us.
We tried to write letters to you — but they were taken away by the cai and burned.
Around them the coolies punished earlier whimpered and groaned in their sleep.
Others snored and all the time the rain pounded loudly against the thin palm thatch above their heads.
 "But why did you run away from the hunting camp in the first place?" 
Both brothers shifted uncomfortably on the wet ground but did not answer.
 "Why, Dong, why?" he asked again in a gentler tone.
After another long silence Dong found his voice.
 "We were ashamed, Father." 
 "Ashamed of what?" 
A slight break in the older man's voice suggested he already suspected what the answer might be and was afraid.
"Ashamed of what was happening.
Dong's answer came in an almost inaudible whisper.
We hated what our mother was doing and you knew!"
Loc let out a little moan of anguish.
"I thought you were too young to understand!
I should have tried to explain."
He groaned again.
 "Now it is too late." 
Hoc gripped his father's arm in alarm.
 "Why is it too late?" 
 "Because all I can do is to pray to the spirits of our ancestors for forgiveness." 
The despair in their father's voice had sent a sudden chill of apprehension through the brothers.
"What do you mean?
Where is our mother"asked Dong.
 "Why have you left her alone to come here?" 
Ngo Van Loc reached out in the darkness and clasped both his sons' hands tightly in his own.
 "Your mother is dead." 
 "Dead?" 
Both brothers echoed the word in horror.
"Yes.
She died two months ago — in prison."
 "How in prison?" 
Loc hesitated, then took a long breath.
We supplied information to different revolutionary groups for many years about Devraux's work for the Surete.
I often travelled abroad with him as his driver when he investigated the activities of our revolutionary emigres.
When the Quoc Dan Dang was formed two years ago we joined secretly and agreed to continue spying on Devraux.
His voice broke with emotion and faded to a whisper.
"That's why she did what she did — so that Devraux wouldn't suspect us.
She hated it!
And I hated it too!
It didn't happen often, but when it did, we tried to put it from our minds — to remember only what we were trying to do for our country."
Hoc buried his face in his brother's shoulder and began sobbing silently.
For a long time the furious rhythms of the storm and the grunting of the exhausted men around them were the only sounds to be heard inside the hut.
 "But why was she taken to prison?" asked Dong in a choked voice.
"I had to go away for several days and while I was gone your mother saw some papers in Devraux's desk.
She hid them in our quarters, thinking they might be of use to the party, but Devraux found them and she was taken to prison.
I was warned by the party and didn't return to the house."
He paused, fighting again to control his emotions.
"A month later I learned she was dead.
The French say she died of ill health!
But I know from the jailers that she was tortured!
The French are terrified of the revolutionary movement and are torturing all prisoners for information, with electricity."
 "He killed her!" breathed Dong.
 "Devraux killed her!" 
He pulled his sobbing brother to him and they rocked back and forth together making little moaning noises between their clenched teeth, trying to ease their agony.
A moment later the sounds of the storm were magnified suddenly in the hut as the door at one end flew open.
A flashlight searched back and forth across the sleeping bodies of the coolies as the hulking figure of Duclos advanced down the barrack in a dripping black rain cape.
The beam came to rest on the Ngo brothers, and after a moment's hesitation Duclos bent down and seized Hoc by the arm.
 "Come, my pretty lad, you're coming with me!" 
He hauled the sobbing boy to his feet.
"This is no time to sleep.
There's a spot of extra work for you tonight."
Beneath the shelter of the plantation house verandah, Auguste Lepine was standing, his eyes glazed with opium, watching the rain.
When he saw Duclos striding back across the compound dragging a young Annamese boy behind him, he smiled quietly to himself, stepped back into his bedroom and began fumbling with the buttons of his silk shirt.
The plangent notes of the dawn gongs rousing the coolies from their barracks faded and died as Claude Duclos drained his third and last cup of cafe noire on the verandah of the plantation house.
The scowl of irritation on his face was more marked than usual, and the moment he replaced the cup on its saucer the congaie, who had been hovering behind the screen door, hurried out to remove his breakfast tray.
Sniffing the moist morning air, he fancied he could still detect sickly traces of the opium smoked by his guest, and his scowl deepened.
He found the personal habits of the coolie recruiter deeply repugnant and this only increased the resentment he felt at his helpless dependence on him for replacements to his dwindling labor force.
From inside the house the scratchy gramophone burble of "Muskrat Ramble" was providing an incongruous counterpoint to the screech of the wild birds wakening unseen in the roof of the surrounding jungle, and Duclos sighed and closed his eyes to concentrate better on the music.
For a minute or two he relaxed; with something approaching a smile on his face, he sat drumming his fingers on the tabletop and tapping the toe of one of his jungle boots on the verandah boards.
Then he opened his eyes again to peer at his watch and the expression of irritation returned.
From the nearby compound of Village Number Three he could hear the Annamese cai marshalling the shuffling coolies for roll call.
He listened for a moment to their angry shouts and the occasional thud of their rattan canes, then he stood up and jammed his pith helmet squarely on his head; automatically his hand checked the presence of his bone-handled knife in its sheath.
As he made to step down from the verandah he heard a footfall  behind him and turned to find Lepine, already immaculate in his white suit, ready to leave.
Although the recruiter had obviously bathed, he still exuded the faint mustiness of the habitual opium smoker as he pressed past Duclos to take his place at the breakfast table.
"Bonjour, Auguste, mon vieux.
I hope you've enjoyed your first visit to Vi An,"said the plantation director with a forced affability.
Lepine confined his greeting to a surly nod.
Without looking up he poured himself coffee and sipped it noisily.
 "Your Annamite was scabious — and he snivelled constantly," lie complained in a sour voice.
"Tant pis, tant pis!
Perhaps next time I'll have more time to prepare.
I know what to look for now."
Duclos offered his hand, anxious to be gone from the unwholesome presence of the recruiter.
 "Please excuse me I must begin my work." 
Lepine shook his hand perfunctorily without rising.
"I trust from now on you will employ your work force sparingly.
Replacements for your plantation won't be so easy to come by in future."
The recruiter's voice had become undisguisedly offensive and Duclos, after a moment's hesitation, stepped off the verandah and strode angrily away without replying.
When he reached the barracks of Number Three Village the sky to the east was already lightening but the cai had still not finished handing out the morning quinine.
Immediately the anger and irritation he had brought with him from the house erupted in a howl of anger.
He snatched up a handful of the medicaments and began distributing them himself to the coolies in the front rank.
Halfway along the line he came across the Ngo brothers, and his eye fell on Hoc.
The Annamese boy was standing in an attitude of despair, his chin sunk on his chest.
His coupe-coupe and his other tapping tools hung limply in his hands at his sides, and he didn't raise his head at the Corsican's approach.
The sight of the youth who had so displeased the detested recruiter and thereby jeopardized his future supply of coolies stopped Duclos in his tracks.
Hoc's puny shoulders and bowed head reminded the furious Corsican suddenly of his own helplessness in the face of the unreasoning demands from Paris, and without warning he struck out at Hoc with his free hand, knocking him to the ground.
"You snivelling wretch!
Stand up straight and show respect to your superiors — or you will feel the irons of An Dap about your ankles again!"
Hoc struggled upright with difficulty.
For a moment he stood  gazing balefully at the Corsican's back as he turned away to pass on down the line.
Then his eyes, red-rimmed from weeping, widened dementedly and he lunged from his place swinging the long blade of his coupe-coupe high above his head.
One of the Annamese cai yelled a frantic warning, and Duclos was starting to turn when the sharpened edge of the heavy blade split his helmet.
Because he was swivelling his head to look behind him, the blow skidded off his skull, severed his left ear and bit deep into vital veins and arteries at the base of his neck.
The anguished force of the stroke drove the Corsican to his knees and, paralysed with shock, he remained in this posture, groping ineffectually for the bone-handled knife as his blood spurted onto the red dust around him.
Hoc and his brother shrank back in momentary horror front the man dying at their feet; then Hoc began sobbing loudly.
All around them the other coolies stared in disbelief at the sight of their tormentor so astonishingly struck down before their eyes; then the floodwaters of their hatred burst some invisible dam, and several men dashed forward screaming incoherently to slash at the kneeling man's head and shoulders with their coupe-coupes.
He fell on his side under the onslaught, and one coolie wrenched the bone-handled knife from his helpless fingers.
With a wild yell of triumph the Annamese dropped to his knees and plunged the knife to the hilt in the dying Corsican's chest.
The moment Duclos fell, his two young French assistants and the cai started instinctively towards him; but seeing the electrifying force of spontaneous, hate-inspired rebellion sweeping through the crowd of five hundred coolies, they froze where they stood, their faces blanching with fear.
The coolies sensed their fright instantly and in a moment forty or fifty of them were advancing menacingly on the little group of overseers, brandishing the implements they had used for so long to tend the rubber plantation under their ruthless tutelage.
Caught up in the hysteria of the moment, Hoc ran blindly with the milling crowd, still clutching the bloodstained coupe-coupe with which he'd felled the Corsican.
His brother, Dong, ran yelling beside him, as shocked and bewildered as all the other coolies by their sudden freedom.
Knowing they could expect no mercy from the revenge-crazed mob, the Annamese cai were the first to turn and flee, and the two terrified Frenchmen followed them.
They reached the shelter of the brick-built cainca far enough ahead of their pursuers to lock themselves in, and for several minutes the coolies milled around the building, trying without success to smash  the stout wooden doors and shutters.
Then a voice yelled: "Burn them out!
We must burn them out!"and Dong and Hoc joined a party of two-dozen coolies in a headlong dash to the tractor sheds to fetch drums of oil.
The two boys were splashing the fuel frenziedly over the walls and windows of the cainca when their father found them.
Flushed and wild-eyed like all the others, they resisted at first when he tried to drag them away.
"The alarm will be raised soon!
The provincial garrison at Bien Hoa will be called out!
We can't take on the whole French colonial army — we must escape.
Now!"
Loc seized them both by the arm and forced them to run with him towards the jungle.
As they reached the trees they heard a wild burst of cheering and turned to see the first tongues of flame licking up the walls of the cainca.
Several hundred coolies were surging round the building baying for the blood of the overseers inside.
"They will have guns in there!
They'll shoot their way out!"cried Loc, urging his sons on again.
"Many coolies will be killed.
They are foolish to stay."
 "But where are we going, Father?" asked Dong frantically.
"Whenever we tried to escape before we were always captured by the Moi.
It's impossible to get through the jungle to Saigon from here."
"We're not going south!
Runaways from these plantations have always tried to reach Saigon because it is the nearest big city.
That's foolish!
We will go the other way — to Hue, to Hanoi.
It's much farther but there we can carry on the fight.
The Quoc Dan Dang is stronger in the north!"
A sudden flurry of shots rang out from the direction of the cainca, confirming the older man's prediction, and without further argument the two boys turned and followed him into the jungle at a run.
On the verandah of the plantation house Auguste Lepine heard the commotion in the compound but in the half-light could not see clearly enough to identify its cause.
As a precaution he returned leisurely to his bedroom to collect the case containing his business papers and the revolver he habitually carried.
On his instructions his luggage had already been carried to the Citron by the congaie.
When he stepped out onto the verandah again, to his astonishment a mob of twenty or more Annamese was swarming across the garden dragging between them drums of oil and petrol stolen from the tractor sheds, intent on firing the house.
They recognized him instantly and half-a-dozen coolies wielding coupe-coupes separated from the rest and dashed towards him.
Snatching his revolver from his case, he emptied the gun into the advancing group from a range of only thirty yards; three or four of the coolies stumbled and fell, but the rest came on screaming with even greater frenzy.
Sweating with fear, Lepine dashed along the verandah and flung himself behind the wheel of the Citron.
The engine started first time and the car shot away down the dirt road, but he could not prevent the leading coolie from leaping onto the running board beside the driver's door.
As the motor car gathered speed, the Annamese flailed wildly at the windshield until the glass splintered in the recruiter's face, blinding him.
Revving fast in low gear the Citron swerved in a half-circle and smashed into the bank at the roadside, flinging the coolie clear.
Lepine was knocked unconscious by the impact and a few seconds later his head was hacked from his shoulders by a flurry of coupe-coupe blows rained on him in the driving seat by the surviving coolies.
They tipped the contents of one oil drum into the car and threw in a burning rag.
When its petrol tank exploded a few minutes later, the flames from the blazing car, the house and the cainca lit the dawn sky more brilliantly than the first rays of the rising sun.
Dao Van Lat studied his naked body in the long mirror and was seized afresh with an exhilaration of awe.
For an instant, too, a detached sense of pity welled up inside him at the body's seeming frailty in the face of its task; could the slight, sloping shoulders carry the heavy burdens of leadership, the thin arms and bony wrists hold a long steady course?
Would the sharp-jutting pelvis, the spindly, narrow-thighed legs support all the endeavours of the rest?
His amber skin was suffused with the roseate glow of a red Tet lantern hanging from the ceiling, and because it cast a shadow across the dark valley of his groin he brushed his hand quickly down the funnel of his lower belly as though seeking reassurance of his completeness.
Poetic wishes for longevity and health written in Chinese calligraphy on blood-red streamers decorated the walls of the shabby room adjoining the printing shop of the Hanoi newspaper for  which he worked.
On the little altar to his ancestors beside the mirror, lighted candles stood amidst tiny dishes of fruits, pork, fish and rice, and behind him incense burners and small brass pans of aloe wood set on a low lacquered table sent perfumed smoke drifting in gentle spirals towards the ceiling.
When he raised his gaze to inspect his face, Lat found his eyes agleam with the intensity of his fervour.
Round, high-cheeked, boyish but with a scholar's high brow, it was the face of a man of twenty-seven years of age nerving himself for an extreme deed, a supreme effort of will.
It was a face that Joseph and Flavia Sherman would have recognized instantly from their encounter with the Annamese journalist in the palace of Khai Dinh at Tet exactly five years earlier because it had changed little, if at all, in the interval of time.
Lat searched his own eyes and saw reflected there the mingled emotions that haunted his mind.
He was proud that the invisible spirit animating the slight frame had dared to conceive the intended deed as his duty; but he was afraid at the same time that he would lack the courage to endure the pain and carry it through.
 "Our hearts are like iron or stone; they will never tremble!" 
Between clenched teeth he quoted the words of the nineteenth century poet Phan Van Tri.
Written nearly eighty years before as marauding French forces seized their first tracts of territory in Cochin-China, they reflected his own deep conviction, derived from a totally different experience, in the ultimate supremacy of the spirit of man.
Hadn't he studied in France and seen the men of this supposedly superior civilization living amid their mighty machines and their great institutions?
Hadn't he read the philosophers of France, of Germany and of other European nations?
Didn't they all agree with Phan Van Tri that the seeds of victory were to be found only in the spirit of man?
And wasn't the disciplined, self-denying spirit of Nietzsche's Superman the finest expression of this high ideal?
After all, hadn't the insuperable iron ships, the powerful weapons, the all-conquering engines of the colonialists been born first in the determined spirit of Western man?
If Western nations could produce the philosophical Superman of Nietzsche, why not Asian nations too?
The time had come at last for Confucius to bow to the sages of the modern world!
He nodded avidly in affirmation of his train of thought and turned so that the light fell directly on the front of his body.
Again he ran his gaze down his reflection from shoulder to loins.
The physical manifestation of his manhood, as always in repose, appeared a shrunken, insignificant part of him.
He wondered  anew that the great and glorious power of life could flow so fiercely and endlessly through such a shrivelled and unbeautiful fountainhead.
It hardly seemed possible that powerful, destructive passions could spring unendingly from such an unpromising source!
He shook his head in a little motion of disbelief but he knew there could be no turning back.
If he was to rise above the constant lure of carnal lusts that distracted him daily, if he was to dedicate and devote his life to freeing his country from the monstrous rule of France, there could be no choice!
He clenched his fists at his sides to strengthen his resolve.
If he was to become the Asian Superman of Nietzsche's teachings, he must cast aside all thought of pleasure and sensual gratification and concentrate only on the task before him!
Closing his eyes, he forced himself to think of his hatred for the colonial French.
Behind his back they called him a "Jaune" — a "yellow" with its unmistakable implication of cowardice; if feeling more tactful they called him an "Annamite" — but wasn't that only in truth a man of China's ancient colony, the "Pacified South" ?
True, they had been vassals of China for nine long centuries — but hadn't their hearts "like iron and stone" enabled them at last to throw off the Chinese yoke when the Tang dynasty crumbled?
Hadn't they hurled back the Mongols from their frontiers and defeated the invasion forces of the Sung and Ming emperors?
And when their great Emperor Gia Long finally rose from the Mekong delta a century ago to unify all the peoples from Saigon to Hanoi, hadn't he triumphantly renamed his new empire "Viet Nam" ?
That was what they must keep in mind!
The arrival of the French colonizers a few decades later had merely given them another chance to demonstrate their indomitable spirit.
The white foreigners may have partitioned and ruled their land for seventy years, but that didn't make him and his countrymen "yellows,"  "Annamites" or "Annamese." 
They were men of "Viet Nam" !
They were Vietnamese!
And in their spirit lay the dormant power that could make them proud, free men again!
That power must be released, allowed to gush forth.
Yes, and he must lead them and inspire his companions by his example!
He opened his eyes and glanced at the clock beside his bed.
In five hours time it would be midnight.
The first day of the first month in the Year of the Horse was at hand.
In the Western calendar a new decade had just begun — it was the right time for a new beginning!
The intensity of the emotions evoked by his train of thought quickened his breathing and he rushed across the room to the bookshelves in the shadows beside the ancestral altar.
