The Gateway
SCENE: The Garden in Summer
A tall, ugly, c.1930 red brick house; sash windows, slate roof, twin dormers, chocolate front door with full-length reeded glass panel, anodised letter box.
The rest is new, maroon paintwork, the edges badly over-run on the glazing.
Flat marshland to either side.
Behind the house, the railway embankment stretches straight and level in both directions as far as the eye can see, which is a long way.
The only other buildings visible are the multiple apexes of a warehouse showing above the embankment, the pumping house and eight vats of a sewage works half a mile west, and, at least three miles beyond this, a small group of houses and the square tower of a church.
A concrete road separates the open front garden from a field of bright yellow rape.
A flat concrete drive on the left of the house leads to the rear.
A strip of bare earth to the left of the drive contains three black lumps of metal that might be car engines, and part of a rusting harrow.
At the back of the house, a square lawn slopes down to a vegetable plot.
A fence cannibalised from old pallets divides this from the scrapyard and a large, old-fashioned caravan hand-painted in green and cream.
The near, right-hand end-window of the caravan is partially blinded by a crude leaded-light depicting a pink figure with purple beard swimming into the mouth of a big purple fish.
Rising from the roof of the caravan is an eight-foot Dexion cross guyed by a triple wire  hawser.
Both upright and cross-member are strung with orange light bulbs.
Beyond the caravan, various sheds, a yellow crane and mountains of wrecked vehicles.
The grass of the lawn is green in a circle around a sprinkler (not turned on) and in a smaller patch around a longstanding leak in the hose; the rest is brown grass or bare, cracked earth.
A pair of double sheets hang from opposite sides of a rotary drier at the centre.
One of the sheets is worn to a hole, the other muslin-thin.
From an open French window comes the drone of what might be ‘Gardeners' Question Time’.
In the shade of the washing sits Cymbeline, straight brown hair elastic-banded into bunches.
She is plump with ingrowing elbows.
She wears only denim dungarees (one strap, unfastened, hangs loose) and pink bootees.
The skin of her naked arms and shoulders is smooth, pink and, like the dungarees, dirty.
She has water in her red teapot.
Between her spraddled legs is a yellow gingham tea towel on which are laid two red cups and saucers, both containing water, and two plates with Smarties and hundreds-and-thousands on.
A thin, pale woman emerges from a side door with a basket of washing.
Her hands and arms are streaked with maroon paint, a clot of maroon hair flops over one eye.
She hangs the washing then kneels by the child and pretends to sip ‘tea’.
She makes sounds of relish: ‘Mmmm, mmmm.
Thank you, darling.’
From the front of the house comes the chug and clatter of a heavy petrol mower.
Today the breeze is from the west, and it stinks.
Enter: Me, grunting, carrying a large, overflowing grassbox.
I am helping my Pa with the outdoor work, as is right and proper.
In September I move up to top class.
Unfortunately I'll be stuck there for two years.
As Miss Barraclough says, there's nowhere else to go for a star like me.
I smile at Ma and my sister as I totter towards the  compost heap beyond the garden shed.
Cymbeline is too engrossed to notice, but Ma glances up and tells me, ‘Cymby says she would like Bimbim to join her and Mummy in a nice cup of tea when he's finished his job.’
That's all she says, then goes back to their private party.
I nod, but she's not looking.
Trudge, trudge, trudge.
Puff, pant, phewy.
Lift, grunt, tip.
My fingers ache and I feel my face to be beetroot-red.
I'm not complaining.
Far from it.
It's jobs like these that earn me my pocket money — forty pence weekly which goes straight in my savings account.
When I'm ten, it goes up to fifty.
Some of them at Marshside Junior get more than that already.
For nothing.
Spoilt brats, I say.
Money doesn't grow on trees.
I lean into the compost box to grab a double armful of grass cuttings which I take to the courgette beyond the shed and carefully place around the stem.
This is to stop the roots drying out; I have not been ordered to do this but am using my initiative.
On the way back, I set down the grassbox, unplug the sprinkler and coil the hosepipe (which Pa, being always so busy, has obviously forgotten) in even circles around my hand and elbow, then go to the shed and lay it carefully over the two dowelling pegs.
I then collect the grassbox and jog back to the front of the house where Pa is waiting.
I stand well back as the engine accelerates to cutting speed with a roar and a grind and a clatter of the blades.
I love watching the grass fly into the box, and the beautifully cropped track the big machine leaves in its wake.
And the smell…
Pa is a genius with machines.
He's the best.
If he sees a worm or even a woodlouse, everything stops for the rescue.
The front is the shady side of our house; the grass here is long.
Soon the box will be full again.
I rest for a minute on our cardinal-red front step.
The Ransome Multimower 30inch Reel-cutter with seven horse Villiers engine is not new — of course it is not  — but it's big.
Pa bought it at Faversham market where the man gave it away for ten pounds.
There were minor problems with the belt and gears but, as Pa said, It's a great deal of engine for ten pounds, and Ma should not be afraid to use it.
Especially since there's no electric cable to cut for the fifty-fourth time, he added, with a big wink so she'd know he was joking.
Ma is thin and she's not all that strong, but she did have a go, persevering even after it mowed down most of her prize herb bed.
These things take practice, as Pa explained.
It's only a matter of getting accustomed to the weight of the clutch.
You can't expect miracles.
But Pa is operating the machine himself today, it being Sunday and Ma having excused herself on account of the washing.
I don't think Pa was too pleased, in view of his Sunday schedule, but he would never raise his voice to her, particularly on this day of all days.
He finishes at the front and brings the machine round to the back lawn where my sister is having her picnic.
The old engine has bags of character, which makes it a little hard to start sometimes, so Pa has left it running while wheeling it through.
Although the revs are low the blades are still turning so he has it tilted back on the iron roller.
It makes very loud crunching, splitting noises on the concrete path.
At this point the outside phone bell goes.
Pa sets the Ransome down on the grass, runs to the caravan, which has its own telephone at the office end, and disappears inside.
Although neither Mrs Chalmers, the light-bulb lady, nor old Frank who does tyres and drives the Recovery, work Sundays, Pa is always ready to collect vehicles himself at any time, night and day, weekends included.
This does not conflict with his religious principles because, as he says, he enjoys it.
And if a person enjoys something, that's rest.
Sunday mornings, he records ‘Morning Service’ on  Radio Four, and, in the afternoon, he retires to the caravan to prepare the sermon.
These activities, and Evensong itself, are top priority; at these times, Ma takes the calls indoors, which means I am in charge of Cymby and any cooking et cetera which might be in progress.
Other than that, Pa's Sundays are spent on the garden, which is also ‘rest’, being his pride and joy.
There are no flowers in our garden, but the vegetables are exceptional.
Pa and Ma are both vegans.
One of the courgettes has been allowed to grow into a marrow, ready for our own harvest festival.
It's already as big as Pa's gumboot.
This summer has been bad for veg, apart from the courgette, which had special treatment.
The hosepipe ban made it hard for Pa to water during the hours of daylight.
The back lawn is so parched it barely needs cutting, but the Percy Thrower book does say that lawns must be cut at least weekly in summer, so that's what we do.
While Pa answers the phone, the Ransome chugs lumpily; the tickover being slow for such a large, single cylinder.
Although I am not a mechanic like Pa, the machine holds a strange attraction for me.
It sets my imagination on fire.
Miss Barraclough says I've a ‘bizarre’ imagination, which, according to Ma, means exceptional.
This morning Pa sharpened the blades.
He has a special machine for this.
It comes from the 1930s when they made things properly.
My job was to spray the drive belts with belt gum whenever they started to slip.
Sharpening the blades of an eighteen-inch cylinder is a four-hour job, so he really did need my help.
The blade sharpener has its own wooden shed.
The machine is spragged to the walls to stop it from rocking, but it doesn't.
What happens when you turn on the motor is the whole shed begins to vibrate.
At first the belts slip round the flat pulleys — they're meant to — but as soon as I squirt the gum they grab and the shafts pick up speed  real fast, and the spokes on the pulleys blur and disappear.
Then comes the slapping sound of the belt-joining clips whipping round the iron pulleys, getting faster and faster as the whole machine gathers speed.
I watched Pa mark the first blade with yellow chalk, pull down his welder's mask, then winch up the grinding wheel till it just pinged against the right-hand end of the blades, throwing a couple of sparks.
I had to stand back with my finger on the off button as he turned the handle which moves the grinding wheel along the blade.
The operator must keep the blade in contact with the stone at just the right pressure with his fingers.
This is to achieve a polishing action.
Too much pressure, and you get a rough edge.
After about an inch I was told to switch off while he checked the angle and depth of cut.
Some blades are flat, but the Ransome has a slight feather down on the trailing edge.
That is what makes it cut so cleanly.
He adjusted the angle slightly and notched up the vernier to increase contact.
He then nodded to me, and dropped the visor.
Mainly the sparks fly down off the wheel, but some seem to cling to the circumference all round then fly up into the operator's face.
With the mask down I could not see my father's expression.
As I was watching the sparks bounce off the curved perspex, I suddenly remembered part of a nightmare I'd never remembered before.
There were no details other than the knowledge of a fountain of sparks and my skin dissolving like hot margarine.
Next thing Pa was lunging past me to switch off the machine.
Up went the visor.
His angry, red face said, ‘Have you gone deaf, boy?
Here, give me that.’
And he snatched the can of belt spray out of my hand.
‘Go and see if your mother wants you.
You're nothing but a menace in here.’
I wasn't quite sure what I had done, or rather, not done, but whatever it was, I was thoroughly disgusted with myself.
Father had lunch in the caravan.
I seemed always  to be letting him down one way or another.
The afternoon job, grass boy, seemed to offer a wonderful chance to make amends, to show how responsible I could be when the opportunity arose…to show my initiative…
Now, whilst Pa is busy on the telephone, I keep my eye firmly on the coughing, vibrating mower.
Partly I am mesmerised by its spinach-green tanks and cowling, its red pulleys, dogs and levers, its greasy leather belts, its twitching, glittering blades, stink of hot oil, petrol, exhaust…and partly I am praying for the chance that something — I've no idea what, but just something — may go wrong…so that I, Jimbo, the firstborn, may step into the breach and save the day.
The mower vibrates.
Inch by barely perceptible inch it rotates on its axis…
Imagine my joy when, slowly, slowly, all by itself, it begins to creep off down the slope…
At first I just follow.
I don't push it.
I don't even touch it.
Ma is indoors now.
And Cymbeline — bless her heart — is down by the fence, still busy making tea for the workers.
I make no claim to supernatural powers, nor do I believe in guardian angels et cetera, but suddenly a vision of what is about to occur flashes vivid and uninvited, inside my forehead: the screams, the blood-covered sheets, Pa scurrying round the lawn snatching up the pink and white scraps, calling to his God then staring at the bloody morsels of his daughter as though they're a jigsaw with missing bits.
Gradually the huge machine gathers pace on the slope.
If it were possible to yell for my Ma, that's what I'd be doing.
Unfortunately my voice has seized up so that all I can do is throw my four stones at the iron handles.
Dragging along behind, it is all I can manage to hang on.
The mower alters its fatal course not one half of half a  degree.
Meanwhile my mouth keeps making the shape of screams, Ma!
MAAA! but, as in nightmare, no sound emerges.
I know then there is no one but me — only I can possibly stop the fountain of blood and minced flesh which my sister will become in those flashing, fluttering blades.
My legs go to tubes of warm jelly.
Someone give me strength, I pray.
But Heavenly Father is out of earshot.
When he emerges from the caravan, Pa's reaction is not quite as imagined, and strikes me as rather odd.
Staring around him at the butchery, he says, ‘What a mess.
What a mess.
Come on, James, help Daddy clear up.’
Then, noticing my quivering lip, he tuts and says, ‘No grizzling, now.
Accidents will happen.’
This breaks me up.
‘I tried to save her, I did, Pa,’ I wail.
‘I expect you did, James.
You're a hero,’ says he.
He has me fetch the plastic bucket from under the sink, then returns to the caravan with the bigger bits in the bucket saying he has some letters to write.
He's really going to the chapel, I'm sure, but that is what he says.
Ma has still not appeared, which leaves only me to deal with the scraps and slivers before the flies from the sewage works arrive.
All the Smarties have gone from the plates which now have small pink morsels on.
One of the teacups has been chopped into little pieces but the other still has some water inside, which to me looks redder than it should.
Ma appears briefly at the French window, then disappears upstairs, running, holding her mouth with one hand.
This upsets me even more.
I know I must finish clearing up the lawn, but, before doing so, I decide to telephone Auntie to come over on her bike even though I know it will take her an hour to get here from Hambledown.
The phone is high up on the wall.
I can just reach to dial with one finger.
After two tries, I succeed.
Auntie tells me not to panic; she'll come by taxi, and, has anyone phoned for an ambulance?
After saying goodbye to Auntie, I fetch the basket and stool from the utility and take the sheets in, thinking Ma will be even more upset if she sees her clean washing all splashed with red.
I'm just finishing this, when Auntie arrives and takes charge.
She asks where Pa is.
When I tell her, she says what a wonderful Christian Pa is, by which, I imagine, she means his calmness in adversity.
She tells me the ambulance is on its way, then she fetches Ma downstairs and sits her by the Rayburn.
She makes a cup of tea which Ma stares at, Ma is very white but not crying so I suppose that is something.
Auntie kindly offers me tea as well, but I'm beginning to feel iffy myself, so excuse myself, go outside, and quietly get on with the clearing up.
In the corner of the shed, I find the two short planks Pa uses for leaf collecting and set about scraping up the smaller pieces.
Using my initiative again, thinking, there might not be much to be rescued here, but at least it's a spot of organic for Dad's favourite veg.
I dig a hole with the hand trowel and pop them under the courgette together with the hands, feet and eyes (which I'd already collected).
I then take it on myself to swill off the blades and rollers so they won't put Pa off finishing the grass when he's done with the Virgin in there.
Life goes on, as they say.
After that, I sit on our front step and wait for the ambulance.
Dark.
Sitting on the step.
First thought: why is it dark?
Second thought: why so cold?
Third thought (weird — like coming out the flicks): I've been dreaming; this is the dormitory; must be late, there's no sign of the windows.
Fourth thought: STEP?
WHAT STEP?
We don't have stone steps in the dormitory.
Fifth thought: shit, this is the turret of the Cathedral; and it's dark because it's late and the floods have gone off.
At which point I turn and see that they haven't gone off at all, that I'm sitting on the fourth step, the bottom step, right up against the barrier.
I had no memory of descending the steps to the barrier.
I reached out and touched the rough, sawn surface.
I shook my head, not liking this one bit.
Certainly, I'd had hallucinations before.
Several times in fact, once on the tube train, twice on the ordinary trains, so it wasn't the pictures that upset me — Doc Keylock had explained all that years ago, it's all to do with the panting, what they call hyperventilation, causing a temporary malfunction in the brain — but I'd never had anything as vivid as the memory I'd just been through.
And I'd certainly never sleepwalked before, if that was what I had done.
Perhaps it wasn't.
Perhaps I'd come down here before the…whatever…
On the other hand…
On the other hand, what about that bald-headed cat?
That bugger moved.
I heard myself swear out loud.
I didn't know why, I just knew that the memory was unwelcome.
Unwelcome or not, sitting in the darkness, head in hands, there came a picture of the somersaulting St Tom which rapidly turned into a circular blur like a white spinning-top with red stripes…
Could an animal do that and still be unconscious?
I felt my head shaking from side to side.
What was it the old boy had said?
Some story about a raid, that was it, them finding ST with a stainless steel jig screwed to his pate, them sticking him in a sack, jig and all.
Something about apes or monkeys too.
I remembered him using the word malfunction, ‘a surgically induced malfunction’, that was it.
And that would tie in with the markings and the holes…
Let's leave it, said headvoice.
I don't think it's a good idea right now…
Like you say, you might have moved down here before the ——
Shut up a sec.
Please.
I…
A gut-churning premonition had hit me, the horrific conviction that the relics would have moved, just as I had moved.
Or, worse still, vanished!
I stood, swayed, dropped my hands to the steps and crawled up.
The relics were exactly as I'd left them, inside the hexagram, nothing had changed.
I let go a lungful of air, slumped back against the parapet and lit another Capstan.
Deep drag, slow release — control.
To speak or not to speak, that is the question.
What the hell?
We won, didn't we?
Ssssh; why provoke?
Besides which, you've missed the point as per usual: to speak is to admit existence.
To shit oneself is to admit existence.
Fair comment.
Feeling more than a little self conscious now that the adrenalin had ebbed away, I addressed the single, lit eye: ‘OK, love?’
I said.
‘No need to tell you how sorry I am — goes without saying — but I wouldn't call that murder, would you?
Unless you're accusing Pa.
Is that what you meant by killers and victims?
He was careless, true, but that's not murder, that's manslaughter, lovey.
Anycase, you're not blaming old Pa…
Are you…?(silence) Are you, love?(silence) Eh, love?(silence) Cymby?’
No answer.
Outside the sounds of the city had dwindled to discrete vehicle sounds and a very soft hum.
In the quiet of the turret, a flash of white light beyond the city, beyond the hills which surround the city on three sides.
The silence disturbed me — more than the voice.
I didn't know the forecast, but could see we were in for a storm.
The floods had extinguished on the first stroke of the eleventh hour and I was sat watching the lightning fluttering like an electric city on the blink behind Gorsley Wood.
It's pretty when it's silent.
Down below the watchman was finishing his round, slow voice echoing between the buttress:
‘Eleven-o'clock-on-a-fine-night-an d-all's-well.’
I had a little snigger; it had to be fully ten minutes since the last stroke of eleven, and the thunder had been murmuring dark warnings ever since.
I'd a terrible urge to shout,Fuck-all's well up this turret, mate!
But then I thought, Where would we be without the night watchmen of the world, guys with the talent to ignore totally what's staring the rest of us in the eyeballs and tell us, in a good firm voice, preferably with a couple of well-chosen statistics how well it all is?
When the ice-cap melts and radioactive codfish cruise the nave, the watchman will be there in waterwings, and we don't need ten guesses what the message will be.
What's the betting all was well the night the Vikings came?
Not a squeak from any Ghostvoice since the game.
I had to admit that, given my experiences of the evening, it remained a logical possibility that there might be some kind of entity out there skulking in some dark corner of the Cathedral, but somehow I thought not.
I now had the distinct impression that headvoice had been right all the time, that it was in fact down to me, or rather the old ‘guilty conscience’(which is well known to be capable of playing up without proper cause), playing tricks with my head.
Now that I'd drawn the incident out from my unconscious, in much the same manner as Doctor Keylock or any of the so-called psychotherapists might have done, now that I'd faced it, admitted it to myself, thought it all through without holding back from any of the horror of what happened that sunny afternoon seven years ago, I could see that, whoever's fault the accident might have been, it certainly wasn't mine.
So that should be the end of it, I thought, full stop.
If — and it was a megalithic if, but I supposed we should consider every possible option now we were at it — if, in some weird way the Ghost and her voice really did exist, then as soon as she'd got over her disappointment, she would have to admit she'd been defeated fair and square, and would just have to honour the deal and flit off back to heaven or wherever it was she lived now.
Whatever the truth of the matter might be, I felt more than justified in assuming that, by the same time tomorrow, I would be able to both see and smell — above all, smell — a real change in the relics.
The turning to dust, and the eternal silence…
I'd settle for that.
So, what now?
Good question.
I promised to give it the fifty-one hours, so that's, let me see, forty-five left.
And that's what I'll give it.
Meanwhile.
I shook my head.
Meanwhile, folks, why not relax and enjoy the atmosphere: Jimbo alone in the tower.
Darkness lurks without the paneless windows.
And the storm approacheth.
You know something.
It occurs to me, mate, this would make a neat scene for some kind of black-comedy gothic-horror viddy; just before the bit where the dismembered body — equals relics in this case — comes to life, and our hero gets —;
Naar…not really…too far-fetched.
It's been done, anyway.
I was cold, tired and hungry, but there seemed little point in going to bed until the storm had gone through.
Thunder always got me buzzing.
I certainly wouldn't sleep.
In the meantime, despite my reservations, I found myself reflecting on headvoice's idea: I had to admit, it might make a story.
I decided to try out some opening ideas: The storm has played Grandma's footsteps with the terrified child (that's me).
It has leaped the last few leagues in one bound (great stuff), and lands smack BANG on the  Cathedral roof (or thereabouts).
Skull-cracking — flash-WALLOP, and not a lot between.
Outside the black fabric rips from pole to pole showing glimpses of heaven bla, bla, bla…
Brilliant, eh, head?
Definitely.
Hammer House out of Mary Shelley, said headvoice.
When all this is over, we'll go for it, eh?
It's got to be better the scrap metal, or journalism.
To the west, the intricate pinnacles of the clock-tower suddenly jumped black out of blinding light into the narrow stone frame where my forehead received the first raindrop big as a grape and cold.
Ace!
You've done it again, oh Bearded Wonder.
I am beside myself, fatally attracted to your photon display, lacking only a companion —
‘Kinell!’
I exclaimed, leaping to my feet as lightning wrapped the turret, shaking the very stones (and putting a lid on the purple prose).
‘Shit! there's a conductor on this thing, a green copper strip from gold flag to earth down the outside of one pillar.’
I remembered about acid rain, and what it had done to the noseless bishops in their crumbling niches, and the warning notices on this boarded-off turret: Condemned…
Keep Out…by Order of…
‘Christ Almighty!’
Three arched windows printed themselves in black and white on my retinas, the relics flared under a sizzling discharge between sky and turret.
Suddenly I was jumping, yelling out as the flagstone beat my feet like a cudgel or stone cricket bat.
Ozone buzz.
I hugged my bursting shins, thinking, Ow, my fucking shins are bursting!
Then thinking, What if fresh relics should chance to get a million or so volts up them?
Jesus! anything could happen.
While trying to convince myself how ridiculous this thought was, the turret lit up like a flash-bulb and exploded, or seemed to.
For a second I thought: I'm dead.
My legs have split wide open and I'm paddling in warm  liquid…sweet Jesus! my trainers are full of blood.
I felt through the Spidersuit for the gaping edges.
There were no gaping edges, just warm, wet tracksuit legs, rapidly cooling: I'd peed myself.
The wind and rain arrived.
Let's get out of here.
Now!
My ears were ringing.
Rain firehosing in one side and out the other.
Nothing to stop it but me in between.
What I needed was medicine, real bad.
And I needed my dry bed of Bibles.
I'd had the big three — fag, belt, Aspro — and was feeling much better inside the Bible-bunk.
Lying there all comfy, I thought of the relics.
I supposed that I ought to have brought the Ghost down too, but the priority had been to save myself from what seemed like imminent electrocution.
I still couldn't hear properly, I realised, unless it was the walls being so thick they kept out even the sound of the storm; it was still going on out there; from time to time the cloverleaf aperture lit up steely blue.
Strangely, this was a comfort.
I had wrung out the Spidersuit and Y-fronts and hung them over a Bible suck thinking how He would just have to lump a bare arse on His books for one night.
Feeling the cold more than ever in my nakedness, I had, reluctantly, dismantled a poor looking cloth-bound work titled A Victorian Psalter, scrunched up the pages and stuffed them into the spaces around my body.
After a few minutes, I began to feel quite snug.
If I had a little light, I thought, I might be tempted to a bit of a read in bed.
If I had a decent book.
The thought had barely come and gone, and I was in the act of reaching out to replace the whisky bottle, when a long burst of electric-blue light from the aperture showed me something that froze me in mid-reach.
Flashing its gold title near the bottom of a huge pile of Bibles, was a  foot-long, ivory-coloured spine.
I knew at once I had seen its like recently.
Almost immediately the location came to me: the glass-fronted bookcase in Doctor Sopworth's bedroom.
It was three o'clock by the tower clock when I finally forced my numb fingers to dose the creaking covers of the Thesaurus Exorcismorum.
By the flickering light of a hundred or more paper spills, and with no small straining of the eyes, I had read things to haunt the most sceptical, least imaginative mind, even on a summer's afternoon in good company.
On this stormy winter's night, alone in the darkness of the Cathedral, I found myself falling prey to a host of disturbing thoughts.
Soon I was pricking my ears at every hiss and rustle, every creak and sigh, every flap, scuttle and click.
The work was originally published in 1626, the flyleaf informed me.
This ‘modern’ edition was printed in Venice in 1887.
The bulk was in Latin, a language of which I had only the barest understanding from a single term spent in its study at Elizabeth Barton's.
To make things more difficult still, it was printed in a typeface which I recognised — thanks to information received from one D. Dick — as Gothic Black Letter type.
There were, however, abundant footnotes in English.
Many of these were more than sufficient to set my thoughts racing.
But of all I had read so far, nothing troubled me more than two notes I encountered towards the end of the seventh chapter.
One on the subject of baptism, the other on something referred to as stigma diabolicum.
The first note seemed almost casual.
It informed the reader: Those possessed by Behemoth may devour only unbaptised children, having no power whatever over those properly* baptised by an anointed Vicar of Christ, inside a church or other consecrated place.
[*Pollidori also informs us: ‘Liability to possession arises from Original Sin not wholly effaced by  inadequate Baptism…and sometimes from other sins, great or small.
‘]I blinked at the last sentence as a disturbing memory formed in my head.
The Chaplain was asking me something…or telling me: ‘I take it you have been baptised, James?
Yes, yes, of course.
Or you would not be here.
It's just that your father's letter…it seems almost to suggest —’ At which point the spill I was holding burnt my fingers.
I lit another from the ember, matches being in short supply.
A dozen spills later I came across the Stigma note: Indicia are signs which create a certain presumption (proof).
Menghi, however, asserts such presumption to be semiplina rather than plena (sufficient).
An example of such indicia would be the Stigma (or Stigmata) Diabolicum — bloodless, insensitive patches which may be discovered anywhere on the body of the possessed.
I transferred the spill to my left hand, and reached into the bunk with my right.
I found the burn mark on my thigh by its roughness to the touch…not by any pain or discomfort.
I heard myself let out a shuddering sigh.
Look, can we just stop this, said headvoice.
It's worse than a medical dictionary, that is.
Soon we'll have every damned sign in the book.
Just shut it.
And let's get some sleep.
I agreed entirely.
My only reservation was the assumption that sleep would come.
Concentrate on the Matter, I thought, concentrate on the ordinary, start with the ‘basic needs’, start with food.
So far we have had precisely four slices of bread all day.
And there are only two slices left.
I think it's time to make that a priority.
Tomorrow we really do change the bread into meat.
Low blood sugar level, that could be half the problem.
Only as the cloverleaf began to appear as a grey shape in the otherwise black wall did I at last fall into a dream-wracked sleep.
In the morning, I slept through the pigeons, but around 8.30 a loud banging started down in the nave like they might have been building a scaffold or something.
I sat up feeling strangely light-headed and carefree; maybe I'd not had much sleep, but at least I had beaten the organist, at least I'd been spared the Magnificat on an empty stomach.
One should always think positive, as the good doctor said.
I squinted around the bright walls and stacks.
The cloverleaf aperture shone down on the Bible Room like a brilliant blue sun, driving away the dark shadows, shrinking the inflated terrors of the night to their proper proportions.
I stretched my bare arms.
There was no such thing as possession; and even if there was, it would be those lumps of meat in the turret that were infested with demons, not me.
I leaped out of bed, scattering scrunched-up pages.
After stuffing these back in the bunk-hole, I picked up the Thesaurus which was still lying open beside the bunk and re-sucked it underneath a big leather Bible.
I had to concede it had made compelling reading, from an historical point of view, but I did not anticipate referring to its pages again, not in present circumstances.
I did, however, check my thigh, just a brief glance.
It now bore a long yellow blister, fag shaped and red round the edges, but there was still no pain, not even when I pressed it.
This absence of feeling, I dismissed as damaged nerve endings.
What, after all, was cauterisation but the deliberate searing of nerve and capillary?
How different things seem with a little light on the subject, I mused.
I noticed I was humming as I tidied my things; a little hymn; ‘Green Hill Far Away,’ as it happened.
Not everything was as I wished it, however.
The Spidersuit was still sodden round the crotch.
I felt dirty, hungry and cold; I'd a headache; I was running low on Aspros, and the Vat was nearly all gone.
The most urgent requirement was food.
Apart from that, as we watchmen say, all was as well as could be expected.
Then I noticed the Bible lying all on its own on the other side of the bunk; the Bible on which I had laid out the relics the night before last, Night Zero.
To my surprise, its emptiness moved me, much as the empty highchair at our family table once moved the young James Bishop.
And the question I had been holding down with my domestic frenzy, my sorting and tidying, my focus on Matter, burst through: would the decay have set in?
My pulse was suddenly bumping hard.
On a crazy impulse, I knelt by the bunk, hands together, eyes tight shut: ‘Dear Heavenly Father, please…’
The prayer trailed off.
I had not prayed for so long I didn't know what to say.
I wanted to ask for help with the relics, and I wanted some moral support, but it felt wrong somehow, sort of like sneaking to an adult; an adult I didn't even believe in.
In the end I said, somewhat flippantly, I confess: ‘Please ask Lawrence to come and find me…
I need money…
And an Eccles cake, if I may, Lord…
Two, if he's got the dosh.
Amen.
‘Oh!’
The ‘Oh!’ was caused by a flash of insight; it seemed like an answer to the prayer I had not prayed, the prayer I had only thought.
‘Got it!’
I shouted aloud, then, remembering — where  I was, clapped my hand over my mouth.
What I'd suddenly recalled was a picture hanging over the altar in the caravan; this in turn had reminded me of one of the statues over the south porch of the Cathedral.
Both were the same in one particular: both had one finger raised in what had always struck me as a rather rude gesture.
The statue was probably some bishop, but the picture was supposed to be Jesus or God — a print of the Coventry tapestry, I now knew.
I seemed to think that I'd seen scores of other holy pictures just like it; God with his fingers held funny and always with one pointing upwards.
That had to be it!
The Umpire — it had to be Heavenly Father!
Who else?
Fancy my not guessing at once that the Umpire She was on about was none other than the top man himself.
Well then, I thought, if I believed in such a being which I had to confess I once did but no more — He (She or It) would certainly have to be on my side now, the game working out as it had.
Perhaps, after all, a little prayer could do no harm — might even help, psychologically.
I closed my eyes, and once more put palms together.
And I prayed; this time choosing my words with care and with deepest respect:
‘If it seems fair to you, Lord, could your…humble servant, James Bishop, possibly be granted a small sign of some description…
The relics…
I mean…could they be…well, just a tiny bit…well,rotty this morning?
Please.
Thank you so very much, Lord.
Amen.’
That's it then, I thought, I'm not asking for miracles; just what's normal and natural: decay, moth and rust and all that.
I had to admit, I did feel good for a moment or two psychologically speaking, but when I stood up to finish tidying my room I began to feel rather ashamed, even though no one had been here to see me or hear me.
Wasn't  it a touch hypocritical to pray to a god one didn't believe in?
Truthfully, I hadn't believed in Heavenly Father since my fourth Christmas Eve night, the night when Auntie trod on my brick-truck as she tried to sneak in with my present — a smart Apollo Candy with stabilisers, hand-painted maroon — Pa being out with the Recovery.
Once woken by her fourteen stones hitting the deck with the play-bike on top, no amount of cotton wool beard or red dressing gown was going to convince a smart kid like me that those Australian curses and bandy legs stockinged in green wool belonged to Father Christmas.
More to the point, at that age, Auntie tells me, I saw no distinction between the two Fathers, both of whom lived in the sky.
To me they were each the source of all-things-bright-and-beautiful, and therefore identical.
The result being, this episode wiped out Father Christmas and Our Father in one flash of green wool.
(This was shortly before the scene I made in church, so maybe the two were connected.)
But according to Aunt Mary, what upset me more than anything, including the Father Christmas thing, was the business with the rainbow.
Apparently I practically lived in the Bedford for weeks after that.
It also got me banned from our playschool, for life.
In a way, Pa was responsible.
How often had he told me a lie is always sinful and bad in itself.
Always.
I'd never, ever questioned his word.
But after the Santa fiasco, I began to notice things.
What happened was this.
One day Miss said to the group, Today we'll do finger — painting.
You can all do a picture of a rainbow.
I've always been good at painting; I'd nearly finished my picture — which included the ark and a mountain when Miss began telling us how rainbows were all an illusion caused by sunlight and raindrops.
Naturally, I was cross.
I told her she was telling porkies because I knew for sure that God put it there as a sign  he was never going to drown us all again or otherwise wreck the planet.
And that people who told porkies went into the oven, and serve them right so she'd better watch out.
Lying was a sin, I told her.
It was probably too late to say sorry, but she'd better bluggy try!
Not surprisingly she got narky with this bumptious little turd giving her lectures in infant-theology and set about proving things with a prism.
Apparently her lack of repentance only made me angrier.
In the end I threw my yoghurt pot full of glue at her and said the ‘f’ word I'd learnt from Auntie.
Her hair and spectacles were plastered in white treacle.
When she took off the glasses I could see I'd overstepped.
But the damage was done as far as my faith was concerned, which is probably why I went mad.
So anyway, that Christmas Eve night confirmed my worst fears, it was like a kind of ‘royal flush’ for the infant Jimbo: all three kings — Pa, Santa and the King of Kings — all down the pan together…
And to be honest, I don't believe any of them stands a chance of ever making a comeback with me.
Not that there is anything to lose by keeping the door open, but really I believed it is every man for himself.
Which is why I must cover my traces, I thought, then go up and check the state of the relics.
Naturally, I hoped for the best as regards the efficacy of my heart-felt prayer, but I had to be practical.
And positive.
Whatever the result turned out to be, I would need sustenance,(the Eccles cakes being something of a long shot), and that meant being prepared to risk leaving the Shell for a lightning raid into Pigeon Alley.
It also meant speculating with the second to last slice of bread.
An hour and a half later found me flopped on the floor of the turret in a serious state — my vaunted practicality in utter disarray.
I'd a lump on my head the size of a goose egg; I'd been through some kind of hell in the spaces; I'd prayed for…it was not what I'd prayed for at all.
Crawling around the balcony en route to the spiral staircase, the sounds of banging and sawing and general hullabaloo from below had become too curious-making to resist.
Peeping over the low parapet, I saw men in overalls building a platform or stage of some sort at the foot of the choir-screen steps.
This fascinated me so much I failed to notice the Mamba slip out of the gate beneath me.
Until he looked up.
It was Pretty Boy with the hair, again!
I ducked so fast I wasn't sure whether he'd seen me or not, but it gave me a prickly feeling just to imagine it, so I scuttled for the door and legged it up the spiral stairway three steps at a time, just in case.
As I ran, I remember thinking stupid thoughts like: How did he know I was up here looking down?
Perhaps the guy has a heat sensor where his tonsure should be.
Which shows how cool I was at first.
I was totally confident I could lose any nancified verger on my chosen ground, provided I had a decent start, which was precisely what I was giving myself.
Now, I normally notice the point where the stone part of the spiral stairway becomes the brick lining, this time I missed it and WALLOP!
I'm sitting on this step with my tongue bit nearly in half and the top of my head about flush with my shoulders.
When my eyes finished leaking, I looked up and of course it was the lead drainpipe.
I sat a moment cursing the junkie builders, then suddenly the thought came: Hang on, Jimbo, this could be good news (there's nothing like a crack on the nut with a lead pipe to wake a body up), this could mean we've got fresh water piped to the back door whenever it rains, and sucks to the waterboard.
I gingerly fingered the rapidly rising egg…no blood…it almost seemed worth it.
Then I heard the  footsteps…coming up fast= an echoing, slapping sound making me think of a great bird or bat flapping up from the bottom of a wall…
Get out of here quick, said headvoice.
But I'd already started up the spiral.
Not that way, idiot!
It's a dead end isn't it.
We'll have to go down.
The speed of the Mamba's ascent shook me.
I turned and plunged downwards, hoping my footfalls would be masked by his, making-plans as I went.
I knew that this spiral joined the crypt to the turret via the south-east corner of the tower.
I figured I might have rather less than ten seconds to beat the ascending Mamba to the balcony, from there I'd take the door which leads to the vast western attics and unexplored spaces beyond.
Enough time.
Just.
I practically fell through the door to the balcony, shut it after me, turned left, scrambled the twenty or so feet to the door in the south-west corner and plunged through, closing this too.
I stood in the darkness, panting.
I could just hear the footsteps; they seemed a little slower, and…
I held my breath…yes, they were fading.
He'd passed the balcony and continued on up.
For a second I relaxed but another thought struck: Had I refixed the boards behind me when I'd fled the turret during the storm?
If I hadn't…
If he entered the turret…
What would he find?
The memory of lightning flaring between the cracks in the boards and me pushing home the four-inch nails with numb fingers arrived simultaneous with the patter of descending footsteps…
The Mamba was coming back!
I searched the darkness.
From the tiny amount of light leaking around the door behind me, I could just make out the boards of the platform I stood on, and the first few feet of three narrow walkways emerging from the gloom, one cutting sharply away to my right, another straight  ahead and a third branching left off this a few yards along.
I shuffled forward as fast as I dared along the central walkway, figuring this to be less likely to lead me towards a choice-limiting edge.
After only three or four paces, a loud crash came from behind me.
It sounded as though the door from the spiral staircase had been flung open.
I took off at speed with the flimsy boards flexing and bouncing at each stride.
I prayed there would be no sudden turns.
From the deadness of sound, I judged I was in the main roof-space.
As I ran, I weighed the odds.
Although there were four possible exits from the balcony, and three different walkways for my pursuer to choose from, I could not take chances.
But even if he chose lucky and came straight for the exit I had taken, I reckoned I could make at least twenty yards before he would open the door behind me.
By which time I would be off the ‘purpose built’, heading for the spaces…
He'd never find me in the spaces.
After twenty paces, I threw myself flat, rolled to the edge and over.
The drop was not great.
I landed on all fours, stayed on all fours, then scampered off into the blackness.
The ground felt as I imagined a first world war battlefield might feel — all pits and trenches — but dry.
I'd made maybe ten yards when the door crashed open, and some grey edges appeared in the darkness before me.
The opening yards of the passage — if we should call such an accidental meeting of two surfaces a ‘passage’ gave no clue to the horror it held in its depths.
But in any case, my former cockiness had evaporated.
Somehow my pursuer had guessed correctly at every turn.
Now, with the torch beam sectioning the darkness above and behind me– I gratefully entered the dark cleft and began to pick my way over the lumps of rubble and mortar beneath my feet.
My shoulders brushed both walls at once, so I twisted  slightly to cut out the sound.
-After maybe ten or twelve yards, the right-hand wall gave way to a right-angled turn which felt of a similar width to the one I was in.
Another chance, I thought, another opportunity for the Mamba to choose wrongly.
I would not calculate this time, this time I would try to select my route in a random way.
So far he'd read me too well.
Maybe logic was the problem.
I turned to look back at the softly gleaming, parallel surfaces converging towards an oblong of dimly lit structures, an oblong much taller and narrower than any doorway.
And as I looked back, into that zone of lesser darkness there silently drifted a dense moving shadow.
A light source wavered slowly back and forth.
The light could only be from a torch — obviously — but there was something oddly fragmented about it.
And the shadowy shape was also wrong…something about the shoulders…too bulky and hunched, almost like those of an American footballer but more upwardly curving.
What the hell was he wearing?
Dead centre of the oblong, it stopped.
Silence.
The light extinguished.
The dark shape was still visible against a background of dimly lit beams.
It seemed bigger.
Suddenly it shortened to half height, less.
‘Shit,’ I whispered.
‘He's leaving the walkway.
He's coming this way!’
How did he know?
I'd hardly made a sound.
Using the corner to steady myself, I slowly and silently turned about and moved to my right, into the blackness of the side alley.
Once round the corner, I moved forward as fast as I dared, though the going was very uneven.
Ahead was pure blackness; I tried closing my eyes; it made not the slightest difference.
Suddenly, from behind, I heard the crunch of rubble.
I stopped to listen, holding my breath.
The sound ceased.
Silence, but for the hiss of blood in my ears and the thud of my heart.
Why did the man not shout for me to stop, to give myself up?
Why this silent pursuit?
It was not natural.
No voice came.
I hurried forward again, trying to tiptoe with little success…
It was then that I felt the first cobweb — one sticky tendril, unbelievably strong, across my right eye and the bridge of my nose.
I jerked back, tingling with fear, feeling it peel off like a strand of elastoplast.
Behind me the sound again of moving rubble; from the change in sound quality, I guessed he had already entered the passage.
This was immediately confirmed by a sound similar to that which my own shoulders had made on first entering the narrow space.
But there was a difference.
The sound I heard now was lighter and hollower and…somehow familiar…
Jesus Christ — Wings!— the dry, hollow rustle of quill against stone.
I tried to deny it, but it was too late, the thought was there.
Twin terrors combine in the instant with nightmare logic: feathers and cobwebs, cobwebs and feathers…and now…words…words burned into the blackness…white words, black words…seen, yet not seen…silent, yet heard…words I had read in the Book and forgotten but now knew again…word for word:
Satan is the ape of God.
It gives him great pleasure to incarnate himself in the shape of man as Christ himself did.
Suddenly, and with terrible certainty, I knew that what was behind me was no ordinary verger.
Verger it may have seemed once, down there in the sunlit nave…but  up in the spaces…with no one to witness…it no longer needed that shape.
From the very first, I had sensed something wrong about the long-haired Mamba…for one thing a man should not be that beautiful.
Now I knew what it was I had then only felt…
I knew what the creature would look like without its disguise…
I had seen it before, many times, as a child.
In the cellar.
At home.
In the Roombed also…
Soon it would reach the place where I had turned to the right.
It would make no mistake.
It would follow me here…
I had to go on.
There was no other choice possible.
I sucked a huge breath, ducked low, praying I might yet slip through beneath the bulk of the web which I knew must be draped across the passage in front of me.
But when I moved forward, my face was instantly smothered in cobweb so thick and heavy it seemed like damp, clinging rag.
With a gasp, I swiped at my face and neck and plunged forward, shuddering, flailing my arms wildly in front, feeling the drapes of web building on me, dragging me down.
From behind came a dry, hollow rustle…close now…and the stench of the poultry house…
When the eight legs marched across my forehead I was already beyond shock.
The soft, cool abdomen drew one sticky line from temple to ear…
I might have been the butterfly I'd watched enmeshed on the hanging geranium in Auntie's backyard.
She should never have fluttered the way she did.
Never provoke.
After the bite, the lingering poisonous kiss, she could not move…
A small corner of my brain ached to send the message: Hand rise up and smash the soft, repulsive body away…but…
He inside me…the Father inside me…forbade it.
So what could I do?
Without blood in my legs or the tips of my fingers……
I went down.
SCENE:[The Attic — Summer The roof space is very hot.
A bare bulb illuminates the scene.
Empty black plastic sacks are scattered about, together with piles of crumpled brown paper.
To one side stands a part roll of fibreglass insulation.
Beside this a man in blue overalls, wearing a cheap aluminium facemask, is cutting off the strip he has just laid between the joists.
He wears pink rubber gloves, their tops stretched over the overalls' cuffs.
With his right hand he works a large pair of red-handled scissors.
Less than half the area has been completed.
I am seven years old.
Ma is still away.
I miss her, but must be brave.
And helpful.
Today, my job is operating the big industrial vacuum cleaner, to clear an the crap between the rafters and joists while Pa deals with the cutting and cutting.
I have been allowed to take off my shirt and am working in just shorts and plimsolls .
I know that I am not meant to vac up the spiders, just their cobwebs.
But when I can see he's not looking, I do so.
Because they scare me.
Even the little ones.
There are quite a few spiders in our attic…
‘I'm going down for another,’ shouts Pa over the howl of the cleaner.
‘Make sure you do properly under the eaves.’
I turn and nod as he disappears backwards through the hatch.
I am glad that the rolls are too big for me to handle.
I hate the way the fibres prickle your skin; you can't see them, but you can't seem to brush them away either.
I step off my chipboard kneeler on to a joist in order to slide the three-foot square board up near the eaves in the corner.
And that's when I see it.
The biggest blackest spider I have ever seen in my life.
It seems to be looking straight at me, its knuckled legs poised, tense, waiting I know for one false move from me to trigger it into an electrifying spring…straight at me.
Straight at me  where I kneel unbalanced, precariously lodged between joist and board.
Moving like a boy in treacle, I rotate on the axis of my right knee and pick up the yard and a half of large bore nozzle between hands slick with sweat.
I swing round slowly, slowly, and slowly level it to aim at the spider, slowly push it forward against the pull of the concertina pipe behind.
The four-foot-long nozzle is heavy for me and hard to hold level, but I do not take my eyes off the spider.
Not for one instant.
The creature is square on to me, spread across four inches of brick chimney breast.
As the nozzle gradually closes in, its shadow, thrown by the bare bulb behind me, creeps across the chimney towards the spider.
I am no longer breathing.
Nor do I notice the sound of the vacuum cleaner.
Nor the creaking of the loft ladder…
The nozzle is still four or five inches short of target when the spider vanishes with a quick shushhh and a sickening thud from the body of the cleaner.
‘I am watching you, James,’ says Father.
I jump so hard I nearly fall off the board.
‘And I'm afraid you are going to have to pay for that sinful act.
Downstairs, please.’
I gather up my shirt in silence and start down the ladder.
‘All the way, James.
I'm sorry, precious boy, but you simply must learn.’
If I had known what he intended, I believe I would have run.
But he smiled with his lips, as usual, giving no clue to change.
I thought I was just to be shut in the cellar, as usual, the light turned off, as usual , the better to think out my wickedness, the better to pray for forgiveness.
No light comes into our cellar.
Even when hunched on the top step, no chink can be seen leaking around the doorframe, because it is perfectly insulated with foam plastic strip.
Although I put my hands together every night — with Ma, when she's home, otherwise on my own — I have not prayed since the rainbow incident.
(I may have gone through the verbal motions once or twice, but that's all.)
I do not pray down here.
What I do, when I'm sent down here, is sums and tables.
Today it is counting, adding and subtracting in base seven…until I hear the scraping sound…that stops me.
In all the times I've been down here, I have never heard that sound before.
There then comes a sound that seems to me like a brick or tile being moved.
A sudden spear of light strikes across the distempered roof timbers.
The source is at the top of the right-hand wall, the outside wall.
The ceiling joists sit on the top of this wall.
Between them are gaps about a foot wide and six inches deep.
One gap suddenly shows daylight.
Something moves in the depths of the gap.
The light reduces.
The nozzle of the big cleaner appears, it keeps coming until it falls on to the furniture and other junk piled against the wall.
The light around it blinks and disappears.
Silence.
I still don't get it; I suppose because, to me, vacuum cleaners are all about sucking.
‘Can you hear me, James?’
It's him.
Just the other side of the door.
What's going on, I think, he never speaks to me down here?
‘Yes, Pa.’
‘I have checked in the bag, and you're lucky this time.
Fortunately he's still alive.
And so are the others, James…you really are a wicked child, aren't you?
I cannot imagine what possesses you.
When I switch on, I want you to go down the steps, sit down quietly on the floor by the end of the nozzle…and I want you to apologise.
Is that clear?
‘And we'll just have to hope they forgive you, that's all…’
Silence.
‘Are you there, James?’
‘Yes.’
‘Yes, what?’
‘Yes, Pa.’
‘They all look extremely angry to me, James, and hurt.
Hurt and angry.
So you'll just have to hope they calm down.
You'll just have to hope that they're a great deal kinder and more charitable than you are, James.
You'll just have to pray they forgive you.
You are not coming up unless and until they do, I'm afraid.
That would not be fair or right.
‘I'll be listening, James.
I shall be able to hear everything perfectly through the tube.
So make sure you do as I tell you.
Exactly as I tell you, James, clear?’
‘Yes.
Pa.’
‘You may start your apologising as soon as I switch off the machine.
Is that clear?
Then we'll see what they say…’
(Silence.
While I contemplate screaming for mercy.)
‘Is that clear, James?’
‘Yes.’
Silence.
I guess he has gone to switch on.
I guess the machine blows as well as sucks.
I am numb with dread.
I am literally shaking.
And I'm crying like a fucking girl, but silently.
Silently.
Beyond the wall, the vacuum cleaner howls into life.
A wind fills the darkness.
I am struck by small objects and my nostrils fill with the stink of rot.
Down below, two points of red light appear, one at a time like a wink in reverse.
I hear the stirring of wings.
I feel myself falling, painlessly jolting down the steps.
233  
I stood a moment, staring at the empty floor of the turret.
Then a wave of feebleness swamped me and dumped my body on the top step.
The barrier had been in perfect order when I arrived — boards secure, nailheads flush — so through I'd come, tugging it all closed behind me.
But the second my eyes cleared floor level I saw that the relics had gone!
There was the hexagram, a bit washed out, but no mistaking it.
And there were the two, four, six dark patches where the feet, hands and eyes had been and the water had yet to dry out…
But where were the things themselves?!
Where were the relics?
I lit up with trembling fingers.
Long drag.
Fight for control.
First question: Me.
Am I all right?
Of course you are.
We've had a bit of a scare, that's —
Bit of a scare!
Christ…!
I fingered the lump on my head where I'd struck the drainpipe.
I felt like a clubbed seal, but that wasn't what worried me.
I'm in bloody trouble, you bastard.
You know it.
What's going to happen to me now?
Ssh — take it easy, take it easy —‘control’, remember?
OK, so you swallowed a spider —;
Not just a spider, you bastard —
All right.
All right.
You think it was the spider, and you think you might have ——
Not might have, DID, damn you.
I felt the bastard go down!
I felt it wriggling, fuck it!
Why don't you —
Look, calm down…
And think.
You were in a panic.
Right?
You took a bad fall — twenty feet, maybe — almost vertical.
Right?
It's hardly surprising if the old imagination started —
Imagination?!
All right, how come I still feel it, in here?
(I prodded my solar plexus.)
It's the one all right.
The size of it, Jesus Christ!
When I came to…ughh, fuck…mouth wide open…laid on me back…choking…swallowing…
(Blank slate.
Memory censored.
Silence.
Apart from the wind.
And something flapping, something rattling below and far off.)
And what about that other thing?
Don't tell me I imagined that too.
It followed me!
I saw it, for Christ's sake!
You know what it is.
Same as I do.
And you know where it went.
It changed shape again.
You know it did, you bastard, don't pretend…
Jesus, I'm bloody terrified.
Terrified.
And all you can do is —
I took another long drag at the Capstan, and inspected my trembling hand.
Control…
I had to regain it.
And keep it.
That was the whole object of my being in this place.
I didn't want to be here; it's a trial.
Concentrate on the Matter.
Start with the objects at hand — rather, the objects not at hand — that's the way…that's control.
Focus on first causes…
Last drag, a long, long draw, fizzing the baccy, burning my tongue, making me dizzy, ahhh.
Right; fags out.
Now, concentrate.
My first idea was that Mambas had found the relics.
But then I thought, Why would they replace the barrier exactly as I had left it?
Unless…
Unless they wanted to spring a trap, of course…
In which case…why weren't they here, waiting?
My second idea was jackdaws; the barrier had almost certainly not been opened; the tower was unscalable from  without; who or whatever took the relics must therefore have flown in.
It would certainly be possible for a jackdaw to get in through any of the eight window openings, but then I thought, No.
Jackdaws are supposed to be great collectors, but even a jackdaw could not fly off with the hands, feet and eyeballs of a four year old crammed into its beak all at once.
Either it would have to have made six separate trips, which was mad, or else there would have to have been six jackdaws.
Which was just as mad.
Where were the feathers?
The droppings?
Surely at least one would have been caught short at some point during the operation.
And anyway, why would the Cathedral jackdaws suddenly break the habit of centuries and come to the south side when their haunt had always been on the north?
Fingering the lump, I began to scrape the theoretical barrel-bottom; I had prayed for the whiff of putrefaction hadn't I?
Yes.
All the same…
I could hardly imagine the relics rotting away to nothing…all in the course of a single night.
I even managed a small snigger at that one.
It didn't last long.
With jackdaws and Mambas both out of the frame, I found myself considering the bizarre idea that the storm had something to do with the disappearance of my dead sister's remains.
I should say at once I was not harbouring any weirdo Lawrentian notion that the lightning had zapped the little cow back to life the moment I left the turret; for one thing there was the matter of missing parts.
No, when it comes to resurrections, I believe in the defibrillator and that's about it; which means I have less trouble with Frankenstein than I do with say, Lazarus, to cite one of Pa's favourite yarns.
(I'm pretty certain I never believed that one, I mean the guy had been dead a week, for Pete's sake.
In that climate he'd have been well past his sell-by date.)
But in any case, it seems to me that resuscitation is a mechanical problem, to do with parts and labour  rather than seances or last suppers.
That's all.
With regard to the relics, I was prepared at least to consider the possibility that there could have been some sort of automatic response in the nerves and muscle fibres triggered by the lightning.
The walls and floor of the turret had been awash with storm water, after all.
And water being a conductor, the charge might just possibly have bridged the gap by this means.
(We'd learned in science about Galvin and his electrically operated frogs' legs; if they could do it, why not relics?)
I felt the control returning.
My relief grew rapidly as I warmed to the theory.
I began to feel I was really homing in on the answer: involuntary spasms had sent those lifeless appendages hopping about the turret like bingo balls on a current of air…until their trajectories just happened to coincide with not-wall, not-floor, not-ceiling (which I quickly worked out was better than a one in three shot every hop).
That had to be it!
Their departure was pure chance, devoid of all sinister significance, non-sentient; no supernatural explanation required.
In all probability they were now far apart, lying — sweet Jesus — wherever they happened to fall!
Holy Shit!
The thought sent me dashing to the window slits.
If I had guessed correctly they would be out there somewhere, lodged in a gutter or on the flat roof of the tower.
Or God forbid — down on the pavement waiting for a party of schoolgirls to tread on them!
But, although it was still early for tourists, the relics were in none of those places.
After an exhausting hour having dared the open roof to dredge the lead guttering behind the parapet — I was–forced to abandon both search and hypothesis.
Not only were the hands and feet not in any of the places I had thought possible, but I had come to realise that the hypothesis was quite inadequate to explain missing eyeballs, these being hopelessly ill equipped for hopping, volts or no volts.
Looking back I realise that, if there ever was a moment when I might have quit, admitted defeat and abandoned the Cathedral to throw myself on the mercy of school, home or child guidance clinic, this was that moment.
But to me, then, that seemed the road to insanity…or worse.
There were just too many unanswered questions now, too many battles to be fought and riddles to be solved.
I still felt I could do it.
But, at that precise moment, that climax of black confusion and fear, I desperately needed a refuge.
And time to think things out and assemble some positive strategy.
Obviously I could not relax and take stock in the turret after what had happened, so I worked my way back to the Bible Room, closed the door quietly and lay down in the bunk.
I remained motionless for a while, practising the muscle relaxation techniques I had learned in drama, sending round my mental supervisor to check that every part was free from tension, at the same time, striving to calm myself mentally, to empty my mind by focusing on the One, then dismissing that also.
But the thought refused to depart that my refuge, this whole vast Cathedral, stone, paper, metal, cloth, wood, everything had gone wrong, sick, contagious; it had turned against me; even the Bibles were against me; I seemed to feel their angry pulse on my back — bump, bump, bump, bump…
Things weren't getting better in here, they were getting worse; what had happened in the passage; I daren't even think about that.
I had blocked those thoughts.
I'd clawed my way back up the mountain of rubble like a demented animal, and returned to the turret on automatic pilot.
But where could I run to now?
Nowhere, said headvoice.
Pull yourself together.
Do something constructive.
Such as?
We haven't eaten for…
(A burst of hysterical laughter from me) Haven't we?
I have!
…thirty-six hours.
I suppose it would be naive to suggest we might hungry.
Yes.
It would.
Can't you see when a person's upset.
Let's hunt relic then.
We need action…positive action.
On an empty stomach?
OK, let's eat then?
But for God's sake, to something.
Let's get the meat.
(If only Lawrence was here, I thought, he'd cut through the crap.
What would Lawrence do, in this situation?)
‘We'll get the meat,’ I said.
There's a narrow space between the north wall of the Cathedral and the Chapter House where the sun never shines.
Here the pigeons roost and nest in holes in the wall where stones are missing.
The walls are black and slimy with lichen and pigeon shit.
It smells of worms and leaf-mould.
Because it takes the run-off from both eaves, it's never, ever dry.
The only light comes from a metre-wide strip of sky fifty feet above, and the little that falls through the arch at the end.
We call it Pigeon Alley.
It's another alien space.
An iron ladder descends this accidental chasm from the nave roof, but it stops a good fifteen feet above the moss-feather-and-shit-covered earth.
The only way to reach the bottom rung is to jump from the roof of a wooden hut the builders occasionally use for storing things.
It was lucky I knew this.
If I wasn't an animal-lover there would have been no problem, but when it comes to catching pigeons I draw the line at the fish-hook method on humanitarian grounds.
How anyone could thread bits of bread on hooks then snag the poor buggers in the crop and just reel them in I'll never understand.
You won't catch me behaving like that.
But it was this anti-cruelty attitude of mine that almost cost me my liberty.
As with so many worldly matters, it was Lawrence who had introduced me to the gravel and grain method of 241  humane culling, but only the theory of it; I'd never yet tried it in the field.
From the shadows of the chasm I had already spotted the beige and white pigeon goose-stepping around on the grass just outside Pigeon Alley, apparently pecking at sweet f.a.
Hungry, I thought, like me.
I inched my way along the wall towards the narrow opening.
I could see no tourists or other strollers so quickly cast out a handful of breadcrumbs.
She jumped a bit at the unexpected prezzy, but Cathedral pigeons are raised on bread and pretty soon my bird was tucking in, which is when I followed up — a bit harder — with a handful of precinct gravel.
It wasn't hard enough though.
My supper flapped off round the corner in a storm of feathers with the blood coming out of the side of its beak.
I'm off round the corner after it like Wally the cat; then I pounce.
There I am on the neatly mown grass that says Keep Off Grass with the pigeon pinned under my armpit trying to bend its neck double and it smacking me in the face with one wing, when all of a sudden there's this: ‘Oi!’
Then again, ‘Oi!’
A man in a raincoat is running towards me.
From nowhere a Mamba appears and I'm up and running with the bleeding pigeon up my jumper playing the bongos on my chest.
As I run I'm computing the Mamba's speed in that heavy black frock against my chances of making it up the north transept steps before he rounds the corner.
The answer is a raspberry, so it's over the shed, drop down the back, breath held, pulse racing.
I hear leather soles smacking the flagstones rapidly, they stop, then heavier, rubber footfalls, then voices.
I'm cursing because the pigeon chooses this moment for an escape bid up the neck of my Spidersuit, plus I can tell they know I must be close but can't quite imagine the trans-shed escape route I've taken.
As the neck of the pigeon  clears the neck of the suit, I grab it, double it back and pinch the bend as hard as I can — remembering you have to be cruel to be kind — scratching my own neck quite badly in the process.
The wings go berserk and the whole thing is beginning to make me feel rotten, then they stop and I figure I've done it.
There's blood on my hands, mine or hers I don't know.
After what seemed an age, Rubber Feet moved off towards what they call the Lavatory Tower (not what it sounds like), Leather Feet must have figured I'd gone inside the Cath because he pattered off up the steps, which of course meant the end of all hopes of returning to my refuge via the Crypt.
All was quiet inside my Spidertop which I'd tucked under my belt.
The pigeon lay soft and warm on my belly, and I stood listening while my metabolism returned to something like normal.
The north side of the Cathedral is not the public, tourist side, but faces the school.
Fortunately the Chapter House intervenes and is so tall it not only screens the full height of the iron ladder but also one of the half dozen hatches dotted around the parapet which lead directly into the roof-space.
Less fortunately, that particular hatchway gives access to the loft of the northeast transept, the place I call the Wild Wood.
I could get back to base via that loft…but the thought of it made my scalp wriggle.
The Wild Wood is one gigantic nest.
The entire loft is a matted tangle of sticks and twigs brought in by the jackdaws over God knows how many centuries; in parts it is many metres deep.
It's the kind of place best avoided after dark; it makes me think of poor Moley, and Ratty's warning, and that's why I call it the Wild Wood.
I tell you it's…weird doesn't begin to describe it.
And the sun already down.
The worst of it is, the Wild Wood is alive with the most hideous of micro-monsters; by which I mean the so called Cathedral Bug — though ‘bug’ is too cosy a name for that  black abortion — Satan's Crab suits it better.
Anyway, the Wild Wood is seething with them, and in its endless darkness the beasties multiply; they've no enemies to control them, and they've been at it for centuries!
(If ever I get the DTs I know what I'll see and it'll be Cathedral Bugs and more Cathedral Bugs all the way down to the bottom.)
I've actually seen them only once — Lawrence and I wandered in there one morning– the torch beam just happened to fall on a clutch of them sitting tight on the wall, right by my ear.
They were waiting to pounce, I know it; that's how they live; they hang about in the dark, watching (such a creature will see in the dark, never fear) and listening and feeling for the minuscule rise in temperature and small vibrations which signal a passing vascular system, then they hop on board and they…suck.
Yes.
And that is exactly how they look — like things that jump out of the dark and land without a body feeling them and burrow into living flesh, flesh they have numbed with preliminary injections, and…suck.
According to Lawrence, they drink nothing but jackdaw and pigeon blood — he also told me they were brought here by Crusaders returned from the Holy Land, which sounds about right — but I don't buy the other: blood is blood, I reckon.
They may only be alien ticks, but their shells are so hard they are almost indestructible, and they can survive for years without 8 meal of any sort…
They revolt me.
The striking of the half hour alerted me to the incoming tide of darkness.
At any moment the floodlights could come on, then even this ladder would be too risky.
I climbed on to the shed roof and gathered myself for the jump.
I used what mind control I could muster to blot out the thought of what lay ahead — at least I'd have food to eat — after the gauntlet was run.
I steadied, and jumped.
The iron was ice-cold.
I climbed fast for fear my fingers  might freeze to the rungs.
Within seconds, I'd rolled over the parapet, scrambled along the lead gutter to the hatch, drawn the bolt and entered — all without giving my head time to jam the works.
Wall of darkness and…stink.
The Wild Wood has a different smell to Pigeon Alley, more like the chicken transporters that make you gasp when you can't get the car windows up fast enough — a cocktail of scurf, shit and butcher's shop.
I tried breathing through the sleeves of my tracksuit.
Useless.
Other than the light seeping through the hatchway behind me, the only thing visible was twin columns of dim stripes from a pair of narrow slatted windows in the end wall.
No direct rays could enter, and I knew that, as soon as I closed the hatch, I'd be travelling blind.
But I couldn't give in; one monster is much like another — once you falter, you're done.
As my eyes accustomed to the gloom they began to make out details close by.
I was standing on a catwalk three boards wide.
To my left was a rough wooden handrail, below, to right and left, I could now make out the grey slopes of two of the conical pits formed by the vault of the transept beneath — the floor under the catwalk was really a negative ceiling — but, apart from a yard or two near the edge, it was completely submerged in nest, as was the catwalk itself a few steps further in.
The handrail was visible for a yard or two more, so I figured the catwalk might still be passable; beyond that I could see nothing.
What about the Bu —, began headvoice.
Shut it!
I hissed.
I closed the hatch, gripped the rail and shuffled forward into the Wild Wood.
245  
I moved fast, hoping to catch the creatures napping, or, at least, cause them to miss.
But soon after the point where the catwalk turns left along the centre line, I found myself high-stepping through deep, brittle nest.
A moment later even the handrail was covered by the mat of twig and fibre.
I was forced to a standstill, gagging on the charnel stench of the place, suddenly aware of aeons of jackdaw mortality.
Don't stop! wailed headvoice, they'll get us.
Fuck this!
I snarl, but just as I'm turning about this itch comes…
Oh!
Oh!
I cry, grabbing myself.
Then comes this scrabbling round my belly-button and I'm walloping myself as hard as I can.
God help me — my belly's alive!
Jabbing me back, exactly as the infant Cymbeline once did with her puny fists!
My legs buckle and I fall off the catwalk shouting, ‘Stop it!
I didn't mean it!
I didn't mean it!’
as if I was the infant and she the elder!
Then down I go, over the edge and into the pointy pit overflowing with Lord knows-how-many fathoms of stinking nest…and Lord knows-how-many Crabs of the Prince of Darkness.
The more I wail and thrash the deeper I go, just like in any swamp or quicksand.
In seconds I'm over my head in stinking nest, my feet still not touching the bottom.
Then these hideous scrawking, banshee noises break out of my belly…
Ahh!
I hear myself scream in the treble, and, Ahhh! and Ahhh! again.
My belly is writhing and wriggling!
Christ!
Is it about to rupture and spew forth a real-live Alien in a fountain of blood and shit!?
Ahhhooo!
No no noooo, please, pleeeease…
Going down…
I grab at my belly again, and feel…
…a small claw…
BLOODYHELL!!
‘My turn to go first.’
‘What?!
No.
Hang on, I —’
‘You started last time; that's fair.’
‘But you lost!
And I was innocent!
I proved it.
So you shut it.
Shut it!
That was the deal.
You swore on the —’’ Sorry; you cheated.’
‘I never!
I —’
‘Sorry, games, I insist.’
‘Insist?’
‘Insist, yes.
Going down.’
‘Not me!’
I cry, and I reach out and, lo and behold, I touch wood and I know that it's one of the posts which hold up the catwalk.
So I lock my arm round it and…
‘No choice, James.
Feel your body, feel that crimson muscle inside your chest, and those frothy pink bellows of yours, pumping away.
The doctor calls it a panic attack, I call it a trip down memory lane for big bro.
The real memory lane, this time.’
‘I'll fight you, you cow.’
‘Think about the Bugs, games, it'll take your mind off things.
Did you know they always head for the warmest, softest parts of a person, parts like a boy's teddy-tail, for instance.
gust ask yourself, whereabouts on your body is the skin most like plucked pigeon.
I'll give you a clue, it's round, and there's two.
‘Ahhh!
Ahhhh!!’
‘You've got it, big bro, that's where they like to burrow best, and next to pigeon blood, the thing they like most is a nice drop of fresh semen.’
‘Ahhhooooeeeeaye!’
‘That's why we call them Satan's Crabs, on this side.
Going down…
That's the style…relax…let yourself go…the anaesthetists are really first rate…you won't feel a thing down bel…
‘Oooooooo!’
SCENE: The Garden — Sunday Afternoon, Summer
I step out on to the patio carrying the tray with porcelain mugs by Boots the Chemists.
The mugs are three-quarters filled with tea and there is no mark on the white melamine, not a single brown ring, not a drop of spilled milk, not a grain of sugar.
The sun flashes like an Apache signal off the two rocking circles.
I halt at the edge of our lawn which is the colour of dry prairie.
It is wrong to slop and make messes that others have to clear up behind one.
My muscles tense to stop the rocking pools of light, circles within circles, dazzling.
(Something flaps, something else rattles in my brain.
The end of my teddy-tail is tickling like mad, but it is not-nice for boys to scratch down below.
Besides I might slop.)
The circles grow steady.
A moment more.
To be certain.
Good.
I proceed.
‘Oh, thank you, my darling, that's lovely.
Pop it on the table, there's a pet.’
This is my lovely Ma speaking to me in her love voice.
But I will not look up from the tray until I have it safely landed on the white plastic table.
Then I'll look up with a smile, and breathe freely.
It pleases me that she called me my darling and not my little prodigy as she once did; this is the best sign yet that I am winning her back.
Her forehead shines whitely above the dark glasses; she  has not been well but the resting home has allowed her to visit us for the afternoon.
There is no deck chair for me so I sit on the lawn at Ma's feet and draw some barley water up the straw, gently so as not to disturb Pa who is reading.
The morning breeze has died completely and my prickly grey shirt attaches to my spine.
(Good; it'll take my mind off the other itch.)
In a moment I will massage her poor feet which have swollen due to inactivity and the hot weather.
From beyond the palletwood fence comes the sound of Lucky dragging his chain over the concrete.
Back and forth, back and forth; continuously on the move.
Without appearing over the newspaper, Pa says irritably, ‘What's the matter with that animal?
Didn't you water it this morning, James?’
I am acutely conscious that I have been a source of aggravation to Pa recently over my stupid allergy to vegetables; it cannot be pleasant to see the products one has slaved over summer and winter being regurgitated on to the dinner plate of one's elder child.
However, it is one of my duties to supply the guard dog with water and to clear up his doings each morning before school.
He is never allowed off the chain, so can't help the mess and smell he makes, but it is one of my least favourite duties.
I never neglect it, however, and am hurt by the suggestion.
So I do not hear it.
This causes him to fold down the top half of the newspaper, to see if I have set off, and to lose his place.
Things have not been quite the same between the two of us since the business with the vacuum cleaner in the cellar.
I feel his glare now, but let my own eyes wander past the fence to the yellow lattice of the heavy lifting gear and the big iron disc of the magnet hanging down, and the motorcar-mountain that has built up over the holiday season.
‘James!’
I manufacture a little start.
‘Sorry?’
I say politely, pleased to observe that the fly on the rim of his mug is taking refreshment now.
‘Sorry, did you —’
Ma intercedes: ‘Would you mind, dear?
When you're ready.’
She withdraws the blue-veined foot I am soothing and smiles sadly down.
‘Poor Lucky, it must be baking in the yard.’
Ma tries her hardest to divide herself fairly between my own and Pa's needs, but sometimes she must find it difficult, and it hurts her that, as yet, she can only be with us for these brief visits, and always seems tired.
However, I prefer to do things about the house out of the goodness of my heart rather than on request and consider making a little tut noise with the tip of my tongue behind my top teeth.
But this would now seem directed against the invalid so I hold back, thinking, in two years I will be at the comprehensive and only five years after that — providing I pass the scholarship exam, which I easily should — I'll be at boarding school, and then I'll be free, free to scratch and do whatever I like.
Furthermore there will be other scholarship boys beside myself, and hopefully my intelligence will provoke less spite than it does at Marshside Junior.
In the middle of this quiet preview of my academic future, Ma does something — only a small thing, but it breaks an unwritten law of the household — and that's what started me off…
It was my own fault really, for not remembering the date, September 15th; it's hardly surprising she was acting strange…
The accident had brought about certain changes in our house.
Almost immediately, things began to disappear.
The day after the ambulance took Ma away, the rotary drier vanished; on the Sunday it had been loaded with sheets (I had taken them down myself.
I couldn't forget  that) and by Monday night it was gone.
Some households take them in when not in use, I know that, but we never did, ours stayed there all the time like a yellow and blue tree.
So this struck me as odd.
Pa began taking our family wash over to Hambledown every Saturday evening in pillowcases.
On Sunday mornings Auntie would bring it back clean, cook lunch — which always included the one vegetable I can stomach, ie beans-in-a-tin because they're not disgusting green — and afterwards she and I would play the test match while Pa worked on his sermon.
The next thing to disappear without mention was the Ransome.
Now that did surprise me, knowing how highly Pa rated it, as a machine.
It was this disappearance that really roused my suspicion, and started me searching for some kind of pattern to make sense of these changes.
For a while I was stumped, I confess.
The Ransome was replaced by a small Black and Decker in orange plastic,(secondhand, naturally)— hardly a classic of the engineer's craft.
The whining motor couldn't cope with the long grass by the fence, and it melted the extension cable when Pa forgot to unwind it fully from its blue plastic drum.
After that, it too was turned in for a Qualcast with loppy handles and collapsible wheels.
But it wasn't until a fortnight after the accident, when I took it upon myself to see to the downstairs — particularly the kitchen which was in a state — ready for Auntie's visit next day, that the riddle was solved.
Pa being occupied with his sermon, I grabbed the chance to empty the teapot which, for economy reasons, is only done once per week, there being, according to Pa, ‘A power of goodness in well-mashed leaves.’
(I suspect it's his way of getting some vegetables down me considering the number of soft, plump leaves that end up in the bottom of my cup when the pot gets to be half full of the things.
I knew Auntie wasn't that keen, either.)
The point  I'm coming to is this: on that particular day, I had reason to open the lid of the dustbin.
Imagine my shock when, just as I'd begun thumping the bottom of the big brown pot, I chanced to look inside the bin and there, half buried in rubbish, was Cymbeline's red plastic teapot.
Everything fell into place: clothes drier, grass cutter, teapot — what did they have in common?
The answer is, all three had featured in the accident.
All three had now been secretly disposed of.
The reason was obvious: the accident was not to be spoken of; the accident was not to be thought of; the accident never was.
Period.
At that moment I realised for the first time that not a single word had been uttered on the subject since the accident happened.
Not by anyone.
Including Auntie.
Until that moment this had seemed perfectly natural to me; I never imagined it to be something contrived, something worked at in secret, something which even had Pa acting against his most sacred principle: Waste not, want not.
True, I'd had trouble with nightmares the two nights following the accident, but the medicine which Doctor Keylock brought sorted that out, and afterwards I never gave it a thought.
I now realised that there must have been other little gaps and vacancies about the house but, between the tablets and the total absence of any careless talk, I had wiped the whole unfortunate episode right out of my head…
Now this…
A single, thoughtless action from poor, dear Ma…and it all comes tumbling down…
‘Have a Smarty, dear.
You've earned it.’
I stare at Ma, dumbstruck.
My scalp wriggles and writhes.
Smarties!
Gentle Jesus — even the word is forbidden…and here she is showing the objects themselves!
An awful thought comes.
My brain grabs it: What's the  date?
I start counting from Wednesday which I know because it was the first day of term.
When I get to fifteen, I stop…
Her birthday cake always shone with Smarties.
It had to, even the first.
A Smarty number in the middle and a double row round the edge.
Today would have been the sixth.
I could picture it clearly, a big number 6 made of all the colours in the tube.
My sister would have eaten the lot, by herself.
But, there was more to Smarty-power than that.
It was Smarties that made the coloured hand prints on the wall; with Smarty ‘buns’ she would charm all the grown-ups, and with Smarty ‘prezzies’they would encourage her performances and tricks; with Smarties she would entertain her invisible friends; Smarties bribed her to bed, to bath, to the toilet.
Smarties were Cymbeline; Cymbeline was Smarties.
On Mother's hand lie all the colours in the range: brown, lilac, red, yellow, green, pink, orange.
As I stare down with racing heart, the hand seems to shrink, and grow plump.
Its paleness turns pink and smooth…
‘No,’ I croak.
I feel dizzy, shut my eyes, squeeze.
Behind my forehead…fresh dug earth bulges, breaks open.
I see a mushroom…that isn't a mushroom…
It is part of the dream, the nightmares that came before, the one that would not let go…
Please, I moan in my head.
Above the dark lenses, Ma's eyebrows rise quivering.
‘Are you all right, dear?’ she asks.
The moan must have escaped.
Not trusting my voice, I nod.
But I know her eyes sure on, worried, alert, reading me.
She's a psychic my Ma (maybe they all are), I know I must cover up quickly.
‘I mean, no thank you,’ I manage in almost a normal voice.
But inside my head is a warning: She's rising like Lazarus!
Hurry.
Go quickly.
254 
I'm aching to run, but make myself sit for a second while she watches me through the black circles.
Control.
Good.
I blow up my fringe, and yawn, and slowly stand up.
‘I'll go get him some more water then, OK?’
I say.
Ma stretches her lips and lowers her head back on to the headrest.
‘Thank you, darling,’ she says.
I rise and move quietly away.
Heart pounding.
I draw a can of water from the outside up, and make my way towards Lucky's tethering place.
The animal is asleep on the turd-laden concrete, his chin resting in a pool of saliva, black-brown lips splayed on either side.
I hardly notice the stink of drying dog piss.
I reach over the palletwood fence and pour water from the long spout into his half-empty ice cream tub, then straighten and stare at the huge, inert body, my mind searching for an excuse to proceed beyond the shed.
Not a bird, not an insect, not a zephyr relieves that hot, heavy silence.
I am panting.
‘He's OK for water,’ I call softly over my shoulder.
I feel cold though the sweat runs down my back.
I glance behind me.
Both parents seem asleep.
‘I fancy a spot of weeding,’ I call, in case they are awake and pretending.
I set down the watering can and start for the vegetable plot.
I collect the long-handled trowel as I pass the shed.
The sun presses down, and the toad in my belly gurgles.
For some reason I am panting, my heart is pounding, my fingers tingle, and my legs…my legs are like cool jelly…
Only I know what lies beneath the courgette plant, whose yellow trumpets are so curiously attractive to bluebottles.
As I tread the grass path between the two plots, I hear again, in my head, the roar of the great machine, the chattering blades; feel its handles in my palms…
I killed her!
I killed her!
Rubbish.
It was an accident, says a voice inside my head.
You meant to steer it away.
You were too little, that's all, not strong enough.
A cloud of flies rises buzzing and zooming, several striking my face and hair.
This new voice persists: The bits and bobs will be down there all right, happily rotting away.
There's no funny mushroom.
And there's no Ghosty.
But you go ahead; see for yourself, then perhaps you'll be satisfied, Doubting Jim.
In a daze, I set to with the trowel.
The thick rasping stems draw white grazes with little beads of blood on my tender young arms.
I pause to roll down my shirt sleeves and button the cuffs.
For the first time I notice the great hairy leaves have five fingers.
The topmost foliage is taller than me and the growth is so dense I cannot be seen from the lawn as I dig into the muddy trench which forms an oasis round the stem.
Ignoring my presence, some of the flies have returned to their unnatural feast.
Suddenly from among the lichen and lank chickweed drawn up by the gloom of the canopy, comes the first flash of pink.
I turn the hand with the trowel's tip, feeling faint.
A thousand-legged worm crawls out of the severed wrist.
It moves with surprising speed.
My stomach clenches and my lungs pump.
A little mud clings to the infant hand but otherwise it is perfect.
No sign of nibblings, no shrivelling, no darkening of the flesh.
In twelve long hot summer weeks, putrefaction has not touched these remains.
I feel tears of frustration starting: Little cheat, I moan.
And dig on.
To extract the bike means shifting a sack of dried dog food, a pile of gardening tools and a dozen old floorboards saved from the extension, ‘just in case’.
The maroon paint is old and scratched now, and the once shining rims quite chromeless.
Though far too small for me, the bike had been saved to be passed on to Cymbeline; somehow it had been overlooked in the purge.
I thank Heavenly Father, for it is the only escape I can think of.
Both of the playbike's tyres are soft, but, Pa being Pa, the pump is still attached, fixed on with masking tape to make sure.
After the pumping, I feel hot and dizzy.
I sit on the wooden floor for a moment to gather my strength, also to decide exactly where I should take the relics to dispose of them.
Somewhere far away, I'm thinking.
(Perhaps out of nightmare-range?)
A place they can never be disturbed…
Where no one would ever dig…
Got it!
I stand up.
The river!
The river is perfect.
Ten minute ride.
Good long throw and it will all be over.
Finished.
I feel calmer already.
I find an old plastic carrier bag, tip out the few bits of string and wire it contains and replace them with a handful  of rusty bolts from the biscuit tin.
I weigh the bag in my hand and think of it plummeting into the swirling, beige water of the estuary.
(Perhaps I smile.
Perhaps not.)
The six relics go in, and, after carefully expelling all air, I fasten the neck with string and push it into the white saddlebag.
With wildly beating heart, before opening the shed door I rehearse the lie I am about to tell him — just like in drama — including the correct tone of voice: ‘Just going for a quick bike ride, Pa.
Five mins, OK?
Want anything from the shop?’
That's it.
Let's keep this casual.
With the bike's front tyre, I push open the shed door, wheel the bike through…
And that's when I hear it:
‘Bad Bimbim!
Me telling.’
I stare at the saddlebag, open mouthed, feeling my legs drain of blood.
Trembling.
Into my head rushes a total insanity — no thought processes occur — the voice comes…and it's there — complete: this is the voice of dead Cymbeline, who is five years old — sorry, six now.
My head shakes violently: ‘No!’
My legs will barely hold me.
Aware that I have barked the word out loud, I glance towards the lawn.
No movement there.
I lay the bike down on the grass, turn back to the shed, slowly push open the door…peer inside…without entering.
The shed is quite empty!
I stare again at the saddlebag, feeling sick.
My stomach is gurgling again.
What am I to do?
What am I to do?
A green bonfire is smouldering down by the heap.
The smoke drifts to me…and a little attack of hope.
‘No!’ says the voice.
‘Bimbim bad.
Cymby be wiv Bimbim.
In Roombed.’
I feel dizzy now, close to passing out, I feel.
What can I do?
I pick up the bike and return it to the shed.
I open the — saddlebag, take out the polythene carrier bag and tuck it, cool and heavy down the front of my shirt.
I return to  the lawn, make an excuse to go to my room where I lock the relics away in my blue metal toolbox…
And that's where they have stayed, quite quietly until…
Ever had a tick in your knob end?
Head buried, nothing to see but the brown velvet belly full of blood, all soft and bloated like a spider's abdomen.
Don't laugh: it could be you!
I knew I'd been dreaming again (or whatever we call it) because, when I came out of it, the wooden post — that old pile I'd clung to like a drowning man — was nowhere!
I was still submerged in stinking, suffocating nest, but and here's the rub-a-dub-dub — I was at least three pits further out.
How I ever found my way back is a miracle, but, eventually, I touched wood again and, somehow, managed to haul myself up and over.
When I finally arrived back at the Bible Room, headvoice was giving me unmerciful stick:
— what she?
She doesn't exist, for fuck's sake!
My head ached.
I felt sick.
Look, I groaned, it's something to do with the spiral…can't you see?
No, you can't, can you?
You never see anything.
All right, I'll try to spell it out: the beginning was the dream — don't ask, I don't know, I only know that's where the word came from — I mean exorcism — that word.
That word — that idea — started the rot.
It was an admission, a crack, a thin-ended wedge.
Things come in pairs.
You can't have just one, you have to have both…
Shit!
I remember now…
Old Sopworth, he said it: ‘If you want God, you've got to have Satan.
If you want Angels, you've got to have Devils.
If you want to understand Theology, you'd better take a gander at the Demonology too…
That's what he said.
So what?
So what?!
I'll tell you so what, you thicko, exorcisms, that's what.
If you want exorcisms — and that is what we both wanted, you may just possibly remember — if you want all the comforts of that gem of ecclesiastical mumbo jumbo, you'd better get ready for the opposite an’ all…
You'd better be prepared for the hauntings, because hauntings is what you'll bloody well get.
They're a set, see?
Hauntings and exorcisms; you can't buy them singly.
You see what we've bloody well done?
Between the two of us clever bastards, we've opened the bloody door, that's what!
And now, now it's as if there's a spiral stairway built out of pure bloody fear.
It leads straight up from hell to that turret.
I made it!
Me, with my fear.
To fear something is to believe in it — there's no fear without belief.
You're scared of something, you've got to believe in it…that's another little pair for you…
That's what I'm trying to tell you.
It's a vicious spiral: she feeds it, I feed her —;
So?
It's not real.
So what does it —— and it's getting bloody worse every time…
I'm moving…in the games, I'm actually moving…
I must have moved, what…? twenty feet under that filth.
I could easily have — Christ!
What now?
Sopworth's cat, ST, St Tom!
It's a freak.
What about it?
Shut up.
I'm thinking…
It's coming back…
Yes…
When he finished his pee, Doctor Sopworth shut the door and drew an old army blanket across.
He then shuffled around the room cupping his hand around the chimneys and blowing out one lamp after another.
With only the fire's glow and the light from the lamp on the table remaining, he stretched out on the sofa, the tumbler between his hands bobbing gently on his domed belly.
He closed his  moist, red-rimmed eyes and, in a voice soft and careful, told me the story of St Tom.
‘There is a research station, not light years from here, James, where the professors and gifted students of the department of behavioural sciences torture apes and other animals for the benefit, they tell us, of all mankind.
‘Until recently, Tom was helping with their inquiries on a strictly involuntary basis, you understand…?’
The red eyes popped open, turned to me.
I nodded, totally relaxed, slightly dizzy.
His eyes lingered, reading mine.
Apparently satisfied, he went on:
‘Sources close to these clever men — in distance, that is to say, not philosophy — last week informed our coterie of the cruel nature of these…in-vest-igations, the effects of which you have yourself witnessed this very evening.’
His eyes indicated the room above where all was now silent, the sounds of hunting having subsided.
‘The prize these men seek is indeed remarkable.
In brief, it is Superman; Creator-man, more accurately.
Creator-man will simply create his own universe around him, precisely as he wishes it to be.
Furthermore, his body will respond to this self-made reality precisely as it would to what we now regard as ‘the’ universe.’
Again, the doctor's red eyes sought mine.
This time he certainly saw blank incomprehension mixed with a liberal dollop of incredulity.
In a voice now noticeably slurred he went on:
‘Perhaps it would help if I were to relate all this to what is known among the micro-electronic geniuses as ‘virtual reality’.
You've no doubt heard of these helmets which can feed a man's senses a crudely simulated universe-a cartoon universe — with which he can interact physically; he rotates, it rotates; he hears a sound, he turns towards it, the source is where it should be, so on and so forth.
They use the idea for designing the interiors of buildings and so on; essentially it's a toy in its current form, but it  gives you the idea.
Hmm?
And it seems to have given these madmen the idea of producing a biological version, capable of creating a world indistinguishable — indistinguishable, I ask you, ye Gods!— from reality.
‘In other words, James, they believe that Creator-man is with us now, inside every human skull.
Tomas was simply the latest in a line of cats drafted to the realisation of this insane ambition.
Cats are nothing, you see?
They're expendable; like test-tubes; you bust one, you buy another; or steal it; or receive it.
They like cats especially, it seems, because cats are apparently good strong dreamers.
But…’
The doctor rose slowly to his feet.
‘I happen to like cats too, I and my pals…’
He was rummaging under the cushions of the armchair next to mine; leafing through magazines, one after another, and discarding them.
‘Excuse me,’ he said.
I stood up.
‘There's an article here somewhere.
Where the devil?
Ah.
This is it: Can Faith Make Mountains?
Reads like a joke, Jim, but it's not.
Oh no.
Not to the cats.
Not to us either.
I've marked the relevant passages.
Read ‘em.
See what you think.’
I picked up a folded-back magazine and began to read a passage pointed up in lime highlighter.
Early results of the DSR (Dream State Reactivity)— the so called, Night Jerk — research suggest the remarkable possibility that the inhibiting function of the DSD (Dream Suppression Device), sometimes referred to as the ‘Gateway’, may indeed be chemically overridden for periods as great as .073 of a second when the brain is in Dream Mode; this state being identifiable by the usual REM (Rapid Eye Movement) sleep and related EEG brain rhythms.
So called slow-wave, or ‘deep’ sleep terminates, and the subject is ‘virtually’awake.
The distinction between this state and the state of normal dreaming being that movement and other physical responses take place.
It has now been established that in cases where the Gateway has been totally excised, this condition may be extended indefinitely.
The Gateway itself is situated deep in the brain stem.
Improvements in the difficult techniques involved in its excision are one of the laboratory's most notable triumphs.
All the more reason, therefore, to deplore the proposed reduction in Government funding outlined by the minister on —
There the yellow highlighter stopped.
I looked up, shaking my head, wondering as much about the English teacher's two personae as the article, not knowing what to think about either.
Or say.
Sopworth smiled, extended the bottle and poured me another half inch.
‘There's more, of course,’ he said.
‘It goes on to explain how the geneticists and the neurochemists — neurotransmitters and all that — are in on the act =’ His red eyes searched mine once more, then turned away to stare at the solitary lamp.
‘I don't know how you feel, but to me it's not progress, to me it's an obscenity — successful or not!
Christ!’
The old man sat up with a jerk, slopping scotch over his hands which I noticed were shaking.
‘He can't even hunt, the poor bastard…’
He looked back at me.
I could see he was close to tears.
‘They're not feeding them, you see, Jim; they want to see if dream mice will keep them alive…’
He slugged back a mouthful.
‘It's insane…it's bloody…
Christ, I could…’
The doctor drew a shuddering breath.
‘Sorry,’ he said.
‘Troubk is, the poor brute won't eat.
He's starving but he just doesn't seem to know it.
It's terrible.
They've wrecked his brain, the swines.
Sorry.
Sorry.
Not your problem.’
He swallowed thickly and stood up wobbling slightly.
‘It's just…you remind me of Michael.
I shouldn't have…
Sorry.
Please…just forget what I  said.
Can you manage that, Jim?’
I nodded.
‘I'm just a senile old Luddite, I suppose.
But…
Tom…he's never been a mouser in his life, I don't imagine.
He's a domestic pussy.
We did that to him; we humans.
Now he's dependent.
And those loonies expect him to —’ He cut himself off with a hard slap to the bald head.
‘Sorry.
At it again.’
He smiled, staggered a little.
‘You'll be all right on here,’ he said, patting the sofa.
‘I'll fetch you a blanket.
We'll leave the fire in.
It's frosty outside now.’
‘Who's Michael?’
I asked.
‘My grandson.
He's dead now.
Meningitis.’
When he returned with the blankets I must have been asleep.
I never felt him cover me, or tuck me up…
Sometime during the night, I was woken by my cold feet, a warm weight on my chest and the loudest purr I had ever heard.
My neck ached from being forced up by the arm of the settee.
The lamp on the table was out.
By the fire's steady glow, I could see the shaved and scarred head of ST.
The cat was neatly folded on the centre of my chest, its smiling face bare inches from mine.
When I moved, it settled in the hollow made by my drawn-up knees.
I fell asleep to its slow rattle and wheeze.
In the morning, ST was still there.
Still purring…
The memory fades into spiralling fear.
I'm left with one thought: Creator-man.
What's it to do with us?
Nothing.
We're not a cat.
And if we were, we —;
Who's responsible for this lot?
Who's in charge here?
Oh, Christ Jesus, what am I to do?
Stop it, will you!
Feel your heart rate — that's dangerous — cut it out.
Now!
We need sleep.
What about…you know…down there?
Down there?
Scrotum.
That?
Ridiculous.
A wind-up.
It's obvious…
Look, if you're worried, we'll…
Not now.
Not now…
Later.
I picked up the bottle beside me and took another long swig.
Until the medicine started to work (come on, medicine!)
I could only lie there staring, burning more pages to hold back the dark, because every time I closed my eyes I saw the same thing: the dark shadow of a manlike creature with shoulders curving up in two great arcs on either side of its head…
I looked around the Bible Room, and again thought of Lawrence.
I remembered that first time we had come here.
How I had despised his brutishness then, and how I longed for his toughness, his uncomplicated, animal certainty now.
If only he were here, I thought, how different things would be…
At that precise moment, I heard a sound from beyond the door…footsteps, outside, on the balcony, softly treading the dusty Shelf.
I held my breath.
Were they approaching or going away?
Talk of the devil…
Fumblingly, shaking with excitement, I struggled to pull up my tracksuit trousers, half praying, half whispering: Wait, Lawrence.
Don't go.
Don't go, please.
I'm here…
I quickly trod out the flickering twists of paper, and scrambled across to the door.
I opened it cautiously, only a crack, just in case it might not be my friend though I could think of no one else who would be here at this time of night.
I was amazed it had taken him so long.
What was more, I would tell him so, in no uncertain terms…
I knelt on the top step and poked my head through, near the bottom of the gap…
There was someone there…a figure in grey, half lit by the floodlight entering through one of the leaded glass  windows at the far end of the Shelf…
Lawrence!
Thank
God!
Lawrence's tracksuit was grey, like mine…
It is Lawrence!
Let's call him.
Sssh!
Hold on.
I'm not sure.
It looks…a bit dark…a bit big.
Which way is it facing?
Don't know.
Wait.
It's turning, I think…
My God!
Those shoulders…
Get back.
Get back.
I pushed the door to slowly, silently, crept back down the steps, into the corner and bunched up small.
Silence.
Seconds grew to minutes.
The clock struck some half hour.
Nothing.
Not a sound.
The clock struck eleven chimes.
There's no one there.
If there was anyone…they've gone.
But I don't think —;
Trick of the light, you mean?
Yeah…
Yeah…a trick of the light…
Plus the worry.
Plus the worry.
That's it.
That'll be the —;
It wasn't…
It wasn't Her, was it?
It wasn't —
Don't be stupid…
How could it be —;
I dunno.
It's crazy…
I've just got this crazy idea that…that somehow She's out there…maybe…maybe in another form, another shape…
I dunno, fuck it.
I just can't stop myself thinking She's out there…stalking around in the dark…hunting…for me.
That's…that's just daft.
That's potty.
I mean, that's really, really potty, you know?
I know, I know.
I just…
Come on.
Light another taper.
Let's have some light in here.
We've got to face things.
It's not facing things, that's the cause of it all.
Let's take a butcher's at those bugs.
I mean…what are they?
I mean, really!
They're nothing.
Right?
They're just little bugs.
I felt for the matches.
Head was right.
Things had to be faced.
I lit the taper, twisted another dozen pages, lit one more  and pushed the waistband of my trousers down to my knees.
Stop panicking, can't you —;
Panicking?!
Look, you know they can give you brain diseases, don't you.
There's people in Canada gone nutty from tick bites.
They reckon we've got it in England an' all.
In the New Forest…
This isn't the New Forest.
Just pull the bastards down, will you.
And let's see.
In the light of the fly leaf, the end of my penis looked like a peeled pomegranate.
There had to be more than a dozen black bulges hiding under the foreskin.
I felt the blood rush to my centre — legs, fingertips, head all emptying at once in a rush —
No!
You can't get out of it that way!
I quickly stuck my head between my knees, remembering…remembering.
Sometime, someone said, don't pull the body off or the head'll stay in and go septic.
Spray them with something.
Alcohol?
Was that it?
What if it made them go deeper?
Jesus Christ!
No.
A cig!
That was it.
Burn them out — roast the buggers!
It's the only way.
I took out my next to, next to, last but one Capstan, and lit it with trembling hands.
I took a deep, deep breath…peeled back the hood, and…rapid eye movement…
Out wriggled…
Tumbled…
A dozen fragments of broken nest!
My clothes, hair, ears, trainers had all been full of broken bits of twig…
What was the matter with me?
Why hadn't I guessed?
There were no bugs anywhere else on my body; what on earth had made me think…?
Well…
I'll be…
She really got you going there, Jimbo?
What a wind-up!
Jesus.
The cow!
Almost another panic-attack there, eh, son?
Touch more, and  you'd have been off on episode three…
You're handing it to her on a plate, you know that?
It's all in the mint, man.
For fuck's sake get a grip.
I mean, really: Satan's Crabs!
And an Aben…!?
That turns out to be a half-dead pigeon.
Holy shit! what a dork.
Thanks.
Don't mention it.
By the way, what was it you said?
‘She really got me going…’ et cetera; you did say, ‘She’, didn't you?
I did hear correctly, I take it.
Figure of speech.
That's all.
I didn't mean —;
That's OK, I just wondered.
Up yours!
The pigeon had still not passed on when the last fly leaf sputtered out an hour or more later.
The big bonger chimed midnight as I put the finishing touches to our Bible beds (hers has a closing lid, of course).
I'd decided to leave the ‘coo' de grass until the morning when I would feel more up to it.
The trouble with pigeons is the neck; it's like old celery; you double it up and squeeze like buggery but it still won't snap.
Really, I was too shagged to bother, but also I had an idea she would pass on peacefully in the night without any more help from me.
I love animals myself but everyone's got to eat and there's only a crust in the Sunblest bag now.
I closed my eyes to shut out the glow from the cloverleaf window and tried for sleep.
I had stopped seeing the nightmare shape when I shut my eyes but every so often the pigeon stirred just enough to keep me awake.
Then my stomach began to play up, gurgling and rumbling.
The one thought I could not tolerate kept bubbling to the surface: had I really swallowed it?
All my efforts at control failed to keep this horror at bay.
I imagined it inside me; still alive!
I even thought I  felt it moving about.
A more hideous thought still came.
Supposing it wasn't a spider at all…supposing it was a big tick…?
Jesus Christ, what would it do in there…?
There were six Aspros left in the strip.
I popped the lot and tried my hardest to meditate.
Hopeless.
I decided to focus on the Matter.
Lying rigid in the dark, I had caught a whiff of myself — a dreadful pong, horribly nesty.
This made me aware of how badly I'd done with the domestic arrangements.
Above all I needed water for washing, and drinking, of course.
On the subject of personal hygiene and ‘standards’ in general, I had noticed that I was beginning to swear rather too much in my own thoughts.
Admittedly no one could hear, but that was hardly the point, I could.
Things like that can easily turn into thin-ended wedges.
Swearing is a sign of weakness.
‘Let your yeah be yeah’, as they say.
These are my walls, as Hamm says in the play.
The clock struck one.
The pigeon settled down.
But sleep would not come.
I decided to focus on the Matter again; the cooking facilities; it looked like it would have to be a barby of some sort, with paper logs made out of Bible pages twisted up and tied into knots — not the lovely picture pages, they remind me too much of Ma and Pa's bedroom — perhaps a few letters to the Corinthians; nice and dry.
I did not think He would mind this, especially if I made the whole thing into a sort of combined barby stroke burnt sacrifice.
I realised I'd be doing the eating so it wouldn't exactly be going up to heaven in a cloud of smoke, but as CJ says, it's the thought…
At that moment I heard a small scratching sound.
I knew at once it was the pigeon again.
I reached for the matches, and lit a spill.
She looked like a goner piled into the corner, one claw poking out, eye a milky slit, panting like a cat in a car.
I wanted to help her.
On impulse, I knelt down (the second time in twenty-four hours), hands together, eyes  closed…and waited for inspiration.
It came at once in the form of none other than the mighty Lord's Prayer; but it wasn't until I got to the line about daily bread that I saw the light — I hadn't given her any!
Or daily water either.
I could not help thinking that something beside mere chance was at work here, showing me the way.
But for that prayer, I might never have thought of nourishment (not for her, anyhow).
I knew there was only the one slice left, but I've never been the sort deliberately to starve an animal to death, so in it went.
Crumbs and all.
(I hardly expected her to eat it.)
No sooner had I completed this act of, shall we say, mercy, than a wonderful feeling of peace and calm came over me.
And I slept.
I awoke to total darkness and something crawling into the bunk hole beside me.
Terror.
Me rigid.
I had been dreaming of Cymbeline riding piggyback on my shoulders.
Becoming a monster with terrible claws.
Strangling me.
Tearing my throat out, so I cannot even scream.
Her drinking from the fountain of my jugular.
Slurping her lips.
Purring…
Whatever was on my shoulder now = was covered in hair; I felt its coarse hairs prickle my neck…
Smell of wet earth…
My belly writhed.
Bitter gall in my mouth.
A cold lump rising from my stomach.
Soon I must vomit.
I felt the thing on my shoulder dig claws into my flesh…it began to growl…
The lump of vomit reached my throat…back of my tongue.
I felt myself convulse violently, twist to the side, spew…
The creature moved from its place on my shoulder…deeper into the bunk, stirring the balls of screwed-up paper against my thigh.
With a cry, I leaped from the bunk, scattering Bibles.
A hideous howl from the bunk.
I felt the hairs stand on my head; my legs were fast emptying.
I searched the pouch furiously for matches.
Struck one, breaking the match which fizzed out on the floor.
Swore.
Struck a second.
Cupped the small flame with a trembling hand.
Cast about for a taper.
Found one on the floor.
Squatted to light it.
Saw the vomit, yellow and translucent on my training shoe lying beside the bunk.
Saw the huge black spider close by; standing; glistening; staring straight at me.
Saw the wreckage of the bunk.
Saw the creature emerging…
I heard laughter…horrible laughter…my laughter.
The creature…
(Who is in charge here?
Who's in control?)
The creature now crawling slowly from my bed of Bibles was…
…none other than…
Tomas, the cat.
I had barely time to recognise the shaven and scarred head emerging from the heap of Bibles and screwed-up paper, when a quick movement caught the corner of my eye.
The spider was scuttling towards the door.
Before I could react in any way, ST was on it, both paws.
In the mouth.
One shake of the head.
Gone!
Gobbled up!
Dead or alive.
I stopped laughing and sat on the floor, back to the wall, legs out straight.
The spill in my hand was beginning to sputter, but-I noticed that the cloverleaf aperture was now glowing pinkly.
I dropped the stub on the floor, still sputtering.
Headvoice was screaming: Where did that thing , that Godawful object , come from?!
I shuddered violently, thankful I was already on the floor.
ST came to me and rubbed against my side, purring his rattling, wheezing purr.
I touched his back, wanting to comfort him, wanting his company, yet not wanting to touch the ugly shaven head.
Under my hand I felt the knobs of his spine.
The  spill went out.
The room was suffused with soft, pink light.
‘I thought you were off food,’ I said.
‘I thought you weren't eating, old Tom.’
He stepped on to my lap and began to tread my crotch, purring loudly.
I put up with the small pricking claws.
People with cats live longer, I'd been told.
(Nothing about cats who eat spiders.)
I ran my hand gently down the bumpy back.
Awake, like this, the animal seemed perfectly normal, not at all like the crazed, somersaulting creature I had seen at the cottage.
I felt my pulse slowly returning to normal.
St Tomas was filthy, I now noticed, caked with mud, his fur barely recognisable as white.
He had to have travelled the better part of five miles cross country and another two from the edge of town in order to reach the Cathedral.
I remembered Sopworth saying how the cat had no sense of territory, how he'd only just caught it the first time it escaped, racing north along the A2.
‘Why here, puss?’
I murmured.
I felt my eyes prickle.
‘I'm very, very grateful, but…’
A deep memory stirred.
Still stroking the scurfy back, I said, ‘If you wish to live and thrive…
Do you know this, ST?
If not, you'd better listen…
If you wish to live, and thrive, let the spider run alive.’
At that moment there came a faint scratching from the box I'd built in the corner last evening for the pigeon.
Surely the thing was not still hanging on.
ST's ears twitched.
He stood and strolled over to the box.
He sat down and pushed at the lid with one filthy paw.
I rose and followed him.
‘No,’ I said, ‘You can't have that one.
Sorry.
That's mine.’
I picked him up gently, just to move him back so that I could look into the box…
And he bit me.
Hard, through the heel of my thumb.
I swore and dropped him, clutching my bleeding hand.
The door was ajar.
In a flash, he was through it and gone.
I was left gaping.
I felt empty suddenly, and terribly disappointed.
And scared again, like I'd felt when I'd woken before.
That must have been in the middle of the night.
I'd heard scratchings, that was it.
Rats!
I'd thought.
Then I'd lain rigid, like the man under the pendulum, not knowing whether it was dawn or midnight.
Then the bonger had struck the hour and it was only three bongs, and my feet were numb with cold, the Bibles had been kicked askew.
Another dream, I'd thought, and tried to remember, but remembered the pigeon instead: it wasn't rats, it was her again, winding me up.
Why wasn't she dead?
Then horror beyond all bearing — imagining Her in every shadow of the chamber.
The thought coming back that somehow the Ghost had managed to add movement to her other impossible trick: the voice trick…
I must have fallen asleep again then…
I think so, yes…
I think that's when I had the first nightmare…
I don't really know…
My screams woke me.
For seconds the dream-picture remained — a spiral stairway, a worm with a thousand legs moving in waves, climbing fast.
Then that other dream, the piggyback monster…
I shut out the memory, but my stomach was rumbling again.
It was definitely hunger this time — not unnaturally — this was, after all, day three, and so far I'd eaten precisely half a cut loaf.
I picked up the empty bread wrapper.
Made a funnel of the waxed paper, and tipped it into my wide-open mouth.
Nothing.
I stooped and lifted the Bible lid a couple of inches at one side.
One black, twinkling eye.
Alive then.
Quite perky, in fact.
I raised the lid further.
Half the crust eaten, the other half shat on.
Shit!
No breakfast for me, then.
This is hopeless, said headvoice.
So?
I said, sitting on a stack, head in hands.
What do you suggest?
If you want to know…
I suggest we try learning from our mistakes —
What does that mean?
Try thinking back to last night, for a start.
Meaning?
Meaning we cut the knee jerks and start using our brains.
Think about it.
Think where we are.
This place.
This is a Cathedral, right?
A holy place, right…?
Get on with it.
I'm not saying I believe this, and I'm not saying I don't, but…
Oh, for Christ's sake —
But…if, as they say, this is all in the mind, ie it is all down to your guilty conscience — excuse the expression — why not do something about it?
Eh?
I mean why not?
Either way, a good deed never hurt anyone, did it?
Mmm?
You know the sort of thing I mean: ‘For as much as ye do it unto one of these my children —’
What conscience?
Cut the riddles.
I'm not in the —
— Or creatures great and small, for example.
Small, sick creatures.
Or wounded creatures…
Look, do we have to have the parables?
Why can't you —
Do as you would be done by, old son.
Think of others.
Like?
Oh!
Got you…
I think.
Virtue is its own reward, mate —
Ah haaa.
I'm beginning to —
Get the Umpire on our side, eh?
Then —
The umpire…right.
We can do anything.
Right?
Right.
Sky's the limit.
Right?
Right.
Get some good karma around us.
Set an example.
I mean, who's the man of the family, right?
Who's the eldest?
Eld-er.
You are, right?
Right.
OK, let's go, team.
Operation Nightingale.
Good scene, head.
I have discovered two new rooms in the tower; the lower, immediately above the fan ceiling, has bell ropes dangling and is obviously still in use, whilst the upper is bare, dusty boards apart from a giant treadmill in the centre which might once have been used for hauling up stone but is clearly redundant now.
I have moved the patient in there to be closer to the turret, the better for me to nurse her.
The door — which I had to unlock — is only a few steps down-spiral from the turret, so I shall be visiting often.
She seemed to have taken a turn for the worse, her eyes had gone dull and slitty again with a third kind of lid coming half across.
No way could a person eat something like that — not that I had any intention of killing and consuming the poor creature, now that my eyes had been opened.
However humble, I now saw that the pigeon was one of God's creatures.
As a human being I had to respect that.
Certainly we had been given dominion over them, but that didn't mean we had to go cramming their little corpses down our necks like there's no tomorrow when soya beans and wheat mountains rise up from Mother Earth like a sign saying: Meat is Murter.
Holding her gently in my hands and feeling her warmth and the trembling lightness of her, I was genuinely moved t– tears and am not ashamed to admit it.
You have sinned, Jimbo, I told myself out loud, but it is never too late to repent.
It is hard to describe the feeling I had as I persuaded her scaly old feet on to my finger and gave her a dose of my very own medicine.
She immediately sneezed and perked up, and her eyes opened wide.
I was really choked up for a moment.
Then she went and spoiled everything by behaving as if pissed, lurching backwards and forwards till she ended up hanging upside down from my finger, gripping so tightly she almost drew blood.
When I prised her off and tried to stand her on the floor she kept rocking back and sitting on her tail, then falling over sideways and lying there like a stuffed parrot.
I admit love deserted me for a moment, but I pretty soon realised that this was not her fault.
I mean, neither of us had eaten since the early hours, and drinking on an empty stomach is dodgy.
Also, half a capful might have been rather a lot, weight for weight.
She dropped off to sleep, I believe, and may have snored in her own quiet way through the two little holes in the top of her beak.
I had rebuilt her box in the bottom of the treadmill.
I now sat by her bedside and worked out ratios.
As far as I could tell she'd drunk a litre and a half, allowing for spillage, so her behaviour was understandable.
Although she was asleep, I whispered, I forgive you, and made a mental note to be more professional in the future.
I was so hungry now I could hardly think.
I kept asking, is this fair?
Nobody answered.
Not that I really expected them to; I could hardly expect the Umpire to side with me so soon.
All in good time…
Meantime:
Food.
We cannot live by bread alone, but it helps.
Indeed, for me the need was becoming more and more urgent.
My famished brain kept throwing up the same line, and I had  not the strength to control it, even though I knew it was wrong: Cymbeline Ghost-relic has returned from the Other Side:
I felt certain that nothing would cut out this mad idea until I found those missing relics, and the un-supernatural explanation I knew, in my heart, existed.
At the same time I just had to find something to eat, for me and the patient.
Also a receptacle for catching rainwater.
Action stations, said headvoice.
Only people with soft heads stick them in the sand and wait to be kicked up the arse by little cheats and liars.
After hours of fruitless searching, wandering through the attics and passages of the Shell, I drifted into a dim chamber filled with piles of what seemed junk somewhere above the north quire isle.
Giddy, weak, no longer interested in the inedible, and with even my fear of meeting again with the Mamba overridden by ravenous hunger, I stumbled over a heap of damaged hassocks towards a door marked in red letters, FIRE DOOR — KEEP CLOSED.
I listened briefly, jerked the bar up, entered, blundered down a flight of wooden steps into a second, cupboard-lined room, and…
Stopped dead, eyes locked on what seemed a miracle (in comparison to which the loaves and fishes seemed small beer).
There, resting against the foot-pedal, under a scratched and battered grand piano, was a paper bag bursting, overflowing, with Glacé Mints.
Could it possibly be mere chance, I asked myself, that this manna from God knew where just happened to be my absolute favourites bar none?
Or was there an Umpire after all?
Was this a sign, a reward for my good deeds of the morning, a promise of better things to come?
There looked to be over a pound of the delicious, translucent sweets the bag was bursting, spilling over so that a dozen or more lay scattered on the dusty floor, gleaming like diamonds through the wrappers.
Normally a sucker, I sat under the piano and chewed ravenously, ripping the cellophane off the next and the  next as I did so.
Crunch, splinter, gulp — three, four, five at once.
Within seconds, I felt the power returning.
‘Thanks,’ I spluttered to no one in particular, then concentrated hard on eating.
After a minute, with a quarter or so inside me, I began to slow down, to look around.
The room was cluttered with hymn books and psalters and shelves stacked with boxes with handwritten labels such as Magnificat, Stanford, Nunc Dim and Jesu Joy.
Three long, wooden stalls occupied the centre where I guessed the choir stood during practice.
I climbed to my feet, stuffing the bag of mints into my pouch.
The blue paint of the practice stalls was scarred with initials and hearts and anarchist signs among others.
It occurred to me such deceptive ‘little angels’ would not be above nicking the odd relic if they happened to come across it.
I was wandering between the stalls, searching, though with little hope to be honest, when a bright object caught my eye: hanging from a music stand, beside the piano, was a three-inch knitted choirboy in pink and purple with white knitted ruff.
The face, with its black bead eyes and singing mouth — a vertical red line, one stitch tall — although knitted, was peculiarly alive looking; its expression somehow innocent and wicked at once.
It made me think of Cymbeline.
I moved to the leaded window, looked out.
Ruined arches, black branches, grass island the size of a football pitch but round, a police car with blue and red stripe parked outside the bursar's flint-fronted office.
(Someone in trouble?)
Black and grey figures streaming out of the dining room…
Benedicat nobis…
Boiled cabbage almost taste it through the dusty diamonds of glass.
Strength returning.
Strong enough to deal with options?
How long can a person go on mint-flavoured sugar?
Long as it takes.
Is that an option?
Are there options?
Sure.
Wednesday midnight the wager is up.
That's it, is it?
We can go then, can we?
I'd love to think so.
What to you mean, ‘think so’?
We're going.
Full stop.
You don't imagine we can simply walk out of here, do you?— win or lose, up stakes and toddle off back to the world of boiled cabbage and beds with sheets?
That's not an option, that's a delusion.
Lose?
Who said anything about lose.
We're not going to let that little bitch —
Sssssh.
What's that?
Treble voices.
Ascending from below.
Coming quickly.
The choir!
Get out of here, fast.
I ran on tiptoe for the steps.
Something made me snatch the woolly choirboy from its metal gallows (even at that moment I noticed its surprising weight).
Up I skipped, through the fire door, into the low, dark junk room above.
The fire door had a fierce pneumatic return.
It took all my strength and nerve to control the final inch of its closing.
Boys pouring into the room below, laughing, chattering, me seeing them through the crack.
At last the door seated against the jamb.
I was free to inspect my hiding place.
To judge by the piles of broken stone, chunks of gargoyle, carved oak, black-brown and shot with wormholes, the upper chamber must once have been a workshop but was now a dump for unwanted Cathedral tat.
The only source of illumination was a low arched window which had leaded lights and a sill barely twelve inches above floor level.
I knelt and wiped a diamond pane with my sleeve.
The window gave on to a small lead roof beyond whose parapet I could see the topmost branches of the elm tree, the ornate brick chimneys of my own House — School House.
After a moment, my eye was caught by something lying in the gutter at the base of the parapet, then almost immediately by two similar objects at the opposite end.
I cleaned another pane with my cuff.
Among a mass of bloody feathers lay what appeared to be the remains of two– or it mi–ht have been three, freshly killed pigeons.
I looked back at the first.
That was definitely one pigeon, though its head was missing.
For a second I considered whether I might not be able to make a meal from the remains, but, not only was the edge off my appetite, there was something repulsive about the thought of eating carrion, however fresh it looked.
Babble of voices below — a man's voice calling for quiet.
I settled on the floor between two small statues.
Both lay face down and, at first glance, appeared to be Virgins sculpted from some dull, black stone, but, when turned, revealed skulls under their hoods, rib cages, skeletal shins and feet peeping out from their gowns.
I pushed them away with a shudder, but when I looked up I saw, lying on a shelf opposite, an infant or Cupid carved in black marble.
It was obviously made to stand up with its foot on something which at first I could not make out for all the dust and dirt but eventually realised was a skull.
Cymbeline would love to do that to you, said headvoice.
Really, I said, popping in a Glacé Mint.
I placed the knitted choirboy on the floor beneath the heel of my trainer.
Like this, you mean?
I was trying to be cool, but the statues were not funny to me.
They were weird; unlike the other contents of the room, none was broken.
I could not understand why they had been banished to this dusty attic.
Until this thought: hadn't Sopworth mentioned objects like these?
In Shakespeare's day, didn't he tell about people wearing skull rings and brooches to remind them of death.
Memento mori, wasn't that the phrase?
Perhaps objects like these had been fashionable in churches once upon a time, but no longer, hence the attic.
Or perhaps, in the old days, people were even more scared of death than we are, so tried to appear friendly towards it, as a woman might try to appear friendly to a rapist in the hope —
Bollocks.
You talk some right ——
Sssh.
Something happening below: Tap, tap, tap.
‘Ready?
In the key of G then — la, la, la, laaaa.’
Outside the window, light fading fast.
This could take a while.
When it's over I'll go on down.
Plenty of time.
Eyes closing.
Sweet and sour memory:
Me and Lucy walking the sun-dry common.
Should have been Lawrence, not me.
Lawrence couldn't make it.
‘Entertain her,’ he said.
I didn't twig.
Until later.
[Treble voices — rising sweetly: Gloriaaa]
Lucy in black sleeveless polo neck — so smooth and tight it makes me dizzy.
Hawthorn pollen on the breeze.
Hand in hand, my head composing witty excuses to lay hands on those ball-aching boobs — break the ice, break the duck.Too late; she brushes herself down, roughly, I feel, making them jiggle.
Making me release her hand and walk with my hand in my pocket.
Benny, her mongrel, foraging ahead.
Here, Benny.
Fetch, Benny.
Fine dark hair on her lip, fine black hair on her forearms.
Smooth brown shoulders.
Smooth brown legs.
Five foot tall in flatties and something else…
[Gloria Gloria In excelsis de-ee-o]
Lucy sees it first: forty pounds of barrel-chested, pink eyed albino bull terrier, charging down on Benny, bandy legs flying — white rhino in a hurry in a collar with two rows of studs.
‘Don't like the look of that.’
‘Nor me,’ says Lucy.
No owner in sight.
Benny's time has come, I think, searching for a stick all the same.
[Gloria]
Like a rhino close up, it skids to a halt, grrrr, grrrr, yellow and black teeth.
Next thing, damn me, out comes four inches of crimson willie.
‘Holy shit!’ says Lucy, ‘He's got his lipstick out!’
Now, Benny is a dog, plain and simple, and what Benny is into is rabbits and balls, balls and rabbits.
Nothing much else.
But it soon becomes clear that rhino is keen on other things.
What rhino likes is fucking and killing, killing and fucking; he isn't at all fussy which end he fucks, so long as he gets to fuck.
And fuck hard.
Very sensibly, Benny stands perfectly still while the psychopath reaches up on tiptoe and attempts to screw his earhole.
[Gloria Gloria]
‘Archie!
You bugga,’ calls an aristocratic voice.
Looking up I see an ageing female, flowered hem in one hand, Panama held on head with the other, racing towards us.
‘Sorry.
Sorry.
He's an absolute bugga,’ she pants, grabbing towards Archie's collar, but not getting close.
‘Mine's a boy,’ says Lucy, staring with obvious distaste at the fucking Archie.
‘Matters naught to this bugga, I'm afraid,’ grunts Panama.
‘Dogs, bitches, fur coats, small boys, gerbils…
I could kill him.
He's not mine, he's my husband's.’
Meanwhile Archie negotiates round to make hot pelvic: thrusts in the rough area of Benny's tail, pink eyes rolling in passion, or hate.
Lucy says to Panama, matter of factly: ‘You can make a dog stop that by sticking your finger up its bottom.’
I glance across.
Her face is quite serious.
Panama shoots her a quizzical glance, moves round to a position directly behind Archie's plunging rear and, saying, ‘You can do it like this an’ all, dear,’delivers her chunky brogue with astonishing force into Archie's tight scrotum.
Yelp!
[GLORIAAAAAAA]
‘Reminds me of Lawrence,’ says Lucy, as Panama and Archie (now walking, it seems to me, more bandy-legged than before) retreat down the track.
‘The male animal at its worst.
Not like you, Jimmy.
You're different, you know that?’
Should I be pleased?
I wonder.
She takes my hand.
We walk on.
After a hundred yards, I ask, ‘Different?
What way?’
‘You're nice.
The nice boys don't normally talk to me.’
She smiles almost shyly.
I say, ‘I'm not a nice boy, actually.’
She laughs more.
‘Say it again.’
‘Say what?’
‘Actually,’ says she, exaggerating the poshness I had not realised was in the word.
Only to cover my embarrassment, I say something really stupid.
I say, ‘Actually, I'd rather care to feel you up, blue eyes.’
She stops and looks at me.
There's real hurt in her eyes.
Then she says, ‘Sorry,’ takes away her hand and walks on slowly.
I don't mean what I say next either, it's just I'm furious with myself, but it comes anyway: ‘I suppose a fuck would be out of the question?’
She doesn't answer but keeps walking, me standing like a zombie watching the action.
Without turning, she shouts back, ‘Sorry, Jimmy.’
I see that her shoulders are shaking.
Laughing or crying?
I don't even know the answer to that!
I kick at a flint, hard, missing and catching my other ankle.
I sit in the grass at the side of the track, rubbing the skinned ankle.
Suddenly there are two brown feet.
I look up.
She's staring down at me, smiling, woman to child.
I say, ‘Why  not, Lucy?
Why Lawrence?
Why not me?’
She says, ‘Lawrence is an animal.’
She sits beside me in the grass, not looking at me, picking cloverleaves between her feet.
‘If we did, you know, you couldn't handle it, Jimbo.
We wouldn't be able to, to talk like we do.
It would change things…the mind things.
That would all…it's not that I…quite the opposite…it's just…’
‘What about him?’
‘I don't care about him.’
‘Lawrence said I was to entertain you.’
She flashed me a look.
‘Bastard!’ she said, standing up.
‘Bastard!
I hate his fucking guts.’
Her voice sounding hard now.
‘Did he tell you —’
‘No.
He never told me nothing,’ I blurted.
‘I bet!’ she said.
Then she laughed, then she stooped and took my hand.
‘Right,’ she said, towing me into the tall bracken.
‘Animal!’
Her breath smelled of wild garlic.
It wasn't garlic though.
When I kissed the dark mole, she laughed again and held the back of my head, tight so I couldn't breathe.
But I would not pull away.
[In excelsis de-ee-ooo!]
Cold.
And the chamber seemed darker beyond the elapsed time.
Soon it would be night again, the question still unanswered.
I felt my pulse quicken.
Don't get heavy, said headvoice.
Look on the funny side; I mean, supposing, just for a sec, we pretend that, somehow or other, the little cow hat actually managed to come to life.
I mean, what would she look like?
Eh?
Eh?
Imagine it.
No body.
I began to snigger.
An image had come of her standing before me, just hands, feet, eyes and dress — knickers  round her ankles — nothing to keep them up, not even ankles, to be accurate, well maybe half an inch, no more…but the image changed.
Snap!
Just like that.
The laugh cut dead.
Now there were bones — full set, ribs, pelvis, clavicles the lot — draped in bloody shreds of denim.
And, beneath her heel…the head of Jimbo, bloody and bawling!
I rubbed my eyes hard.
Stars danced.
I blinked.
I swore.
The picture vanished.
But She was close; I felt her.
You must keep control.
I felt my jaws clench, teeth grind together.
My pulse was beginning to gallop.
Control.
Must keep control.
Reasoning would be useless.
Who could reason with that?
She was the sort that keeps coming, that never knows when they're licked…the mad cockerel I once hit with my toy cricket bat — it was an accident, of course it was, but I had to keep hitting it and hitting it until it was nothing but a bloody pulp on splintered sticks.
Then even as I was grinding its neck into the gravel it was trying to peck my heel.
Even with its beak all splintered to fuck.
I shuddered at the memory.
I would need to do more than just win this game, I would need to annihilate her like the cockerel; more, I would need to break her completely.
My eyes returned to the statue of the infant with its foot on the skull.
Suddenly I seemed to know why, to understood the reason for my presence in this small, forgotten chamber with its images of death.
Two worlds were coming together in this place, the Creator-man world — the world I make — and the world that is.
And nothing I could do would hold them apart…
Shifting my foot.
Absently bearing down on my heel.
Shit!
A jet of warm liquid catches me full in the teeth.
I wipe with the back of my hand…look at this!— crimson smear — blood!
I spit.
The woollen choirboy under my heel!
I stare in horror at its bloody mouth, that vertical stitch of red wool now dribbling crimson.
Get away!
My  leg lashes.
The doll shoots across the floor, into a pile of carved stone, leaving a dark streak in the dust.
Lungs pumping.
Fingers tingling.
Legs emptying fast.
Scrubbing my mouth with my sleeve, I feel the Cathedral lurch beneath me, tilt towards a new trajectory.
Eyes shut.
Shocking brightness under the lids.
A pool of light, expanding circles, merging, dragging me down.
In the centre a dark oblong grows, distant figure radiating shadows like a child-drawn sunset.
Here comes the light of the world…
Ma?
What are you doing here?
She does not wear the dark glasses now.
I see her face clearly, the care lines and pouches have gone, it is the face of a young woman.
Her expression is stern.
Though her lips do not move, I seem to hear words: I am to go back — to sort out this nonsense, once and for all.
That's not fair!
I'm not ready.
No, Ma!
Please!
‘They're waiting to begin, Jimbo…to begin at the beginning, dear.’
Before She arrives?
Before the Monster arrives, you mean?
‘Now, now.
Big three year olds don't call names.’
The figure recedes, the circle dims, the piano plays softly so far away…
The Monster
SCENE: My Blue Bedroom — Evening Sunshine
Pa is standing on my blue nursery stool.
He is taller than the light bulb.
I am standing beside the stool, helping.
We are working as a team, putting up the mobile.
It is not an easy job.
‘Right.
Again, James.
And try not to drop it this time, please.
Is this the place?’
He points to a spot on the ceiling.
I nod, pointing to the same spot.
(He has already decided.)
‘Agreed,’ he says.
I do not like the mobile, but it is a present from my new sister so I pretend.
My new sister is a disgusting colour and very ugly.
It's no wonder she cries all the time.
Myself, I have never been happier.
Everyone is being extra nice to me and, best of all, Pa is taking me to the yard tomorrow.
I am Pa's best boy.
I aim to stay that way.
I do not like the dark.
‘Pass it up then, James.’
I stretch up with the bundle of sticks, thread and cardboard fairies (or angels or whatever they're supposed to be).
Before Ma left me to collect my new sister from Maternity I would not have been able to execute this upward stretch unaided, now I hold the pose perfectly, without touching the chair back.
I am sorry Ma has missed  this, she would have been proud of me.
Pa is too busy with the drawing pins to notice.
Pa stoops with a big grunt, emphasising the effort we are both putting in.
(This is part of the game.)
As he takes the mobile from me he says, ‘That's my best boy,’ and I feel my legs do a little dance.
Ah, the joy.
He thanks me: ‘Ta.’
He presses home the pin and steps down.
For the briefest second I wonder why my Thomas the Tank Engine mobile has been taken down, but assume it is to be re-positioned to make room for the present.
Pa throws the clips and drops the side of my blue cot.
‘Now then, James, plastic mattress’ He holds out his hand without looking.
‘Baby won't be a nice clean person like you.’
Baby?
What does he mean?
Pa turns to look at me.
‘Mattress, James.’
My legs have stopped dancing.
They feel empty.
‘There, on the landing.
Pink for a girl.’
My legs are wobbling, they could dump me on the lino.
The sun has gone in.
This room is MY room.
This bed is MY bed!
It must be a joke.
I laugh, but he does not laugh with me.
‘New babies wet the bed, James.
They can't help it.
You'll be in the big bed now.
In my old office.
Won't that be nice.’
Pa's face melts and the colours of the room run together.
Whatever I have done must have been really, really bad.
But, so help me…
I have done nothing!
I have not woken them at dawn with my racket, I have not drawn on the wall in felt-tip, I have not hugged Wally the cat round the neck, I have not spat out my liver and spinach, put worms in the watering can, cacked my pants, made brown finger paintings on the wall…
So what have I done!?
My cheeks burn.
‘Go toilet,’ say I, stumbling to the door.
Shocked, half-blinded by tears, I blunder along the pas sage towards the bathroom.
At this point there is no particular plan in my mind, I just know my head will explode unless I immediately kick, bite or scream.
And Pa will not have such behaviour in our house.
Which means…the darkness, and serve me right.
I reach up and bolt the door, which I am not to, but cannot control it for once.
On top of the cistern I spy the new vinyl doll they have — for who knows what weird reason — bought me.
I grab it.
My sharp teeth sink themselves into its nose.
Arrgh!
Arrgh!
ARRGH!
The lavatory seat is up, maroon bowl stained white, unflushed paper, a dark sinker lurking like a sub in the U-bend.
‘Baby barf NOW,’ I say aloud, ramming the doll in head first.
I swing from the handle till the water dragon roars.
As the bowl fills, I think of Ma.
Back home for one day — one day — and already she's smaller.
She wants the Monster out of her room, of course she does, but to give it MY room!?
And what next?
My high chair?
My pedal car?
My, my umbrella!?
With the long-handled brush, I jab down hard between those squashy pink legs — again, again, again — till the vinyl head squeaks round the bend.
‘What's going on in there?
Come on, James, unlock this door.’
It's amazing how much better I feel.
I answer with surprised reasonableness, ‘Barf le bubba.’
Pa's response comes in the flat voice I know, and fear, ‘Talk properly, James.
Open the door.
Now, please.’
Don't give way, whispers the voice of temptation, you're in charge in here.
I give the pink botty a thorough good scrub, putting in plenty of elbow grease.
White shreds cling to the bristles as I churn the water in frenzy.
And serve it right.
I am too busy to answer.
‘It isn't baby's bath time yet,’ continues Pa, speaking very calmly now, ‘You do Cymbydoll while Mummy does Cymbeline; that's after tea.’
The door knob r rattles.
‘Now!
James.’
His other voice, the voice he uses before something happens to teach me a lesson: ‘Come along please se, you're getting overexcited.’
There is a silence while he seems to be listening.
I stand still.
‘And it's tea-time,’ says he.
Silence.
I am hungry having been too upset for my morning egg because of a difficulty with the soldiers which Pa refused to do anything about, then heartlessly reproduced the very same egg for my lunch.
I have to say, if he wanted to make me mad, he was one hundred per cent successful.
But I keep it all in; it's far more exciting.
If you holler and scream it all gets used up.
And then they just smile at each other and look away and talk about the weather et cetera.
I am about to suggest maybe the new baby would like to return to Maternity or wherever, when a new voice comes through the door.
Pa talking like this reminds me of the witch in the Snow White video: ‘Cymbeline's bought you strawberries and ice cream m for tea,’ it says.
Warning voice: ‘James.
Open this door.
Now, please.’
Pause.
Witch voice: ‘You like ice cream, don't you?’ next to steak, ice cream is what I like best.
So I open.
It is typical of my childishness to suppose Pa meant that I should have ice cream — today.
But, naturally, disobedient boys do not get treats.
Oh, dear me, no.
So in my new bedroom (which used to be Pa's office until he gave it up, just for me, and moved into the caravan), we work out a prayer together, to help me not to be led into temptation again.
God willing, Pa says, I may get to have a double helping tomorrow.
I want to ask about my sin, but Pa is already through to the Lord, praying h rd on my behalf.
To interrupt at such a time would be selfish  and babyish — which I had only just promised Heavenly Father not to be.
This being Ma's first day back, I am excused the dark, which I so richly deserve…
Black diagonals crisscross.
Black branches moving over night sky, clouds lit from below.
Dark building.
And…me, come to at the junk room window, kneeling, elbows on the sill, neck wet, chin slick…
Blood?
Taste…
No, not blood, saliva.
Silence.
The silence seemed…wrong.
Fear in my belly.
Weakness.
Panic attack?
All over now.
But why?
Something frightened you…?
Try to remember…
A sound is missing.
The choir!
The choir has gone.
Bits of the jigsaw.
Think hard.
Something else.
Swimming up slowly — a mouth, my mouth, and it's red.
Blood!
Blood-spitting choirboy-doll Got it.
Where is it now?
Gone.
What happened next?
Circles of light.
Circles of bright light…and…a woman.
Not any woman, a special woman.
Who?
I cannot re-mem-ber…!
Two windows in the roof.
One lit up suddenly.
I placed my eye to the diamond pane…the pane I had cleaned with my sleeve…how long ago…?
A girl appeared in a black sloppy jumper, getting the last from a bottle of Squeezy, her hair up all round with wisps like a Victorian, like (almost remembering, grabbing squirts it away) my Ma…(now I see her) before she went (now I don't)…away.
Hopeless.
The girl was bright, every detail clear in the bright rectangle in the black slab of the roof.
She was singing a love song, you could tell by the eyebrows.
‘Times have changed,’ the Canon said.
‘We have girls in the sixth form, mm?’
‘And some of them do a turn,’ said Lawrence.
‘Smell  my fingers,’ he said.
So I did.
‘Been to the chippy?’
I asked.
His laugh is horrible.
Why did he laugh?
I still don't know why he laughed.
The girl at the window had finished washing up now.
Was rinsing her hands.
I rested my head on the glass, and up went a pigeon.
Roosting on the ledge outside, I hadn't seen it.
One live pigeon, sitting on the wall…up she went between the dark cliffs, clap clap clap clap…
What about my pigeon?
My pigeon can't fly, poor thing.
And it can't feed itself.
And it can't eat Glace/1 Mints.
So dark.
Evensong had to have started down there.
No more relic hunting for today.
How to get back to her, that was the question.
And food.
Food for the invalid…
The window catch was rusty but opened.
This could be an alternative route back to the turret, I thought, a route to bypass the quire.
But someone might see me out there…
The girl pulled back, leaving an empty frame.
Without real commitment, I straddled the sill, climbed out into the freezing night air.
The small roof slopes gently away to a curving,foot-high parapet.
Grass and moss sprout along the grey-green ribs making the lead slippery.
In the grey gloom, the white and beige feathers looked surprisingly bright.
I avoided looking at the headless pigeon in the gutter.
Focus on the Matter.
And on the action to come.
Eight feet beyond the parapet, across a black chasm, a buttress with iron ladder attached.
The ladder has hoops every yard of its length, to stop a person falling, I guessed.
The top of the ladder hooks over the main parapet twenty feet above.
The closest iron hoop is five or six feet from the edge.
Not a big jump.
But the earth below is ten times further.
That makes it big.
I lifted one foot to the top of the parapet.
My legs began shaking.
The other foot refused absolutely to leave the ground.
Even just to practise.
I stepped back.
Retreated.
I might find a plank in the junk room, or some rope or cable to make a life-line.
Back inside I felt sick and my stomach gurgled, starting me off on a worry about the absence of toilet facilities.
The problem seemed not to be urgent, but counting back, it had been three whole days…or was it only two?
I had lost track a bit…
Anyway, it seemed sensible to at least find some paper in readiness.
After a search along the cluttered shelves of the now almost blacked-out room, I found a pile of dusty leaflets, the front pages of which read: The Order For Evensong.
In capital letters at the bottom are the words, PLEASE DO NOT TAKE AWAY.
I shoved twenty or so into the pouch.
They are smooth and stiff but will serve if I scrunch them up before use.
I thought about the gutter outside, surely less obnoxious, less sacrilegious than in here.
But more risky.
I began to approach the window.
Then stopped.
What was this sudden obsession with the ethics of defecation?
I didn't even want to go!?
Suddenly I was aware that all my actions since the attack had been aimless distractions — action for the sake of action.
Memory flash: Two stags on TV.
Crashing antlers.
In mid-battle they break for a bit of a graze.
After chewing the cud for a minute or two, they continue the fight.
You're no different.
Playing for time.
Anything to avoid what's going on.
There's been another game, and you know it.
That doll — that knitted gobshite — when that thing spat at you, you weren't anywhere near the window, you were over by the statues, on the other the of the room.
You've been on the move again, haven't you.
Haven't you?
I don't like it.
I scrutinised the Spidertop.
Blood spots on my sleeve.
More on my chest.
I prised off a scab and gave it the tongue test.
Blood?
Could be.
It's not certain.
It's a thin-ended wedge.
Cut it out.
Christ almighty I'm trying as hard as I can!
Don't you understand, for the first time in my life I'm afraid of her…
That bloody doll…it's her instrument…
I feel like…
I feel like She's touched me through that; She's been de d seven years, now She's touched me.
Without my say!
I feel…dirty…
It's…horrible…
OK, look…
I'm not hassling, but…well…this isn't working out, is it?
I mean, why don't we call a truce, eh?
Say you're not well.
Well, you're not.
I mean, look at you.
You've tried to do the man said, tried to face up to things, the things that we all know trigger you off.
That's why you're here.
Well, you've tried, and it didn't work out.
Nothing to be ashamed of.
It's asking too much.
He should know that.
Practice control, he said, steady breathing.
That's a laugh.
Look what's happened!
You're right in the shit.
worse than before.
Far worse!
I mean, what's going on?
I don't understand any more.
Why blood?
Where'd that come from?
Jesus Christ!
The blood's no problem.
That's easy; shock tactics.
Association of ideas.
She's using psychological warfare.
Nothing weird about that.
I'm supposed to think I'm blighted, cursed — you know, witchcraft — that shit again.
I don't buy it.
Never have, never will.
Oh, you don't, eh?
How come you keep saying She, then?
How come it's always She's doing this to me, She's doing that?
You say it's all crap, but you're starting to believe in it.
You told me off before, now you're at it.
You and Pa are like one of a kind, if you ask me — he believes in miracles, you believe in magic.
What's the difference?
They're both supernatural.
You talk about thin-ended wedges…
What do you call that?
You've actually got yourself believing your dead sister has risen from the dead and is running loose in this  Cathedral, hunting you down like an animal.
Next thing you'll be telling me the little cow's summoned up the ‘forces of Evil’.
We've had Satan's Crabs and Dolly-of Dracula, let's bung in Frankenstein and the Werewolf.
What the fuck?
Hm, I said, sitting down on a split rexine tuffet.
You could even be right, head, the little cheat almost had me believing in blood-spitting puppets.
What's happening to me?
It's a woolly doll for Pete's sake — knit one, purl one — I saw it.
How could I be so…?
I suppose that's what She wants…
She wants to confuse me, undermine my confidence so I begin to doubt my own sanity.
Well that just shows how little She knows me.
There you go — She, She, She.
— You've got to stop —;
It's a metaphor, dammit.
It doesn't mean…
It's a tool, a focus, that's all.
Forget-about ‘truces’, I'm not quitting, no way!
So shut up.
I'm thinking…
It was you said we had to face things.
Fair enough.
When I'm good and ready, when I'm fed and rested and calm and peaceful, I'm going to just let my mind go right on back into the past, and I'm going to remember everything there is to remember about my childhood.
And hers.
Nothing's going to be hidden, no skeletons in the cupboard, no dark secrets, everything out in the open where I can deal with it.
But first…first I must deal with this stupid funk I've got myself in.
I have to face the Matter as well, you know, and in this case that means that fucking doll or manikin or whatever we call it.
When I find it…
I'm going to unravel the little prick's knickers, and I'm going to expose its little rubber bladder, or whatever it is those obnoxious bloody choirboys filled with joke-shop blood, then I'm going to fill it up with piss and hang it back on that music stand.
And, when I've dealt with the doll, I'm going to collect some nice wafer biscuits I just happen to have remembered  the location of.
And after that, I'm going home to my turret, my Castle-in-the-Air.
On the way, I'll call in at the Wheel Room, to feed my poor invalid, then…
You know what I'm going to do?
I'm going to bed.
To sleep.
Because, tomorrow…tomorrow, head, you and me are leaving.
How come we're leaving?
I'll tell you: we're leaving because the little cheat's time will be up at midnight, son, that's why.
‘So, if you're out there spying on me, read my lips, little cheat: big brother is not going screwy, young lady, and your thin-ended wedges stop right here!’
Immediately set to work unpiling the pile of broken gargoyles.
The lumps are heavy but I drove myself till my arms cried out and the sweat runs down my back.
But suddenly, just as I grabbed up the half-eroded head of a carved-stone monkey, I found my finger caught so fast between its gritty teeth that a gasp broke from me.
Frantically I tugged my finger free, dropping the head, crushing my plimsolled foot.
Something pink and purple flitted with a scream (that might have been mine) across my other foot and away.
I heard panting like a hunted stag.
It was me!
She's done it again!
I feel the flagstones lurch beneath my feet…invisible stage-hands bring on the kitchen table set for tea.
SCENE: The Dining-Room — Eight Months Later Pa stands at the head of the table.
On his left head bowed, eyes hidden by her fringe, sits Ma.
She smells sweetly of Nivea and stale milk.
Beside her my sister bounces in what was once my high chair, pumping puffs of ammonia out round the edges of her Pampers.
It is high-tea; time for another feeding frenzy.
But first, grace.
Pa's eyes close above the tips of his fingers then pop back open, catching me out.
I lower my head.
He speaks:
‘For what we are about to receive…’
Peeping again, I watch the monster gorging itself while the family prays.
Once more I sense the evil in our midst.
When will Pa do her?
When?
Is he blind?
’…the Lord make us truly thankful.’
Amen, say we three, and the Monster?
The Monster delivers forearm smashes — one, two, three to the liquidised liver and spinach, spattering Ma's face and pink cardigan.
Its black devil eyes fix me.
I quickly look away.
Meanwhile, sweet, innocent Ma absently cuts my fish fingers though I have been self sufficient in the cutting of food since before my fourth birthday.
I fear she is no longer with us, everything is up to me and Pa now.
Maybe today the Monster will go too far, maybe today Pa's eyes will be opened.
I pray so.
I pray so.
The Monster scowls and a green tongue emerges that is  altogether too long and snakelike; green slurry flows down its chin into the plastic bibdish.
Not for an instant do its eyes leave mine.
I cannot bear to look.
I turn aside and bite off food for which I have no appetite.
As I chew and chew without swallowing, the Monster's slobbering and sucky-grunting falls silent making me look up in alarm.
The feeding has stopped.
The mouth is stretched in what would be a howl but for the fact that no air is passing.
In or out.
Its oozing fist is jabbing spasmodically in my direction.
Spite-rays flicker in the black boreholes of its eyes.
Ma leans across with a tissue and wipes away the green drool.
‘There there, wassa matter den?
Wassa matter?
Poor baby.
Ohhhh, ohhh.’
She waves a silver spoonful, coaxingly.
But the Monster's eyes are locked on to mine.
I begin to feel the force of its will.
In her innocence, Ma keeps waving the silver spoon.
If only I weren't so tired…
Now it is a fact that this creature so recently-come among us — gross, obscene and incapable of manipulating cutlery as it is — has nevertheless succeeded in getting itself equipped, just like big brother, with its own plastic spoon.
This spoon it must have, though it cannot use a spoon for spooning but only brutishly wave one while mashing fistfuls of food — the feeding is done by Ma.
(No more than a childish charade you may think.
You'd be wrong.)
Suddenly — still without drawing breath — the Monster lashes out, backhanding the silver spoon and contents away across the room.
Ma glances towards the head of the table.
Pa's face is stern.
Ma pretends amusement.
She turns to the Monster: ‘Ooops,’ she laughs, ‘there now, we've dropped it.
Never mind.
Never mind.
Mummy pick it up.’
Still no breath.
The Monster's colour deepens.
Ma begins anxiously patting its back.
Pa's left eye quivers.
I feel myself grow pale.
Unlike Ma, I know what it wants: not a spoon but my spoon — in fact precisely that spoon belonging to the tea set which became a part of me last Christmas.
My spoon is red; the Monster's spoon is yellow.
Now it wants my red spoon but the Monster's passion is as boundless as it is evil.
What the Monster really wants, its ultimate objective, is to take for itself everything that is mine — I mean everything.
Yesterday a high chair, today a spoon, tomorrow it could be the clothes off my back.
If the Monster's lust for what is mine ended there, with my material possessions, I could stand it.
But it goes further.
Much further.
Objects can be replaced, conceivably.
Not so personhood.
Not so that unique me-ness that makes James Bishop James Bishop.
It is this personhood which is the Monster's ultimate objective.
Though I lack words to describe such devilry, I will try.
What a person does, that person is, yet whatever I do, the Monster does the same, and more.
Take laughing: I have only to titter and, in seconds, the Monster also is rocking with pretend laughter.
Any fool can see it's not genuine laughter — being grossly exaggerated, and ridiculously forced — but, always, she wins the attention of my parents, regardless.
I'm aware that, on its own, this example sounds petty, but there's more.
Take the splashing: the Monster and I must share a bath now.
(I hate this, but what can I do?)
Whenever I splash, the Monster splashes.
Always right at me, till I'm half drowned and choking with suds in my eyes.
But if I dare to retaliate…if even so much as a minute flick of water lands on the Monster's piggy-pink face…
I'm branded ‘spiteful’ or ‘vicious’…
‘She's only a baby,’ is the cry.
‘She doesn't understand.
You're old enough to know better now, James.’
Then there's kissing: I kiss anyone, doesn't matter who, could be the milkman, who stinks, or the cat, and, you've  guessed it, every time, the Monster starts reaching up with its podgy arms and its lips all crimped into a wet sucky snout.
‘Oh, isn't she lovely,’ everyone coos.
So's poo, think I, but what can I do?
And if I cry…
If I cry, the Monster cries — more piteously, longer, louder — not because it is sad, of course not, never out of sorrow or pity, no, merely because Jimbo has cried and thereby been noticed, for his self These scraps of attention the Monster would take from me to the last smile, the last nod, the last little pat on the head.
As the Monster waxes, so Jimbo wanes; total eclipse is a whisker away.
This stealing of the self is impossible to counter.
What can I do when there exists no object, no stolen thing at which to point and say, She's taken my this or that?
Imagine my Ma's response to: ‘She's taken my best smile,’ or, ‘Give me back my hug round the legs.’
Vile and contemptuous as it is, mimicry is not a crime, though it should be, the worst.
And all the time I watch for some sign of awareness in P and M. None appears.
Only once was I innocent enough to voice my fears, bringing down wounding charges on my head.
They actually called me the green-eyed monster.
Monster!
Me!
Anyway, I learn quickly; it showed me that I'm on my own — my dear parents, bless them, are simply too pure and innocent to see what is so obvious to me.
I grip my spoon tight and lower my head to my meal.
Across the table, the spinach-jam breaks with a sob and a gasp.
I wait for the bellow.
It comes:
‘WAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA!’
‘Oh, poppet.
Oh, dare dare dare dare dare.
Never mind.’
The Monster writhes on the horns of a dilemma: to breathe or bellow.
As she silently squirms, I would swear her purpling head is expanding; dumbly, her eyes seem to bugle the pressure within.
A vision comes: ruptured pate, boiling humours venting from the fontanelle.
I pray the dilemma will not be resolved.
Anything seems possible: silent asphyxiation, loud bang…
I know this is wishful thinking…
But, wait!
Can it be?
I really believe…
Yes!
At last, at last he has seen.
Hallelujah, and the heavens be praised…
He is giving it the look.
He is dabbing his lips with the napkin.
He is rising…
Ma is trying to apologise for it with her eyes as she sucks khaki splodges from the sleeve of her cardigan.
But…he is not moved…
The Monster, meanwhile, is oblivious.
With a flailing of arms it drags in a huge breath; it roars, then sucks, then roars again.
And again.
And again.
And again, the din rising steadily towards some unimaginable climax.
At last— miracle of primordial communication — a word emerges: ‘Doon!’ wails the Monster.
Ma flashes Pa an amazed look; Pa's frown merely deepens as the Monster hurls itself up, over the tray of the high chair to belly flop on the table in a wreckage of china and dream topping.
There it lies, pounding and kicking in blind fury, bare inches short of its target — my spoon!
I scramble down from the table, back away, the red spoon gripped tight in my hand.
Ma gathers the Monster to her.
‘Oh bless her, she wants Jimmy's little red spoon, the little treasure.’
She threads the Monster back into the high chair where it stiffens, collapses forward, stiffens again, slides down to the crutch-stop and lies there half under the tray, flailing its arms and legs like a crab on its back…and howling — howling like the hell-sent creature it is.
Inside I am delirious, but then comes the bombshell: Ma turns to me and, shouting over the screams, says: ‘Let baby have your spoon, dear, there's a good boy.’
I'm astonished.
devastated; truly, she is lost to me now.
Forcing back the tears, I reverse into my bolt hole the narrow gap between the cooker and the washboiler.
The Monster continues to scream as if it would blast me from the cosmos.
Then, quite suddenly, it stops screaming and begins to sob piteously — bottom lip out like a septic sausage — wracked by spasms, downcast, pathetic, feigning abject defeat.
Fear, rage and awe contend in me — such talent for deception in one so young!
From my crevice between the two machines I can just see Pa's face.
His mouth is a trap.
Oh, joy, oh mercy, he is not deceived.
Praise be.
He nods slowly, sits down.
He speaks:
‘The Old Adam, Mother.’
Ma flicks him a look, twists her hair.
‘She only wanted—’ she begins, but Pa cuts across her:
‘Original sin; it must be expelled.
‘The first or second Sunday next after the birth,’ that's what the prayer book says.
Our daughter is months overdue.’
‘Yes, dear, I —’
‘Tomorrow.
I promise.
Come hell or high water.’
There is panic in Ma's dark-ringed eyes.
She grips Pa's wrist: ‘You've been busy, Edward.
No one can —’
‘There can be no excuses, Mother, not when a Christian soul is in jeopardy.
Priorities, my dear, priorities.
I have left this too long already, that's plain.’
‘Why not have a professional this time, dear?
Why not —’
The silence is deafening.
Pa is white marble, left-eye working like a semaphore lamp.
‘Pro-fessional, Elizabeth?’
His voice is low, dangerous.
(For a mad second I fear Ma could end in the Dark.)
‘After his insulting behaviour towards me?’
Ma looks at him.
Smacks her forehead as if remembering the obvious.
Manufactures a smile.
Takes his hand in her two hands and squeezes.
‘Of course not, dear.
Of course not.
I forgot, that's all.
But, Edward —’
Suspiciously: ‘I'm glad.
Very glad.’
‘— It's just that Cymbeline is…’
‘Go on, Elizabeth?
Our daughter is what?’
‘It's nothing, Edward.
I'm sure you'll take care…
It's just that…
She's been a bit snuffly…
It's her teeth…
And the weather's so cold now.’
‘Tomorrow, Elizabeth.’
Quietly: ‘All right, Edward.’
The door closes behind him.
My mother stands, gathers up her sobbing offspring and, smiling sadly, approaches the entrance to my retreat.
Although she is outwardly blind to the truth, I believe that, at some deep level of her psyche, she knows it is far too late for the expulsion of Original Sin.
Even the full immersion, even pure rainwater from the caravan roof, cannot prevail when the Devil has such a hold.
But her mother's instinct will never permit her to admit such a thing to herself.
I return her smile with such reassurance as I can muster.
She looks so thin and tired my heart aches for her.
Damn my sister to hell.
I think the creature is beyond the power of holy water, however administered, except possibly by sack and breezeblock.
In response to my smile, Ma asks would I give –p the spoon, to humour the baby.
Miserably I point out that Cymbeline has not behaved well.
Ma nods, looks pleadingly and tells me in her love-voice: ‘She's only a tiny baby, Jimbo.
She doesn't understand.’
Yes.
And baby monsters grow, Mother, I think.
But she reaches into my bolt hole and the red spoon is being coaxed firmly from my fist.
I will store the incident with the others; this one feels like the straw my back had been waiting for.
Today it is raining.
Again.
I think it's been raining all night which is hardly April showers.
Pa has given special permission for the godparents and  me to stand inside at the Jonah window, while he does the immersion outside.
The top light is open to enable us to hear him so we can join in with the responses, but the rain is beating so hard on the roof, we keep coming in raggedly and late.
And Pa keeps glaring.
Mrs Chalmers is standing beside me, tutting and shifting from foot to foot — she has varicose veins, and does not like standing, which is why she always sits down to sort the bulbs.
Next to her is Michelle, her daughter, who helps with the bulbs in school holidays.
Michelle is second godmother — Auntie having refused point blank.
Standing close behind me is old Frank who is deaf and keeps shouting ‘Amen’ for no reason (except maybe the threat of redundancy).
It makes me jump every time.
Kind Mrs Chalmers holds the prayer book high, as if for Frank — who can't read — to see it.
Being short, I am forced to watch through the greenhill on the window, so the picture outside is not only wriggly with rain, but green.
Standing beside the water tank, on top of the caravan's portable step, Pa looks as tall as a Zulu in his red stole (brown, for me) with the black umbrella held over his head at full stretch by Ma who is standing behind in the mud and wet with a white towel draped over her arm and her hair flat and all dark with water.
Pa has just pulled up the sleeves of his jacket and taken the Monster from Ma.
I feel pressure on my back as Frank leans forward and pushes me against the window with his paunch.
My chest feels suddenly empty, in spite of the pressure.
Pa raises the naked, wriggling, wailing Monster.
It immediately stops wriggling, and falls silent.
Cymbeline Bishop looks suddenly small and, though green to me, white.
Pa is speaking, face raised, eyes shut.
I hear the words ‘sanctify’, ‘mystical’, ‘washing away sin’.
‘Amen!’ bellows Frank.
Pa turns and shouts, ‘Name this child.’
Mrs Chalmers lashes back with her heel, simultaneously shouting, ‘Cymbeline Margaret Bishop,’ while Frank shouts, ‘Ouch,’and Michelle mumbles something inaudible.
‘Cymbeline Margaret, I baptise thee,’ says Father, dipping his shoulders, the Monster vanishing into the galvanised tank, ‘in the name of —’
Comes a terrible vision: the closing of green waters; a hollow voice ringing through the iron; dark shadows looming.
’— and of —’
A cry in my throat which, like the water, closes over.
’— and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.’
I feel I must rush out and stop him.
Without thinking, I brace my hands on the window and push back hard, but Frank is very big, very soft, and seems not to feel me.
Too late now.
Luckily.
For it is only now that reason returns to me: she's putting it on, you know she can do it.
A monster's a monster, naked or clothed.
Look at poor Ma.
Pa knows what he's doing, he always does.
Always.
‘— the communion of Saints, the resurrection of the flesh, and the life after death —’
When the Monster resurfaces, it looks a lot darker.
Pa draws the cross.
then they all come inside.
I came to jammed into the corner of the work room, squatting, fists clenched, staring up at a ribbon of orange light across the ceiling and a stack of timber beside me.
I didn't know where I was, only that I wanted to leave.
Also I'd been crying.
As I slowly unbunched my fists my blurred vision settled on the pile of broken gargoyles.
I remembered the monkey's head.
The bite — my hand was throbbing — that was the cat surely…wasn't it?
Yes.
The monkey too?
My foot hurt.
I had dropped the monkey's head on my foot.
Crushed my toes.
Then what?
Then…nothing.
Nothing?
Wait.
What thoughts are these:
Two kingdoms come together in the place…nothing can keep them apart…black birds roosting in the turret…sing Come and play come and play some body up here want play with you…
I am no longer in control.
A pattern is forming — a str–tegy, her strategy — her acting, me reacting like a frog's hind leg!
I fingered the masterkey in my pouch, brought it out, stuck the ring end into my mouth, clenched on to the shaft and massaged its smooth, hard surface with my tongue.
I turned it and inserted the blade end, felt its planes and spaces with my tongue's tip; the edges were perfect Lawrentian craftsmanship.
There was power in such Matter — great power.
I thought of its maker; Lawrence the animal; Lawrence the master craftsman ; such an amalgam, so potent; take away the magic of hand and eye — no replica of the key; take away the brute — no key to replicate, for only a brute could have done to Holy Harding what Lawrence did to Holy Harding — Holy Harding, school monitor, altar boy, server in the Cathedral of ix…
Shag found out about the wet-dreams.
Somehow, I don't know how, he got his great maulers on a letter from Harding's mum saying how she was sending her son a dozen washable condoms to help with ‘the problem’.
Also, apparently, Matron had been overheard making some indelicate comment to one of the cleaners about the state of Harding's sheets.
Lawrence made the connection Lawrence would.
On the way to assembly he made his approach.
‘Wonder if you could spare a moment?’ he said politely.
‘Hm?
What is it?’ said Harding.
School monitors are distinguished in many ways, the most obvious being the vermilion gown; they may also grow a moustache.
Harding's was long, thin, dark and greasy.
When Lawrence spoke to him, the tall, white-faced youth did not look to see who was addressing him but strode on, chin high.
‘I'm having a spot of bother with my periwinkle,’ said Lawrence in a cultured voice I'd no idea was in his repertoire.
‘Really?’ said Harding, still not looking.
‘What bother is that?’
‘The fucker keeps shooting its load,’ said Lawrence, quite loudly.
Four boys in front turned round and grinned.
Harding stopped dead, and turned to Lawrence.
He was whiter than white, totally colourless, maybe a touch green round the mouth.
‘It's right embarrassing.
The sheets an’ all,’said Lawrence.
smiling openly up.
But Harding was rallying his faculties fast; I was certain Lawrence had gone too far this time.
I wandered on a yard or two, pretending to look elsewhere.
Harding was looking at him now all right, voice shaking as he fought for control: ‘Firstly…
Lawrence, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
Firstly, Lawrence, you do not use language when addressing a school monitor — remember that, will you.
Secondly, Lawrence, I fail to see what your…problem has to do with me.’
With that, he turned and strode on, speaking as he did so without looking up, ‘So if you would kindly —’
Lawrence cut in, shouting after him, ‘I wondered if I might borrow one of your washable johnnies, mate?
That's —’
Harding was back.
‘Shut up!’ he hissed.
‘You little — Yes.
Yes.
Come to my study.
After assembly.
Now, for goodness’ sake —’
‘Only kidding,’ said Shag, with a big, horrible grin.
‘You know what I'm after.
I asked you last week, mate.’
A worldliness came into Harding's face.
He nodded slowly at Shag.
‘The key,’ he said, reaching into his trouser pocket.
‘I'll have it back before supper.
Understood?
Without fail, understood?’
The monitor's hand reappeared, palmed something to Lawrence.
Lawrence was nodding, smiling happily.
Still keeping my distance, I watched, fascinated.
‘Providing I'm through, mate.
See what I can do for yer.
No promises, mind.’
‘Tch,’ said the monitor.
He whirled and strode away.
Lawrence shrugged and shambled after, feet splayed, arse under, hands in pockets, grinning like a dirty monkey…
The Cathedral was silent now, Evensong long done, I felt sure, candles snuffed, faithful departed, gates locked, doors bolted, empty — this quiet, it had to be.
I was glad.
I'd had more than enough of this place and its unnatural Matter; now, perhaps, I could withdraw in safety.
The ladder was out of the question now, what with the floodlights.
In any case, with the church deserted it would be quite safe I felt certain — provided there were no more nasty shocks, I'd have to take a chance on that — to descend.
I'd go down through the choir practice room and St Andrew's chapel beneath it, make a quick call at the sacristy (where Holy Harding does his serving), then cross the quire to the south side, where, with the help of the Talisman of Shag, I would enter the-spiral stair at ground level, and so — relicless but, hopefully, bearing precious manna for the invalid — to the Sanatorium (formerly known as the Wheel Room) and, after that, bed.
And tomorrow?
Tomorrow, at the first stroke of midnight…adieu.
To celebrate, I popped in a mint.
I rose and groped my way towards the fire door.
No more surprises, please, whispered headvoice.
Apart from the sacristy — that won't take a sec — we're stopping for nothing, not even a dump, I said.
Could it have been to make up for Cymbeline's cheating that the Umpire permitted me to find the sacristy so easily?
Maybe so.
(Though it was in fact close by the high altar steps, so perhaps a little logic came into it too.)
The chamber had priestly vestments draped on dummies like olden days tailors might have used, and I identified it at once by the basin and marble slab in the corner.
From somewhere above, fillets of amber light fell aslant a small oak door armed with iron bosses and the usual Chubb lock.
I looked up; high in the rough hewn wall, a narrow arched window with bars.
The place was a fortress.
Holy of holies .
The oak door yielded at once to the key.
Out of the gloom of that stone vault things glowed and twinkled  with their own wondrous light.
There was the silver paten shining in the dark like an oval moon, and there a jewelled chalice (making Father's communion goblet seem like something got with filling-station coupons).
From a wall niche, a pair of crystal decanters glittered like splinters of ice, and beneath them the object of my search, the pyx itself.
The simple cylinder seemed like gold polished to shine like silver.
(Father uses a tartan McVitie's shortbread tin.)
I raised the lid.
At first I thought it empty then noticed a knob in the centre of what appeared to be the bottom, but was not.
I pulled the knob and out came a circular weight covered in purple velvet.
Beneath this lay sixty to a hundred communion wafers, each no bigger than a ten pence piece, each with four small Xs crossed by vertical letter Ps embossed on the surface.
They were thin and tasted of very little but would certainly keep the pigeon going, for now.
My heart began to flutter as I lowered the heavy pyx into my pouch.
I also borrowed a small silver bowl for collecting water from the drainpipe.
Feeling a little like I imagined a tomb-robber might feel, but knowing that my motives were of the very best, I relocked both doors and left without a backward glance.
(My intention was to leave both bowl and pyx with a little note of thanks on vacating the premises.)
The thought of the pigeon sitting alone in its Bible-nest inside the big wheel, with black shadows all around and no one to talk to, set me scurrying off like the returning hunter.
Even though I had not found the relics, I felt amazingly good inside.
If the Ghost did exist (by no means proven) then her cheating strategy had backfired; I had gained bread, of sorts, for me and my ward, and She, by her terrorist activities, had lost the moral high-ground.
And that's what the whole thing's about.
The Pin
At night, no light penetrates the interior except through stained glass.
The floodlight rays fall up, not down, daubing the high canopy with jungle colour.
At man height the quire aisle is dark with thick arteries of shadow connecting every feature to its neighbour — steps, sepulchres, arches, screens all laced together and to the towering pillars by these black branches from which thick clots of blue and red hang like deadly, tempting fruit.
All one cavity, one forbidden grove.
Tilting back my head, I saw shrouds and regimental colours hanging like winter leaves when the flesh is gone and only a gauze of capillaries remains, scab of red, mothwing of gold.
And me turning about like a drowning fish in a mesh of shadows drawing round.
Down the steps, beyond the quire screen, the empty nave a whale's throat yawning darkness with dim glows and mysterious sparks like phosphorus in dark water that is very deep.
The smell of wax.
The smell of dry cave.
Forbidden.
Secret.
Kingdom more alien than the attic wilderness above — history's interface with death.
Cut the shit and get out of here, said headvoice.
I felt the weight of the pyx in my pouch.
No urging needed — I had a mission.
To reach the south transept- and access door meant passing from the north quire aisle across the quire with its  brass eagle and dark mahogany stalls and out the other side.
I moved to the iron gate in front of me.
Locked.
I worked my way along the haphazard-looking perimeter fence formed from the tombs of kings and bishops; all one piece, all stitched together by a web of carved stone and iron railings.
The single entrance gate bears a lock from the age of dungeons.
Nasty feeling creeping up.
Not for the first time was I confronted by the limitations of the mighty Talisman of Shag; neither the giant oak doors of the western entrance, nor the south porch, nor any of the transept doorways yield to it.
All exits from the Cathedral are guarded by massive iron locks, all reinforced by systems of bolts and rods and bars, none of which can be sprung from within; a fact which had surprised, but not alarmed me, until now.
Now my heart performed a little jig, impromptu.
I sensed a shift in the cavity.
A sound?
I stood listening.
High above something flapped in a draughty attic.
The tower clock chimed a quarter, three notes rising, signifying nothing but the passage of time.
Quarter to or past sometime, what did it matter?
Biting off fingers matters, said headvoice.
No answer from me — if there was an Umpire, he would know what was in my heart — instead I gave myself orders, pumping myself up with little pecks of the head: Concentrate.
Take no chances.
Stop for nothing.
Bring home the bacon.
Home?
Was that how I thought of it now — the Bible Room and the Wheel Room, the stairs and turret?
Home.
Yes.
She'd be there, waiting, in her own way praying I'd make it back OK.
Without me, no bread; without bread, no pigeon.
A new thought came to drive me: what if she should die before I got home, give up the ghost and pass on, alone in the dark?
That got me moving east fast, searching hard now for access to the quire.
Along the aisle, half running.
Within a dozen yards, I came to a set of iron gates closing off the steps east of the high altar.
The whole eastern end was sealed off.
Christ!
What if she should get better before I got home — all on her own, without any saving by me?
I turned back, running hard now.
Another iron gate, completing the quirescreen barricade, closing off the steps to the nave.
Trapped.
About turn.
Search the barrier.
A glimpse of statue pulled me up short.
Stretched out on a stone slab, under a crusted canopy, lay — to judge by the mitre and colourful vestments and the pairs of angels at feet and head — a bishop.
The upper part of his tomb had been made part of the perimeter by a grill of fine arches behind.
There was no way into the quire climbing over his lordship, but under…?
I dropped to the floor, hopeful I had found a gap in the defences, and stopped dead.
Waxy flesh — cage of ribs — naked — male — corpse!
Ah! shit!
You little bitch!
Hoppity hop heart beats, dizzy, fingers a-tingle…
Wait, wait, wait.
Corpse?
Even in that jungly light I see something doesn't add up: can a corpse have half a nose and two fingers busted off at the first joint?
This is no meat and bone corpse, this is another statue, another memento mori if my suspicions are correct.
His grace will have had the tomb made in advance, to remind him of things to come.
Above, he's represented in all his earthly splendour; below, this emaciated body, wearing nothing but a kind of nappy, representing his (and all men's) fate.
I sniggered with relief.
Three wide arches support the slab front and back; I could easily scramble through.
There was nothing to stop me.
Nothing but the thought of rolling over the awful figure within.
Treading on graves has never bothered me, but this seemed different.
We're stopping for nothing, remember? said headvoice.
Not even a dump, you said.
You're asking for trouble, mate.
Get going, for Christ's sake.
I was full stretch on top of his grace when the eyelids rolled up and showed me two white lights.
A pair of waving ginger hairs appeared in the corner of a mouth the colour of old putty.
The mouth opened a crack and out slid a worm with a thousand legs, foul breath, and four words: ‘James Bishop murders babies.’
The big muscle jerked.
I had time to feel bony legs clamp under my buttocks, then down I went without even a scream.
(My body is learning.)
SCENE: The Dining Room — some days later.
Saturday that is, washday
Ma is clearing lunch, and the Monster (who had proved as immune to holy caravan water as predicted), is sprawled on the rug stinking the place out as always.
The wash boiler is on in the kitchen so you cannot see through the French window for steam.
Auntie is seated in the armchair behind the Monster who must be constipated because she is even more red-faced and cross-eyed than usual.
As it happens it rained after lunch so the test match with Auntie was cancelled.
I was miserable at the time, but later I realised Heavenly Father was looking after me because if Aunt Mary had said play, we'd have gone out, and I'd have missed the breakthrough.
This is how it came about.
‘Everything all right out there?’ calls Ma through the hatch.
Auntie doesn't answer.
So I look up from the jigsaw I had for my birthday.
To my amazement, Auntie's eyes are squinting, her lips are a tight line, her face is bright red and her cheeks are out like balloons.
For a second I think she must have gone mad, then she makes a really loud rude-noise with her lips, winks at me, points at the Monster and laughs.
Auntie's laugh is like a man's laugh — deep and loud.
Ma's head comes through the hatch and says, ‘Mary!
Little pigs have big ears,’ which is code for Jimbo is listening.
This only serves to alert me of course, though my brain has already caught on.
Since the advent of the Monster, ‘going potties’ has become a miserable, solitary business.
More often than not Ma starts me off only to leave me stranded above the waterdragon with my–backside wedged into the Young Person's Patent Toilet Seat Adaptor (another trophy won from the WI jumble by Pa).
My achievements in this department now pass unnoticed.
Grunt, splash, wipe and it's over; no praise, no hug, no kiss, nothing.
The Monster has them all.
Watching Auntie's performance, the Plan comes in a flash, fully formed: since the Monster wants to be me, I will become the Monster.
I will take the game to her, plus interest.
Love and attention being the rewards of infantile behaviour, it only amazes me that I did not think of the idea sooner.
I will become a little child again, incompetent, inarticulate, dirty, greedy, self-centred.
My heart races with excitement so that I cannot concentrate on my Light of the World jigsaw showing Jesus standing outside the vine-covered door, lantern in hand.
I can't wait to begin, but where?
Suddenly it comes to me: I want to ‘go’ now quite badly.
But I won't.
I'll hold back.
Accumulating.
Cross-legged.
Waiting for the moment.
Purposeful.
Determined.
Totally in control.
By bedtime I still have not been.
By morning I'm a timebomb
Ruined.
Undone.
Sent to the Roombed without any tea.
Here I lie in this vast, unpopulated bed (so big it fills Father's ex-office wall to wall, hence Roombed), knowing that beneath me the Monster squats on my mother's lap, draining her love balloons to inflate its once wrinkled body drum tight.
Now it is my beautiful Ma who has the wrinkles!
I am close to despair as I think of her — –her  hollow eyes haunt me whenever I drift towards sleep being slowly sucked dry by that thing in Pampers.
I know the truth — Heavenly Father sent me a message, last night, like little Samuel only not just a voice, a vision, a terrible, terrible dream that would not go away…
I dreamt that my mother was calling me from the bottom of a deep, deep well.
Her voice was tiny like a doll's voice.
She wanted me to help her.
I stood on the round wall and wound the handle as fast as I could, but when the bucket was still just out of reach, the rope kept slipping so I could not reach the bucket.
And the Monster was sat in the bucket, filling the bucket with its bloated pink body, its great bulging legs hanging over the edge.
And my Ma…my Ma was sat on its lap all tiny like a shrivelled-up doll.
And the Monster was pinching Ma's bosoms with its hideous clawed fingers so that blood squirted out.
I wound and wound but the bucket slowly descended, Ma calling my name in a voice getting smaller and smaller.
And I could see her quite clearly, all the way to the bottom, which was not full of water but blood…
So I do know what's going on, you see.
But I am afraid to tell.
Same as Samuel was afraid to tell Eli.
What else can you expect?
Everything I do or say is turned against me.
I begin to sob silently.
Over and over the events of the day I go, vainly searching for where I went wrong…
I started-first thing by refusing to dress myself.
At breakfast I completely wrecked my egg while clumsily trying to open it — egg all over, nice and sticky — and could not cut a single soldier without upsetting the plate.
Throughout the day my talk was all ber bers and doo doos, and I hardly was able to understand a word spoken to me.
Despite the discomfort, I crawled everywhere, even in the yard.
I dribbled, I wet my pants, even banged my head on the furniture, and bawled…bawled almost nonstop.
My performance was unstinting.
I drove myself on in the certainty that I held the ‘trump’ card behind me, quite literally.
By tea-time I was aware of walking strangely, and dared not run for the little beeps my botty made.
At table there were some small, preliminary escapes, nothing much; I was determined to save everything for the climax.
When Pa came in from the yard, he sniffed the air with a puzzled frown.
‘What's for tea, Mother?’ he asked.
Ma told him, pilchards on toast.
He shook his head, grunted, placed his oil-grained hands on the back of the carver, lowered his head, then, having given us all one look from under his tufted brows, closed his eyes.
Apart from the Monster, we all did the same — even Auntie.
I closed my eyes tight for once and placed my palms together.
Silence.
Standby.
I am ready.
Fire one.
I relaxed those muscles I had been clenching.
What emerged was acoustic only, but startling.
Even I jumped.
Pa's eyes were two round circles.
Even the Monster stopped troffling.
Silence.
Auntie made a strange moaning noise behind her hands.
Fire two: the business.
I felt it erupting beneath me.
The stench was appalling.
Auntie, unfortunately, had to leave the table, a handkerchief to her face.
This was by far the best bigjob I had ever achieved.
I was uplifted.
I flashed the Monster a look of triumph and waited for the attention to begin.
The scent of victory was in my nostrils, not to mention that other, more earthy aroma.
No one could possibly ignore my efforts here tonight.
The Monster blinked, for the first time in its life it looked shaken.
Ma was out of her seat.
My arms were up in triumph.
But what's this?
My wrists were gripped, my body swung up and away.
I glimpsed Auntie sitting on the bottom stair as I flew past above her head.
Her mouth was covered, the tears running down, she was crying, I think, howling actually: ‘Oh crikey, oh crikey, oh crikey…’
No time to ask.
Upstairs, I was stripped quite brutally.
Bathed and bedded in ghastly silence.
‘But —’ I stammered, as the light went out.
Ma answered through the door.
It was her hate voice: ‘Boys who behave like dirty babies go to bed at babies’ bedtime!’
I heard her stomp downstairs, stop, shout back: ‘And don't forget your prayers.
Ask God to forgive you He might.’
I could only conclude she was now so weak that not just her body, her mind also had come totally under the Monster's control.
I prayed for us all in the family prayer:
God bless Mummy, Daddy, all our family, those throughout the world; Keep all Evil from our home, And by the great mercy defend us From all the perils and dangers of this night, amen
But I did not hold out that much hope…
Six miserable hours have passed now.
I've heard them all come merrily to bed, as if there were no misery in the world.
Too upset for sleep, I am forced to lie listening to the sounds.
And imagining.
And hating.
Hating as I have never hated.
Ma is almost gone in her mind now.
I know that, were it not for Pa, she would not only feed it in her own bed, but have the thing sleeping there with them, in the same room as them, all night, just in case it should wake wanting more.
Luckily for her, he won't have it.
He is still our best hope; our only hope.
If it wakes him in the night, he gets angry, I've heard him, not the actual words, just  the voice low and terrible.
So that most times she wakes first and creeps back and forth in the dark.
I know because I have heard her.
One night I peeped through the keyhole, this time the light on the landing had been left on, there was poor Ma in ha nightie, pale as a ghost, staggering, literally staggering, along the wall with her black-ringed eyes almost shut moaning, ‘All right, I'm coming, I'm coming.’
And the Monster commanding her with a series of little short, bad-tempered grunts.
I honestly believe she feeds herself to it whenever it demands.
I fear she is beyond my help, now.
But why does he not do something?
Some might call it jealousy I suppose, but it was once my joy to lie between Ma and Pa and listen to the stories of Noah and Jonah which Pa read to me out of the True Book.
Now I have half a page of Winnie the Pooh, if I'm lucky, and don't get the jokes at all.
Call it what you will, it hurts.
It's feeding on poor, dear Ma again.
It never stops.
Through the thin partition I hear the greedy sucking and smacking of lips.
I am weeping in my pillow.
I–here is no sound from me.
No one knows but me.
I suddenly hear Ma cry out: ‘Ouch!’
A short silence my breath is held, my ears are picking up every creak and rustle — then: ‘Ouch!
OUCH!
You little monster!
You're not supposed to bite Mummy.’
Monster?!
Did she say, Monster?
For a moment I think I am dreaming.
Then I hear Pa laugh.
His wife, my mother, is being eaten alive in his own bed, and he laughs!
Ma shouts again, this time I know it's no dream.
‘Oi!
You hurt Mummy, you brute,’ says she.
‘It's Monday tomorrow, dustbin-day, sunshine.
One more like that and you're out with the rubbish.’
Then to Pa, ‘And you can stop grinning.
Look here at these tooth-marks.’
‘Well, my dear,’ says the voice of my father, ‘if you will persist in breast feeding an eight-month-old infant, with three great big teeth —’
‘Oh, Edward.
That's a little unfair.
It was you said how  it was wrong to waste what the Good Lord provides us for nothing, only to throw away hard-earned cash at the Superstore buying second best.
That was what you said, dear, I remember dis—’
‘You know, the trouble with you, dear —’
‘I know, dear; no sense of proportion —’
Together, they complete the family motto: ‘Moderation in all things, that's the golden rule.’
‘Shall I ask your sister to pop in and get some, on her way over here, next weekend, Edward?’
‘We'll see how it goes, my dear.
We'll see how it goes.
The sucking continues.
After a moment, another sharp cry from Ma.
‘OW!
That really does hurt!
I'm warning you, babikins, I meant what I said, you know.’
To me it is like a miracle.
How many times have I told Ma, send the baby back, only to be laughed at and pinched on the cheek?
I had thought her a goner; now this — from the victim's own lips.
And the answer so simple: what is not wanted…goes in the bin.
I scarcely dare breathe for fear of missing what I yearn to hear.
Then, from the darkness, I hear it, this time louder, more hurt: ‘HEY!
You little — That does it!
Don't say you weren't warned.’
It is enough.
I know what to do.
I'll creep down later and borrow a couple of items from Auntie's handbag and then I'll be set.
The rest is up to fate…fate and the Eastlea Rural District Council.
It is that time of year when dawn and dustmen arrive together.
Well before both, my alert mind has me up and about my mother's business.
The cot side rattles as I lower it.
I stop breathing.
Waiting.
Listening.
They must not be woken.
It is to be a surprise.
My big worry is that the Monster will come wide awake  and ruin things with its gross demands.
To guard against this I have filled the Bopeep Baby Sootha with honey mixed with brandy from Auntie's flask and half a Disprin, just to make sure.
Although the dummy used to belong to me — still does, by rights — I slip it into the sucking mouth: small sacrifice.
Then, though it threatens to break my back, I drag the Monster's reeking nappied arse along the vinolay to the stairhead.
From there I twist and lower, twist and lower, one bump at a time, me standing on the step behind, it between my knees; my arms under its, hands clasped round its chest.
Bumpety, bump and it's off to the dump, I hum inside my head.
Getting its feet into the black binliner is difficult but I manage by laying it down on its stomach and pretending to play this little piggy with its toes till it goes into its silly reverse-crawl routine.
Twisting the wire tie is hard too, but the binning itself is something which would certainly have earned me a Rainbow Award at play-school.
I begin by trying to lift it in, which is hopeless but, in the process, the bin falls over.
I drag out another, half — full binbag which is already in there, cutting my thumb on a jutting piece of glass.
It hurts quite badly, but I do not cry.
I suck the blood up, then I roll in the wrapped up monster all the way to the bottom, squash the half-full binbag back on top, tilt the bin back to its upright position, next to the bin with ordinary rubbish in, and replace the lid.
I stand listening for a moment — crying could ruin everything — but there's only the rhythmic suck-suck, suck-suck, suck-suck as it breathes and sucks on the medicine.
The wet concrete is cold on my bare feet.
I run to the house, creep back up to the Roombed, and take up position at the window.
I keep sucking the blood from my thumb, so as not to spoil things by messing the sheet.
Pa and Ms are both snoring as I watch the yellow  dustcart reverse up our track.
It is raining and the men wear woolly hats, collars up, necks down.
A man in a smart orange coat hangs from the back by an arm and one leg while two others, one each side, walk, twisted sideways, waving and shouting directions.
They arrive at our drive where the bins stand side by side.
The lorry stops.
Our man wears a cheerful yellow hat.
He shoulders the bin on the left, the bin with no Monster inside, and pitches the contents in between gleaming pistons.
The lorry stands digesting, rocking gently from side to side.
The hanger-on stirs the rubbish briefly with his stick.
I hear him say, ‘No treasure here, George.’
Hiss go the pistons and down comes the slab of steel.
‘Never is here, Den,’ says George, then he throws off the lid of the Monster's bin and heaves it up on his shoulder.
The events taking place on the concrete track are not subject to change; they recur every Monday morning, summer and winter, rain or shine.
I know this, but my breath still comes quickly, and the net curtains flutter rhythmically as my whole body marches in step with the thing inside my chest.
The man in the yellow hat flexes and snaps his knees and the bin with the Monster in ejects its load.
The binbag arcs towards the garbage-filled trough.
The engine roars, the pistons hiss, expand.
I feel that a flaw in Heavenly Father's plan is about to be rectified by immutable powers.
I barely hold back a hurrah, but cannot stop myself from doing a backwards roll during which everything seems to go into slomo and clarify like a TV closeup: my backward roll begins, the picture outside the window slowly slips downward.
I detect something happening to the profile of the flying binbag; at the top of its arc the shape bulges in its upper surface, a small clenched fist bursts through, punching the dark.
The hanger-on shouts, ‘Oi!’ lunges forward…
The picture flicks down like a faulty framehold, vanishes beneath the rising sill.
I listen, breath held.
The engine roars on, quite long enough, I'm sure.
Bye bye bubba!
I yell into my pillow.
The tears are of joy now.
I snuggle down thinking, how much better if I wait until the Teasmade goes off before announcing my big surprise, but, believe it or not, I fall straight into a deep, dreamless sleep.
What wakes me is my head being slapped, and the screaming.
‘You devil!
You murdering toad!’
It's my mother, screaming, at me: ‘Ohhh, ohhh.
I can't bear it!
I hate you!
I HATE you!’
Slaps and hard punches rain down.
More words I can't take in.
A glimpse of her face — hardly recognisable.
Being dragged from the bed, along the landing, me sobbing and screaming too.
She suddenly gone, because…
I'm falling downstairs, crashing, rolling.
Colliding with Pa.
Going down.
Hitting the hall floor in a bundle with Pa.
‘It's all right.
It's all right, Pet,’ he calls — not to me — but she's gone.
I hear shrieking and moaning upstairs.
He picks us both up.
‘Why, James, why!?
What in God's name possessed you?’ he demands, face close to mine, pinching my shoulders, tilting me back so I can't look down.
‘It's a monster,’ I blubber.
‘She said so.
I —’
‘What?
That's absolute nonsense, James.
Go to your room and wait there till I —’
But I'm already running — not to the Roombed — out of the back door towards Bedfordshire.
‘Come back here!
Come back here, you —’
I keep running.
Nothing my father says can enter my brain for the words already in there screaming: Murdering toad.
HATE you!
HATE you!
Half blind with tears, I fly past Lucky who growls, everyone HATES me.
In the distance I hear Pa call, ‘All right, Elizabeth.
It's all right, I'm coming.
I'm coming, Mother.’
It is several hours and nearly dark before anyone comes to find me.
Then Pa arrives.
I am sitting in the cab crying the tears of the hopelessly misunderstood.
He opens the door.
‘Go away!’
I shout, and I punch out but miss.
He lifts me out without speaking, takes my hand and leads me, snivelling and sobbing, back towards the caravan.
‘I wish’— sob, snuffle —‘I was dead,’ I blubber.
He does not reply.
As we approach the van door, the photocell triggers and the orange bulbs light up the cross on the roof.
It seems like a signal to me.
I brace myself mentally.
Inside the chapel, the only light comes from the two glowing valves screwed to the wall one each side of the picture of God with his finger pointing up.
The statue of the Virgin stands on the altar in front of this; her face is in shadow.
Pa sits me on the wooden bench he has built facing the altar, and himself sits down next to me.
His arm goes round my shoulders.
I feel myself shudder; I have come to learn that such touchings normally precede a trip to the Dark.
He speaks:
‘All right.
All right.
You can stop all the crying now, precious boy; there's only me to hear it.
And, in any case, there's nothing to cry about now.
What has happened is nothing short of a miracle; Heavenly Father has heard our prayers; He has watched over our family, and everything is all right.’
He looks at me.
I glance at his eyes and read disgust.
The reason, I realise, is my nose is bubbling, and it's all down my mouth and chin.
I give it all a big swipe with my arm, but my chest won't stop jerking, making more bubbles come.
He fishes a piece of torn sheet from his pocket and scrubs my face, hard.
‘Stop it, now, James.
It's all over.
God guided the dustmen to rescue our little girl.
She's upstairs with Mummy, right now.
I mean it.
You'll see her.
In a minute.
Later on.
That'll do, I- said.
Hush now.
You'll see her, I mean it.
Later on.
All right?’
The question, for some reason, sets me off blubbering again.
‘She HATES me!’
I howl, and I throw myself down on the floor.
‘Now that is enough, James.’
He grips my arms and dumps me back on the pew.
‘Sit up properly.
That is not how we behave in here.
Mummy didn't mean those things.
She was upset.
Naturally, she was.
We've had a good talk now.
I reminded her about the things she said last night — the things you apparently overheard, so you say — and she now realises she was quite wrong to say those things, even if they were supposed to be some kind of joke…and…she is sorry for saying them because she now understands that those careless words of hers were what basically caused the misunderstanding.’
I felt his eyes, but didn't look up.
‘It was a misunderstanding, wasn't it, James?
Hmm?’
I don't answer.
‘Your sister is not a monster — of course not — and Mummy had no intention whatever that she should be put in the dustbin.
That would be silly.
That was a joke — a bad one, she knows that now — because little Cymby accidentally nipped Mummy's bosoms — accidentally, with those new teeth of hers.
That's all…that's all.
So now you can stop crying, boy, can't you.’
He handed me the square of now sodden sheet.
‘Go on, blow hard.
Go on.
And again.
That's better.’
I have begun to sense that, despite the touching and the ‘precious boy’, I may not be headed for the Dark where the soft, fat spiders watch and wait.
My sobbing begins to subside.
I decide to press my advantage.
‘See Mummy?’
I say, then add, a little late perhaps, ‘see Cymby?’
‘I'm afraid Mummy's under sed — She's had a big Aspirin to help her relax.
You see…
Mummy blames herself for what happened.
Never mind.
The doctor has been.
Mummy may have to go away for a…a little rest, James…with Cymby.
We'll manage, all right, you and  I. My sister is coming, for a few days, at least .
You like Aunt Mary, don't you?
Yes.
Hold on — that could be the ambulance now.
I'll be back in a minute.
Wait there.’
As he stands, I say, ‘When I die, will He put me in the oven?’
‘Oven?’
He turns in the doorway.
‘Oh, the oven.
No…not if you really did do it for Mummy, of course…’
He steps back into the caravan, staring hard at me.
He squats down in front of me, face level with mine: ‘There is only one person who knows the answer to that, precious boy.
There is only one person who knows what was in your heart of hearts, James.
And that person is you.’
He tilts his head and gazes into my face as if searching for the answer.
After a pause, he says, ‘Why don't you have a little talk with Heavenly Father while you're waiting for me?
Kneel here, by the altar.
That's where He lives.
You can talk to Him.
Tell Him everything, just like you do down below.
Tell Heavenly Father what was in your heart of hearts.
Be sure it's the truth, mind.
He is the Judge of Mankind, remember, and remember…he already knows.’
What upset me was hearing the door locked.
Why?
Why couldn't I see them, and tell them soy?
It was almost dark outside now, and the tiny chapel was full of shadows.
My nose was running again, and my thumb was throbbing where I'd cut it on the piece of glass in the bin.
I looked at the altar; in the orange glow of the valves, I suddenly saw the vision, the nightmare of the well-shaft — there was the huge seated figure, and, apparently, sitting on its lap, the dark shrivelled form of the Virgin.
I shrank back against the wooden seatback.
I knew that the altar was only an old chest freezer with a sheet thrown over the top…but…there could be something inside it.
Did He really know?
And if He did, what did He know?
What was in my heart of hearts?
At that moment I heard a commotion outside.
I sped  to the Jonah window and pressed my forehead to the greenhill.
I could see green sleet falling straight down on a big green ambulance backed up our drive.
The rear doors were open, steps down.
As I watched, Ma came out of the house between two men in green coats, Pa following.
The men were lifting her elbows.
Her slippers were trying to walk, flapping an inch above the green slush.
She was carrying Cymbeline wrapped in a green towel.
I waved, but they lifted her.straight into the ambulance and laid her down.
One man stayed with her, the other climbed out, shut the doors, walked round to the cab.
It drove off without any siren or light.
Pa went back inside.
I sat on the pew sucking my sore thumb, staring at the glowing valves, waiting for my father and the hard questions I knew — whatever he said — were coming.
And that's where I came to: sitting on a pew in the choirstalls of this dark and deserted Cathedral, sucking my poorly thumb…
Sucking my…
Oh, for Christ's sake…my thumb has a deep cut.
How did that happen?
You've been dreaming
Dreaming?
What do you —?
Wait.
Oh, no…
I remember.
there was a…a dustbin.
I was putting something in…something alive!
There was glass — broken glass I got cut…but…
Come on.
We'd better go.
It was a dream — a dream — so how come…?
Move, will you.
She's waiting.
Stop asking questions.
Just GO.
Escaping from the quire was no easier than getting into it.
In the end I was forced to climb the choirscreen with its curtained box seats, up over the castellated organ loft, like some human fly, and down the other side using the encrustations and statuettes as toeholds.
And all the time my cut thumb reminded me of what I must forget to stay  sane; all the time sick with worry about what's happening to me so I have to keep ordering myself: Think about the invalid.
Think about the mission.
That's your Good Deed.
That's how to keep things all square with the Umpire.
For a moment I felt better, then my face chanced to come alongside the face of a three-foot-high king in a crown — I'd been pushing down hard on the bishop's corpse memory, now he reared up again…
And I froze.
Don't stop! squealed headvoice.
Instant thaw.
I let go.
Fell to the nave steps and ran.
Jesus!
You never learn, do you?
We don't stop for nothing.
Nothing!
All right?
The mission.
Think of the mission, nothing else.
I didn't answer.
I was already entering the south-west transept.
The access door was somewhere in that square.
Of this I was certain since, but for a short, horizontal passage running behind a row of blind windows, the main spiral leads directly, in two long verticals, from crypt to turret.
There was nowhere else the door could be.
After a brief search, I found it tucked into a corner, guarded by the pikes and pennants of the Twenty-First Lancers.
The key worked perfectly.
As I opened the door, a white streak flashed past my ankles and vanished around the first turn of the spiral.
I cried out in shock, then gaped at the empty stairs disappearing into blackness.
An image of a skinny white body and a head with wings was printed on my retinas.
As I began to recover, the thought came: What's skinny, and white?
Answer: ST, the cat.
Good.
Now, a head with wings?
I shook my head, my pulse still racing from the shock.
What has wings, and gets into cats' mouths?
I sniggered.
Course.
Then another thought came.
But —
I know —‘He's a domestic pussy’, he's not supposed to be a killer.
Well it seems he's learnt.
Remember the junk store window — the gutter?
Who do you reckon did that little massacre?
I felt myself nod.
I thought of the spider, then blanked out the thought.
I took a deep breath and stepped forward.
Soon I was groping my way up the tight, black corkscrew, mole-mode.
As I climbed, I tried to remember if I had shut the Wheel Room door.
I thought so.
I hoped so.
After no more than two dozen steps, a terrible dizziness had me flopped down in the darkness.
The cause had to be lack of food, the mints I'd had earlier had obviously worn off, but, soft-hearted fool that I am, I was trying to wait so that me and the invalid could sit and break bread together.
That's how I pictured us.
That's what I wanted.
I stuck my head down between my knees.
After a minute or two I felt well enough to resume the climb, all the time now focusing my imagination on her waiting, sad but hopeful, in the Wheel Room, in her box made of Bibles.
In the entire three hundred feet of stairway there are only three windows.
Each pane has eight pairs of tiny glass oblongs set in lead, each so dirty as to be practically useless.
I'd passed the first some way back, the second I knew came just before the horizontal passage.
I set off again, counting steps this time.
Sixty-three, and there it was: a dull orange glow.
I scrubbed a square with my cuff and peered out.
I could make out the Headmaster's fancy brick chimneys, three shaped like corkscrews, three with brick diamond patterns, also the black branches of the elm tree shining wetly in the light of a precinct lamp-post.
It was the view from my turret, but lower.
‘Good.
Master's coming, sweetheart, grub's on its way,’ I whispered.
I took hold of the hand-rope, and the glimmer of light was soon a memory.
Climbing quite slowly in total blackness, I eventually reached what I now think of as ‘the landing’(though it's quite unlike the landing of my real home, which has a sash window one side and a row of pale blue banisters the  other; this one is barely shoulder width, and blind both sides).
Two minutes and one window later, I was turning the key in the Wheel Room door.
My heart was beating fast, partly with anxiety, more with excitement and anticipation.
When the door swung open, I could see nothing but bars of light, curving together like a luminous zebra skin high above.
The source could only be the south-facing windows, but there wasn't a glimmer in that direction; the light seemed to have slid through without touching the stone shutters.
The effect was weird, making me dizzy again.
I wanted to light a match, but knew there were only four matches left now, and that I must wait until I reached the Bible-box where I could first make a handful of paper spills to keep the flame going.
There are ropes, buckets and other building materials scattered about the floor of the Wheel Room.
I dared not move until my eyes had made more sense of the place.
While waiting I tried to imagine what she might have been thinking.
For certain she would be hungry, like me.
In my mind's eye, I imagined her nestling warm and soft in the palms of my hands, trustingly accepting morsels of moistened wafer from between my lips, maybe cooing a little— not to say thank you, I'm not daft enough to think that — because she would be so happy.
By the flickering light of tapers, burning merrily on an upturned bucket or something, I would watch her sick eyelids retract- and her eyes grow black and glittery like before…
Standing motionless, a yard inside the room, I began to pick up a strange hissing noise.
It came and went in waves.
I was mystified and alarmed, then I suddenly twigged it was rain.
Outside there was a storm going on, the rain was being driven in furious gusts against the stone slats.
I became aware of eddies of cold air.
In the brief lulls, my ears strained to catch the sound of the pigeon's soft, wheezy breathing.
Impossible; the wind was too strong  now, and fast growing stronger.
After a minute, maybe more, an arc of the wheel appeared dimly from the darkness, high to my right.
I watched it grow at each end, slowly, like a negative developing in the reflected light of the zebra.
I felt myself stagger, and quickly looked down.
From the curvature of the arc, I had already begun to estimate the position of the hub.
Soon it would be safe to move.
It screwed me up thinking how the invalid's hopes must have soared at the sound of my entry, and how she must now be falling into deeper and deeper misery because of the silence and the nothing happening.
Enough, I thought.
I began to shuffle forward, hands stretched out in front.
I somehow avoided all of the obstacles and my fingers soon touched one of the wooden spokes.
I groped for its neighbour, found it, ducked through the gap and up on to the curved deck of the treadmill.
I remembered the Bible-box being about a yard in from the edge.
I squatted, swept the dusty boards with my hands, felt a thick leather spine, found the lid, opened the top cover and tore out several pages.
With a dozen spills to hand, I reached for the matches in my pouch.
