PART THREE
London 16 October 1987
ELEVEN
After two hours of driving Carson and Alison stopped at a motorway services area, a cut-rate chunk of space-age that straddled the carriageway.
The cafeteria was an upper floor, and the rest rooms and sales kiosk were below.
There was muzak echoing from cheap speakers, generated from a cassette somewhere that couldn't keep speed.
As Carson waited for Alison he wandered across to the kiosk, the floor was wet from swabbing down, and there was a faint smell of disinfectant rising from the glistening vinyl.
Even in the mid-afternoon there were still copies of most of the morning's newspapers, and Carson picked up a couple at random.
Outside in the concourse he looked through for any mention of the events at the clinic, but there was nothing.
He dropped both copies into a battered wastebasket when he heard Alison approaching.
‘Everything okay?’ he said, and she wrinkled her nose in disgust and then smiled.
They returned to the Mercedes and refuelled before joining the traffic flow.
Home was a little nearer, and with every few miles the countryside grew a little uglier.
The motorway slashed on through fields and villages without regard for either, and after a while the villages flowed together and became towns, and the towns joined and merged to take on the appearance of a city.
When the press of grey on either side became too much the motorway fizzled out and abandoned them to the early-evening commuter jam of the North Circular Road.
During the slow hops between traffic lights Carson stole sideways glances at his passenger.
She'd reclined the seat  again but she wasn't sleeping; her head was turned aside and she was looking out of the window, not really seeing anything.
The last few miles to Ealing were covered in a jerking crawl which took more than an hour, and daylight was breaking down into darkness as Alison gave directions through the maze of streets and parked cars away from the main shopping area.
Streetlight timers were cutting in and the lamps were glowing red as she pointed to a space and asked Carson to pull in.
Alison's flat was on the top floor of a large house, one which, in its own extensive grounds, might have been attractive; but it was packed into a close row of dwellings, its gardens disfigured into tarmac parking space.
Carson carried her weekend bag through a brick archway to a side door, and waited as she looked for her key.
‘Thanks again for the ride,’ she said.
‘What about the petrol?’
Carson shook his head.
‘There's no expense.
Forget it.’
‘I can't just forget it.’
Alison found the key and opened the door, reaching inside to switch on the hall light.
‘You've got to concentrate your resources until you can find another job.’
‘That won't be a problem.’
She held the door open as he shuffled through sideways with the bag, and then closed it behind him and led the way up the stairs.
The hall was neat and tidy, but it was bare in a way that betrayed its nature as common property.
‘The agency will get me placed again as soon as I'm ready.’
‘You're going to wait a while?
She nodded.
‘I think I might.’
A short half-landing gave on to passageways to different parts of the house.
Alison led the way to where four doors lined a shallow cul-de-sac.
Two of the doors were numbered, and Alison opened up the door bearing an eight.
The curtains in the flat were drawn, cutting down even the poor light that remained from outside.
Carson heard the flick of a switch, but nothing happened.
‘Looks like the bulb needs replacing,’ Alison said as she  moved across the room, bumping some furniture as she misjudged her way.
There was another click, lower down; possibly a table lamp, but still nothing happened.
‘There's no power at all,’ Alison said with obvious annoyance.
‘Excuse me for a minute.’
She brushed by him in the dark, and her closeness, brought a sudden tingling which raised the short hairs on his skin for a moment; then she was gone, and light from the hallway spilled into the room from the half-open door.
Carson set down the bag and moved across to the dim grey square of the window behind the curtains.
He pulled the drapes back, and it helped a little— the mixed twilight and yellow sodium light would at least be enough to prevent Alison from falling over the bag in the middle of the floor.
On the far side of the hallway there was an insistent knocking on the opposite door.
What he could see of the flat told him nothing.
There was a drop-leaf table under the window with a hard chair on either side, facing into the room like two stone lions.
In front of that were a low sofa and a coffee table.
The table was glass-topped, and there were several piles of magazines under it.
On another low table by the wall there was an inexpensive stereo unit and some uneven stacks of records; he couldn't make out the details on the posters on the wall above the unit, but they might have been Escher prints.
Across the hallway, a door was opened and an unfamiliar girl's voice registered surprise.
‘Alison!’ the girl said, ‘I didn't know you'd be back so soon.’
‘Why's the power off?’
‘They did it this morning.
I've been querying the bill.’
‘But I'd sent you a cheque to cover my share of the quarter.’
—‘I know, but it wasn't that.
I wasn't happy with the bill.’
‘You mean you haven't paid it?’
The girl, although Carson couldn't see her, was obviously being evasive.
‘I've got the money set aside,’ she said.
‘But why didn't you tell me about it when I was here two days ago?’
‘I didn't want to worry you.
I wasn't expecting you back so I didn't think it would affect you.’
Alison sighed: ‘I suppose this means there's no hot water and no cooking.’
‘I'll go down and sort it out tomorrow,’ the girl said with an attempt at eagerness.
‘I'd have gone today if I'd know you were coming home.
Sorry.’
Carson realised with a guilty start that he'd almost wandered uninvited into the bedroom, all his attention on the conversation outside.
Despite a tug of interest he moved away, and after a little less than a minute Alison returned.
There was something in her hand, Carson couldn't see what, but then she held it up; a box, and it rattled slightly.
‘She's given me a box of candles,’ Alison said, somewhere between resignation and disbelief.
‘That's what I call consideration.’
‘How come she pays the bills?’
‘It's a shared meter.
I'd like it separate, but there's a common bathroom and kitchen between the two flats.
I'm damn sure she hasn't queried the bill because she's said nothing about it before.
She just hasn't paid it, that's all.
She's supporting an unemployed Turkish waiter with my money while I sit in the dark.
I at least wanted to offer you something to eat.’
‘You can come home with me,’ Carson offered, and the speed of her reply shook him slightly.
‘You talked me into it.
Let's go.’
This time, she insisted on carrying her own bag down the stairs, because it was no longer a social prop to precede an invitation.
Carson's place was only a couple of miles away, in a vastly overpriced and overcrowded strip along less than half a mile of the river east from Kew Bridge.
The traffic had thinned considerably by now, and most of the twenty minutes of the journey were taken up by Carson calling at a late-opening delicatessen on the way.
It was a huge house, too big to survive as a single occupied  unit; a developer had stripped it out and done a thorough conversion to make it into four self-contained apartments with only the hall and stairs common to each.
Of the three floors and the basement, Carson had all of the ground level and what had once been the garage on the side of the house, now a second bedroom which was reached by a slightly awkward twisting passage which cut under the stairway.
Carson parked the Mercedes on the forecourt off the road, and walked around to help Alison out.
She seemed slightly awed by the size of the building, by the large white-columned portico and the four stone steps that had to be climbed to reach it, by the cleaned and refaced brickwork and the elegant white shutters on the windows.
There was a light in the top-level flat, the smallest of the four.
The front door was heavy and solid, and it pushed back against the pressure of a slow-closing spring.
Just inside the hallway, behind the speaker grille and the numbered bell-pushes, there was a shelf with a few pieces of mail; a couple of them were for Carson but they were junk mail, expensive waste paper from a motoring organisation.
The door to his own apartment was the only one in the hall on this level, a few yards down and on the left.
As Carson was opening up, the front door finally closed itself.
Alison said, ‘You leave the hall light on?’
‘It'll switch itself off in a few seconds.’
They went in.
Now they were in a lesser hallway, an irregular square which opened out on the right into a short passage which turned under the angle of the stairs.
There was a bedroom to their left, at the front of the house, and Carson pushed open the opposite door and led the way through into the sitting-room, switching on the light as he went.
‘I'm impressed,’ Alison said.
The room was long and plain, stretching down to french windows which gave on to a railed veranda and a view of the gardens and river beyond.
The thick carpet was moss green and the walls were dove grey, and the only diversions from simplicity were a Regency fireplace with gas logs in the cast-iron grate and some ornate  plasterwork in the angle between walls and ceiling.
Outside the french windows, the last redness of the day was draining from the sky.
Carson seemed to have been taken off-guard by her appreciation.
He looked around as if he never really gave the place any attention.
‘Thanks,’ he said uncertainly.
Alison stepped forward and ran her hand along the green velvet covering of a Chesterfield in front of the fireplace.
‘With all this and the car, those magazine articles must pay you pretty well.’
Carson shrugged.
‘Not really,’ he said.
‘I don't sell many.’
‘I don't understand…’
‘The articles are just something to do,’ he explained.
‘Most of my money comes from a trust fund.’
She nodded, curious but too polite to pry.
She said, ‘I don't suppose there would be any hot water for a shower?’
‘As much as you like,’ Carson said.
‘There's a shower just off the bedroom through there, or there's a bathroom around the corner.’
‘Shower will be fine.’
He showed her into the bedroom and put her weekend bag on the bed, and then went to get her some towels from the linen cupboard in the hall.
She unzipped the bag and started to dig through the tangle of clothing for her soap case.
Tomorrow she would have to do some shopping; she'd kept most of her other clothes at the clinic.
The room was sparse and tidy, as fresh-looking and tasteful as the rest of the apartment, and like the rest of the place it told her nothing about Carson — except, perhaps, that he employed somebody to clean up for him, because it had the impersonal neatness which could only be achieved by an outsider.
There was a radio by the bed, and a full rack of books.
‘It must be quite some fund,’ Alison said, raising her voice to reach him.
‘Prices in Strand are incredible.’
‘I wouldn't know.’
His voice came muffled from the cupboard.
‘An agent fixed it all up for me.’
‘Don't you even know what it cost you?’
Carson appeared with the towels, a bath-sized and two hand-sized, and laid them on the duvet by her bag.
‘I wasn't really interested.’
He moved back towards the door.
‘My father wasn't exactly short of money when he set up the trust.’
‘I can't imagine what that must have been like,’ she called after him.
‘As you grew up, I mean.’
‘I didn't get anything until I was twenty-two.’
Carson's voice was receding fast, towards the kitchen at the far end of the lounge.
‘He left my mother when I was four and never gave her a penny after that.’
Alison was surprised and slightly pleased to hear a trace of feeling breaking through.
‘Didn't he ever do anything good for you?’
‘Yes,’ Carson said, faint and distant from the kitchen.
‘He died.’
She closed the door; she was going to close it completely, but she changed her mind and left it open a few inches.
Then as she started to unbutton her blouse she moved around the bed and sat down, turning her head to one side to read the titles of the books in the mellow light from the table lamp.
They told her nothing, paperbacks and hardbacks mixed indiscriminately, a wide variety of titles and subjects and a few back editions of The Writers' and Artists' Yearbook .
She stood up and shrugged out of her jeans and pants.
Peter Carson stared hard at the open copy of The Cookery Year on the work surface before him.
There was no problem with the recipe; he was simply having difficulty in concentrating enough to read two lines of text in sequence.
He was angry with himself for what he had let slip.
Not because he'd been provoked or excited; on the contrary, it had happened because he'd allowed himself to relax, to lessen his control and to become open and vulnerable.
There were parts of his life that he didn't want the world to see, Alison least of all.
Maybe it was pointless anyway.
She'd probably looked around the flat and compared it with the two shabby and  incomplete rooms that she'd just left, and the first foundations of the barrier would have been laid.
This was the old slug's vicious inheritance, Carson thought bitterly, to dump the money on me before I'd had a chance to learn how to fight for it or to handle it and too late for it to be of any real use.
There was nothing to reach for, no aching energy of ambition to move him; as far as he could see, he was just kicking around in medium comfort and waiting to get old and die.
He should be getting used to it by now, but instead he was almost ashamed of the place where he lived.
Perhaps there's hope for me yet, he thought as he unrolled the fillet on the cutting board.
Blood oozed out of the meat and stained the carbon steel of the knife blade.
The shower cubicle was in a tiny room with a basin and toilet off the bedroom, and a luxurious steam built up quickly in spite of the efforts of the extractor fan to draw it away.
When Alison stepped back into the bedroom the slight drop in temperature immediately sought out the damp patches on her back and shoulders that she'd missed with the towel.
All of the doors between her and the kitchen were open, and the aroma of the food was seeping through.
She pulled the end of the bath towel across her damp shoulders, and the loose tuck that she'd used to secure it came undone so that the towel unwound and fell free.
Carson's bathrobe was on a hook behind the door.
Alison contemplated putting it on, but wasn't certain.
If the place had carried the distinct imprint of Carson's personality the action would have fitted in easily, but the apartment was strangely arid in its elegance and she was sure that she would feel unsettled.
But the breathless battering of the shower had done a lot to sluice away the weariness and discomfort of the past couple of days, and perhaps she felt bold enough to try.
She lifted the blue-grey towelling from its hook, and sniffed delicately at the material; it was clean and odourless with no  man-animal scent, as if it had been bought and hung but never worn.
She put it on, and stood before the dressing-table mirror.
It was much too big for her, of course, but then that was probably rather appealing.
All the same the effect wasn't quite right, and so she undid the Alice-band at the nape of her neck and let her hair fall to her shoulders, tousled and damp at the edges.
Still wrong.
She tried loosening and retying the robe to be more revealing.
Now she'd only have to sneeze and the whole damn thing would slide off her shoulders and into a heap on the floor, in which case she might fairly be accused of trying too hard.
Finally she undid the sash and let the robe fall altogether.
She contemplated the long, pale shape of her body in the mirror, the angles that were softened into curves, the light dusting of talc on the clear skin.
While she had been in the shower the bedroom door had drifted open a few more inches, and if Carson were to cross the lounge on the far side of the hallway he'd probably be able to see her; but there was still something wrong, and it was obvious that an analysis of her appearance would be pointless.
The fault lay not with Alison but with her surroundings, soulless and uninviting.
Peter Carson's camouflage, non-involvement guaranteed.
She sighed lightly and pushed the door closed before she turned to dress.
When she emerged, the wall-lights had been dimmed and the polished table by the french windows had been set for two.
There were wineglasses and an open bottle.
‘Be a couple of minutes yet,’ Carson called from the kitchen.
‘That's fine,’ Alison said, and crossed to look out of the windows.
She could just make out, beyond her own reflection, the night-shapes of a long garden with a flood-wall and a towpath at its end.
She turned as Carson brought a dish of hot rice on a metal stand to the table.
‘Is there a key for this?’ she said, and Carson nodded.
‘Catch.’
He fished a small key-ring out of his pocket and tossed it to her.
‘It's the odd black one that doesn't look like a key at all.
Takes about four turns to wind the deadlock back, then it's the little key for the latch in the middle.’
He went back into the kitchen and Alison unlocked the window, stepping out on to the clay-tiled terrace.
She could look down over the rail into a walled sunken courtyard belonging to the basement flat, a brick-lined niche with some white cast-iron garden furniture and some shrubs in open barrels.
There was a large picture-window through to the apartment itself, and a wooden gate led to a flight of brick steps linking to the passageway down the side of the house.
Overhead there was a smaller veranda jutting from the flat above; the October wind sang through the ironwork of the terraces, making a sound like women's voices plaintively calling.
Across the gardens the river was wide, flat and moonlit, crossed some distance to the east by a railway bridge.
Alison shivered slightly, and stepped back inside.
She relatched the window and looked for the deadlock key on the ring, but Carson said, ‘I'll see to that later.
This is ready now.’
It was certainly better than the sandwich and a can of beer that she'd expected; if this had been the late and unlamented Eddie she'd probably have been faced with a walk to the nearest carry-out to find that he'd finished off the beer in her absence.
She glanced back towards the narrow terrace and said, ‘It's very nice.
But don't you get overlooked?’
Carson shook his head.
‘Only for those few feet outside.
And there's nobody living upstairs right now, anyway.’
‘Someone moving out and selling up?’
‘Sitting on an empty place and waiting for the price to rocket, more like.’
He was about to add that's how the old man made all his money , but he stopped himself in time.
Alison noticed the momentary tension, but he seemed to bring it under control pretty quickly.
Time for a change of subject, although she wasn't sure why.
She said, ‘Tell me about the magazine stuff you write.
Am I likely to have read any of it?’
‘It's possible, but not likely.
I haven't done all that many.
I don't even do them very well.’
‘That's not a very positive way to look at it.’
‘But it's true.
I'm not pushy enough to dig out real controversies, and I can't get worked up about red-hot issues.
I commission most of my research from an agency, and apart from that I rely mainly 011 secondary sources.’
They sat and ate.
‘Why do it,’ she said, ‘if it gives you so little satisfaction?’
‘I didn't say it gave me no satisfaction.’
He leaned across with the bottle, and she realised that she'd almost drained her glass at the first attack.
She'd have to be careful.
‘Sometimes my style's exactly what's needed,’ he went on.
‘I get lots of commissions from company publications, airline in-flight magazines, that kind of thing.
My American agent once got me some stuff placed in Reader's Digest .’
‘Really?’
Alison said.
‘I didn't think anybody actually wrote for Reader's Digest .
I thought it was all done by a computer.’
‘Well,’ Carson said uneasily, ‘that's the kind of thing I write.’
The level of the wine dropped rapidly, and after the meal Carson scrambled around at the bottom of a cupboard and came up with a bottle of port.
His uncertainty over what he had and where it might be seemed to indicate that he only drank when he entertained, and that he didn't entertain very often.
He fired up the gas logs to supplement the background heating and they sat on the Chesterfield.
She agreed to one glass of the port, not because she was feeling at all drunk but because she knew that she ought to be.
Conversation was easier now, and although Alison noticed that Carson managed to keep it centred around her life and background she no longer tried to push and probe.
It would be unsubtle, and there must be better ways to find out.
If Carson had been predictably agreeable and obviously interested she would have accepted the lift and that, apart perhaps from the promise of a follow-up lunch some time, would have been the end of it.
Maybe she was reacting to the challenge.
She didn't mean to, but she finally came to terms with the lateness of the hour with a yawn; it was already happening before she could stop it.
He seemed to understand.
‘I'll run you home,’ he said.
‘Or there's a spare room here, if you can't face the blackout.’
It was a knife's edge of a mood, and by the merest fraction it had tipped the wrong way.
A spare room, modest and demure; not just ‘you can stay here’, but all of the scandal and none of the fun.
She smiled.
‘Thanks, but you've done so much for me already.
There are things I have to sort out, you know.’
Sure,’ he said.
‘I'll get your bag.’
Carson drove with extra care and an eye on the mirror, but they covered the distance on the noisy roads to Ealing without any problem.
There was nowhere to park the car, and that solved any uncertainty about how to handle the parting; before she slid out she gave him a quick kiss on the cheek like a schoolyard dare, and was gone before there could be any reaction.
Before disappearing through the brick arch she turned and gave him a final smile and a wave.
He touched his cheek with his fingertips.
And then he drove home.
TWELVE
The morning sun came slanting through the corridor windows, making the airborne dust sparkle and filling the air with the scent of lavender floor wax.
The courthouse windows were open but the radiators below them were hot; it took several hours for any changes in setting to make themselves felt through the massive heating system, and it was impossible to keep up with the irrational temperament of the month.
A couple of days ago, Tony Donaldson thought, it was pissing with rain and half-freezing; now everybody was stamping around in wellingtons and three pullovers, about as appropriate as scuba gear on a parachute drop.
It wouldn't last, because it never did, and the end of October might even bring the first tentative snows of winter — but until then people would continue to be caught out, and to shiver and sweat as a penance for their gullibility.
Donaldson side-stepped to avoid two solicitors in conversation, youngish men who seemed to have made a conscious effort to propel themselves into a facsimile of late middle-age.
He spilled some of the machine tea from the plastic cups as he moved, and one of the wizened youths glanced back for a moment in disapproval.
Donaldson fought the urge to put his tongue out.
Mrs Balanchine was sitting on a hard chair outside the number two courtroom.
It was a busy corridor with a constant traffic of clerks and assistants between the courts and the offices, a disconcerting place for an outsider to be, and Mrs Balanchine seemed relieved that Donaldson had returned.
She was an elderly lady, small and frail-looking, wearing her best tweed overcoat and a small hat with some  faded cretonne flowers on its side.
She was clutching a large handbag on her lap as if it was a shield.
There was a radiator behind the chairs with a protecting shelf above it, and Donaldson set the plastic cups down on this.
Nervous ? he fingerspelt, following it up with the fear sign but smiling to take the edge out of it.
Wish all over home she fired back in the rapid, unpunctuated shorthand of spelling and sign, blinking through the thick lenses of her glasses.
A teenage clerk from one of the offices down the corridor was passing with a sheaf of rolled documents bound in ribbon, and he was staring at the exchange.
He bumped into the double doors of the courtroom as they opened out towards him.
Easy, Donaldson reassured her.
No fear just talk me .
Take time no rush.
Soon over.
Mrs Balanchine was from the small village of Renwick, about ten miles north of Penrith.
She'd had severe hearing impairment since birth and had become profoundly deaf in her mid-twenties, at a time when welfare services were mainly restricted to those provided by charities and phrases like ‘deaf and dumb’ were still common public currency.
Her early education had been poor because of the misconception amongst her teachers that language ability and intelligence were somehow different facts of a single concept, and it was only in later life, with the help of her husband, that she'd been able to make up on the intellectual deprivation of those early years.
Edward Balanchine was now in hospital.
He'd been hit by a car three weeks before, and he had a broken arm and pelvis.
His wife had been comparatively lucky, thrown into the road and bruised but otherwise unhurt.
Now the driver of the car had been traced and in a few minutes would be appearing at committal proceedings in the Magistrates' Court on charges of dangerous driving, failing to report an accident, and failing to stop at the scene of an accident.
Tony Donaldson had rearranged his visits and his work schedule back at the Social Services department so that he would  have most of the day free to serve as Mrs Balanchine's interpreter.
The clerk of the court was standing by the doorway and calling for Mrs Balanchine.
She read Donaldson's expression and stood up with him, turning and leading the way through into the courtroom.
The room was a waist-high maze of rich wood panelling, staggered over several levels with the magistrates' bench at the highest.
The senior magistrate was a large and imposing man with a round face and a bald head; the man and woman on either side of him seemed dried-out and lifeless by comparison, as if most of their energy had been diverted to sustain their companion.
Nobody appeared to have been told about the need for translation, and there was no copy of the interpreter's oath in the courtroom.
Fortunately, Donaldson had his own copy in his wallet, written on the back of a creased and much-used card.
As he was reading-it out he became aware of a movement at the back of the room.
He looked over the card as he delivered the oath, which he knew by heart, and saw the incongruous green of an army uniform through the glass of the doors.
The court usher was out there talking to the officer, and Donaldson was about to return his attention to the card when he saw the usher deliberately turn and point at him.
The army officer turned to look.
Donaldson faltered.
Several heads were raised, and one or two swivelled in the direction of the doors; the usher saw this, and started to hustle the army man away.
The officer was saying something, but the usher was shaking his head firmly.
The oath was ended, and the prosecuting solicitor got to his feet.
Donaldson wasn't too happy about his placing in the room — the light was behind him and against Mrs Balanchine, the complete opposite of the ideal — but they would probably manage.
He repeated the opening question out loud, fingerspelling each word with an occasional supportive sign, breaking away for the sake of legalistic  accuracy from their usual curtailed and compressed flow of pure communication.
Mrs Balanchine frowned and concentrated, trying to hold the tortuous grammar in her mind as the question was formed letter-by-letter.
Over in the dock the accused, a gangling boy of about nineteen, was smirking.
He seemed to think that he had an idiot for an accuser, but his solicitor was not so happy; he didn't seem to like the idea of having to address a witness through an intermediary.
The army officer was back, his uniform cap in his hands as if he was in a church.
He was sliding into an empty bench at the back of the public rows.
Only a reporter from the local newspaper turned to glance at him.
The session was short, the smile fading from the face of the accused as Mrs Balanchine described in detail how the car had come storming around a blind corner and swung in close to the wall where they were waiting to cross.
The defending solicitor tried to fault her on identification but she described the car as having a metallic paint job, wide wheels and a number of triangular stickers in the rear window; she also thought that she could remember a couple of fluffy dice hanging from the rear-view mirror, and she gave the first three letters of the registration number.
The rest of the proceedings was over very quickly.
The accused had fixed a new glass fibre wing on his car the day after the accident, and he said he couldn't remember what he'd done with the old one.
After a hurried consultation with his counsel it was decided that he wanted to alter his plea.
The magistrates gave the go-ahead to the committal and would be prepared to consider a bail application in the afternoon.
There was coughing and shuffling and a lot of page-turning as the court prepared to move on to the next case, and Donaldson helped Mrs Balanchine down from the witness-box.
As they moved across the courtroom the army man stepped out to meet them.
‘Mister Donaldson?’ he said.
For a soldier he was casually, almost comfortably dressed, a heavy pullover and an old-fashioned thin tie just showing over the crew neck, pressed trousers and polished shoes.
He looked younger close-up than he had from a distance.
Donaldson said, ‘That's right.’
‘I've to ask you to come with me.’
‘Where to?’
‘I can't tell you here.
It's been fixed up with your office.
They know all about it.’
‘So?’
Donaldson said, and started to lead a confused Mrs Balanchine towards the door.
The officer moved to block them.
‘Please, sir.
I've got my orders to get you to come along, no matter what.’
‘At gunpoint?’
‘No,’ the officer said, obviously uncomfortable, ‘of course not.’
The court usher appeared then and asked them to move out into the corridor.
The army man reluctantly gave way.
‘Look,’ Donaldson told him outside, ‘I'm not being deliberately awkward, but you can't appear from nowhere and expect me to go along with you without an explanation.’
The officer hesitated, and then said, ‘It's to Langstone.
Do you know it?’
‘I know it.’
‘We need someone to do some —’ he flapped his hand inarticulately ‘— translating, or whatever you call it.’
‘When?’
‘Right away.
I've got a Land Rover outside.’
‘Out of the question.
I've got to get Mrs Balanchine to the hospital so she can see her husband.’
‘That's all right.
We can take her on the way.’
Mrs Balanchine was helped into the Land Rover.
She sat without protest in the passenger seat as Donaldson clambered into the back to sit on a narrow sideways bench, thinking to himself this isn't real, it isn't happening.
The driver was apparently unfamiliar with the area, and the need to call directions forward made questions and conversation impossible; the only responses he could get were Langstone, a promise of explanations later, and another reassurance that everything had been cleared through his office.
The impenetrable lack of doubt in the military mind, he reflected; if it's been okayed on the next step up, further question becomes unnecessary.
The Land Rover pulled into the ambulance unloading bay at the hospital and then moved off to wait in the staff car park while Donaldson took Mrs Balanchine to the men's ward.
Her husband was on the free list, visiting at any time, which meant he was bad.
Donaldson left Mrs Balanchine on the ward and found a pay phone to call his office.
They confirmed that the army's request had been approved by the head of department but no, he wasn't available to explain.
He never damn well is, Donaldson thought, and asked what was to be done about Mrs Balanchine.
Somebody's on his way over, he was told.
It was an uneventful drive to Ravens' Bridge, past the steamer pier and the small wooden jetties before turning sharply to cross over a shallow, slow-moving stream; a final view of the calm and sparkling waters of the lake and then they were swinging around into the village's centre — a wide area off the road painted into parking spaces, a couple of tea rooms, several small hotels and a marine shop with a yard for pleasure boats alongside.
There was an end-of-season atmosphere; relief and sadness mixed.
The fishing nets and the postcards were no longer on display, and the woollens and the charming useless pottery had been packed away for the coming winter and the new season to follow-then they were out of the village, passing through a scattering of newer and less substantial houses and following the narrow lakeside road to Langstone.
They met no other cars on the road and when they reached Langstone itself they didn't stop.
They took the first turning after the hotel and began to climb towards the Jenner Clinic.
Tony Donaldson's first view of the clinic site was of a curious and ill-assorted hybrid of stone and canvas.
Those parts of the complex which were neither intact nor totally  destroyed had been covered and converted to shelter equipment, and the central courtyard was almost completely sealed in by an open-sided marquee top supported on braced poles.
Two army lorries with hanging tailgates were parked nearby, and behind them was another Rover.
The officer led him into what had once been some kind of common room.
The TV set and the vinyl chairs had been piled in a corner, and the room was now a field headquarters.
The air still held the sharp, sooty smell of burning, now dampened and a little stale.
‘Please wait a moment,’ the officer said, and went out of the door.
Donaldson looked around.
There was a noticeboard with safety messages and memos, some of them old and yellow.
No carpet.
A heavy wooden desk with a large-scale ordnance survey map of the area pinned out across it, and some papers which Donaldson was trying to read upside-down when the little fat man walked in.
‘Sorry about all this,’ he said, ‘my name's Hennessy.’
He turned to introduce a dark-skinned and compact officer who had followed him.
‘This is Captain Robert Windeler of the Army Special Services Unit.’
Windeler gave a slight nod, but didn't otherwise change his expression.
He sauntered around the desk, leaving the show to Hennessy.
Donaldson said, ‘Are you finally going to tell me why I'm here?’
‘You mean, nobody's said?’
‘Apart from someone needing an interpreter, nothing.’
Hennessy seemed satisfied, as if this was exactly how it should be.
‘Good.
We'll give you all the details in a moment, but first I'd like you to read something and sign it.’
Windeler slid a form across the desk.
‘It's only a declaration under the Official Secrets Act,’ he said.
There was a trace of accent in his voice that Donaldson couldn't place.
Mediterranean, perhaps, if the skin colour that he'd taken for suntan was natural.
‘Just a formality.’
Donaldson read the form through and signed it; only his silence was needed to keep him from all liability.
Windeler  took the sheet from him and slipped it into a drawer in the desk.
Then he locked it.
‘All right, Hennessy,’ he said, ‘you can go through with him now.
But I still think you're wasting your time.’
‘Perhaps I am.
We'll soon know, won't we?’
Hennessy led Donaldson out into the courtyard.
‘You may find this job a little…unusual,’ he said, choosing his words as carefully as he picked his way through stacks of jerrycans, bundles of wire, and anonymous green sacks.
The canvas overhead snapped and cracked in the wind, the supporting poles quivering with the strain.
‘In fact, it may not turn out to be a job at all, but without you we couldn't know for sure .’
The wet plaster smell and the white dust on the cobbles underfoot indicated that rubble had been cleared from the yard only a short time before.
They reached the entrance to what was probably the least damaged of the buildings, long and windowless.
There was a soldier in battledress and beret by the door, and he stood aside to let them pass.
The only windows in the building were narrow and high, and they washed the enclosed space in an opal gloom.
For a moment Donaldson supposed that he was in a stable but no, the smell was wrong, dry and musty and not nearly so strong as the fertile stink of horses.
There were cages against the long wall and dark, manlike shapes were moving towards the bars; the tiled floor glistened wet from a recent hosing-down, the walls were rough and whitewashed, and at the end of the room there were some battered grey lockers, a large enamel sink, and a bare wooden butcher-block table with a greengrocer's scale on it.
The larger of the two chimpanzees stood upright and grasped the bars of the cage.
Her coarse fur was bristling with ready aggression.
There was nobody else in the room.
Donaldson turned to Hennessy.
Hennessy said, ‘Please don't look at me like I'm a fool.
I suspect I'll feel enough of one anyway.’
‘But who am I supposed to be talking to?’
Hennessy was obviously embarrassed.
‘To them, actually.
Their names are Bobo and Fifi.’
The larger chimp had settled down.
The smaller peeked around from behind her.
Donaldson said, ‘Is this a joke?’
‘No joke, I assure you.’
‘But they're monkeys.’
‘Chimpanzees.
I'm told there's quite a difference.’
‘Not that much of a difference.’
Donaldson looked again, keeping well beyond Bobo's brawny reach.
She was black and well-built and obviously powerful.
Hennessy said, ‘Please, Mister Donaldson.
I asked for you to be brought here to do a specific job.
Will you at least please make an effort?’
‘To sign to a chimpanzee ?’
‘There's nothing ridiculous about it.
They're lab chimps, and before they were acquired for the Jenner Clinic they were part of a language project.
I want you to find out whether they've kept any of their signing ability, and if so how much.’
Bobo was watching Donaldson, not attempting to meet his eyes but reading his body and his posture instead.
He said, ‘But how — how do I start?’
‘I don't know.
The same way you'd open a conversation with a child.
You're the expert, Mister Donaldson.’
Donaldson had got over being self-conscious about his signing quite early on in his training, but as he squatted down before the cage and made a greeting sign he felt that early embarrassment returning.
Both of the chimps looked at him without reaction.
Fifi yawned and scratched herself.
Donaldson straightened.
‘You can't be serious about this.’
‘Please.
Just try.’
He tried again, spelling Bobo .
The larger chimp pulled herself up and rested her face against the bars, watching him sideways, while Fifi grinned and shook her head from side to side.
Hardly a great display of comprehension.
He said to Hennessy, ‘What do they like?’
‘Like?
How do you mean?’
‘Sweets, chocolate, anything like that?’
‘I don't know.
I thought they only liked bananas.’
‘Can you get me some stuff from the village?
There must be something we can use to get their interest.’
Hennessy thought for a moment, then nodded.
‘I'll fix it up,’ he said, and moved towards the door.
Whilst Hennessy was talking to the soldier outside, Donaldson found a light switch for three unshaded bulbs high in the rafters.
They didn't do much to cut the gloom, but they were a help.
He went back to the cage and concentrated on Bobo, because she seemed to be giving him more attention and was sitting close up to the bars.
He fingerspelt Bobo want chocolate ? and got what he thought might be an expression of interest as Bobo made a couple of deep whoo noises and rocked from side to side.
He repeated the query, substituting biscuit, ice-cream, banana; there was the same level of response, but nothing more.
Donaldson sensed that Hennessy had returned and was behind his shoulder, and he said, ‘Are there any bananas around?’
‘I think they have them in their feed,’ Hennessy said, moving away again.
‘Let me check.’
As Hennessy was opening up the grey lockers at the end of the room, Donaldson spelt Bobo again.
Fifi had wandered off and was throwing small handfuls of straw around at the back of the cage but the big chimp stood up and grasped the bars, still rocking.
Hennessy arrived with a handful of bananas, blackened and ripe.
Bobo responded immediately by reaching out with a begging gesture, palm upwards and fingers slightly curled.
Fifi shuffled over and stood behind her, eager to share in the bounty.
Bobo want banana ?
Donaldson signed as Hennessy watched anxiously.
Bobo continued to reach out, but Donaldson held the banana beyond her grasp.
‘This isn't going to work,’ he started to say, but Bobo pulled her arm back into the cage and made a vague two-handed gesture.
‘Was that something?’
Hennessy said hopefully.
Donaldson was doubtful.
‘I'm not sure.
It could have been a variant on the banana sign.’
Watching Bobo he repeated the sign in full, a stylised outlining of the fruit with thumb and forefinger followed by an exaggerated peeling gesture.
Bobo touched her crooked finger to her lips and then lowered her hand, palm upwards.
Then she brought both hands back to her lips and spread her arms expansively, before bringing them back together and pushing her fists forward at waist-height as she rocked on her haunches; then the banana sign, clearer and more distinct this time, both hands finally coming together with the fingers bent, a rough but distinct letter B.
The signing was crude and approximate, but the meaning was unmistakeable; PLEASE TRAINER GIVE BANANA BOBO
Donaldson gaped numbly.
Bobo was reaching out with her begging gesture again, and he realised that he was still holding the bananas.
He broke one off the bunch and held it out tentatively.
Bobo pursed her lips and began to pant and chomp her jaws in appreciation as it came within reach.
As she took the fruit her hand brushed Donaldson's, rough and dry and warm.
Then she knuckled off to the back of the cage and Fifi followed, her eyes fixed on the banana although she wasn't trying to snatch.
Hennessy said, ‘What are you getting?’
‘I'm not sure.
They know some signs, all right, but I'll need time to find out how many.’
‘But you'll be able to ask them questions?’
‘That's expecting a lot.
I don't think so.’
Bobo was breaking off pieces of the banana, rolling them around with her lips.
Fifi was sitting patiently by, hand outstretched in the begging gesture.
Bobo broke off a piece and magnanimously handed it over.
‘There are a lot of claims about chimp language ability,’ Hennessy said.
‘See what you can find out.’
Donaldson took the bananas over to the butcher-block table and found a knife and a dish.
He chopped the fruit into pieces; Bobo and Fifi were now at the bars again and getting  quite vocal.
He needed to keep the rewards small to maximise his results, or he'd quickly end up with two bored and sick chimps and no means of persuading them to co-operate.
He set the dish before the bars as a visible inducement.
Then he started to make progress with simple objects in the room, rewarding each correct identification.
Bobo was doing all of the signing and collecting all of the fruit, while Fifi watched each transaction anxiously but made no effort to communicate.
The signing was unorthodox, many of the gestures modified and difficult to read; there was no fingerspelling at all other than of first letters of names.
It was more than a simple indication of wants, because with a little prodding Bobo was starting to make sentences with a logical construction to them.
In some ways Donaldson realised that it was he that was actually doing all the learning-Bobo was using a vocabulary that she'd already acquired, whilst he was struggling to adapt himself to it.
‘I don't believe I'm doing this,’ he muttered.
The thrill of the bananas started to fade after a while.
Bobo gave every other piece to Fifi, and after that she rolled away from the front of the cage and started to throw straw around.
Fifi stayed, her hand stretched through the bars, looking from the bowl to Donaldson and back again, but otherwise not signing.
‘What's the matter?’
Hennessy said.
‘She's getting bored.’
‘You should be making it more difficult.’
‘Not with the conversation, with the food.
It's hard to get a real exchange going.
As soon as she gets what she wants, she stops signing.’
Hennessy moved in closer now that he knew that he wasn't placing communication at risk.
Bobo was lying on her back, her short legs waving in the air.
‘Can't she understand what you're trying to do?’
‘She understands it.
She's milking it for all it's worth.
How long is it since they were taught to sign?’
‘A few years, but the handlers kept it up — that's what I've been told, anyway.
It made the chimps easier to manage.
They were already used to using signs, and over a period the handlers picked them up.’
There was a knock on the door at the far side of the room, and after a moment the soldier entered with an armload of goods in striped bags.
He dumped them on the table by the scales, and Donaldson went over to sort through them.
There were bags of boiled sweets, several blocks of chocolate, some assorted bags of toffees, some cartons of flavoured milk, and a block of ice-cream that was starting to melt and ooze through its wrapper.
The soldier said to Hennessy, ‘Could you sign this, please, sir?’
Hennessy looked down at the slip of paper that he was being offered.
‘What is it?’ he said.
‘An expense voucher.
They wouldn't give me credit in the shop.’
‘Trusting of them,’ Hennessy observed as he put the slip down on the table and reached for his ballpoint pen.
‘I didn't press it.
I felt bad enough as it was.
They probably think we're all having a Smartie party up here.’
Donaldson dropped the leaking ice-cream into the sink and emptied the rest of the bags into the tray from the scale.
He left the toffees on the table, not wanting to have to wait through five minutes of loud chewing between replies.
He carried the curved steel tray over to the cage and set it down just out of reach, leaving it in view as he went back for a chair.
Hennessy looked up from replacing his pen in his jacket pocket, and called out a warning.
Donaldson turned and saw that Bobo had her arm through the bars, prodding at the basin with a straw and rocking it so that it came close to spilling its contents within her reach.
Donaldson rescued the bowl and placed it between his feet as he sat down.
‘Smart monkey,’ he said.
Bobo tapped her head, the think sign.
Hennessy brought a chair of his own and set it down some distance away.
‘Don't underestimate them,’ he said.
‘They can pick locks when they want to.’
‘All right, I'm ready to give this a try.
What do you want to know?’
It went slowly, with Donaldson struggling to transform Hennessy's questions into logical chains of linked concepts that Bobo might grasp.
Bobo remember fire?
FIRE (a dead end; she was simply recalling the sign, not the occasion.
Try again.)
Bobo remember when big fire Bobo scared Bobo run?
BOBO RUN COLD GREEN STRAW (Cold green straw?
The grass outside,’ Hennessy supplied.
‘It was deep and-wet.
There was another chimp that night, an old one, got pneumonia and died afterwards.
Ask her who opened the cage.’)
Who open cage Bobo Fifi?
PLEASE TRAINER OPEN CAGE BOBO
Trainer no can open cage.
Who open cage?
PLEASE TRAINER OPEN CAGE
If Bobo tell who open cage, trainer ask open cage.
Who open cage?
PLEASE TRAINER GIVE CHOCOLATE BOBO
Who open cage so Bobo run from big fire, run cold green straw?
Tell trainer, trainer give chocolate Bobo.
BIG FIRE BOBO RUN, BOBO HIDE
Who open cage Bobo, so Bobo run?
LUCY OPEN CAGE BOBO
‘Keep at her,’ Hennessy urged.
Bobo tell trainer who open cage big fire?
DIRTY SHIT TRAINER
Bobo ran to the back of her cage and Fifi had to scamper out of the way to save herself from being trampled, and then Bobo was storming back with a handful of straw and dung which she hurled at Donaldson before slamming herself into the bars and screaming loudly as they shook.
Her fur was bristling and erect, and she was grinning furiously to show her yellow uneven teeth.
Then she abruptly dropped back and walked away.
Donaldson had jumped from his chair and stumbled back  a couple of paces, and Hennessy had removed himself even further.
The guard from outside was at the door, but Hennessy waved him away.
‘You want me to try again?’
Donaldson said.
Fortunately the dung had been dry, and it brushed out of his hair easily.
Bobo at her most literal.
‘No, I don't think it's worth it.
Thanks for trying at all.’
‘I'll carry on.
I don't mind.’
‘It's getting late.
Thanks anyway.’
Glancing at his watch, Donaldson saw that it was after five; seven hours since he'd been picked up at the courtroom, during which time he'd skipped lunch and spent his afternoon handing tidbits to a bright primate.
Fifi was back at the bars and stretching out her hand in a vain attempt to reach the steel tray.
Her fingers were crooked, but she didn't seem to be attempting the begging sign.
Bobo was muscling up and down morosely at the back of the cage.
‘Looks like the little one's making a ‘C’,’ Donaldson said.
‘Could that be anybody?’
‘No,’ Hennessy said, and he kicked the tray so that the contents spilled within reach of the bars.
‘Come on, I'll get a car to take you back.’
The Land Rover was waiting, but it took a minute or so to find a driver.
As they stood by the covered courtyard Hennessy said, ‘Remember, please, not a word to anybody.
It's been cleared with your office.’
‘Who would I tell?’
Donaldson said in a voice which suggested that he even doubted it himself.
‘Who would believe me?’
‘You might be tempted, but it wouldn't be wise.
Thanks for your help.’
Evening mists were starting to fill the valley as the Rover began the steep descent to the village and the lakeside road.
It all seemed disjointed and unreal to Donaldson, as if his world had suddenly taken a lurching sideways step.
He felt both elated and frightened.
For a few brief moments he'd been able to forget the room and the bizarre encampment and Hennessy at his elbow, and he'd conversed in a language  that came to him now almost as readily as his first; he'd conversed with a dark-eyed alien.
Hennessy watched the Rover go, following it until it was lost behind a fold in the uneven green that provided a covering for the harsh crags underneath.
Then he looked across to the far side of the valley, softened by the twilight into a cascade of blue silk; it was going to be another damp and lousy night of drizzle.
Tomorrow he would have to make a visit to Penrith to get himself fixed up with some more appropriate clothing for this unsympathetic and unreasonable patch of country.
He turned and looked back at the half-covered clinic, at the low exposed walls of the animal house.
‘Lying bastards,’ he said softly under his breath.
Rennie Hamilton came from behind the counter of the village store and picked her way across a floor that was crowded with display stands and boxes, craning to catch a glimpse of the Rover and its occupants as it sped on past the hotel and towards the lake.
The army trucks had passed through in convoy the previous evening, and any new fact or assumption about the happenings of the clinic's ruins were now conversational gold-dust.
She was too late, there was nothing to see.
She was lowering herself from the tip-toe that she needed to look over the panelled backing of the window display when something else caught her eye, further down the road.
‘I don't believe it,’ she said.
‘Believe what?’ her husband demanded, levering himself with difficulty out of the empty space of the refrigerated bacon counter.
He dumped the wiping cloth back into the sulphite bucket, and some of the liquid slopped on to the linoleum.
Finished, the job that he'd been putting off for most of the day.
He switched on the refrigeration unit, and as it shivered into life the counter lights came on under the glass.
‘One of the Gaskell children's coming down the road with a shopping bag.
The little lad.
Nobody with him.’
She  moved away from the window.
‘I've seen everything now.
Eight weeks of collecting the order and still they haven't paid a penny.
Now they send a child rather than face us.’
‘Don't serve him,’ Billy Hamilton said decisively, stretching his dog-lean, fifty-year-old frame and feeling some of his joints popping.
‘I can't not serve him,’ she said as she moved around the counter and back on to home territory.
‘And his father knows it, too.
That's why they've sent him on his own.’
‘I'm going to go up there and ask Gaskell what he thinks he's playing at.’
‘It's not for us to chase.
It's for him to come down here and settle his debts, like everybody else in the valley.
Not to send the little boy in his place so he doesn't even have to offer excuses.’
The door swung open and the bell bounced on its spring.
Peter Gaskell shuffled through in his oversized wellingtons, a large empty canvas bag flapping against his knees.
His hair was rumpled, and the toggles on his duffel coat were done up wrong.
He could only just reach the handle to close the door behind him.
Hamilton had disappeared through the connecting passage which led to their living quarters.
The door was more or less permanently wedged open, and Rennie Hamilton could hear the abrupt gush as the sulphite was emptied away.
Peter Gaskell placed a half sheet of exercise-book paper on the counter and said, ‘Can I have the order, please?
‘Are you on your own, Peter?’
‘There's no school.’
He didn't seem as elated as he might by the idea.
‘I know, but that's a heavy bag for you to carry on your own.’
‘Only going back,’ he pointed out with incontestable logic.
‘It's empty coming down.’
‘Couldn't your father come down with you?’
‘He's out on the fells.
I can manage it all right.’
She looked down at the undersized and ill-clothed child, and was warmed by an ache of loving despair.
She had no children of her own.
For a moment she w anted to say that her husband would run the order up to the farm in his van, but something else quickly stepped in and said no.
It wasn't the valley way.
People paid their debts and when they needed help, they asked and it was never refused; it was the way that the small and widespread community had always lived, and as a system it was dignified and efficient.
Perhaps the Gaskells behaved like outsiders but the community was there, ready and open to them; all they had to do was to slip into the place that was offered.
She looked down the list.
All the standard items, but there were a couple of puzzling additions in a childish hand at the bottom.
She turned the list around on the counter and said, ‘What does this say, here?’
‘That's fruit.
We need apples and oranges this week, that kind of thing.’
‘Did you write it in?’
‘Yes.
Dad asked me to.’
‘Well, there's an ‘i’ in fruit.
It's not very easy to recognise without.’
Hamilton came back into the shop, rolling his shirtsleeves down and buttoning the cuffs.
‘Give it me,’ he said, nodding towards the list.
‘I'll make it up.’
He moved off along the shelves, reading as he went.
He was a slow reader, and his lips moved as he followed the words.
Figures he could handle, quarterly returns and VAT, but words danced along almost beyond his reach.
Peter Gaskell thrust his hands into his pockets.
He didn't wander over to the rack of imported American comic books as he usually did, but he seemed to be watching the street outside.
It would probably be dark for the last half-mile or so of his walk home.
What could his parents be thinking of, sending him out alone like this?
Rennie Hamilton said, ‘How are your mother and father, Peter?’
‘All right,’ he said.
No details.
‘Has your father managed to get his tractor fixed yet?’
‘Not yet.’
Hamilton called from the far side of the shop, ‘It's end of season, you know.
These apples are a bit expensive.’
His wife motioned to him to be quiet as she moved around the counter.
‘Come here a minute, Peter,’ she said.
‘You've got your toggles done up wrong.’
She squatted down to his level, and he stuck his chin up in the air so that she could rebutton his coat for him.
‘You can tell your father,’ she went on in a low voice, ‘there's plenty in the valley willing to help.
But nobody wants to pry, that's all.’
‘I'll tell him,’ Peter promised.
Hamilton added loudly, ‘You can tell him we'd like a word next time the order's due, as well.’
‘That can wait,’ Rennie Hamilton said sharply as she straightened up.
‘Haven't you finished yet?’
‘Just the bacon.
I suppose it's to go in the book.’
Peter said, ‘Yes, please.’
The bacon and the cheese had all been transferred to the room-sized storage refrigerator behind the shop, and while her husband was out of the way Rennie Hamilton loaded all the groceries into the canvas bag and did a quick addition on the list and noted the amount on the end of the growing column in the credit book.
When the bacon arrived she tucked the greaseproof package down the side and gave the bag to the child.
It seemed almost too heavy for him to lift but he managed it, resting it against his leg and swinging it along as she held the door open for him.
‘And what was all the hushing about?’
Hamilton wanted to know as soon as the door was closed.
‘It wasn't the time,’ his wife said.
‘Not the time?’
The open book was on the counter before him.
‘Have you seen how much we're owed?’
Down the street, she could see that Peter was level.
with the schoolhouse.
He set the canvas bag down and walked around it, changing his grip to put the weight on his other side for a while.
‘It won't break us.
Not yet.’
‘But when are we going to get it, if we ever do get it?
Reluctantly she turned away from the window.
‘You can't take it out on the child,’ she said.
‘That's exactly why Gaskell sent him down.
To play on your sympathy.
Seems like it worked well enough.’
‘Don't you start,’ she warned, glancing up at the old clock above the shelves.
Another half-hour and they'd be closing.
‘You do enough mumbling to yourself at the back of the shop when the child's around, but when it comes to something constructive…’
‘I said I'd go up there, didn't I?’ he protested.
‘Only as long as you knew I wouldn't let you.’
Hamilton said, ‘Gaskell won't last another year in this valley.’
‘Not with the landlord he's got.’
She looked down the darkening road again Peter Gaskell was out of sight.
‘But we can't interfere.’
THIRTEEN
As Desmond Gaskell's son was walking out of Langstone village with his difficult load, Roger Forester was sitting in a hired car just outside another village some three hundred miles to the north.
He was off the road on a forest track, little-used and thick with dead leaves, and he was watching the failing light through the branches of the trees overhead.
He knew that he ought to be trying to sleep — he'd managed no more than about five or six hours in the last fifty — but he was edgy and alert with the cold-water clarity of near-exhaustion.
He'd sleep later when he returned to the track, curled awkwardly on the back seat of the car under an overcoat.
He'd sold his own car for cash in Carlisle, and he had more important uses for his funds than a guest-house bed.
The hire car would be running up a heavy bill, but apart from the advance that he'd had to hand over Forester had no intention of paying it.
Petrol, food and a few tools had been his biggest expenses so far, and if the budget started to tighten he'd have to stop buying food and see what he could find in the woodland around him.
Forester had chosen his area carefully.
He'd begun from Inverness and started to work his way westward, around Beauly Firth and towards the forests of Corriehallie and Lochrosque.
He was interested in the hamlets and villages on the fringe of the deer country, the cottages and the farmhouses that might provide bases for dedicated stalkers.
Anywhere that was obviously occupied he drove on past, as he did with any place that was exposed or too close to the main road, but deserted-looking buildings on village  outskirts and elevated rows that were set back from the road generally rated at least a circling-around and a second look.
He thought that he'd found what he wanted in a village so small that it wasn't even marked on his petrol-station roadmap.
He drove on through and then turned around in a gateway and cruised back more slowly.
Two sets of cottages had caught his eye.
They were several hundred yards apart and hidden from each other by a bend in the road, and they were both set well back and reached by private tracks which were better maintained than the road itself.
Clean whitewash and straight rooflines of new-looking slate showed through the trees.
Promising.
He drove a few miles out of the village and then pulled off the road to wait for dusk.
It was a calculated guess but sooner or later he expected to hit lucky, and here on the fringe of a large private estate the chances were better than anywhere.
The kind of place that he was looking for was the second home, the petit-bourgeois country retreat which is usually sparsely and cheaply furnished and rarely occupied.
The area was about four hours away from Edinburgh or Glasgow — near enough to be accessible for weekends, far enough to be considered remote.
Perfectly placed for the man from the city whose idea of a good time was to get a Roe or a Red in his telescopic sights and blast it with a soft-nosed slug.
At seven-thirty he got out of the car with a flashlight and pushed through the undergrowth to a nearby stream.
The last traces of day were gone and the blackness was total, perfect.
The air carried a reviving chill which Forester reinforced with a couple of splashing handfuls of cold stream water which made the skin of his face sing and drove out the dull ache behind his eyes.
Then he filled his cheap vacuum flask and took it back to the car where it completed a meal of dry crusty bread and cheese.
The turning of the car's starter motor was an ugly and unwelcome sound in the stillness of the forest.
He backed up all the way to the road, squinting to make out the track behind in the faint glow of the reversing lights.
When the car  bumped out on to the tarmac he swung the wheel hard across and turned the car around to face towards his chosen village.
He slowed as he came to the first of the two rows, leaning across the dashboard in order to be able to see up the slope.
Besides the long access drive that climbed into the trees alongside the road there was a break in the wall by a drain culvert, and a flight of narrow stone steps which climbed towards the cottages.
Lights glowed dimly through the woodland.
He drove on.
Further on around the bend there were no lights and no signs of occupation in the second row.
He carried on past and found a place to pull off the road, and then he collected together his flashlight and a roll of tools and set off to walk the short distance back.
Steps had once linked this row to the roadway as well, but they were overgrown and unusable.
He had to go the long way around, but it gave him plenty of time to watch for any indication that there might be anybody at home.
It was a terrace of three stone cottages, with a cobbled clearing at the front and a common area with a few small outbuildings at the back.
They'd been builder-restored as a unit, and they looked too picturesque to be true.
One of them had window-boxes and a cartwheel propped against the wall by the door.
All of the curtains were open, and none of the rooms was showing any light.
Forester put his flashlight to each of the front windows in turn and peered through the glass as the distorted beam slid around the rooms.
Each was low and irregular, plain white plaster walls with prominent wooden spars bracing the ceiling and an open stone fireplace.
In two of the cottages he could see glass-fronted rifle display cases.
Empty, of course, but then he hadn't expected it to be that easy.
The back of the row was similarly standard, low-cost fitted kitchens with plain flagged floors.
The doors to the kitchens seemed to be the originals, stripped and revarnished and rehung after being fitted with modern Yale locks.
Forester set the canvas roll down on the ground and undid  the tape that bound it up.
He had a pry-bar amongst the tools if he needed it, but ideally he wanted to get in without it being obvious.
Metal pinked against metal as he opened out the roll, and a sheaf of little plastic cards fell out of the middle.
They were joke-shop membership cards of fictitious organisations — Alcoholics Unanimous, recruiting secretary for the Pudding Club, Registered Lecher.
They were about the same size and thickness as credit cards.
The second door was the most badly warped of the three, and around.the lock a gap of about a sixteenth of an inch appeared when he put his weight against it.
Holding it back with his shoulder and managing the flashlight under his arm, Forester took one of the cards and forced it into the gap, feeling it bend stiffly as he pushed it around the edge of the door.
When there was little more than half an inch left protruding from the frame he gripped it with thumb and forefinger and started to work it around.
After a minute or so the plastic card split where it bent, and Forester had to pull it out carefully.
He pocketed it, leaned on the door a little harder, and tried with another.
He could only guess at where the angled metal of the sprung bolt might be, and hope that with sufficient working around the card would eventually ease it back.
He kept up the pressure with his shoulder to give himself the widest gap possible.
The door opened unexpectedly, and he would have fallen into the dark kitchen were it not for the fact that after four inches it jarred and stuck.
The flashlight showed the silver gleam of a length of plated chain stretched taut just above the lock.
He took a pair of bolt-cutters from his kit and applied the jaws to the chain, and thirty seconds later he was inside the kitchen.
Obviously the owner of the cottage had never been burgled and didn't really believe that it might happen; there was a new-looking bolt at the bottom of the kitchen door that hadn't been shot.
Forester checked the drawers and cupboards before he moved through into the main room.
The china was market seconds, and all of the pans and utensils were unmatched  oddments.
In a drawer by the sink he found a billspike with a number of receipts, and he took these with him.
A short passage linked the two rooms together and gave access to the stairway.
He found the meter and turned on the mains, and then switched the lights on after closing the drapes — it would look a lot less suspicious than the occasional flicker of torchlight across the glass.
The gun case had room for six hunting rifles and there were two drawers underneath which were not locked.
One contained only an empty ammunition box, the other a number of receipts from firearms dealers and some guarantee cards.
He put these with his haul from the kitchen and crossed the room to where a pile of mail lay on the mat inside the front door, pausing on the way to look at some of the framed photographs and certificates that were arranged along the mantelshelf.
The photographs showed sporting groups posing with their weapons, except for a couple which showed a man — the same in both — on one knee by a dead stag.
He was holding the animal's head up by its antlers and looking shyly pleased at the camera.
He had protruding ears and a thatch of curly hair that sat on his head like a woolly beret, slightly off-centre.
The stag's eyes were rolled back and its nostrils were clotted with blood.
Both photographs seemed to be of the same occasion.
There was nothing of interest upstairs, even though Forester went through the pockets of some expensive looking rough country wear that he found in the bedroom wardrobe.
He went back down to the kitchen and assembled his information on the table.
The mail was uniformly trivial, but he read it all and then stuffed the torn envelopes and their contents into his pockets for disposal elsewhere.
The firearms receipts were probably of the most use to him, and the guarantee cards all carried the purchaser's signature,Ian P. Sampson in a leaning scrawl that shouldn't be too hard to imitate.
The P stood for Paul, he learned from another of the documents.
He reached into an inside pocket and took out a form which he placed on the table.
Application for the Grant/  Renewal/Variation of a Firearm Certificate .
He scribbled a few lines on a scrap sheet to get the hang of Sampson's cramped style, and then he started to fill in the form.
On Sampson's behalf he denied that he had any history of criminal activity or mental instability — not much point going on if he didn't — and then with the records from the gun case drawer he compiled a list of the weapons that Sampson already possessed.
He was making out a case for the purchase of a .308 rifle as an extra weapon for deer hunting on the nearby estates.
It would be a serious game rifle with considerably more punch than a target toy, a guaranteed killer of the same gauge as the 7.62mm NATO standard issue Service weapons with which Forester was already familiar.
It was a reasonable plaything for someone like Sampson to hunger for.
There were still gaps on the form when he'd finished, mainly relating to Sampson's personal details.
Forester had an idea of how he might get the additional information, but it would have to wait until tomorrow.
Forester returned the billspike to the kitchen drawer and the receipts and guarantees to the gun case, and then he took a screwdriver from his canvas roll and unscrewed the cut end of the doorchain from the frame and slipped it into his pocket.
At some time over the next couple of days he could call into a hardware shop to find a match, and replace the missing part on his next visit.
Sampson would simply assume that he hadn't put the chain on at the end of his last stay.
It might not matter in the end — Forester fully expected to be traced and caught-but every difficulty and delay that he could strew behind him could make a final difference of hours or even minutes that might determine the distinction between success or failure.
He took a last look around.
There were a few places where he'd disturbed dust, and he blew on them hard to blur the marks and redistribute the deposit.
Two or three days, and they wouldn't show.
Other than that, the place was as he'd found it.
He switched off the lights and opened the curtains; the night was still as black as a stone.
He cut the  power by the meter and collected his roll and the half-completed form from the kitchen table before he let himself out through the back door.
The lock snapped into place behind him, and he set off down the hill towards his car.
FOURTEEN
Carson was in his bathrobe, messing around the apartment at the slob things that people always do in bathrobes, when the telephone rang.
He padded barefoot across the carpet and lifted the receiver.
It was Alison.
‘Hello, Peter,’ she said.
He'd been thinking about her, but he didn't want it to show.
He said, ‘Alison!’ and sounded surprised.
I was going to ring you.’
‘I was going to ring you.’
‘Why didn't you?’
Good question.
‘You never gave me your number.’
‘You never gave me yours, either.
But we're both in the book.
–
Ah.
There was an uncomfortable silence for a moment and then she went on, ‘Is this an example of your research methods?
No wonder you don't sell much.’
‘I had the idea you'd be busy.’
‘No, I told you I was going to take it easy for a while.
What about lunch?’
‘Today?’ he said, thinking of the scramble he'd have to get showered and dressed and hoping that the panic didn't show in his voice.
‘Did you have something else fixed up?’
‘Nothing at all.’
‘What about one of those pubs on the Strand towpath?
You won't have to rouse yourself to go far.’
‘I'm not quite the sloth you imagine me to be.’
Oh yes you  are, he thought, tightening the tie on the robe as it threatened to slide undone.
‘Shall I pick you up?’
‘I've got a couple of things to do, first.
I'll meet you by Kew Bridge in an hour.
We can walk down from there.’
‘Fine,’ Carson said, and she hung up.
He arrived a little before twelve and waited below the bridge at the riverside, across from the peeling frontage of the old Thames Road laundry.
Above him, traffic rumbled noisily towards Richmond and Kew.
The towpath proper didn't start until a few yards further down where it angled away from the road and followed the river; here it was marked by a narrow strip of waterside grass and trees that would immediately raise the cost of any overlooking property by at least ten thousand.
Alison reached the bridge a few minutes late, and she apologised.
Carson said it didn't matter.
They started to walk and he said, ‘Why today, in particular?’
‘Because it's the first decent break in the weather we've had.
And because I owe you a meal from a couple of nights back.’
‘Look.’
he started to assure her, ‘I don't have to be paid back…’
‘Relax,’ she said, ‘I was joking.’
‘Of course.
I'm sorry.’
They stepped around a duck which wasn't about to move for anybody.
This section of the towpath was about six feet wide, with the riverside cottages to their left and an iron railing to the right.
The tidal waters beneath were low, exposing slick grey mudbanks which would be swallowed during the afternoon.
Some of the cottages behind their stone sea-walls had real charm, others were plain and cramped and only borrowed a little grace from their situation.
Alison said, ‘You know, Peter, I think I'm starting to make you out.
You're really sensitive about being well-off, aren't you?’
‘I wouldn't say that.’
‘You assume it slams up some kind of barrier around you.
You're expecting people to resent it so you hold back before they can get any ideas about hurting you.’
‘There are disadvantages,’ he admitted.
‘But nothing I'd want to complain about.’
‘Well, don't complain when I buy you lunch.
And don't worry about whether I can afford it, either.
The agency have agreed to pay me a retainer for a couple of weeks while I think about what I'd like to do next.’
‘A retainer?
Sounds like a pretty enlightened agency.’
‘Lab staff are pearls without a price these days.
We're getting into a science economy, didn't you know?’
‘The fact was passing me by until now.’
They came to a pub which was low and dark and already starting to get crowded.
Two bearded young men in tracksuits were standing by the door, beer glasses in hand and bellies stretching their Adidas sweatshirts.
They were watching Alison with interest, and trying to appear not to.
‘There's a better place on the other side of the bridge,’ Carson told her, and they walked on.
The bridge carried the rattling old carriages of the District Line from Gunnersbury to Kew Gardens.
As they passed in its shadow Alison remarked on the low floodwalls before the cottages.
Carson said that in theory his own place was within the flood basin, but there had never been any trouble as long as he'd lived there; places right on the towpath used to get flooded regularly when the tide was high.
They came to the pub that he'd had in mind and climbed the steps to the door.
Inside the bar they descended again into the dining alcove, and they sat at a table by a small-paned window which was back on a level with the path outside.
Carson placed the edge of his hand against the glass, about two feet above the sill.
‘I was in here once,’ he said, ‘and the water was this high up the glass.’
‘I don't think I'm jealous of people with houses on the riverbank any more.
I'll stick as a visitor, thanks.’
She said that she'd be happy with wine so he caught somebody's eye and asked for a carafe of the house red.
Then he said, ‘How long do you get to spend in London?’
‘It varies.
There's usually live-in accommodation with the jobs; but there's no continuity to it.
I like to keep in touch with my own place.’
‘How long had you been at the Jenner Clinic?’
‘To be honest, I've lost track.
Don't make me start counting the years up, please — it'll ruin my whole day.’
The wine arrived in something resembling a hospital urine bottle.
As he filled their glasses, Carson said carefully, ‘How do you feel about it all?’
She didn't reply for a moment, and he glanced at her anxiously.
She was hesitating, getting her thoughts into order.
Then she said, ‘I don't, really.
I suppose I still haven't grasped it, and I don't want to.
It's like…well, the longer I leave it, the less it will hurt when I finally face it.
What about you?’
He set the carafe down.
‘I was hardly involved.
I'd feel guilty if I started looking on myself as a victim.’
‘For God's sake, Peter,’ she said with a small and surprising explosion of irritation, ‘why don't you let yourself go for once?’
‘I don't know what you mean,’ he said, and then a girl was by their table with her notebook.
They ordered, and as soon as the girl was walking away Alison started in again
‘Of course you know what I mean.
You're defending yourself by being indifferent again.’
‘I don't do it on purpose.’
‘I'm not so sure.
You're always going for the safe line, no involvement and no chance of damage.
Do you find me attractive?’
The question took him off-guard.
He glanced around, uneasy.
‘Well, yes,’ he said.
‘I'll try to discount the element of evasion and take that as sincere.
Would you shrink from the idea of sleeping with me?’
‘It would depend.’
‘On what, for Christ's sake?’
‘On whether you came on with the aggressive line you're using now.’
‘Peter,’ she pleaded, ‘I'm not attacking you, I'm only trying to reach you!’
‘No need to reach me.
I'm here.’
‘The front's here, but where's Peter Carson?
Two nights back, in your flat, I needed comfort.
I got a damn fine meal and a hell of a lot of elegance, and that was it.
I had to get a lift home with the richest virgin in London.’
Salad plates were slipped before them, but Carson hardly noticed.
He said wonderingly, ‘You've really been storing this up, haven't you?’
‘I need to know,’ she insisted.
‘Are you rejecting me, or did I really make such little impression on you?’
‘Listen, Alison, I'm sorry.’
He wanted to say, I don't really know how to read people, and every time I've tried I've got it wrong.
But all he said was, ‘I haven't wanted to hurt you, and I'm sorry if I did.
Can we go on from there?’
She was about to say something, but then she changed her mind.
She smiled and loosened, and to Carson it was like the warm sun falling on his skin.
After a while, Carson said, ‘You know, I had an idea earlier.
You've just confirmed it for me.’
‘I have?
How?’
He had to hitch his chair forward to make room for a party who were moving in around the table behind him.
Four men of different ages, all wearing medium-cost suits in bad taste, a lunchtime ritual to pass an hour of freedom from the office.
He said, ‘You were right, I've been holding what happened to Tracy at arm's length.
I shouldn't close my eyes, I should try to find out more.’
Alison was guarded, suddenly sober.
‘Like what?’
‘I'm going to write a piece about the Jenner Clinic.’
‘That's not confronting the problem, Peter.
That's making a game out of it.’
‘If I approached it the way I usually work, I'd agree.
But  I'm going to make a break from that crappy airline magazine style, ditch it altogether.’
She frowned and looked out of the window.
A train was crossing the bridge, and its thunder drummed against the glass.
She said, ‘I'm not sure it's a good idea.’
‘But it's the kind of thing you're trying to push me towards.
And I'll need your help in setting out the basic research outline.
There's a lot I don't understand — like, how come Jenner picked such a remote and inaccessible spot for his labs?’
‘He liked the view.’
‘And, you know, I haven't the faintest idea of what actually goes on at a baby farm.
Where did those chimpanzees come into it, for instance?’
She took the paper napkin from her lap and crunched it up into a tight ball, dropping it on to her plate.
‘I've got to go,’ she said.
Carson looked at her blankly, and she went on, ‘I've stayed longer than I intended.’
She took some notes from her pocketbook and laid them on the table by her plate and her half-empty glass.
‘These should cover the bill.
See to it, will you.
Carson watched uncomprehendingly as she stood up and edged sideways from between her chair and the table, looking down and not meeting his eyes.
He said, ‘But you were going to tell me about the business.’
‘Some other time.
Please, Peter, forget the article.’
‘But why?’
‘Don't ask, just believe me.
It's better forgotten.’
He wanted to follow, but he was trapped by the money on the table and the hard chair that was jammed against his back and wouldn't move.
The office fellows on the table behind laughed abruptly and in unison.
It was social laughter, an attempt to hammer out a common weapon against despair.
Alison was up the steps and away, lost in the press of people that had filled the bar since they'd come in.
Well done, Carson.
Screwed it up again, haven't you?
FIFTEEN
He was almost home before he thought to look at his watch.
It was only just after one o'clock.
As he stood on the steps before the heavy front door and dug in his pocket for his keys he could hear the ringing of a telephone, blanked and muffled by several layers of brick and plaster.
In the hallway with the traffic noises pushed into the background it was a little louder, and when he opened the door to his apartment the sound became rounded and alive in the empty rooms.
Carson let the door swing behind him, hurrying through into the sitting room and reaching for the receiver.
As he started to speak he heard the line go momentarily dead and then break into a callbox paytone.
The line cleared, and an unfamiliar voice said, ‘Carson?
Peter Carson?’
‘Who is this?’
‘Roger Forester.
Don't you remember me, from Langstone?’
Forester.
How could he forget the intense little man in that crypt of a dining room?
He said, ‘Yes, of course I remember.
I wasn't expecting to hear you, that's all.’
‘I've been working through all the Peter Carsons in the London directory.
I got it narrowed down to your number.’
‘What can I do for you?’
‘I need some help.
Did I hear that detective say you were a reporter?’
Carson hooked his fingers under the phone base and carried it across to the Chesterfield.
‘I don't know what you heard, but I'm not.’
Forester seemed thrown.
‘He said something about  you phoning the story in,’ he insisted.
‘About stopping you.’
‘He'd got it all wrong.
I do features for magazines.’
‘Isn't that the same thing?’
‘No, nothing like.’
The time-pips were sounding on the line, and he added quickly, ‘Do you want to give me your number?
I can call you back.’
‘It's all right,’ Forester said after a moment.
‘I've got a bag of change.
Those features, do you have to do research for them?’
‘Sometimes.
Look, if you can tell me what it is you want to know…’
‘I need somebody to get some information for me.
I don't know how.’
‘What kind of information?’
‘It relates to that business at the clinic.’
Forester was being careful.
‘Please, don't ask me to go into details.’
‘If you won't give me details, I don't see how I'm supposed to help.’
‘I need background on someone.
I thought you might have contacts.’
‘Someone from the clinic?’
Carson asked, intrigued
‘No.
And nobody famous, either.
It really needs someone who can get the information unofficially.’
‘I told you, I'm not a reporter.’
It wasn't what Forester had expected to hear.
‘Please,’ he said, ‘at least give me some idea of how to go about it.’
‘I'm not sure I should.
What are you trying to do?’
There was another break as the pips sounded and Forester fed the callbox again.
‘I told you not to ask,’ he said when the line was grudgingly given over for another fifty seconds.
‘They've made the accident story official, and now they're covering up like mad.
The village is back to normal, but the army's sealed off the ruins.’
‘I know you're still upset, but…’
‘Upset?
And what about you, Carson?
You lost someone, too.
Or have you forgotten already?’
‘You need to be careful,’ Carson told him.
Forester  was sounding pretty obsessed over…well, an egg in a bottle.
‘Look,’ Forester said urgently, and Carson could imagine his knuckles going white as he gripped the payphone receiver hard in an attempt to get his point across, ‘my chance at having a kid's been ruined, and the police and the government have got their heads together to cover up for the killer.’
‘But why should they want to do that?’
Carson said, and he wished that he could be as confident as he was trying to sound.
‘Because there was something foul about the set-up at the Jenner Clinic, and they don't want it made public.’
‘Something foul?
Like what?’
‘I don't know.
Maybe bad publicity for the fertility business could make waves on an international level.’
‘That's a bit far-fetched, isn't it?’
‘Not at all.
This is just about the only country in the world with an organised industry.
There are a few places in the States, but there's no federal policy to get them organised on a big-money basis and all the little local pressure groups keep them harassed and staying small.
Same over most of Europe with the religious organisations.
If some sheikh wants a son and he needs a push from technology, he sends over a couple of wives and a bottle of frogspawn.
The sons are assembled for him, and he even gets a genetic guarantee of health.
And he pays for it.’
Carson leaned back into the Chesterfield.
He said, ‘I don't see what that has got to do with murder.’
But his tone said carry on .
‘You don't understand how big it is.
Income from eugenics equals income from arms sales.’
‘Arms sales are down.’
‘Hardware, maybe.’
This was — or, at least, had been Forester's field.
‘Now we concentrate on research and exporting technology.
So nothing goes through the docks, the income's still there and it's getting bigger.
I suppose now you're going to get timid, and tell me not to rock the boat.’
‘I don't want to walk in with my eyes closed.
It doesn't mean I've been frightened off.’
‘Can't you see the scale of it, now?
Can't you see that they might find it worthwhile to bend the truth and sit on justice when there's so much at stake?’
The money ran out.
When Forester had fumbled another coin into the machinery, Carson said, ‘Tell me what you need to know.’
‘Are you going to help me?’
‘I probably can't, personally, but there's a research agency I use.
I'll put them on to it.’
‘I'll pay whatever it costs.’
‘That doesn't matter.’
Carson got a pencil and a reporter's notebook from a drawer in the telephone table.
He rested the book on his knee and wrote as Forester gave the details.
‘It's a man called Ian Paul Sampson, and I think he lives somewhere near Edinburgh.
Could be Leith, but I'm not certain.
Early middle age, and not too badly off although you wouldn't call him rich, either.
I need to know his home address, his occupation, and his business address, and if any of these have changed in the last five years.
Then I need to know his date and place of birth.’
Carson wrote B.D. — when and where ? and then said, ‘Anything else?’
‘No, that's it.’
He frowned at the pencilled details.
‘I don't see how this ties in with the clinic.’
‘He doesn't, directly.
But that's all I'm prepared to say.’
‘I'll see what I can do.
Where can I get hold of you?’
‘I'm moving around,’ Forester said.
‘I'll contact you…how about tomorrow afternoon?’
‘It might take longer than that.’
‘I'll call anyway, see how you're getting on.
Thanks, Carson.’
‘Don't mention it.’
‘I mean it.
And I'm sorry about the way I spoke to you before.
There was the same note, the same feeling of hard comradeship that Forester had shown once before towards Carson, back in Langstone.
Carson found it strangely warming.
He said, ‘That's all right.
I think I'm starting to get used to it.’
With the call over and the notebook still open before him, Carson stared into the cold fireplace.
Forester had been perfectly correct, the happenings at Langstone had been gross and illogical; he'd chosen simply to deny involvement and ignore them.
When Alison had pushed him he'd started to gather the momentum to ask the same questions that were obsessing Forester — apparently not the reaction she'd expected, judging from the way that she seemed to have slammed the lid back on the mixture before it could boil over.
He went back over to the telephone drawer and took out his slim and little-used address book, flicking through to find the number of his research agency.
He'd found them through an ad in Private Eye , and they always welcomed his business — but then, the tottering co-operative would welcome anybody's business.
The line was engaged.
He tried re-dialling two or three times, but either it was a long conversation or he couldn't time it right to slip in between calls.
At least they still had a phone.
He hung up and got the last volume of the bigger directory from the rack under the table.
There were hundreds of entries under Wells and a dozen or more A's; none of them matched with Alison's address as he remembered it; and yet she'd told him she was in the book.
He put the directory back and tried the agency again, but it was still engaged.
What the hell, he was up and about and dressed for the road.
He returned the phone to its table and slid the notebook into his pocket; it took some forcing, but it went.
First call was to Ealing via the Underground.
Carson knew better than to use the Mercedes as in-town transport-traffic and parking problems made a car into a liability during the daytime.
The side door to the house swung in when he touched it  probably only locked at night.
He climbed the stairs and knocked on the door to Alison's flat, but there was no reply and the sound had a hollow ring which said nobody home .
The door opposite was trembling in its frame from the loudness of the music behind.
He went over and banged on the panel so hard that his knuckles hurt — even so, he knew that he'd be lucky if he were heard.
Then the record shifted into a quieter phase and he heard something falling over inside the flat.
After maybe half a minute, the door was opened and Carson was hit by the rise in the music level and a sickly aroma which billowed out around him.
The unemployed Turkish waiter stood in the doorway and peered at him; he was muscular and squat, and he was wearing only pyjama trousers that were creased and stained.
His olive skin seemed to glint in the soft light of the hallway; the flat behind him was almost totally dark.
Carson said, ‘I'm looking for Miss Wells.
Do you know when she'll be back?’
The Turk didn't reply, but turned and disappeared.
Sinews bunched and moved under his skin like oiled spaghetti; Carson guessed that he'd been posing and flexing in front of a mirror.
Shapes moved against the drawn curtains of the room beyond, and a few seconds later the girl came forward into the light.
She was barefoot and wearing a man's shirt over jeans, the sleeves rolled back on her thin arms.
No make-up, hair a mess, tired-looking.
She said, ‘Is something the matter?’
‘I'm looking for Alison Wells.
I was wondering if you'd know where she is.’
‘I heard her go out around eleven this morning.
Then I think I heard her come back and go out again about an hour ago.’
The shadow of the Turk passed across the room behind her, eyes glowering at Carson like twin red coals.
He persisted, ‘You don't know if she'd be at her agency?’
‘What agency's that?’
‘I don't know what it's called.
The one which finds jobs for laboratory workers.’
The girl seemed blearily surprised.
‘Is that what she does?
I never knew.’
Carson said, ‘Well.
Thanks, anyway.’
She flashed him a brief and insincere smile, her eyes puffy and filled with her own worries.
She closed the door.
The Researchers' Co-Operative was just off Leicester Square, reached through an alley alongside one of the big prestige cinemas.
All of the Hollywood gloss and glitter was up front in the square where the lines formed and the buskers milked, but the alley was just a mean crack with high walls of featureless brick, somewhere to hide the trash cans and somewhere for the tramps to sleep.
The ground was a mush of litter banked up on either side, and overhead the sky was blanked out by the narrow crowding of the strap-iron ladders and landings of fire escapes.
The offices were in a high building, one which might well have been neat and prosperous around the time that Dickens was labelling bottles in a boot-blacking warehouse; now its main value lay in the soaring price of the land on which it stood.
Its frail old shell served little other purpose than to squat on the ground and prevent any adjacent developments from creeping across it.
The original entrance foyer on the main road behind the square was barred and boarded and papered over with layers of handbills; Carson walked up a few steps near the end of the alley and pushed open the door of a tradesman's entrance.
The floorboards inside were bare, although they still carried the black tack-heads which had anchored linoleum.
The strong smell of damp and cats gave a quick explanation of why the first two floors of the building were uninhabited.
Carson started to climb the stairs, passing some stacks of yellow newsprint and a bicycle which was chained to the rotting wood of the balustrade, before turning and starting up the next flight.
Rooms gaped empty on the next landing, their doors gone for firewood, paper stripped and plaster crumbling away from the lath walls.
RCO had tried to brighten up their corner of the third floor with a few gallons of inexpensive paint.
The bright crust over the decay was better than nothing, even if the job-lots of emulsion clashed badly.
In its own way the co-operative was quite a success story if only for the fact that it had kept going more or less continuously for almost five years.
It had been started with two friends by Adrian Cotterell, Polytechnic journalism drop-out, and although the two friends had themselves dropped out after the first twelve months Cotterell had managed to keep enough people together for the place to stay in business.
Carson looked into the outer office.
Furnishings and fittings were strictly junkshop, stacked with box-files and scribbled notes and second-hand reference books that were mainly bought cheap and out-of-date when libraries renewed.
In the next room along, a telephone was ringing.
Cotterell was at his desk, a large mahogany monster that had been inherited with the premises because nobody could face the idea of carrying it down the stairs.
‘You busy?’
Carson said from the door.
The telephone stopped ringing, chopped in the middle of its signal.
Cotterell looked up blankly for a moment, and then Carson and his wallet slid into a niche in the young man's mind and he smiled.
‘Nothing that can't wait, Peter,’ he said.
‘Are you working on something?’
Closing the door behind him, Carson said, ‘I'm making a start.’
Another man who was unknown to Carson put his head through from a connecting office.
Under a dark pullover without elbows he was wearing a Levi shirt that appeared to have been sucked colourless by some dog.
His hair was cut close into a fringe, to-make the best of the fact that he was losing it.
He called to Cotterell, ‘It's the Royal Veterinary College, that fellow you wanted to ask about horse doping.’
‘Can you see to it?’
‘I'm supposed to be at the Holborn library in ten minutes,’ the researcher objected.
‘It won't take a second.
I was only after a couple of references.’
Co-operative or not, Cotterell was obviously in charge and not to be messed about with while he set up a commission.
The researcher stopped hanging on to the doorframe and stepped into the room.
He said resignedly, ‘Where's the file?’
‘On here, somewhere.’
Cotterell lifted some manila folders, and they slid around and spilled across the desk.
They'd been re-used many times, titles and references and hasty notes making it difficult to see any sign of what the current contents might be.
‘Got it,’ the researcher said, and pulled one out from underneath.
Cotterell made an attempt to push the remaining files back into a stable heap.
‘Sorry about that,’ he said to Carson when they were alone again.
The researcher could be heard in the next room, stalling on the telephone while he looked through the file for the references.
Cotterell said, ‘Do you know David?’
‘I don't think so.’
‘David Reynolds.
He joined us a couple of months back.
It must have been after the last job we did for you.’
‘Probably.’
Carson-moved two bound runs of American Cinematographer magazine off the office's only spare chair so that he could sit down.
‘I've got another one for you, now.’
Cotterell nodded and started looking around for a piece of paper.
‘What's the subject?’
‘It's medical.
Fertility treatment as practised in State and private facilities.’
‘What's the slant?’
‘I don't know yet.
I'll have a better idea when I can see the background.
I want as many concise and informed references as you can find, but nothing so technical that I can't understand it.’
David Reynolds passed through, dropping the horse-dope  file onto Cotterell's desk and pulling on his jacket.
As he stepped past Carson he gave a quick, tight smile of acknowledgement.
Cotterell said, ‘Do you have a limit, or do you want us to give you an estimate?’
‘An estimate will be fine.
I want something deeper than the stuff you usually do for me, so don't look for ways to cut corners.
There are some specifics, as well.’
‘Fire away.’
Carson pulled out his pad and tried to read the shaky notes that he'd made on the Underground.
‘Background and biography of a Doctor Jenner.
I don't know his first name, but he was a consultant in some hospital in Carlisle and he ran a backup laboratory near Langstone in Cumbria.’
‘How about an interview?’
‘That might be difficult to arrange.
There was some kind of explosion at the clinic and all the staff got wiped out.
You might find out for me what the official version is.’
Cotterell was writing in a mixed shorthand, spelling out some words and substituting personal symbols for others.
He said, ‘Sounds like it calls for a trip up there.’
‘I'd rather you didn't.
I don't want to make the interest too public-not at this stage, anyway.
Next I'd like whatever you can find on someone called Hennessy.
I don't know his name either, but I think he's a medium-range civil servant.’
Cotterell said doubtfully, ‘Jenner should be straightforward enough, but that one's a bit thin.’
‘Sorry, but it's all I've got.
I only know that he turned up a few hours after the accident and got into some row with the head copper.
The next day the police had to fold their tents and leave.’
‘We'll see what we can do.’
Carson flipped back a page, to the first entry in the notebook.
‘That's it for the moment, except for one other thing.’
He tore out the lined sheet and passed it across the desk.
‘Can you get these details about somebody called Ian Paul Sampson?’
Cotterell nodded as he looked at the list of biographical queries.
With a middle name and an approximate area, it  shouldn't be too hard.
‘Is this connected with the other business?’ he asked.
‘It may be, but I'm not sure.
If it is, I'd like to know how.’
Cotterell chose his next words carefully.
‘We don't usually ask questions, but is this one sensitive?’
‘I don't know.
Assume that it is, and go from there.’
‘It's quite a departure from the usual kind of thin– you do.
‘I wouldn't worry about it, if I were you.
I'm expecting it to cost me.’
Cotterell put his pencil down and rocked back in his chair.
It groaned in disbelief.
‘I'll put some feelers out and then ring you tonight with the outline proposal and estimate,’ he said.
‘You can start so soon?’
Carson said, getting to his feet and returning the notebook to his pocket.
‘No problem, it's slack time.’
Cotterell bumped the chair squarely back on the floor before coming around the desk to see Carson out.
‘Whoever heard of anything interesting happening in October?’
‘The Russian revolution.’
‘Well…it depends what you call interesting .’
Cotterell was in touch that evening, at around eight.
Carson had only just put the phone down after trying to get Alison's number from Enquiries, but as he'd waited for his call to be taken he'd thought of her, perhaps contemptuous of his anxiety and annoyed by his persistence, and he'd hung up without even making his request.
Whatever she'd told him, he would go ahead.
Not because of the article — that idea was just something to get him moving-but because he wanted to know.
There was no preamble.
‘Got the estimate for you, Peter,’ Cotterell said.
‘I reckon, with what you've asked for, there won't be much change out of four hundred.’
‘And what will I get for it?’
‘Well, fifty's gone already in backhanders to a couple of the girls at Central Records.
We'll bill it as expenses.
We'll have Anne tied up in the libraries for two or three days going  through the periodical indexes, that'll be another hundred plus whatever the xerox charges are.’
‘That fifty.
Does it mean you've got something for me already?’
‘Just the basics on Hennessy and Sampson.
You want them now?’
He'd kept the notebook ready.
‘Go ahead.’
Sampson, it seemed, had been the easiest.
He was an Edinburgh solicitor who had two houses, two cars and had commuted between two women before one of them found out about the other.
Carson scribbled down all the details that Cotterell gave him and commented, ‘That was fast.’
‘Thank the silicon chip.
Just bang in the name, and the whole lot comes spilling out like a Sealink breakfast.’
‘What about Hennessy?’
‘A bit harder, but I think we managed it.
You said he turned up a few hours after the event, so it seems likely he left London at short notice.
Plus the fact that he was throwing his weight around with the police seemed to say Whitehall and no small potatoes, so we started with that.
We tried Education and Science first.
They've got a Hennessy, but according to his secretary he hasn't been away from his desk for a week.
So I went on to the Home Office; they've got two employees with the name, but one's a woman and she's off having a baby.
The other one went North on business three days ago — no number or address being given out, but his office is relaying messages.’
That sounded like the one.
Carson said, ‘What does he do?’
‘He's the Deputy Commissioner for Genetic Control.
It's a Home Office post, attached to the Medical Research Council on Park Crescent.
He's the executive part of a committee whose main function is to review and license proposals for experiments with DNA.
They grade the proposals according to danger, and lay down sets of conditions for the experiments.’
‘Has that got anything to do with fertility?’
It didn't sound like it.
‘I don't know, but we'll find out for you.
I was going to put Dave Reynolds on to the Jenner part of this; will that be okay with you?’
‘Whoever you think's best,’ Carson told him.
‘I won't argue.’
‘That's where the main expense comes in.
When I checked in Who's Who I found that Jenner held down a post for several years at David's old university.
He's got friends there who've moved on to the staff, and he reckons he can pump them for information without making any official waves.
Didn't you say you wanted it low-profile?’
‘That's right.
Go ahead with the trip.’
‘Have you got any ideas yet for a particular direction?’
‘No, just carry on as you are.
I don't want to start setting up patterns lust yet.’
Cotterell's experience so far had been that RCO had virtually pre-written most of Carson's material for him.
This kind of broad attack was something new.
He said, ‘We'll get going on it first thing tomorrow.
We should have something for you in a couple of days.’
They said their goodbyes, and Carson left Forester's material by the telephone, ready for his call.
SIXTEEN
As the first grey slivers of dawn were filtering down through the trees, Roger Forester climbed stiffly from his hire car and stood on the track beside it, stretching his sore limbs and trying to beat some warmth into himself.
The temperature had dropped during the night, and the dead leaves underfoot were bearded with ice; they broke and crackled as he limped around the car and opened the trunk to get his kit.
The vapour of his breath feathered in a trail behind him as he moved through the cold bushes towards the stream.
For the first couple of days he'd used it to shave and wash but now he was finding it too icy.
Instead he'd fill his aluminium container and take it back to boil on his small gas cooker.
The can of soup that he'd left on top of the flame was starting to bubble when he got back.
Chicken soup for breakfast was a lousy way to start the day, but at least it was hot.
A chill mist was rising through the woodland as he lifted the open can away from the heat and replaced it with the water container.
He could feel the glow through his gloves.
Half an hour later he was crouched in the bushes upslope from Sampson's cottage.
He had a good view of the main road and the side track that climbed to the row, and he could see a part of the buildings themselves, small and neat and quiet.
Fifteen minutes before eight.
A bicycle came into sight on the main road, and the rubber honk of its brakes cut through the air as the postman slowed and dismounted.
He held on to the machine by the handlebars as he turned off the road and started to push it up the steeper incline of the track.
Forester sensed a worm of tension, deep in his belly and fighting to get free.
The postman was a tall, skinny man with near-white hair and a permanent stoop; this brief caricature of an impression was all that Forester had been able to make out from a distance.
He was probably as tough as old leather, cycling his rural route with a heavy sack every morning.
Over the three days that Forester had been observing, his schedule had been consistent to within a few minutes either way.
Today he was slightly late.
He'd probably had an extra delivery to make, perhaps at the occupied row further along the road.
Forester waited until the postman had come freewheeling down the track, and then as the momentum was spent and the postman pedalled off into the morning Forester started to move downslope towards the cottages.
He used another of his plastic cards to let himself in through the back door.
He was getting quite practised now, and it was faster than using a key.
The new chain that he'd fixed brushed against his sleeve as he entered the kitchen.
There had been no problem in finding a matching replacement for the cut piece; a hardware shop in Inverness had supplied it, and it had taken only a few minutes to fit.
There was only one piece of mail behind the door.
Forester glanced at the envelope once and dropped it back.
It was advertising mail, like most of that which he'd opened on his first visit and later burned in the forest.
He sighed heavily, and forced himself to relax.
He'd scattered a few items around the place so that anybody looking in through the window would get the impression that the owner was in residence but out for the day or the evening: a box of tissues and some magazines in the main room, a half-empty bottle of fresh milk and some crockery draining in the kitchen.
Now he collected them together.
They'd served their purpose, as a handwritten note pushed through the door on the Saturday afternoon had shown;Mr Sampson — Appreciate your haste and will get things moving as quickly as I can for you .
It referred to a  note which he'd included with the Firearm Certificate application form and the fee, saying that he (Sampson) had a chance at a Weatherby Magnum Deluxe rifle at a price that was madness, but only if he could wrap the deal up within a few days.
Forester had delivered the certificate and the other papers by hand to the country police station; it wasn't much more than a converted garage alongside the local man's house, and it hadn't been difficult to pick a time when it had been unattended.
The policeman's note had promised action some time during the next two or three days, which could no doubt be split into a fraction of a second for a data check to establish that Sampson was a worthy and responsible citizen and neither a pervert nor a dangerous lefty, and then many hours of waiting in a paper tray to be shunted and shuffled and finally put into an envelope.
It was the time taken for this bureaucratic grind that chewed at Forester's patience the most — each day away from Cumbria increased the chance of his missing the conclusion of the investigation.
When he was satisfied that everything was straight, he let himself out of the back door.
For the rest of the day he-would go into Inverness, take his spare clothes into a launderette and then perhaps try to find a public baths with hot showers.
But he would be back tomorrow.
As Roger Forester was closing up the cottage behind him DI Mike Schaffer was swinging his legs off a creaking camp-bed in the office of the Langstone schoolhouse and sitting groggily upright.
His situation was not unlike Forester's in that he was cold, sleeping badly and eating out of tins warmed on a small portable stove.
He also had a telephone, a telex machine, and a roof, but none of these was much consolation.
It was worse than being in the CID room with its battered furniture and wire baskets and overcrowded notice boards.
At least, things happened there; it was obvious to Schaffer that his presence in Langstone was nothing more than the merest nod towards protocol, but Stoneley had refused to let  him return and make the police withdrawal complete.
At least try to keep an eye on what they get up to, he'd told his inspector, and then made some vague and undefined promise about arranging a relief.
So Schaffer sat with a stack of paperback books from Hamilton's corner rack, and occasionally tried to catch Hennessy to pump him for information.
He turned on the gas and put a match to the stove so that it could warm the office.
He had an electric bar fire, but unless he actually stood over the mesh it was a cheerful glow and no heat.
When he felt brave enough he took off the old pullover and the tracksuit pants that he'd been sleeping in and started to dress.
Schaffer was still young enough to find his job largely exciting, but to find appealing the idea of being the force's lone representative in the shadow of a major incident was not the same as embracing the reality.
He'd applied to join the police in his final year at university; it had been an unfashionable thing to do but he'd given it a lot of careful thought.
After his selection and Police College training he'd been slightly surprised to find himself not to be a component of an irresistibly righteous machine, but a member of an organisation that was as flawed and human as any other.
It depended for its success on the motives of those involved, like Jerry Crichton's need for the satisfaction of peaceful authority or Toby Knight's wish for a permissible framework to act out his resentment of the world.
Because he'd been a graduate entrant, accelerated promotion had been guaranteed.
He could handle the fast rise now, although he'd had some trouble along the way.
He knew that his abilities had been recognised above, not by the glory-seekers and the empire-builders, those who ‘shaped policy’ and ‘formed long-term strategies’, but by the old wise hands whose influence was most effective in the end.
When the time came, they would elevate him to become another Stoneley.
This was the dark cloud that every day was banked a little higher on Mike Schaffer's horizon.
After his long, slow  climb Stoneley had found himself to be a novice at office in-fighting, some examples of which could make the brutal intentions of a common criminal seem almost harmless.
He had a small mousy wife, and two grown sons who came home to drink all the beer out of the refrigerator and tell him that he was a strong-arm man for a decrepit and decaying society.
Worst of all, he was beginning to suspect that it might be true.
And this was the prized position that was being prepared for Mike Schaffer.
He wished they'd left him the radio mast, so that he could at least listen to some music and pick up the news.
A little transistor with a tin spike for an aerial was useless so far up the valley.
The only sound that broke the quiet of the cavernous schoolroom was the occasional hum and spatter of the telex.
He ambled through to take a look at the machine.
He'd heard the daily summary coming through some time after midnight, but he hadn't bothered to check it; anything important or relevant and Stoneley would have telephoned him direct, and there were too many big shadows and dark corners in the schoolroom for his liking.
The two-layered paper had spilled in a heap off the back of the printer.
He tore it off and rolled it up to glance at later.
The room was still in the mess in which the incident squad had left it, the desks pushed together to serve as mortuary slabs and the movable screens stacked to one side to make way for the meat sacks being carried out.
Schaffer paused to look at some of the bright crayon drawings that were pinned to the foremost partition.
Soon his own children would be making similar pictures for him to admire, so maybe he'd better start getting into practice.
Some were competent and some were barely recognisable, but each had its unique charm.
He bent to get a closer look at one drawing that had been fixed lower than the others, as if the teacher had somehow tried to segregate it off and pretend that it wasn't part of the display.
There was a strip of green and brown along the bottom, and a house crammed into a tight space on one side.
There  were three figures in the foreground, with a boy on the left and a girl on the right.
They were holding hands with the figure in the middle.
After staring for a moment, Schaffer straightened and blinked.
Perhaps now he could see why the drawing was in a space by itself.
Any child that could produce such a disturbing vision from within its own mind probably needed psychiatric attention, and fast.
He looked again, and read the name in the corner of the sheet.
Peter Gaskell Aged 7½.
Sounds of a Land Rover in the street outside.
Schaffer was going to move into the cloakroom and take a look through the window, but as he grabbed his binoculars from the office there was a polite knock on the thick outer door which resounded through the hollow space of the building.
Hennessy was waiting outside by the railings.
He wasn't wearing the ridiculously inadequate suit in which he'd first appeared in the village on that same spot.
Instead he was in tweeds and brogues, his idea of a country outfit.
There was an army man by the Rover behind him.
‘Hope we didn't wake you,’ Hennessy said, and Schaffer was reminded that he was unshaven and unwashed.
He said, ‘Good God, a human face.
Well, near enough.’
Hennessy turned to the army man.
‘This is Detective Inspector Schaffer.
He's one of Stoneley's men, which accounts for the courtesy.’
The army man seemed pained.
‘Don't try to get me involved in a departmental dispute, Hennessy.
I don't have the time.’
He looked towards Schaffer.
‘I'm Captain Windeler, in charge of the special unit based up at the clinic.’
Schaffer nodded.
‘I've seen you driving past.’
‘I think that's one of the reasons why Stoneley chose to hang on to the school as an observation point,’ Hennessy said.
‘Anything going in or out of the valley has to pass along this road.’
‘We've nothing to hide from the police,’ Windeler said.
Schaffer didn't readily swallow the PR.
‘Or from the public?’
‘Strategy demands that we be wary about the information we release at this stage.’
‘Is that why you persist in calling the clinic incident an accident?’
‘We've never called it anything of the kind.
I understand that the accident story was the idea of your superintendent, conceived shortly after the quarantine story.
We've done no more than fail to alter it.’
‘It was only intended as a short-term measure,’ Schaffer objected, ‘to keep the valley clear and give us the best possible chance for a manhunt.’
Windeler smiled politely.
‘As it continues to do.
I'm grateful, I assure you.’
‘But why does it need the army?’
Schaffer demanded.
Hennessy was looking around and trying not to seem too pleased with himself.
‘This is a straight police assignment.’
‘My unit's a special unit, we do very special work.
This is no ordinary manhunt, Inspector.’
Schaffer almost snorted.
‘I'll agree with that.
Nothing much seems to happen up at your camp.’
‘I'm glad to see you're putting those binoculars to good use,’ Windeler said, indicating the Zeiss that Schaffer was still holding, ‘but I doubt that they'll tell you much.
On the other hand, there is something you can tell me.’
Schaffer said warily, ‘Oh, yes?’
‘Don't be difficult,’ Hennessy advised.
‘It's not worth it.’
Windeler went on, ‘Before your force withdrew, you checked on a number of the valley farms, is that right?’
‘Some of them.
The check was never completed.’
‘If you can give me a list of the visits made by your men, the list will be completed now.’
‘You may as well start again from the beginning,’ Schaffer said.
‘Anything could have happened over the last few days.’
‘Perhaps, but it hasn't.
I'd have known.
You see, we haven't been completely idle, Inspector.
We've been moving at night.
Now nothing and nobody can travel for any great  distance in the valley without my knowing exactly where he
‘If your man's still in the valley.
The chances of that must be nil by now.’
‘That's where you're wrong, Inspector.
Probably the only assumption that we can safely make is that ‘our man’, as you call him, is still in the area.’
This was enough for Hennessy, who seemed to think that the policeman and the Captain were starting to get on too damn well for his liking.
He said, ‘I think we've said enough, Windeler.
The list, please, Inspector.’
Schaffer gave a little shrug and went inside, leaving them to follow or not, as they wished.
Windeler came in straight away, Hennessy a moment after.
He found the list of farmhouses along with the radio operator's log in one of his file boxes.
There were ten listed, and four of them had been checked off.
Schaffer held the paper out to Windeler and said, ‘You know that you're throwing it all away.
You can't just wait and expect him to come to you.’
Windeler looked at the list for a moment, and then folded it neatly.
‘Whereas the police, no doubt, would continue to draft in innumerable squads of men to trample the landscape and inspect the ground, and exude such an aura of busyness and continuous reorganisation that even the most cynical observer could not fail to be impressed.’
‘It's the system, and it works.’
‘Most of the time, but not here.
That's why my unit has been brought in.
Waiting can be quite constructive if you have a clear idea of what you're waiting for.’
Schaffer was unconvinced.
‘And what are you waiting for?’
‘Snow,’ Windeler said simply, and walked out of the schoolroom.
Even Hennessy was taken by surprise at the abrupt departure, and he stood in a moment's confusion before turning and hurrying out.
The Land Rover's motor was already running when he arrived in the street, and when  Hennessy had clambered in on the passenger side Windeler moved off without even waiting to see if the door was secure.
Schaffer stepped down from the railed entranceway and watched them going.
Then he looked up towards the softly defined slopes, high above the village.
No movement that he could see, with or without the aid of the binoculars — but then he didn't really know what he was looking for, whilst Windeler had seemed far more assured.
He slung the binoculars over his shoulder by the carrying strap, and went back into the schoolhouse to throw together some breakfast.
‘Snow?’
Hennessy said incredulously as Windeler took the clinic turnoff without slowing.
‘Are you serious?’
The Rover bounced stiffly on its springs, but it held a tight grip on the road.
Windeler said, ‘Why shouldn't I be?’
‘I'm sorry, obviously I'm no strategist.
We save our energies and wait for pneumonia to get him first, is that it?’
Windeler paused, as one might when humouring an over-ambitious suggestion from a bright child.
‘It's an idea,’ he conceded.
‘If we could be sure he's having to hide out in the open, it might even be a good idea.’
‘Oh, come on.’
Windeler glanced across before giving in to the slope and changing down through the gears.
The Rover rumbled with new life, and he said, ‘Schaffer's getting to you, isn't he?
Come on, Hennessy, admit it.
You're impatient to see the whole valley turned upside down and shaken to get him out.’
‘Of course not.
We don't want to arouse so much interest.’
‘Exactly.
So we maintain the illusion of a low-manpower exercise, and we wait for him to show himself.’
‘And where does the snow come into this?’
‘Tracks.
We've had a few scares from the lasers so far, but when we get on the scene there's nothing to see.’
Hennessy was caught off-guard.
For a moment he forgot  his attempts to look dignified in the Rover's utilitarian steel cabin.
‘The network's genuine, then?’ he said.
‘It certainly is.
That's how we know he hasn't slipped over into the next valley.
The weather reports indicate that we may get a light snowfall some time over the next few days.
After that, all we'll need is one definite alarm and we can follow him wherever he goes.’
‘Pray to God it happens away from the village.’
‘It'll be fast and quiet, I promise.’
Hennessy wasn't wholly reassured.
‘If word-ever got out, my career would be over.’
‘There are broader issues than that to consider,’ Windeler reminded him.
‘Maybe, but that's the one I get all my energy from.
I had word last night, there are ripples in London.’
‘What kind of ripples?’
‘More danger signals from Central Records — somebody's been milking the system from inside, trying to get hold of data on Jenner and the clinic.
I've started a quiet enquiry to find out who's making money from being an unofficial outlet.’
‘Could it not have been something innocent?’
Hennessy didn't think so.
‘There were enquiries made about me, as well.
That's the part that really bothers me.’
‘Then it's in your interest to find out who is asking the questions,’ Windeler said.
‘Find out, and divert him.’
‘Sit on him hard, you mean.
I get the impression that it's some sort of systematic research, maybe a response to a leak.
I've put through a request for all the technical libraries to run the Jenner reference list through their own databanks at the end of each day.
Any withdrawals or xerox applications on books and magazines that might worry us, and we'll have a straight printout of the names and addresses of all the applicants.
If any name appears more than once, then we'll know it's time to move.’
The clinic was now in sight, some way ahead.
Windeler said, ‘What if he turns out to be working for the Americans?’
‘Don't say it.
I don't even want to think about it.’
Windeler grinned.
‘You're in the wrong job, Mister Hennessy.
The way you worry, you'll drop dead when you're fifty.’
‘If the Americans ever find out what we were doing at the Jenner Clinic,’ Hennessy told him gloomily, ‘I won't even make it that far.’
SEVENTEEN
The Tuesday morning was overcast and dull with none of the compensating crispness that had helped Forester to crawl back to an alert state on previous days.
His head ached as he made towards the observation point above the cottages.
It felt like somebody was trying to poke his eye out from the inside with a pencil.
He should have sensed that something was wrong, but he saw the thin trail of smoke above the trees and it hardly registered in his mind.
Only when he broke through into sight of the track and the buildings did the realisation hit him.
There were two cars on the cobbled forecourt.
A Range Rover before the end cottage with the cartwheel and windowboxes, and a blue Volvo Estate by Sampson's door.
What the hell was this?
The weekend should have been the danger period, not a Tuesday , a nothing day of the week when nobody did anything other than look back wistfully on the pleasures behind them and look forward to the unformed pleasures ahead.
Sampson had no damn right to appear on a Tuesday and fuck everything up.
Who the hell did he think he was?
Forester was staring at the cottages and the cars, his fists bunched up hard, trembling with rage.
He took a couple of deep breaths and forced himself to calm down.
He had no more than ten minutes before the postman would come cycling down the road.
Maybe he wouldn't be bringing the certificate today, but then again in ten minutes' time Sampson could be on his way down to the police station with an open envelope.
Forester could simply melt away and  leave the area, but his own freedom wasn't his main concern; he'd already spent a week away from Cumbria, and he had a sick fear of returning to find the clinic ruins empty and the valley returned to placid normality.
He couldn't move to another part of the country and start the process over.
He had to get to the postman before he reached the cottage.
He started to push his way downslope towards the road.
He recalled his first day in the area, when he'd stopped off at Conon Bridge to browse around a sporting store and listen to the gossip.
— As he'd studied the tackle and the nets and the green canvas bags on display he'd listened to the gunsmith behind the counter taking telephone enquiries.
Nothing around the twentieth, the gunsmith had repeated for each caller.
Both of the safari buses were booked up solid for the month after that.
Forester had moved to the window and looked out into the yard where the two long-wheelbase Land Rovers stood side by side, somehow managing to be tough and elegant at the same time in their rough-country rig with full-length roof racks and mounted searchlights.
Nothing for him, so he'd wandered over to pretend an interest in the shop's felt-covered notice board while he tried to overhear the conversation of two men who were trying on shooting jackets.
Today was the twentieth, the end of the closed season on hinds.
The females had dropped their young and reared them to the point where they could survive to be next year's prey.
Sampson, like many others, had come looking for a kill before the numbers fell.
Forester scrambled over a low wall and on to the road.
He glanced at his watch; less than five minutes, and as he trotted along to intercept the postman's route he couldn't come up with any plan that seemed remotely workable.
Threaten the old man and take the letter, or even the sack and the bicycle; he would remember what deliveries he had yet to make, and after some simple detective-work the word would go out and Forester's certificate would be useless.
And what if it wasn't in today's delivery?
He'd have blown it all for  nothing.
Somehow he had to stop the man, distract him.
But how?
He had to dodge in to the roadside as an open-backed van loaded with milk-crates passed, its brakelights glowing as it slowed to take in the bend.
Any time now, the bent figure and the bicycle would be coming into sight.
And Forester had no idea of what he would do then.
The noise of the van receded and Forester expected its place to be taken by the measured squeak and clank of the old machine, a sound that he'd so far heard only through still air at a distance.
There was only birdsong, and a splashing of water somewhere off in the woods.
Then he came around the bend and saw the bicycle.
It was propped against the end-post of a break in the wall, the same break that gave on to the cottage steps which Forester had passed before.
Obviously the postman preferred the short climb to the longer haul up the access road.
There was no delivery sack with the bicycle.
Four big slabs of grey-green stone formed the opening of a drain culvert beside the post, and the bicycle had been placed squarely across this.
There was no bubbling of water from inside, and the culvert seemed to be disused and silted up with debris.
Forester moved the machine aside and leaned forward to look into the dark space that was uncovered.
The brown canvas delivery sack was hidden around the corner on a stone shelf, several inches above the rotten humus that blocked the culvert.
Forester lifted it out.
Thinking that it was heavier than it looked, he undid the straps and buckles and threw back the flap.
The envelopes were packed together in bundles and secured with thick elastic bands.
He rested the sack on the flat top of the culvert; high above him on the slope he could hear somebody whistling.
He pulled out a bundle and looked at the first address, but he didn't recognise it.
He tried another.
He thought he could hear footsteps now, nailed boots scuffing on worn stone.
How could he know if there was any mail for Sampson  at all?
He had only a few seconds before the postman came into sight through the trees above the road.
He could hear–the grinding of the boots on the steps distinctly; the postman was on his way down, whistling as he descended.
Surely the bundles must be in some kind of order.
He'd pulled two out at random, but the one that he wanted would be the next on the route.
He reached for the packet that was nearest to the front of the bag.
It was one of the slimmest, and the envelopes in it were pinched in slightly by the pressure of the bands.
He fanned it out and tried to read the addresses inside.
Forester pulled out a single white envelope with Sampson's name on the front and stuffed the bundle back into the bag, throwing the flap across and fumbling to thread the straps into the buckles.
He couldn't remember whether they'd been fully done up or simply pushed through loosely.
He looked up, expecting to see the grey skinny man staring down at him from the steps.
Nobody there, but he couldn't be more than a few yards away and Forester's fingers wouldn't obey him enough to get the buckles properly secured.
Maybe they hadn't been secured anyway.
He slung the bag into the culvert and replaced the bicycle, remembering to lift it clear of the ground so that the whickering of the freewheel gear wouldn't give him away.
Then he jumped on to the wall and missed his footing, banging his shin hard and falling headfirst into the bushes on the other side.
He had a soft landing on rough ground, and the foliage closed up again behind him.
He held his breath and didn't move.
The footsteps came to road level, and then there was a pause.
The bicycle moved back and rattled against the wall, and then there was a soft scraping of canvas across stone.
Then a long silence.
Forester could visualise the postman frowning at the interference with his sack, looking around angrily, seeing scuff-marks in the moss of the wall where Forester had stumbled over, the broken twigs and an  undiscovered shoe or a sleeve glimpsed through the leaves; he didn't dare even raise his head.
The whistling resumed, some way down the road.
The postman was gone.
Forester allowed himself a quiet groan of relief.
Twigs dug into the palms of his hands as he pushed himself upright.
Sampson's letter was underneath him, and he picked it up and straightened it out.
Dirt had obscured the postmark, but it was machine-franked with no stamp.
He tore open the envelope.
It was his certificate, fully made out and legal.
No longer would he have to pin all his hopes on the random burglaries that he'd carried out in that first couple of days, none of which had turned up anything better than a shotgun or a low-calibre target weapon; those were useless for his purpose, and he'd left them where he'd found them.
But now he was in business.
It was time to do some serious shopping.
EIGHTEEN
David Reynolds had arranged to meet Diane Rohmer in the Science block, because unlike the Union building it had open access and he wouldn't have to be signed in.
The style of the place was very much mid-seventies, a long open-plan corridor of painted brick which was saved from cheapness by the rich texture of the veneered doors and woodwork of the offices down its length.
Down below were the lecture theatres; above, four identical corridors and several hundreds of labs and offices that were made barely personal with books and posters.
An increase in the traffic marked the end of a timetable period.
Reynolds moved out of the way into an alcove.
It had been set aside for no obvious purpose with a low table and several padded vinyl seats; they were old and split with yellow foam bulging out, and on the walls were two art-school lithographs bearing optimistic prices.
A girl in a duffel coat and jeans was taking an early lunch in the corner, reading a magazine and eating a sandwich from an open plastic container on the seat beside her.
Reynolds looked out of the window across the campus.
He didn't want to watch the quiet parade of students — they made him feel so damned old .
If it wasn't for them, he'd be feeling like he was home again.
He wondered how many of those around him were there for what he would call the right reason: the feeling that it was simple, playful fun to know things, an eager delight at the discovery that each piece of learning was a key to greater complexities of understanding.
Probably about ten per cent, if his memory of his own days still held; perhaps less, considering the government's attitude that the universities could only justify their existence by pre-packaging high-level robots for industry.
Diane Rohmer had been an unspectacular student, chugging through the system along a safe, marked trail, and it wasn't surprising that she'd gone into research.
He'd managed to track her down on the Friday evening, waiting for several minutes as she was summoned to the communal phone in the hall where she was now a deputy warden.
She'd been surprised and off-balance on hearing his voice, but her subsequent enthusiasm and willingness to help him out had been well-feigned.
He could remember the hall well.
It was an old house in its own tidy grounds, all parquet and notice boards, three floors of quiet cells inhabited by ungainly girls who wore long skirts and tucked their legs under them when they sat on floor cushions drinking coffee.
There were a few stunners, true, but they always moved out after their first year whilst the ungainly ones became permanent fixtures.
Diane hadn't been a stunner, but she'd had a pleasant face and a more than tolerably decent body.
Would she have allowed him the use of it in any outside circumstance, anywhere that open sexual contact would be anything other than common and unremarkable, and was he being honest in trying to tap some dry spring of old feelings to further his own ends now?
No, he told himself firmly, you're a working professional.
And besides, don't forget, it was she who dumped you in the end.
There was no pressure on her to help him, but still she'd agreed to get together as much information on Jenner as she could over the weekend.
‘Sorry I'm late,’ she said, and he snapped around from the window in surprise, almost forgetting to smile for a moment.
‘Only just got here myself,’ he lied.
‘Good to see you again.
How've you been?’
‘Fine.
What about you?’
‘You know.
Okay.’
He wanted to study her without it being obvious, to match her up with his memories of the girl  he'd known.
A few years had improved her considerably, firming up the soft and rather indecisive lines of late adolescence to a more attractive overall effect.
Her hair was as he'd remembered it, chestnut brown and long.
She said, ‘I managed to get some of the information you asked me for.’
Reynolds glanced at the file under her arm, pressed against the stiff white of her lab coat and the softness beneath.
‘Any problems?’
‘Not really.
I knew a lot of it from way back, when Doctor Jenner was still here.
I remember seeing him a couple of times.’
‘Did you have to spend anything?’
‘Nothing that matters.’
‘I told you, keep the receipts.
I'll pay you what I owe and then get it back off the agency.’
She shrugged.
‘It was only pennies, really.
Three or four science articles I had copied for you in the library.’
‘It doesn't matter how little.
It's more than enough that you should be helping me.’
‘I didn't even keep the receipts.
Honestly, it was nothing.
I made you some notes, as well.’
She unshipped the file and held it out.
‘Dates, the people he worked with, that kind of thing.’
He took the folder.
‘You've gone to a lot of trouble,’ he said, opening it out.
‘Half an hour, that's all.
It was quite useful from my point of view.’
Reynolds looked at the first page of the notes.
They'd been typed on an old portable with a faded ribbon, so badly laid out that it was obvious Diane was no typist.
It must have taken her most of an evening.
She said quickly, ‘Would you like me to go through what I've done for you?’
He smiled, and closed the folder.
‘Why don't we go down to the refectory and look at it there?
They'll be serving morning coffee, won't they?’
They were now into the next lecture period, the last before  lunch, and the campus had quietened down again.
As they were walking down the paved way to the Union building, Reynolds asked, ‘How's Michael, these days?’
There was a silence, which told him he'd scored a bull's-eye, and then an over-bright tone in her reply that confirmed it.
‘I haven't seen Michael in ages.
We split up years ago.’
Which means, Reynolds thought, he dumped her shortly after she dumped me.
For some reason it seemed to kick down some of the barrier of strangeness between them.
There was no porter manning the reception desk, so he didn't have to be signed in after all.
In the refectory a queue was already forming alongside the hissing Espresso machines and perspex lids of the snack counter, so he sent Diane off to find a table.
He insisted that the least he could do would be to pay for the coffee, and he always tried to do the least that he could.
She smiled and relaxed a little, even though he was sure that he must have used the joke on her before.
Face it, he used the same joke on everybody .
He got a coffee for her and a tea for himself and then made his way through expanding groups at undersized tables, stepping over canvas bags, overstuffed briefcases, sliding piles of ring-folders.
Diane had got them a table in the corner and had spread the notes and articles out.
She moved a couple of the sheets to make way for the saucers.
‘Am I allowed to wonder why you need all this?’ she said as he pulled a chair in and sat down.
‘There's nothing secretive about it, if that's what you mean, but I don't know myself exactly where the information will finish up.
The agency takes on any kind of job — you just name the subject and give us some indication of the kind of thing you want to know, and then we go out and get it for you.’
‘And is it a good job?’
‘It's not really a job, in the accepted sense of the word.
We run the agency as a workers’ co-operative, and we all share in the profits.’
‘Some sort of commune?’
‘Not really.
It's a registered company, as capitalist as you can get.’
Diane indicated the pages before her.
‘It's just that I was surprised that you should be doing something scientific like this.
Or don't you have specialists in different areas?’
‘We're not so big,’ he admitted.
‘And there's really an advantage in having a layman on something that's going to be a bit convoluted.
You're less likely to end up with gaps and assumptions.’
All of the tables and chairs around them were now taken, but the coffee line was no shorter.
She said, ‘Will you be wanting to look around the labs afterwards?’
‘If you think it will help.
I don't have to be back until tomorrow.’
‘You're staying somewhere?’
Diane asked, and Reynolds detected a slight anxiety in her voice.
‘I'll find a hotel,’ he assured her.
‘You could have had my sofa, but I'm afraid it's a bit difficult, with me being a deputy warden now…’
‘Don't worry, I remember.
I did my share of late-night drops from the fire escapes.’
‘Sorry,’ she said, and smiled weakly.
‘No need to be, the client pays my expenses.
My dossing days are over.’
‘As long as you understand.’
He understood more than had actually been said, and he wanted to find some way to ease her embarrassment.
He said, ‘Why don't you tell me what you found out?’
‘Well,’ she said with relief, ‘Doctor Jenner left the university in 1982, that's the year I first came here so I never really got to meet him.
Besides which he never really lectured, he was more pure research.’
‘What kind of research?’
‘He was part of a team under Professor Liawski.
They were trying to isolate the gene that produces insulin and insert it into the nucleus of a bacterium, so that you could get a self-replicating life-form which could then be used in the treatment of diabetes, or else it could provide a source of  insulin that wasn't animal-derived and didn't give you rejection problems.
Is that too complicated to understand?’
Almost, but Reynolds reckoned he could just about handle it.
‘That's fine,’ he said.
‘Have you any idea what Jenner's specific job on the project might have been?’
‘Not really.
It was a sponsored project, probably by one of the drug companies but I'm not sure.
Anyway, that meant that the whole thing was top secret, because they didn't want to risk any leaks in case somebody followed up the work and got in first with a patent.’
‘Could you make a guess?’
‘I suppose he'll have had something to do with the animal house.
He got his PhD through animal experimentation, but he wasn't qualified when it came to recombinant DNA technique.
He was really an MD — kept up a second income from some sort of consultancy at the teaching hospital.
Did you know that?’
‘No, I didn't.’
She sorted through the papers and pushed across some stapled xerox sheets.
Sugar grains crunched and gritted on the table beneath it.
‘This is a report on the PhD work he did, if you're interested.
I had it copied from a microfilm of the Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology for 1975.
It's a pretty poor piece of research.’
Reynolds looked at the title of the piece, but he couldn't make much sense of it.
‘In what way?’ he said.
‘Jenner took the easiest way he could.
It's a trick you fall back on if you can't really do any original thinking — you devise a new research procedure to ‘confirm’ an already established theory.
All you have to do is make a sufficiently methodical presentation and you can get away with it.’
‘You don't approve,’ Reynolds said.
‘Because it's bad science, that's why.
Dressed up as ‘basic’ research.’
‘What exactly did he do?’
She looked down at the xerox and shook her head.
‘Read it for yourself.
You wouldn't believe me if I told you.’
‘How did that kind of line get him on to the insulin project?’
‘Probably because of the sponsors.
If it was a drug company, they rely pretty heavily on impressive animal test data to put the product over.
But that's really a marketing thing, it isn't too scientific.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because animal results rarely apply to human beings.’
‘So why rely on them?’
‘It's cheaper than experimenting on people, and there are far fewer risks and restrictions.
The simple fact that it's not an adequate form of research doesn't count for much in the commercial field.
Look at LD-50 — that's a mandatory test to establish the concentration of a product which will kill at least half of a test group of animals.
It's worthless.
It's no guide because no two species react to substances in exactly the same way.’
Reynolds said, ‘That's the commercial side.
What about the academic side?’
‘Sorry, I was including that.
When you're seeking a grant for your pet project, you have to sell it to the sponsoring body as if you were touting it on the open market, because there are so many pet projects and only so many grants.
You're in a competitive situation, and you've got to either learn the salesmanship or else start getting used to failure.’
‘But how come you still get animal experiments if that's the case?
Surely they only take place when the data's known to be applicable to people.’
She sighed heavily, as if she'd often met this concrete wall of misconception, and she leaned forward and looked at him intensely.
‘Thalidomide was proved by three years of animal tests,’ she said, ‘and these were confirmed in every country of its use except for Turkey.
They didn't rate the animal results, and they did lab tests instead.
They didn't like what they saw, and they prohibited it.
Everyone else went ahead on the basis of the animal data, and then found out the hard way that if it's taken during pregnancy you get damage to the foetus.’
‘Presumably that discredited animal testing?’
Reynolds hazarded, but he should have known better.
‘Not at all.
It was used as an argument that more should be spent on development of technique.
You're not going to brush aside a tradition with a few facts.
Look at the amount of resistance stirred up when it was first suggested that operations should be carried out in aseptic conditions.
It's like anything else, most of the people who make it through into professional science don't really have the commitment or the imaginative fire to be there.
Ninety per cent of them just slog along with their heads down, following the established line and being intellectual conformists because it's the easiest way to win peer approval.
Why are you smiling?’
They were off the subject of Jenner — at least, in any direct sense — but he wanted to go on watching and listening to her talk.
She was unlike the girl she'd been or the women he'd known since; she had a rare energy, and it was good to be near.
He said, ‘I'm reeling at the way you're shouldering my prejudices aside.’
‘I wish it was always so easy.
I'm working on the production of a culture from placental tissue which can give reliable results in toxicity tests.
I have to fight for every penny I get, I've no assistants, no commercial sponsorship, and I'm always last in line for equipment and computer time.’
‘I would have thought that if you were offering something better, people would rush to take it up.’
‘Not the case.
Not unless you've got somebody very high in the scientific establishment with enough swing to make the lesser lights take notice.
It's not as if the evidence wasn't hefty enough — there's an endless list of drugs and substances which show how results can't be extrapolated across species barriers.
Penicillin kills guinea pigs, but strychnine doesn't.
Chloroform kills dogs, and if you give them digitalis it raises their blood pressure.
That's the opposite of its effect on man.
Two of the commonest experimental animals, and the examples are typical.
But then, I'm not in too much of a position to complain.
If I'm honest I'll have to admit that the major application of my research will be for commercial  drug production.
I'm really only looking for my place on the bandwagon.’
‘Now you're being unfair to yourself,’ Reynolds told her.
‘Not really.
There's a third world study which lists a minimum of drugs and medicaments essential to public health.
There aren't more than fifty products on it.’
‘Why stick with it, if you don't believe?’
‘I suppose I'm weak,’ she said, regarding him evenly.
‘I climbed upon the science train because it was the only door that swung open for me after I got my degree.
I'd come so far without looking from side to side, only seeing the next qualification up, that by the time I began to feel closed in it was too late.
I envy you, David, I really do.’
Now it was his turn to be embarrassed.
‘Envy me ?
By your standards I'm probably a tramp.’
‘Perhaps once.
But I'd have been wrong.’
Wow, Davy boy, this is starting to get too deep for comfort.
Better suggest a move.
The refectory had almost emptied, the snack counter had closed, and the tables were being wiped down.
It was Diane who proposed that they should go over and take a look at the labs where Jenner had worked and Reynolds agreed, more than a little relieved that they were returning to the main subject; he was made uncomfortable by Diane's self revelation and the way in which it had begun to erode his easy preconceptions of her and her ‘type’.
As they walked back along the paved way between the Union building and the Science block he said, ‘Did the insulin project ever come to anything?’
‘No, someone else got there first.
It hadn't been the greatest operation anyway, because it seemed that Jenner and Professor Liawski had some big argument around ‘seventy-nine.’
‘What about?’
‘You'd have to get hold of someone who worked on the project to tell you the details.
I'm not aware of anyone who's still around.
Presumably it was something to do with the way that Jenner approached his work.
Because it was a  secret project there were several phases being developed separately, and it's possible that Professor Liawski didn't like the forms of experimentation that Jenner was using.
He didn't much approve of animal experimentation in the first place, so I'd guess that it was forced on him by the sponsor.’
They stood aside to make way for a blind Indian youth in a parka who was confidently striding down the way with his cane held out before him.
Reynolds said, ‘You say that of all the people who worked on the project, none of them are still here?’
‘Jenner took most of them with him,’ Diane said as the youth passed and they moved on towards the doors of the Science block.
‘He went up north somewhere to set up his own unit, I don't know where.’
‘Cumbria,’ Reynolds supplied, pushing open the glass swing door and standing aside for Diane.
‘What?’
‘That's where he moved to.
He bought up a farm complex and converted it into a private lab to give specialised service to his medical practice.
Any idea why he should decide to do that?’
‘There was no secret about it.
He got quite a hefty government.
grant, cashing in on the fertility boom.’
Ready-money karma, indeed!
They passed the entrances to the lecture halls and Reynolds said, ‘It was being handed out, just like that?’
‘Obviously Jenner's work aroused more interest than Professor Liawski's.
This way, I'll show you the animal house.’
The animal house was actually a section of the basement, reached by a wide staircase at the end of the concourse.
There was a heavy entrance door that looked as if it might be airtight, but it was wedged back.
‘This was always kept locked when Jenner was here,’ Diane said.
‘You could only get in with a pass if you were a member of the project.
The rats had to be kept in another part of the building.’
They were in a corridor that was lined on one side with a  six-foot-high bank of cages.
Each cage was about the size of a wire basket for office mail, and in the corner of every one was a pellet hopper and an inverted water bottle.
They were tagged with colour-coded labels bearing experiment numbers and feeding instructions.
Each cage held at least one white rat.
They shuffled around on the wire, blinking at Reynolds in their hundreds as he was led past.
Some of them had pink shaved patches on their heads with electrodes that stuck up like a second pair of ears, and here and there were dark grey rats that seemed bigger than any of the others.
They were soulless little beings, numerous and uniform, no more than a commercial product bred to a standard, and Reynolds was slightly disturbed to find that they didn't evoke any feeling of sympathy from him.
Diane exchanged a couple of words and a smile with a young man who had emerged from a side door carrying a clipboard and what looked like a litre bottle of clear water.
Reynolds hung back and looked around self-consciously.
Then the young man moved on, and Diane led the way through into the room that he'd left.
It was a large tiled room, brightly lit and with the dry, rich smell of animal feed — it made Reynolds realise that there had been no noticeable odour in the corridor at all.
Apart from the sacks of feed and the table and scales, the room held four large cages.
They were heavily barred and on wheels, somewhere between a luggage trolley and a circus sideshow.
Reynolds said, ‘What are these?’
Diane glanced across as if she'd momentarily forgotten that they were there.
‘Those are the primate facilities,’ she said, ‘but they're not used.
Primates are expensive to buy, there's God knows how many regulations attached to keeping them, and you have to employ two full-time handlers to look after them.
Most projects don't run to that kind of budget — not for the big chimps, anyway, which is what these were for.
Rhesus are cheaper but they're bitches to handle.’
One of the cages had a movable inner wall which could  slide along rails the full length of the interior.
Diane explained that it was a crush cage, a means of restraining an animal for injection or biopsy.
‘You transfer them across from their regular cage and then close the door behind them.
Then you slide the inner wall across and use it to pin them against the side of the cage so they can't move or fight.
Then you can do what you like.’
The cages were dusty and unused.
Reynolds wouldn't have been able to stand upright in one of them, and the open-mesh floor would have made it even more uncomfortable.
There was an anteroom and an empty office on the other side of the disused primate facility.
More doors, and they emerged into the empty vastness of a darkened theatre.
They were at floor-level, and beyond the empty ranks of seats above them the only light came from two dim green EXIT signs.
Then Diane found a switch and threw it, and a weak pool of illumination washed down a white screen on the back wall.
There was a diagram on the screen and a few dried-out felt pens on the wooden ridge under it.
Far from brightening the place the light only increased its menace, like a guttering campfire in the middle of a bear forest.
Reynolds turned to Diane.
She was a black silhouette against the screen.
The diagram seemed to show bones, veins, turned-back flaps of skin.
Or perhaps that was only his imagination.
Diane said, ‘Demonstrations.’
There was no lectern, just a big table on a swivelling stand.
Diane's shadow fell across it, and-as she moved forward Reynolds saw a dull gleam of stainless steel.
‘Demonstrations of what?’ he said, not sure that he wanted to hear the answer.
She lifted a buckled strap from the table's edge.
He couldn't tell if it was leather or canvas webbing, but it looked broad and strong.
The table's steel surface was ridged with a network of channels that led to a drain-hole in one corner.
‘You name it,’ she said.
‘Did you see that stuff in the room we just came through?’
He'd looked, but most of the items on the Dexion shelving in the anteroom had been no more than shapes under canvas sheets.
‘Didn't mean anything to me.’
They went back into the anteroom, but the door through to the theatre remained open.
If Reynolds glanced back he could still see the dark bulk of the table against the light, its straps hanging.
It seemed that the room was an equipment store for the theatre demonstrations.
Everything was kept to hand, ready to be rolled out when needed.
She took the covering from one of the nearer pieces, revealing what looked like an old-fashioned letterpress.
‘A smaller version of the Blalock Press,’ Diane explained.
‘Used for crushing tissue on a limb without crushing the bone.’
There were more, doll-sized restraints to prevent the struggles of monkeys in response to massive trauma, sets of electrodes with a variable current supplied by a rheostat, a stock for immobilising a medium-sized dog.
‘This isn't for research, as such,’ she told him as they moved along the rows of apparatus.
‘This is straight lecture stuff, experiments to be repeated even though the results are known in advance.’
It was calculated and clinical, the worst kind of violence that with the stamp of a society's approval.
Reynolds said, ‘What about the animal welfare movements?
Can't they at least bring pressure for control?’
She put the cover back over the Pavlov stock.
‘Not as long as they're sentimentally motivated, which unfortunately most of them are.
It leaves them wide open for dismissal by anybody with a basic knowledge of debating tactics.
All right, so you design a cup and rod device to compress a cat's testicle and crush it, and when you've done it a few thousand times over word gets out and you have protests and pressure.
It happened at New York's Museum of Natural History in 1976, and the experiments had to be wound up because the funding stopped.
But say you use brown rats from the sewers instead.
You think you're going to get the  same kind of opposition?
There's only one way you can cripple a bad scientist, and that's to demonstrate how bad his science is.
Then the really hard part is persuading the public to listen, because the last thing they want to believe is that the charlatan in the white coat isn't going to give them a cure for cancer, a promise he's been renewing at regular intervals for the past two hundred years.
Anyway, this is Jenner's territory.’
A wave of the hand covered the shelving and the dark theatre beyond.
‘Does it give you some idea of the kind of man he was?’
Reynolds hesitated for a moment, then said, ‘I don't see how this ties in with his medical practice.’
‘There would have been some degree of overlap.
Have you never seen a fertility clinic catalogue?’
‘It's not something I've ever really needed,’ he said, trying not to make it sound assertive.
The warmth of an old memory seemed to stir in her eyes, but she quickly dampened it down.
‘Let's go over to the library,’ she said briskly.
‘They may have something on file.’
She wanted to check on some of her cultures before they left the building, so they went up to the third floor and along a corridor lined with rooms numbered for experimentation and behavioural study.
Reynolds waited in the small office that Diane appeared to share with four others; after the windowless basement it seemed almost palatial.
He'd misjudged her, he reflected.
He no longer felt as confident and secure as he had on his arrival.
Diane came back without the lab coat.
It had been shapeless and unflattering, and she looked a lot better without it.
‘There's always an endless wait for the lifts,’ she said, so they used the fire stairs.
As they were descending, Reynolds said, ‘I get the impression that you didn't much rate Jenner.’
She was a couple of steps ahead.
Her voice echoed in the stairwell as she raised it to carry back to him.
‘I told you, I hardly knew him.
But if the way he treated Professor Liawski was anything to go by, I bet his mother would have  had trouble finding something good to say about him.
It's obvious that Jenner only used the insulin project to further his own work.’
‘Which was?’
‘Who knows?
The locks didn't come off the animal-house doors until Jenner had cleared out.’
Another landing when they were close together for a moment, and then another descent.
Reynolds said, ‘Is Professor Liawski still around?’
‘He died a couple of years after the end of the project.’
‘Family?’
‘He didn't have any.
They were all killed in the concentration camps during the war.
He escaped and managed to get to England while they were still alive, but nobody took his stories seriously and by the time they knew better it was too late.
He hadn't exaggerated and he hadn't tried to make the SS seem worse than they really were, the way everyone had assumed.’
‘So he settled over here.’
‘The Academic Freedom committee helped him resume his studies at Cambridge.
He went back to Nuremberg in 1946 to testify, but as far as I know that's the only time he ever left the country.’
The library was a tall wedding-cake of a building on the far side of the campus, unofficially reached by cutting across a couple of lawns.
A chill October breeze forced its way through countless gaps and alleys in the structures surrounding them, tugging and pushing when it was least expected, lifting Diane's hair and flicking it across her face.
‘Liawski must have had papers, notes, things like that about the project,’ Reynolds said.
‘What would have happened to them when he died?’
‘I've no idea.
I expect his notes went into the university archives, and the rest of his belongings would have been sold off.
I don't suppose he had much.’
‘Any idea where he lived?’
She pushed back a straying wraith of hair.
‘You remember  the Evergreens?
He was the warden there.
But the housekeeper looked after most of the administration and discipline for him.
Look, I thought it was only Jenner you wanted to know about.
If you'd like me to ask around again for Liawski…’
‘I wouldn't dream of it,’ he reassured her quickly, ‘you've done too much for me already.
It's getting so I'm almost ashamed to get paid.
Let me do something for you, instead.’
‘What?’
‘Dinner, tonight.’
As soon as he'd said it, he thought how unbearably old-fashioned it sounded.
Diane said, ‘Isn't that stretching your client's generosity beyond reasonable limits?’
‘Not on the client, on me.’
‘Much as I admire your unstructured lifestyle, on the evidence of the knees in those jeans I'd think twice before I traded bank accounts with you.’
He glanced down.
Wait until she saw the elbows of his pullover.
He said, ‘How do you know I'm not an eccentric millionaire?’
‘I might believe the eccentric part.
Dinner's fine, but it's on me, as long as you don't get picky and expect anything too complicated.
There's a limit to what can be done on those little caravan stoves they provide us with.’
He said, ‘Deal,’ and they went into the library.
Security was tighter here than it had been in the Union building, and Reynolds had to be signed in by Diane before he could be issued with a visitor's pass.
He showed this to the porter who watched over the entrance turnstile, and Diane produced her staff ticket.
Once inside they went to the card index.
The system seemed quaint and inefficient in comparison with the microfilm and computer displays used by the library staff behind the checkout desk, but it was still the most convenient way of satisfying reader enquiries and it was a useful backup in case of computer failure.
At one time the cards had been relegated to a storeroom to await incineration, but power strikes around the middle of the decade had left the facility without any index at all.
The  cards had been rescued and reinstated, and the VDUs removed.
Most of the country's fertility clinics were listed, although none of the catalogues was up to date.
They were on reserve, which meant that they weren't on the shelves but had to be ordered from the stock by a librarian.
Diane filled in an order form for a Jenner Clinic catalogue and took it over to be processed while Reynolds waited, arms folded and leaning against a pillar by the card files.
Diane came back.
The computer had located the catalogue, and it would arrive in a few minutes.
Reynolds said, ‘How could Jenner make the leap from insulin to fertility?’
‘Because they're both fringe studies on genetics.
Or molecular biology, if you want to be more specific.’
‘You're losing me.’
‘DNA, the double-helix molecule that carries the genetic blueprint which tells any organism how to build itself.
Right?’
‘Right.’
At least, he thought so.
‘It can be broken down into sets of signals, each signal with a specific function.
Some of them can be isolated.’
‘Like the signal that triggers insulin production?’
‘See?
You know more than you thought.
Early fertility treatments were mainly mechanical, like fallopian reconstruction, artificial insemination, concentrating sperm which had a low count and then, when things started getting a bit flashy, in vitro fertilisation.’
‘In what?’
‘Test-tube babies.
All of this involved taking both parents’ sex cells with their half-complement of DNA signals in the chromosomes, and bringing them together so that the cells could clamp on to each other and start dividing and growing.
The trick was then to get the newly-formed zygote back into the mother so it could attach to the inside of the womb and develop normally.’
Several books from the reserve stocks were being put out for collection, but none was theirs.
Reynolds said, ‘And this is all part of this molecular biology thing?’
‘A lot of the techniques are common to the two fields.
The big boost came when the recombinant DNA programme in the States suddenly folded before it had ever really got going.
Kennedy was fighting on the issue of public accountability for scientists, and the Friends of the Earth were pressing for the withdrawal of Federal funding for recombinant experiments.
Anybody scheduling an experiment was likely to find himself faced with a lawsuit if he didn't make the environmental impact statement that was required under the National Environmental Policy Act.
And since it's usually the case with an experiment that you don't know what the exact outcome is going to be…well, a lot of the top men moved out to where conditions were easier.
Quite a few wound up in the private labs in Switzerland.
Not so many came here.
Two main points about Britain at this time: the science unions were putting pressure on the government to shift economic policies from an industrial to a scientific base, and the health service was on the point of collapse.
Within the year there was money made available for projects which could take the broad skills of a science like genetic manipulation and give them a saleable medical application.
It was a fast move to corner the market, and it worked.’
Most of the books that had been set out on the last delivery had gone, and now more volumes were being added.
One of them was a slim pamphlet that looked as if it might be the catalogue.
As they moved over, Reynolds said, ‘And that's where Jenner came in?’
‘Exactly.
Just about every fertility clinic in the country was set up with a government grant.
And most of the services they offer aren't readily available outside Britain.’
Reynolds thought that Carson would probably want to see the catalogue, so he asked if it would be possible to get it copied.
As he wasn't a registered reader it needed Diane's signature on a xerox form.
After she'd made out the application for him she said, ‘Can you manage if I leave you with it?’
‘I expect so.
Thanks for your time.’
‘You're welcome.
About eight tonight?’
He nodded.
‘That will be fine.
Gives me the chance to get a few things done.’
‘Do you know where to find me?’
The question had a strange and almost forlorn appeal.
He said, ‘I've an idea.
Don't worry, I'll get there okay.’
She went off to attend to her cultures, and Reynolds handed in the form and the catalogue to the copy clerk.
Another delay as the work train was slowly shunted along, and as there were no seats on the customer side of the counter in the tiny room he went out into the periodicals area.
Low comfortable chairs had been set out in a square; too comfortable for-some, because there was a distinct buzz of snoring from the other side of a rack of trade journals, broken only by the bats' wing rustle of folding and refolding newspaper.
He opened the file out and spread the papers across his lap.
First he looked through the typed notes that Diane had done for him.
They gave the bare details of Jenner's life and career as far as she'd been able to check it out — dates, addresses, all the useful stuff that Reynolds could work from — followed by a surprising amount of straight campus gossip.
His early academic record was unimpressive, and his private life had been a disaster; while he worked late hours in the animal house or grudgingly fulfilled occasional lecture commitments, two senior geography students and half the fencing team were back home screwing his wife.
Surely not all at the same time, Reynolds thought, and turned to the summary of Jenner's thesis work.
Observations on the Responses to Systematic Stimulation of the Caudate in Mammals .
It took some puzzling to deduce that a caudate was actually a tail, rather less to see that Jenner had used cats in his experiments.
No explanation of where he got them from.
The test model displayed extreme hyperactivity, and as curare was not immediately available (and would, in any case, have tended to invalidate subsequent observations) the more traditional method of a minute's hanging was employed to subdue the animal.
Handling by kidney squeeze  overcame any further resistance so that it was then possible to secure the model in the Pavlov stock .
Jenner's stiff and stilted prose then went on to describe how the ‘model’— the first of a number — had been allowed to recover before the serrated plates of a Kocher clamp had been placed around its tail.
A measured degree of crushing pressure had been applied, and Jenner had noted the animal's reactions on a Richter-like scale of his own devising: loud crying, sweating paws, panting.
Ideally it would have been wished to leave the model in the stock overnight, but as the equipment was required by another experimenter the animal was removed.
By the next morning its hyperactivity had returned, and to make future ease of handling possible it was decided to employ the Walther method of de-clawing .
Some surprise managed to shoulder its way into Jenner's turgid writing.
It seemed that he'd expected the animal's response to be more intense on the second day, but it actually scored lower on his scale.
Jenner wondered if the unanaesthetised de-clawing may have had some effect on this, and he offered the theory that an alternative source of pain might cause a distraction from the tail-crushing effects of caudate stimulation .
Maybe, he suggested hopefully, a promising new area of investigation had been revealed.
He pushed the idea for a few more pages, but Reynolds didn't read them all.
Recurring words and phrases caught his eye: extirpation, sacrifice, light anaesthesia.
He'd got the message.
His photocopies would be ready, and he had things to do.
The Evergreens had been a large and comfortably rustic dwelling, too big and rambling to be a house but too small and unpretentious to be a mansion.
It was a good half-hour's walk from the campus, standing in its own grounds on the fringe of the green belt.
What remained of the gardens was now given over to the university's botany department, and so the building had been able to retain much of its outward character.
Inside it had been converted to make a dozen study bedrooms with shared facilities and a self  contained warden's flat, painted a bland cream throughout and carpeted with the tough fibre matting that was a feature of all the student halls and houses.
Reynolds decided that a ring-file and a couple of paperbacks were all the disguise that he needed — it was early in the term and the place was full of strangers.
At this hour of the afternoon there were few signs of life in the house.
There was no car in the warden's reserved parking space, and when Reynolds walked openly into the entrance hall there was no one to challenge him.
He'd been in the house once before.
It was for a party in one of the upstairs rooms, but it had been a long time ago.
Perhaps even when Liawski had been warden, but that wasn't something that Reynolds could expect to remember.
He pushed through a regulation fire door and found himself in a narrow passageway that ran along by the stairs to the kitchen.
One of the first rules of house and hall parties had been to scout the building for dark corners that might make useful retiring-places if the evening went well — preference was given to anywhere that had a lock on the inside.
Reynolds had only the vaguest memory of his search of the Evergreens, but he thought he could find what he was looking for.
The door under the stairs was as he recalled it, low and cut on a slant to fit in under the balustrade.
He opened it, reached in, switched on the light.
An unshaded fitting glared weakly down the cellar steps.
The cellar was four large connected rooms of whitewashed brick.
The one nearest the back of the house contained the old-fashioned central heating boiler and had ground-level access through two angled flap doors.
The other chambers were less well-frequented, and it showed.
They were used to store trunks, suitcases, large misshapen cardboard boxes and broken furniture.
The light switches clicked but nothing happened.
Reynolds went back and found an electric flashlight by the boiler, and with this he began to stab and search through the first of the three rooms.
Everything was dusty and sticky with cobwebs.
He tried to knock some aside but they clung to his fingers and a spider danced across his knuckles and disappeared up his sleeve.
He shook his arm vigorously for more than a minute, but it was impossible to tell in the uneven twilight whether it dropped out or not.
It was in the second of the rooms behind a damp stack of spare mattresses that he found what he'd been hoping for.
It was an old tin steamer trunk, its corners reinforced with iron shoes.
The lid had been battered out of shape and the locks no longer met, but a leather strap held the whole thing together.
The initials H.P.L. had been hand-lettered on the side, and the ink had almost faded to invisibility.
Reynolds leaned the mattresses away.
He didn't want to drag them, because even though it would give him more room there would be a risk of noise which might attract the attention of the housekeeper.
On the other side of the thick wall, the boiler fired up in response to some secret signal.
He undid the strap and lifted the lid.
Most of the stuff in the trunk was personal trivia, robbed of its meaning in the absence of the one who valued it.
There were framed photographs, ribboned bundles of letters, awards and certificates.
Nothing for the archives and nothing that could be sold off, this bric-a-brac had obviously been stored against the possibility of some surviving and previously untraced relative appearing to claim it.
Once stored, it had been forgotten.
He moved aside the folded tephillim and uncovered five neatly-bound books.
When he lifted out the first and looked through the handwritten pages he found that he was holding Henryk Liawski's personal diary covering odd and irregular dates between 1952 and 1958.
He put it aside and looked through the others.
He had no way of carrying them all off, but two of the volumes were dated to cover the period of the insulin project as Diane had described it.
On a random dip into one of these Reynolds's eye was caught by the name Jenner .
Gold dust.
He returned the other three books to the trunk and replaced the mattresses.
There would be no  reason for the trunk to be disturbed, and if Carson decided that he wanted to see the other diaries it would be a simple matter to get hold of them.
He listened before he let himself out of the cellar, but there still seemed to be nobody around; Reynolds felt gritty and smeared, at an unhappy disadvantage if he should have to lie his way out of an embarrassing situation.
He only started to relax when he was out on the stone-chip drive and walking away from the house.
Back to the campus and a free shower in the sports annexe, then kill some time in the Union before going on to see Diane.
And maybe he'd be able to save himself something out of Carson's expenses.
It was early evening when the manager of the Langstone Hotel came to the reception desk in response to the ringing of the bell.
Forester was waiting there, and he looked tired and worn.
By the counter were a suitcase, a fishing bag, and a green canvas rod case.
Seven days.
He'd timed the reservation pretty neatly.
Forester's fear was not so much that the room might not have been available, but that if Hennessy had moved out the hotel might be closed down for the off-season altogether.
Elsewhere in the Lakes the tourist industry was having a last determined autumn fling, but not here, not in this quiet and relatively undiscovered cul-de-sac.
Winter came early.
‘On your own?’ the manager said as he shuffled around to get Forester's key.
‘For a few days.
Come to get my thinking straight.’
The manager nodded and handed over the key.
‘Will you be all right with your bags?’ he said.
‘I can call Lesley.’
‘Don't bother,’ Forester said.
‘I know where it is.’
The manager watched him as he wearily climbed the stairs.
Sly bugger probably planned it this way, he thought.
No child to save the marriage, so he sets up some fishing straight away instead.
Who does he think he's kidding?
In the bay-windowed room Forester locked the door behind him and closed all the curtains before turning to the rod case that he'd laid on the bed.
When he was sure that  there was no chance of being disturbed or observed he undid the flap at the top of the bag and reached inside.
Slowly and carefully, he withdrew the Steyr-Mannlicher .308 hunting rifle that he'd bought that same afternoon using the cash from the sale of his car and the Firearm Variation certificate that had been issued to Ian Sampson.
It was a second-hand weapon, but it was in good condition.
From the fishing bag he took a scope sight and two boxes of ammunition, one of them depleted from the sighting-in that he'd carried out in a deserted glen on the drive south.
He'd daubed a rock with paint and used the tell-tale splashes to correct a slight right-hand drift, and then he'd taken a rasp to the elaborate Monte Carlo grip, reshaping the stock to approximate to the military form on which he'd been trained and binding it with tape when it was as he wanted.
The ammunition was soft-nosed, not what he'd been used to but the only kind that was allowed for hunting.
It didn't worry him, because over a distance the soft-nosed rounds would break up on entry and be considerably more destructive, splattering meat in exactly the same way as a hard point carved into an illegal dum-dum.
He fixed the scope into place and then loaded up.
Over by the window there was a wardrobe that had been built to fit into the corner, tall and heavy, mirror-fronted with small brass teardrop handles.
He leaned the Mannlicher inside against the back boards and turned the small key in the door.
The wire hangers rang together like bells and kept it up for almost a minute.
As he waited for the noise to die down, Forester looked around the room.
On his last quick visit he'd been more interested in the situation than in the fittings.
He had two chairs, one hard and one padded, both of them small.
A chest of drawers with teardrops that didn't match the wardrobe's, and a thin metal wastebin next to a modern formica bedside table.
The sink was squared-off and old fashioned, with a white splashback and a tilting mirror; Forester switched on the fluorescent shaving light and tried to tip the mirror to look at himself, but it wouldn't stay in  place until he found out how to tighten a chrome-plated hexagonal nut on the hinge.
He looked like something you'd frighten children with on Halloween.
His eyes were bloodshot, his skin was grey and waxy with fatigue, and there were small patches of bristle in hollows where he'd missed shaving.
He knew that he was going to have to give himself one night's sleep at least, one night when he wouldn't be bent into the back of a freezing car or upright on a chair.
He'd have to leave the window slightly open and hope to be disturbed if anything happened.
He lifted back the drapes and looked out into the road.
The darkness was almost complete.
There was a light in the schoolhouse.
NINETEEN
Early on Wednesday afternoon the telephone rang.
Carson answered immediately.
Yet again, it wasn't Alison.
‘Carson?’
David Reynolds said after the money had been rammed home and the tone had cycled, ‘Carson, are you alone?’
It was a moment before Carson was able to place the researcher's voice — after all, he'd only heard it once before but he said, ‘Yes, I'm alone.
Why?’
‘Trouble, that's why.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘You've started something, I don't know what.
But when I got back to the agency this morning, the place had been cleared out.’
Carson frowned.
‘I don't understand.’
‘Turned over, raided, the whole operation.
There was a van by the door and they were loading up the files, the contracts, documents, everything;’
‘The police?’
Carson hazarded, apprehension growing.
‘I didn't stop to find out.
It's because of this Jenner business, I'm sure of it.’
‘Just hold on.’
This way they were going to generate a lot of heat but not much reason.
‘Where are you?’
‘Euston.
I've got a ticket, and I'm using it as soon as I've seen you.’
‘You've got something about Jenner.’
‘I've got something, all right, and the sooner I can get rid of it the happier I'll be.
It'll cost you four hundred.’
Carson hesitated.
He didn't know Reynolds, and this sounded like a shake-down.
He was tempted to hang up and  call the RCO number to see if this was the case, but something told him no; there was an authentic quality to Reynolds' agitation that couldn't be defined but was nevertheless persuasive.
Carson said carefully, ‘That was the estimate for the whole deal.’
‘This is worth it.
Worth more if anything, but I'm not going to stay around and haggle.
I'll want it in cash.’
‘I usually pay through the agency.’
‘There is no agency now, and I need that money.
You've about an hour before the banks close.’
‘Shall I come to the station?’
‘Christ, no,’ Reynolds said quickly, ‘not with cameras everywhere.
Somewhere nearby.’
What was near to Euston?
Nothing.
‘Regent's Park?’
‘Too open.’
‘For God's sake…’
‘Look,’ Reynolds said, ‘you obviously have no idea of just how nasty this could turn.’
‘I asked for a biography of a dead scientist, not a list of missile sites.’
‘You'd better take this seriously.’
‘You don't make it easy.’
‘I'm not going to tell you about it over the phone.
I'm not going to tell you about it all.
You bring me the four hundred and you'll get what I found.
Whatever you do after that, I don't want to know.’
‘And if I don't think the information's worth the cost?’
‘Sue me.’
It wasn't a matter of money — four hundred wouldn't break him — it was the risk of finding that he'd been duped and made a fool of that made Carson wary.
But there was sincerity in Reynolds's fear, and so he said, ‘All right.
If the station's too enclosed and the park's too open, where do you want to meet?’
‘Somewhere I can see if you're being followed.’
‘How about the zoo?’
‘No, it's too…’
Reynolds seemed to realise that such objections could go on for ever, so he said, ‘Yes.
Okay, make it the zoo in the park.
Do you know the Sobell pavilions?’
‘No.’
‘You can find them, buy a map or something.
The garden area in the middle.
It's appropriate.’
Reynolds hung up.
Carson arrived at the zoo an hour later and bought a layout map from a kiosk just inside the South gate.
The day was miserable and the animals were likewise, with very few people around.
He took a shortcut through the Lion terraces to reach the Broad Walk down the zoo's centre.
Two lynx, sleek and amber in the first enclosure that he passed, were disregarding the tourists and staring possessively at the peafowl across the way.
The buildings and the greens were well laid-out, modern in style and agreeable to look at.
Carson had been before, but the place had always made him uneasy; it was so Victorian in its assumptions.
If there were a colonial mentality that could covet territory across the species barrier, this was it.
A declaration of dominance, of the attitude that had accepted Darwin only so long as his ideas could be misrepresented in shuffling the animal kingdom into a league table with man several steps above its head, almost within touching distance of God.
Children came to laugh at the animals as they rocked autistically or broke into tantrums; creatures accustomed to marking out miles of territory in a single day were now constrained to prowl and circle in a few narrow yards.
He was aware that present-day zoos were no longer dedicated to this ideal, although he wasn't so sure about some of the visitors.
More than a hundred years of systematic captivity had created a whole new genus, animals that had none of the skills and few of the desires of a wild habitat.
He could appreciate that a collection might become the last refuge and hope for survival of an endangered species, but the knowledge did little to modify his response; apart from the dogs' home where he'd once been bought a sick puppy, it was one of the saddest places he knew.
He was starting to wish that he'd suggested somewhere else.
The Sobell pavilions were a number of wire enclosures designed to seem as open as possible, linked to glass-walled brick chambers which held the zoo's collection of apes and monkeys.
Appropriate, Reynolds had said.
Carson stood in the open quadrangle of tended plants and empty benches that he assumed to be the ‘garden area in the middle’, and looked around.
A keeper in a loose green uniform and wellingtons walked past, carrying a yardbrush and a bucket.
Otherwise he was alone.
Reynolds arrived a couple of minutes later.
Presumably he'd been watching from somewhere.
He looked hunted and haggard, and he was carrying a small parcel wrapped in brown paper.
‘Got the money?’ he said.
A baboon shrieked on the far side of the pavilion.
Carson said, ‘I want to see what I'm buying, first.’
Reynolds seemed offended.
‘I'm not trying to cheat you.’
‘I didn't say you were.’
‘Please,’ Reynolds said, ‘please don't get me into any more trouble.’
‘You don't know for sure that this is why the agency was raided.
You're only assuming.
I could be buying expensive junk.’
‘No,’ Reynolds said, and he shifted his grip on the brown paper as if it were getting hot in his hands.
There was desperation under his attempt at reassurance.
‘It's what you were looking for, and more.’
‘I'll decide that.’
‘All right,’ Reynolds exploded, ‘stuff your fucking money.
But you've got to take the parcel off me!’
Carson was surprised to see tears of anger and frustration glistening in the corners of Reynolds's eyes.
After a moment he reached into his jacket and produced a thick envelope.
‘Four hundred,’ he said.
‘It's in tens.’
Reynolds blinked and wiped his nose on the back of his hand.
‘And the cost of a ticket.’
‘What?’
‘The cost of a ticket to get in here.’
Well, it had been Carson's idea.
He took out his wallet and Reynolds gave him the parcel.
He seemed glad to be rid of it.
‘Good luck with this,’ he said.
‘You're going to need it.’
‘What have I bought?’
‘Professor Liawski's diaries, 1978 to 1983.
And if anybody ever catches up with me and starts asking questions, that's all I know about it.’
‘Who's Professor Liawski?’
Reynolds shook his head firmly.
‘You've got your money's worth.
Don't follow me out.’
He was backing off and looking around when Carson said, ‘Where will you go?’
He shrugged.
‘Somewhere safe and cheap.’
And then with a final glance to either side he turned and walked off towards the main gate.
Carson took a peek into the brown paper on the Tube.
By now it was the rush hour and he was squeezed into the corner of a carriage by a family of Swedish tourists who talked loudly and without vowels and continuously trafficked maps and guidebooks across him, so there was no chance of getting a look at the diaries or the few folded sheets of paper that were wedged between them.
Beyond the Swedes was an impersonal sea of heads and hats and magazines and knuckles on hanging-straps.
Forget it.
Frequency of the trains had been increased but the swollen crowds filled up the tunnels and the escalators at the interchanges.
It was almost dark when Carson emerged from Gunnersbury station.
Some of the streetlights were still glowing red but most were at full sodium yellow.
The worst of the evening traffic was already over.
Habit shouldered curiosity out of the way for a moment when he got back to the house, and he checked around the  Mercedes for damage.
As he'd told Alison, spitting and scratching were nothing new but that was mainly when the car was on the road.
Here on the asphalt forecourt tampering was far less common.
Besides the discouraging glow of the porch light he supposed that some invisible demarcation held vandals back to the pavement; that was their territory, this was his.
Maybe he had something nasty waiting for them.
The car was untouched.
It was easy enough to get the front door open one-handed, not so easy to switch on the hall light with no hands at all.
The spring-button was too high for his elbow so he didn't bother.
Enough light would spill inwards from the porch as the door closed slowly on its damper, enough at least for him to get to his own door and line up the key; but when it came to it he hurried too much and was trying to shake out the Yale when the front door put him in darkness.
But not quite.
There was a bar of light under his own door.
He couldn't remember leaving a light on.
When a shadow passed across the bar, he knew that he hadn't.
He started to back off, and the parcel shifted smugly against his side.
Because of me, it said.
All because of me.
Whoever was in the flat must have heard the muffled sound of the closing door and was going through into the bedroom to have a look out of the window.
When Carson reached the stairs at the end of the hall he kept on going, feeling for the first riser with his heel and wincing when the step creaked under his weight.
There was some glow from the tiny window on the half-landing above and behind him, but not enough to do much for the hallway; the sliver of light under his door was hard-edged, bright, unmistakeable.
He could feel it as a line of cherry heat across his back when he turned and began to climb the stairs more carefully.
The only wooden stairs that never seemed to make any noise were those inch-thick slabs in modern public buildings; house stairs always took pleasure in announcing to everybody what you were doing.
Just like the plumbing.
He  walked on the carpet at the outside of the treads and the noise dropped away to almost nothing.
Cheat, came the muffled accusation.
On the next landing he could hear a TV set on the floor above.
The top storey was a one-bedroomed apartment, rooms that had once been servants' quarters in the tight spaces where the house narrowed towards the roof.
It had been bought by a middle-aged nursing Sister who'd had to sell her car to raise the deposit on the place.
She'd lived without carpets for the first few weeks and it had been nearly a year before she'd been able to ditch her old and undersized curtains.
Carson liked her because she seemed to display the ideal mix of warmth and distance that made a good neighbour.
For a moment he was tempted to keep on climbing, to knock at her door and tell her that something was wrong; but what then?
He'd simply have acquired a spectator and a potential liability.
He stopped at the door of the flat directly above his own, the empty place.
The key was on top of the frame where the lazy agent had left it, another Yale on a big paper tag.
Open up — watch the hard rasp as the key slides into the lock — and step inside.
The rooms were cold and empty, and they smelled of dust and glue size.
Because the converting builder had demolished most of the internal walls there was no correspondence in the shape and layout of the rooms to the flat below, but the lounge was still at the back to take advantage of the small terrace and river view.
Carson stayed close to the walls and trod as delicately as he could on the bare boards.
The french-window keys were in their locks.
From the outside terrace he looked down on to his own tiled patio, no more than about twelve feet beneath.
He'd been right when he told Alison that he wasn't overlooked, because he could only see a narrow slice of his lounge from here; but when he got down on his hands and knees and peered through the wrought ironwork the angle improved and he could see almost half of the room.
Alison was sitting on the Chesterfield, staring in front of her.
There was a man in a dark overcoat and gloves standing by, apparently talking to somebody just out of sight.
He turned slightly and said something to her.
Slowly, she shook her head.
Bait?
Or hostage?
Carson couldn't know which.
He scrambled upright and went back into the empty flat.
At the door which led back on to the landing he was looking around for a prop or a wedge to pin it open when he thought of the parcel that he'd been hugging since the zoo.
Well, why not?
With a line of retreat set up, Carson went back down the stairs and got ready to stir up a few wasps.
Still in darkness, he pulled open the big front door and leaned outside.
The second bell up had his name against it.
He pressed twice and heard the buzzer sounding deep inside the house, then he dived back into the hallway and past his own door.
The hot shine must have cut to black as he was soft-footing it up the stairs, because when he turned around on the half-landing and crouched behind the angle of the banister the only light in the hall was the inward spill from the porch, and that was getting less as the door slowly closed on its hydraulic arm.
The all-weather speaker by the bell-panel crackled as the internal phone was lifted.
There was a moment's hesitation and then he heard Alison's voice, filtered and distorted and too distant to make out what she was saying.
The speaker scraped and clicked a few more times, but after half a minute of no reply the phone was rehooked.
There was a muted metal sound from the apartment doorway, followed by the sigh of wood across wood as the door was opened.
A pasty white blob seemed to float out into the darkness, and then the laser brilliance of a pencil flash in the hand below it.
The blob looked towards the door, and as the flash emerged further into the hallway another blob drifted out behind it.
The outer door thumped shut, and the lock that had been holding back and resisting went home.
The pencil light  spun around, raked up the stairs, and speared straight into Carson's eyes.
The world exploded into popping blue circles as his irises clamped shut and his retinas screamed with the shock, like somebody who'd dived into Caribbean waters and found them as cold as Arctic slush.
Carson pushed himself blindly to his feet.
They were coming for him.
He went up the landing by memory, one, two, three.
When he reached the open doorway he booted the parcel into the room and whirled around to slam the door behind him.
The two men were at the top of the stairs and almost within grabbing distance, but if either had tried it he would have left his fingers in the frame as the bang echoed through the house and Carson thumbed the deadlock button, just in case they had any ideas about picking their way in.
There was a soft double-thump as they piled up on the panels.
Pick their way in?
They didn't even consider it.
After no more than five or ten seconds' pause the door shivered under a hard kick, and then another.
Carson knuckled his eyes and blinked.
His sight was coming back but he still seemed to have some uneven blindness, as if he were trying to look at the world through a ragged hole in a postage stamp.
He turned his head from side to side trying to line up his patchy vision with the brown paper package —wherever that was .
The door was solid and would hold up for quite a long time.
Unfortunately the locks and hinges wouldn't.
Under the sixth or seventh kick they started to splinter and break inwards.
Neither of the two men outside had spoken or shouted.
Could there be more than two?
Carson hoped not, as he made out the shape of something like Liawski's diaries over by the skirting board of the opposite wall.
He scooped up the solid little parcel.
If there had been only two men holding Alison in the room, this meant that they'd left her unguarded and she'd be able to slip away.
The door bounced inward again.
Carson tucked the diaries under his arm and went through into the empty  lounge.
Two men had followed him up the stairs.
One was trying to kick his way into this flat.
And the other?
The french windows were still open by a few inches.
Carson stepped out on to the terrace and looked over the rail again.
It hadn't looked an easy distance before, but now it looked impossible.
It wasn't even a very big target.
He held the parcel out and then let it fall, and it had time enough to turn lazily over before it landed with a solid smack on the terrace below and bounced towards the rail.
It skidded to a halt just inside the edge.
The door burst inward and crashed back against the wall.
Maybe it was best this way, he thought, no time to consider, no time to get scared and piss down your pants leg.
He vaulted the rail.
From inside the room it must have looked like he was just hopping off into empty space, say goodbye to Buck Rogers, a suicide leap over a thirty-foot drop.
For a fraction of a second it looked as though it were going to be just that, he'd vaulted too hard and he was going to overshoot the small terrace and land on the ugly hard shapes of the garden furniture in the basement courtyard beneath.
Twelve feet.
Four or five can jar your legs badly and shake your guts up into a momentary dysentery if you land wrong.
Six or seven has the same effect if you land right , leaving you with an aching crotch and bruised joints if you're lucky.
He wished he'd hung from the rail and reduced the distance, but that would have taken several seconds to set up and his pursuer had already been half-way across the room.
He hit.
His legs were bent, unintentional but lucky because they folded neatly under him and stopped his tail from slamming down hard on the tiles.
His spine was saved but his knees punched into his chest and he pitched over sideways, scraping his elbow and knocking his head as he rolled on to his shoulder.
Still in one piece.
He tried to get up, and fell over.
No bones gritted or grated, even though his ankles now felt miserably weak, it was just that his muscles wouldn't  firm up enough to keep him straight.
He grabbed the wall for balance, and it spun him around.
One of the men was re-emerging into the room, heading across Carson's lounge.
Up above, the other man was clambering over the iron rail of the terrace, a dark and uncertain shape against the night sky.
The man inside reached into his coat.
He brought out a gun.
Carson tried again and got to his feet.
He held on to the rail.
His legs were quivering and his insides felt like mush, but he stayed up.
He was facing the man in the lit room with only thin wood and a lot of glass between them and the man was still moving, the blue-black automatic squat and ugly in his fist.
It might have been the man that he'd seen before or it might not; his face was no more than a characterless oval with a few spare lines drawn on it for features.
Alison wasn't in the room.
The man grabbed the inside handle with his free hand and began to shake the windows.
Is there a key to this?
I'll see to that later.
This is ready now .
He'd never got around to closing the deadlock.
It was academic in any case, because the man reversed the automatic and used the butt to punch out one of the panes.
Carson skipped back nimbly enough when the glass cloudburst fountained out past him, and for a moment he felt something soft push against his foot.
He looked down just in time to see Liawski's diaries disappearing over the edge.
The man in the room withdrew his arm and shook it free of slivers before turning the gun around ready for use.
Carson had nowhere to hide, and he was about to be joined from the upper terrace.
Jumping into the dark was easier.
Imagination contracted the distance and made it surprising to fall for so long, and then he was tearing through dogwood and elder bushes and tumbling in a shower of twigs and leaves on to the ground.
He rolled against the legs of a spiky cast-iron chair.
Better under it than on to it.
There was a flat impact twelve feet up, a squealing skid  and a howl of pain.
The dropping man came up against the wrought iron, and glass powder sifted like fairy dust down into the courtyard.
For the second time, Carson was looking for his parcel.
There were no lights on in the basement flat and precious little illumination spilling into the enclosed yard from above; he banged and scraped his hands on table legs and chair legs as he groped around, and he even cracked his head a couple of times.
When he knocked one of the seats he heard paper shift on painted metal, and he grabbed for it.
The man on the terrace was groaning.
It was a deep, inhuman sound.
Carson ran up the brick steps to the courtyard's wooden side-door, rattling the bolt free and stepping out into the narrow alley that ran down the side of the house.
Up ahead, the lights and sounds of the road were a thin vertical slice of freedom.
As he edged past the dustbins he reached in his pocket for the keys to the Mercedes.
On the forecourt he unlocked the car and threw the diaries across on to the passenger seat before sliding in behind the wheel.
On his first attempt to start he pumped the accelerator too hard and almost flooded out.
He glanced in his mirror as he reset the key.
The front door to the house opened, and the man with the gun stepped out.
Carson was putting the shift into Drive almost as the engine caught.
In the mirror the man had stopped and his hands were coming up, clamping together to steady the automatic, feet apart ready to take the recoil.
Carson didn't wait to admire the artistry.
He hit the accelerator so hard that for an appalling moment the wheels spun on the asphalt and the car didn't move.
Then the car leaped forward and the driver's door that he'd forgotten to close swung out and hit the stone pillar at the entrance to the forecourt.
It bounced back hard and left the pillar splashed with paint and some of the trim as Carson fishtailed the Mercedes out into the road and away from the house.
Behind him the man was running out into the roadway, already too far off for a useful shot.
Carson saw him slow and stop, the gun hanging down by his side, a  dark silhouette with a white featureless blob of a face.
Carson switched on his lights.
The yellow metal box that was fixed to the brickwork on the greengrocer's shop reminded Lee Sorvino of his infant son.
It made a lot of noise for its size, and there was no obvious way of stopping it.
Sorvino shook the folding rail across the shop doorway again, but it held firm.
The burglar alarm shrilled on like a Sunday-afternoon drunk in the park.
Looking back at the bell-box Sorvino was tempted to find a half-brick and try to put it out, but that would be fun and not duty.
Duty said that the police wouldn't interfere with the property as long as they could be sure that no criminal entry or damage had taken place.
They'd attempt to trace the owner and inform him, and that was it.
Until he arrived, the poor bastards in the area would have to sit with their fingers in their ears.
Lenny Campion appeared from around the end of the block.
One gloved hand held a flashlight, and with the other he was beating grey dust from the front of his uniform.
‘Nothing out back,’ he said.
‘It's probably set to go off if the cat pisses on the potatoes.’
The loud ringing was starting to give Sorvino a headache.
They walked away from the shop, across the broad sloping pavement to where their area car was hitched up with two wheels off the road, hazards flashing.
Lenny Campion climbed into the nearside observer's seat and Sorvino walked around the big Ford.
Passing cars on the southbound carriageway slowed and came close to bumping as drivers rubbernecked for a spot of interesting carnage, but they drove on disappointed.
With the car doors closed the noise was cut considerably.
Sorvino massaged a tight little muscle on the plate of bone above his ear.
Sometimes it thickened and pulsed with blood and felt like it was going to rip something.
It had to be the cold air and the bright lights against the darkness.
On winter night shifts it was at its worst.
Maybe he should follow up Lenny Campion's suggestion, have his eyes tested for strain.
Campion had unhooked the mike for the multi-channel radio from under the dash, but he wasn't speaking; base desk was giving out a priority call and he'd stopped with the mike on his knee and the coiled flex hanging loosely.
Sorvino treated his eyes to a final squeeze shut and then listened in.
The call was for a silver-grey Mercedes with a damaged offside door.
Distinctive, at least.
The even, tedious voice of the base desk operator went on: ‘Last seen heading north on Kew Bridge Road at 19.20 hours.
We're asked to apprehend and detain the driver, who is not thought to be armed but who may resist arrest .’
Sorvino said, ‘That's only five minutes away.’
‘Mercedes with a smashed-up door.
Can't be many about like that.’
Sorvino couldn't think of a better reason to get away from the ice-pick drone of the alarm.
He said, ‘Nothing worth sticking around for here.
Let's cruise and see if we can pick him up.’
For a moment Campion didn't answer.
Sorvino glanced at his observer and saw that he was half-turned in his seat and looking out towards the back of the car.
‘Christ, Lee,’ he finally said, ‘look at that!’
Sorvino hitched around in his seat so that he could follow.
He caught a last glimpse of a grey Mercedes on the far side of the central barrier railings.
It was moving unhurriedly.
There was a deep vertical crease in the driver's door, and the door wasn't hanging right.
It was carnival time, lights and siren, and Sorvino's migraine disappeared like a popping soap bubble.
They took off at three Gs and cars behind had to stand on their noses to make way as the big Ford burned rubber off towards the next junction south and a break in the central barrier.
Traffic ahead dodged and scattered as Sorvino got across into the overtaking lane and stayed there.
Lenny Campion raised the mike to his lips to report.
‘Base desk from Lemur Sierra November,’ he said, ‘we are following the reported Mercedes north on Hanger Lane.’
‘Acknowledged, Lemur Sierra November,do you have confirmation of the registration ?’
‘The colour and the damage check out.
We couldn't see the plate.’
They were a hundred yards short of the junction.
The lights were red and all three lanes were blocked with waiting traffic.
The crossflow of cars had stopped at the sound of the approaching siren and now drivers and passengers and a small number of pedestrians were all looking around, uncertain of the direction.
Sorvino had every warning light on the car operating except for the headlamp flash, and he pumped this now as he was forced to slow behind the blockade.
There were two cars in the overtaking lane.
The second flashed the first, and they both jerked out of the way.
Sorvino punched through the gap and into a U-turn against the red light.
He nearly took it too fast, and Lenny Campion put a nervous hand on the padded dash as the car tipped sideways and the rear end tried to break away.
The tyres screamed and fought for grip and then the whole car did a little wiggle like the backside of a pouncing cat and stormed on, back in the direction from which it had come.
Sorvino killed the siren but left the lights.
He gave it a few more seconds to get him through the next traffic signals and then killed it again.
Lenny Campion gripped the Bakelite microphone so hard that it began to hurt his hand.
A long empty stretch, and the Mercedes was in view ahead.
Expensive, sporty-looking thing.
Must be quite a villain, he was thinking.
No sudden spurt, no scramble to get away.
They came up alongside, and Lenny Campion was almost within arm's length of the young driver.
The driver glanced over and seemed only mildly surprised to see them.
Campion stabbed his finger twice, once at Carson,you , and then towards the road shoulder,over there , and then Sorvino put the Ford across the Mercedes' bows and slowed him into the side of the road.
With the age and general appearance of the driver and  the obvious wealth behind the car itself Campion was sure it had to be either hard drugs or pornography, maybe a sweep operation somewhere and one of the fishes had struggled through the net.
They both got out of the car.
The carriageway was empty and sealed off from the world by chipped grey railings down the centre and either side.
The Mercedes had almost rolled to a halt about fifty yards behind them.
They started to walk back, one either side, pleased with themselves but still ready for trouble.
‘Wait a minute,’ Campion said.
The car was still rolling.
Nobody was driving.
Lenny Campion ran forward and Sorvino hung back, ready to sprint for the car if this should be a trick to shake them off.
Campion came level with the Merc and looked inside.
It was empty and the automatic shift was in Drive so that the car continued to creep forward under the gentle pull of the engine.
The broken door hung open a few inches.
He looked down the road but could see nobody; the driver had hopped the fence but it was impossible to say where.
He turned back to look at Sorvino.
The police driver was still waiting, still uncertain.
‘He's pissed off!’
Campion said incredulously.
Most of the lights in the underpass had been kicked out and what showed of the green and white tiling had been generously sprayed with graffiti,Hendrix and Are Gay Militants Limp Fisted ?
Carson waded across the newspaper on the undrained floor and climbed the concrete stairway into the night.
Along the road in the far carriageway he could see the two-car tableau under the bright lights, but he didn't linger to watch.
With his much-abused parcel still under his arm, he started walking back towards the city.
When he reached an Underground station he bought a ticket without even thinking of where he might want to go.
Inside the system and moving, he could at least feel safe.
It was tempting to think that he might live down there for ever, occasionally emerging to dodge through the empty quiet streets; watching for the armed patrols of the faceless men in black.
They had Alison, and he couldn't hope to reach her.
He got a corner seat in an empty carriage.
The doors sighed and closed with tender regret, and the whole train growled and shook itself like a dog coming out of the sea.
Reality began to slide away outside, and a sphincter of darkness drew tight around the windows.
Carson started to open out the parcel.
It was actually a brown paper bag, oversized and wrapped around its contents.
Some twigs and leaves fell out of the folds.
The books had taken their battering well, although the covers of one were bent and crimped inwards from a hard landing.
He looked through the xerox sheets that had been pressed between them but there was nothing too controversial there, just a Jenner Clinic catalogue and price schedule and a few dates and details.
He opened one of the diaries.
It was handwritten on fine lined paper in a series of dated entries, and somebody — presumably Reynolds — had marked the locations of a series of entries with folded slips.
The second book was the same.
Carson looked for the earliest marked date, and started to read.
