AUTUMN 2206:
AN INCH OF ASHES
‘The East wind sighs, the fine rains come:
Beyond the pool of water-lilies, the noise of faint thunder.
A gold toad gnaws the lock.
Open it, burn the incense.
A tiger of jade pulls the rope.
Draw from the well and escape.
Chia's daughter peeped through the screen when Han the clerk was young,
The goddess of the river left her pillow for the great Prince of Wei.
Never let your heart open with the spring flowers:
One inch of love is an inch of ashes.’
— Li Shang-Yin, untitled poem, 9th century AD
THE POOL IN THE RUINS
Servants came running to take their horses, leading them back to the stables.
Fei Yen seemed flushed, excited by the ride, her eyes wide with enjoyment.
Li Yuan laughed, looking at her, and touched her arm.
‘It suits you, my love.
You should ride more often.’
Tsu Ma came up and stood between them, an arm about each of their shoulders.
‘That was good, my friends.
And this…’ he gestured with his head, his strong neck turning to encompass the huge estate — the palace, the lake, the orchards, the view of the distant mountains, ‘it's beautiful.
Why, the ancient emperors would envy you.’
Tsu Ma's eyes sparkled and his pure white teeth — strong, square, well-formed teeth — flashed a smile.
‘You are welcome here any time, Tsu Ma,’ Li Yuan answered him.
‘You must treat our stables as your own.’
‘Thank you, Li Yuan.’
Tsu Ma gave a slight bow, then turned, looking down at Fei Yen.
‘You ride well, Lady Fei.
Where did you learn?’
She looked away, a slight colour in her cheeks.
‘I've ridden since I was a child.
My father had two horses.’
She turned back, the way she held her head displaying an intense pride.
In a world where animals were rare, to own two horses was a matter of some prestige.
Only the Seven took such things for granted.
Tsu Ma studied her a moment, then nodded.
‘Good.
But let us go in.
Your father will be expecting us.’
Li Shai Tung was sitting in the Summer House, a small comset on his lap.
Tiny three-dimensional holograms formed and faded in the air above the set, each figure giving its brief report before it vanished.
Tsu Ma sat close by the old man, keeping silent, while Li Yuan went to get drinks.
Fei Yen stood by the window looking down the steep slope towards the terrace and the ornamental lake.
From time to time she would glance back into the room, her eyes coming to rest on the casually seated figure of Tsu Ma.
He was a broad-shouldered? handsome man.
Riding, she had noticed how  straight he held himself in the saddle, how unruffled he had been when leading his horse across a fast-flowing stream, how easily he brought his mount to jump a wall; as though he were part of the animal he rode.
And yet he was immaculate, his hair groomed and beaded with rubies; his tunic an achingly sweet shade of pink that was almost white, edged with black; his trousers of a blue that reminded her of the summer skies of her youth.
She had seen how tightly his thighs had gripped the flanks of the roan horse; how commanding he had seemed.
Li Shai Tung finished his business and set the comset down, smiling at Tsu Ma, then at his daughter-in-law, greeting them wordlessly.
Li Yuan turned from the cabinet, carrying a tray of drinks.
He was host here in this room.
Fei Yen took her drink and seated herself beside her husband, facing the other men.
She was conscious of how Tsu Ma looked at her.
So open.
And yet not impolitely.
‘You're looking well,’ Li Shai Tung said, looking across at Fei Yen.
‘You should ride more often.’
Li Yuan leaned forward.
‘She was magnificent, Father.
A born horsewoman!
You should have seen how she leaped the meadow gate!’
His eyes flashed wide as he said it, and when he looked at his wife it was with unfeigned admiration.
Tsu Ma saw this and pushed his head back slightly, as if his collar were too tight.
He reached into the inner pocket of his tunic and took out a slender silver case.
‘May I smoke?’
He held out the case and Li Yuan nodded, looking to his father for approval.
The old man said nothing, merely smiled.
Tsu Ma removed one of the pencil-thin cheroots and lit it, then inhaled slowly, seeming to relax in his chair as he did so.
The silver case lay on the arm of the chair.
He watched the smoke curl up; a thin, fragile thread of heated ash.
‘I must thank you, Li Yuan.
Today has been perfect.’
His eyes settled on the young man's face, finding nothing but open friendship there; perhaps even a degree of admiration.
He was used to it; accepted it as his due.
But the look on Fei Yen's face, that was different.
That, too, he recognised, but kept the knowledge to himself.
He raised his glass, toasting his host and hostess silently, his smile serene, sincere.
Li Shai Tung watched all, nodding to himself.
He seemed well pleased with things.
For the first time in months he was smiling.
Tsu Ma saw this and asked him why.
‘I'll tell you.
When we are alone.’
The T'ang had not looked at Fei Yen, and his comment seemed quite innocuous, but she knew how traditional her father-in-law was.
He was not like her own father; he would not discuss business in front of women.
She set her drink down untouched and stood up, patting Li Yuan's hand, then turned to bow low to the two T'ang.
‘Excuse me,Chieh Hsia , but I must go and change.
The ride has made me tired.’
It was untrue.
She had never felt more alive.
Her eyes shone with a barely contained excitement.
But she lowered her eyes and went quietly from the room, turning only at the door to look back, finding, as she'd hoped, that Tsu Ma's eyes were on her.
‘Well?’ said Tsu Ma when she had gone.
His manner seemed no different, and yet the word seemed somehow colder, more masculine than before.
‘Good news.
Both Wu Shih and Wei Feng have agreed to our little scheme.’
Tsu Ma looked down.
The development was unexpected.
‘Is that wise?’
‘I thought so,’ Li Shai Tung continued, noting his hesitation.
‘In the present circumstances I felt it…safer…to have the balance of the Council know of my plans.
It would not do to alienate my oldest friends.’
Tsu Ma drew on the cheroot again, then looked up, meeting his eyes.
‘No.
But that's not exactly what I meant.
This whole business of covert action.
Surely it goes against the spirit of the Council?
If we can't be open with each other…’
‘And can we?’
Li Yuan's words were bitter, angry, but at a look from his father he lowered his head, holding his tongue.
‘I understand your feelings, Li Yuan,’ Tsu Ma answered him, smiling at the old T'ang to show he was not offended by his son's interruption.
‘But Wang Sau-leyan must surely not be allowed to triumph.
This way, it seems we play into his hands.’
Li Shai Tung was watching him closely.
‘Then you will not give your consent?’
Tsu Ma's smile broadened.
‘That is not what I said.
I was merely pointing out the underlying logic of this course.
Whatever you decide I will consent to, my father's oldest friend.
And not only because of my respect for my father.
I know you would not follow this course if there was any other way.’
Li Shai Tung smiled then looked down into his lap.
‘If it helps reassure you, Tsu Ma, I will say to you what I have already said both to Wu Shih and Wei Feng.
I do not wish to circumvent the Council in this matter.
This is merely a question of research.
A fact-finding exercise before I present my case to Council.
The brief of the Project will be to study only the feasibility of wiring up Chung Kuo's population.
It will fall far short of actual experimentation.
After all, it would not do for me, a T'ang, to breach the Edict, would it?’
Tsu Ma laughed.
‘No, indeed.
But tell me…who did you have in mind to look after the Project?
It's a sensitive scheme.
The security on it must be watertight.’
‘I agree.
Which is why I'm placing Marshal Tolonen in charge.’
‘Tolonen?’
Tsu Ma considered it a moment, then smiled.
‘Why, yes, I can see that that would work very well.’
He met the old T'ang's eyes, a look of understanding passing between them that escaped the young Prince's notice.
For Tolonen would be opposed to the scheme.
He, if anyone, would be guaranteed to keep it in check.
‘But see, I've talked enough already, and you still know so little about the  scheme itself.
Let Li Yuan speak for me now.
Let him be my voice in this matter.’
Tsu Ma looked across at the young man, interested.
This was why he had come: to hear Li Yuan's proposal in detail.
‘Speak,’ he said, his left hand outstretched, palm open.
A broad hand with long fingers clustered with heavy rings.
Smoke curled up from beneath the hand.
Li Yuan hesitated, then, composing himself, he began, itemising the discoveries they had made at various SimFic establishments: discoveries which had broken the Edict.
Things meant to harm the Seven, now harnessed for their use.
Tsu Ma listened, drawing on the cheroot from time to time, his smile growing broader by the moment.
Until, finally, he laughed and clapped his hand against his thigh.
‘Excellent!
My word, it is excellent.’
He rose and went to the window, looking down the slope.
‘You have my agreement, Li Shai Tung.
I like this plan.
I like it very much.’
Tsu Ma turned, looking back at the young man.
Li Yuan was smiling broadly, pleased with himself, proud of his scheme, and delighted that he had Tsu Ma's approval.
Tsu Ma smiled back at him and nodded, then turned to the window again.
At the bottom of the slope, on the terrace above the ornamental lake, a woman was walking, looking back towards the house.
She wore riding clothes and her long dark hair hung loose where she had just unfastened it.
She was small, delicate, like a goddess made of the finest porcelain.
Tsu Ma smiled and looked away; turned to face the two men in the room with him.
‘Yes,’ he said, the smile remaining on his lips.
‘It's perfect, Yuan.
Quite perfect.’
‘Who is he?’
DeVore turned to Lehmann and smiled.
‘His name is Hung Mien-lo and he was Chancellor to Wang Ta-hung before his recent death.’
Lehmann studied the screen a moment longer, then turned his back on it, staring at DeVore.
‘So what is he doing there?’
The film had been shot secretly by DeVore's man amongst the Ping Tiao .
It showed a meeting Jan Mach had had that morning.
A meeting he had been very anxious to keep a secret from the other Ping Tiao leaders.
‘I don't know.
But I'm sure of one thing.
He wouldn't be there unless Wang Sau-leyan wanted him there.
So the real question is — what does Wang Sau-leyan want of the Ping Tiao ?’
‘So Hung is the new T'ang's man now?’
‘It seems so.
My man in Alexandria, Fischer, thinks Sau-leyan wasn't responsible for his brother's death, but there's good reason to believe that Hung Mien-lo has been his man for some time now.’
‘And Mach?
Why didn't he consult the others?’
‘That's Mach's way.
He didn't like it when I went to Gesell direct.
If he'd had his way he would have checked me out beforehand, but I circumvented him.
He doesn't like that.
It rankles him.
He likes to be in control of things.’
‘But you think he'll deal with Hung Mien-lo?’
DeVore nodded.
‘It makes sense.
If I were him I'd do the same.
He'll get what he can out of the T'ang.
And he'll use that to keep us at a distance.
To make the Ping Tiao less dependent on us.
And, conversely, he'll use the alliance with us to keep the T'ang at a distance.
It'll mean the Ping Tiao won't have to accept what either of us tell them to do.
It'll give them the option to say no now and again.
Mach will try to keep the deal with us secret from the T'ang, and vice versa.
He'll try to make it seem as if the change — the strengthening of their position — comes from within the Ping Tiao .’
Lehmann was silent a while, thoughtful.
‘Then why not kill Hung Mien-lo and prevent Mach from making this deal?
There has to be a reason.’
DeVore smiled, pleased with his young lieutenant.
He always enjoyed talking out his thoughts with him.
‘There is.
You see, Mach's scheme works only if we're unaware of the T'ang's role in things.
If we're fooled by his tales of a great Ping Tiao renaissance.
Oh, their fortunes will be on the up after Helmstadt, there's no doubt, but a deal with the T'ang could give them something they lack.
Something they didn't get from Helmstadt.
Funds.’
‘And you want that?
You want them to be independently funded?’
‘No.
Not if that were all there was to it.
But I don't intend to let them bargain with me.
At the first sign of it I'll threaten to pull out altogether.
That would leave them in a worse position than they began, because all the T'ang can offer them is money.
They'd lose our contacts, our specialist knowledge, our expertise in battle.
And the rest of the Bremen map…’
‘I see.
And then there's the question of what Wang Sau-leyan wants from this?’
‘Exactly.
He wouldn't risk contacting the Ping Tiao unless he had some scheme in mind.
T'ang or not, if the other members of the Council of Seven heard of his involvement he would be dead.’
Lehmann glanced at the screen.
‘It's a thought…’
‘Yes.
There's always that option.
If things get really bad and we need something to divert the Seven.’
‘Then what do you intend to do?’
DeVore leaned forward and pressed the pad to clear the screen.
At once the lights came up again.
‘At present nothing.
Mach is meeting Hung Mien-Lo again.
In Alexandria in two weeks’ time.
My man will be there to record it for me.
It might be interesting, don't you think?
And — who knows?— Mach might even give the T'ang his father's ear back.’
The night was clear and dark, the moon a sharp crescent to the north-east, high above the distant outline of the mountains.
It was a warm night.
Laughter drifted across the water as the long, high-sided boat made its way out across the lake, the lanterns swinging gently on either side.
Tsu Ma had insisted on taking the oars.
He pulled the light craft through the water effortlessly, his handsome mouth formed into a smile, his back held straight, the muscles of his upper arms rippling beneath his silks like the flanks of a running horse.
Li Yuan sat behind Tsu Ma in the stern, looking past him at Fei Yen and her cousin, Yin Wu Tsai.
The two girls had their heads together, giggling behind their fans.
It had been Fei Yen's idea to have a midnight picnic and Tsu Ma had been delighted when the two girls had come to them with blankets and a basket, interrupting their talk.
The two men had smiled and laughed and let themselves be led out on to the lake.
Li Yuan grinned broadly, enjoying himself.
In the varicoloured light from the lanterns Fei Yen looked wonderful, like a fairy princess or some mythical creature conjured from the rich legends of his people's past.
The flickering patterns of the light made her face seem insubstantial; like something you might glimpse in a dream but which, when you came closer or held a clear light up to see it better, would fade or change back to its true form.
He smiled at the fancifulness of the thought, then caught his breath, seeing how her eyes flashed as she laughed at something her cousin had whispered in her ear.
And then she looked across at him, her dark eyes smiling, and his blood seemed to catch fire in his veins.
He shuddered, filled by the sight of her.
She was his.
His .
Fei Yen turned, looking out behind her, then turned back, leaning towards Tsu Ma.
‘To the island, Tsu Ma.
To the island…’
Tsu Ma bowed his head.
‘Whatever you say, my lady.’
The boat began to turn.
Beyond the temple on the small hill the lake curved like a swallow's wing.
There, near the wing's tip, was a tiny island, reached by a wooden bridge of three spans.
Servants had prepared it earlier.
As they rounded the point, they could see it clearly, the bridge and the tiny, two-tiered pagoda lit by coloured lanterns.
Li Yuan stared across the water, delighted, then looked back at Fei Yen.
‘It's beautiful, you clever thing.
When did you plan all this?’
Fei Yen laughed and looked down, clearly pleased by his praise.
‘This afternoon.
After we'd been riding.
I…
I did it for our guest, husband.’
Tsu Ma slowed his stroke momentarily and bowed his head to Fei Yen.
‘I am touched, my lady.
You do me great honour.’
Li Yuan watched the exchange, his breast filled with pride for his wife.
She was so clever to have thought of it.
It was just the right touch.
The perfect end to a perfect day.
The kind of thing a man would remember for the rest of his days.
Yes, he could imagine it now, forty years from now, he and Tsu Ma, standing on the terrace by the lake, looking back…
She had even been clever enough to provide an escort for the T'ang.
A clever, pretty woman who was certain to delight Tsu Ma.
Indeed, had Fei Yen not been in the boat, he would have allowed himself to concede that Wu Tsai was herself quite beautiful.
For a moment he studied the two women, comparing them.
Wu Tsai was taller than Fei Yen, her face, like her body, longer and somehow grosser, her nose broader, her lips fuller, her cheekbones less refined, her neck stronger, her breasts more prominent beneath the silk of her jacket.
Yet it was only by contrast with Fei Yen that these things were noticeable: as if in Fei Yen lay the very archetype of Han beauty, and all else, however fine in itself, was but a flawed copy of that perfection.
The island drew near.
Li Yuan leaned forward, instructing Tsu Ma where to land.
Then the boat was moored and Tsu Ma was handing the girls up on to the wooden jetty, the soft rustle of their silks as they disembarked seeming, for that brief moment, to merge with the silken darkness of the night and the sweetness of their perfume.
They settled on the terrace, Fei Yen busying herself laying out the table while Wu Tsai sat and made pleasant conversation with Tsu Ma.
Li Yuan stood at the rail, looking out across the darkness of the lake, his sense of ease, of inner stillness, lulling him so that for a time he seemed aware only of the dull murmur of the voices behind him and the soft lapping of the water against the wooden posts of the jetty.
Then there was the light touch of a hand on his shoulder and he turned to find Fei Yen there, smiling up at him.
‘Please, husband.
Come sit with us.’
He put his arms about her and lowered his face to meet her lips, then came and sat with them.
Fei Yen stood by a tiny table to one side, pouring wine into cups from a porcelain jug; offering first to the T'ang and then to her husband, finally to her cousin.
Only then did she give a little bow and, pouring herself some wine, settled, kneeling at her husband's side.
Tsu Ma studied them both a moment, then raised his cup.
‘You are a lucky man, Li Yuan, to have such a wife.
May your marriage be blessed with many sons!’
Li Yuan bowed his head, inordinately pleased.
But it was no more than the truth.
He was lucky.
He looked down at the woman kneeling by his side and felt his chest tighten with his love for her.
His .
It was three days now since the wedding and yet he could not look at her without thinking that.
His .
Of all the men in Chung Kuo, only he was allowed this richness, this lifelong measure of perfection.
He shivered and raised his cup, looking back at Tsu Ma.
‘To friendship!’ he offered, meeting Tsu Ma's eyes.
‘To we four, here tonight, and to our eternal friendship!’
Tsu Ma leaned forward, his teeth flashing as he smiled.
‘Yes.
To friendship!’
He clinked his cup against Li Yuan's, then raised it in offering, first to Wu Tsai and finally to Fei Yen.
Fei Yen had been looking up from beneath her lashes, her pose the very image of demure, obedient womanhood.
At Tsu Ma's toast, however, she looked down sharply, as if abashed.
But it was not bashfulness that made her avert her eyes; it was a deeper, stronger feeling: one that she tried to hide not only from the watchful T'ang, but from herself.
She turned her head, looking up at Li Yuan.
‘Would my husband like more wine?’
Li Yuan smiled back at her, handsome in his own way, and loving, too — a good man for all his apparent coldness-yet her blood didn't thrill at his touch, nor did her heart race in her chest the way it was racing now in the presence of Tsu Ma.
‘In a while, my love,’ he answered her.
‘But see to our guest first.
Tsu Ma's cup is almost empty.’
She bowed her head and, setting down her cup, went to bring the wine jug.
Tsu Ma had turned slightly in his seat and now sat there, his booted legs spread, one hand clasping his knee, the other holding out his cup.
Turning, seeing him like that, Fei Yen caught her breath.
It was so like the way Han Ch'in had used to sit, his strong legs spread arrogantly, his broad hands resting on his knees.
She bowed deeply, hiding her sudden confusion, holding out the jug before her.
‘Well…?’
Li Yuan prompted, making her start and spill some of the wine.
Tsu Ma laughed; a soft, generous laughter that made her look up at him again and meet his eyes.
Yes, there was no doubting it; he knew what she was thinking.
Knew the effect he had had on her.
She poured the wine then backed away, her head bowed, her throat suddenly dry, her heart pounding.
Setting the jug down, she settled at her husband's feet again, but now she was barely conscious of Li Yuan.
The whole world had suddenly turned about.
She knelt there, her head lowered, trying to still the sudden tremor of her hands, the violent beating of her heart, but the sight of his booted feet beneath the table held her eyes.
She stared at them, mesmerised, the sound of his voice like a drug on her senses, numbing her.
Wu Tsai was flirting with Tsu Ma, leaning towards him, her words and gestures unmistakable in their message, but Fei Yen could sense how detached the T'ang was from her games.
He leaned towards Wu Tsai, laughing, smiling, playing the ancient game with ease and charm, but his attention was focused on herself.
She could sense how his body moved towards her subtly; how, with the utmost casualness, he strove at each moment to include her in all that was said.
And Li Yuan?
He was unaware of this.
It was like the poor child was asleep, enmeshed in his dream of perfect love.
She looked away, pained suddenly by all she was thinking.
Li Yuan was her husband, and one day he would be T'ang.
He deserved her loyalty, in body and soul.
And yet…
She rose quietly and went into the pagoda, returning a moment later with a p'i p'a , the ancient four-stringed lute shaped like a giant teardrop.
‘What's this?’ said Li Yuan, turning to look at her.
She stood there, her head bowed.
‘I thought it might be pleasant if we had some music.’
Li Yuan turned and looked across at Tsu Ma, who smiled and gave a tiny nod of his head.
But instead of handing the lute to her cousin, as Li Yuan had expected, Fei Yen sat, the lute held upright in her lap, and began to play.
Li Yuan sat there, entranced by the fluency of her playing, the swift certainty of her fingers across the strings, by the passionate tiny movements of her head as she wrought the tune from nothingness.
He recognised the song.
It was the Kan Hua Hui , the ‘Flower Fair’, a sweet, sprightly tune that took considerable expertise to play.
When she finished he gave a short laugh and bowed his head.
He was about to speak, to praise her, when she began again — a slower, more thoughtful piece this time.
It was the Yueh Erh Kao , ‘The Moon On High’.
He shivered, looking out across the blackness of the lake, his heart suddenly in his throat.
It was beautiful: as if the notes were tiny silver fishes floating in the darkness.
As the playing grew faster, more complex, his gaze was drawn to her face again and saw how her eyes had almost closed, her whole being suddenly focused on the song, on the movement of her fingers against the strings.
It reminded him of that moment years before when she had drawn and aimed the bow.
How her whole body had seemed to become part of the bow, and how, when the arrow had been released, it was as if part of her had flown through the air towards the distant target.
He breathed slowly, his lips parted in wonder.
And Han was dead, and she was his.
And still the Great Wheel turned…
It ended.
For a time no one spoke.
Then Wu Tsai leaned forward and took her cup from the table, smiling, looking across at Tsu Ma.
‘My cousin is very gifted,’ she said.
‘It is said in our family that the gods made a mistake the day Fei Yen was born; that they meant Yin Tsu to have another son.
But things were mixed up and while she received the soul of a man, she was given the body of a woman.’
Fei Yen had looked up briefly, only to avert her eyes again, but it was clear from her smile that she had heard the story often and was not displeased by it.
Tsu Ma, however, turned to face Wu Tsai, coming to Fei Yen's defence.
‘From what I've seen, if the gods were mistaken it was in one small respect alone.
That Fei Yen is not quite perfect…’
Fei Yen met his eyes momentarily, responding to his teasing tone.
‘Not quite,Chieh Hsia ?’
‘No…’
He held out his empty cup.
‘For they should have made you twins.
One to fill my cup while the other played.’
There was laughter all round.
But when Fei Yen made to get up and pour for him, Tsu Ma took the jug and went round himself, filling their cups .
‘There!’ he said, sitting back.
‘Now I can listen once again.’
Taking his hint, Fei Yen straightened the p'i p'a in her lap and, after a moment's concentration, began to play.
This time it was a song none of them had heard before.
A strange, melancholy tune.
And as she played she sang in a high contralto.
‘A pretty pair of white geese Double, double, far from dusty chaos; Wings embracing, they play in bright sunlight, Necks caressing roam the blue clouds.
Trapped by nets or felled by corded arrow Hen and cock are parted one dawn.
Sad echoes drift down river bends, Lonesome cries ring out from river banks.
‘It is not that I don't long for my former mate, But because of you I won't reach my flock.’
Drop by drop she sheds a tear.
‘A thousand leagues I'll wait for you!’
How happy to fall in love, So sad a lifetime parting.
Let us cling to our hundred year span, Let us pursue every moment of time, Like grass on a lonely hill Knowing it must wither and die.’
Li Yuan, watching her, found himself spellbound by the song, transfixed by the pain in her face as she sang, and astonished that he had never heard her sing before — that he had never guessed she had these talents.
When she had finished and the lute had fallen silent, he looked across at Tsu Ma and saw how the T'ang sat there, his head bowed, his hands clasped together tightly as if in grief.
Tsu Ma looked up, tears filming his eyes, his voice soft.
‘That was beautiful, Lady Fei.
Perhaps the most beautiful thing I have ever heard.’
Fei Yen was looking down, the p'ip'a resting loosely against her breasts, her whole frame bent forward, as if she had emptied herself with the song.
She made a tiny motion of her head, acknowledging the T'ang's words; then she stood and, with bows to Tsu Ma and her husband, turned and went back into the pagoda.
‘Well…’ said Tsu Ma, looking directly at Li Yuan.
‘What can I say, my friend?
You honour me, tonight.
I mean that.’
‘I, too, Tsu Ma.
This has been an evening to remember.’
Tsu Ma sat back.
‘That's true.’
He shivered, then seemed to come to himself again and smiled.
‘But come, I am neglecting the Lady Wu.’
He turned to Wu Tsai, his smile widening.
‘Do you play anything, my lady?’
Li Yuan smiled, recognising that Tsu Ma was hinting he should go after his wife.
With a bow to his guests he went.
But Fei Yen was not inside the pagoda.
He stood there in the empty room a moment, frowning, hearing only the laughter from the terrace outside.
Then he heard her, calling him softly from the far side of the pagoda.
They strolled back across the bridge, his arm about her neck, her tiny body pressed warm and tight against his side.
The night was mild and dark and comforting about them, but the terrace was empty, the pagoda too.
Li Yuan looked about him, puzzled, then stiffened, hearing a splash in the water close by.
He crouched, facing the danger.
‘Get behind me, Fei Yen!’ he said, quietly but urgently, drawing the dagger from his boot.
A peal of laughter rolled out from the darkness in front of them; rich and deep and full of warmth.
Li Yuan relaxed.
It was Tsu Ma.
‘Gods!
What are you doing?’
Tsu Ma came closer, into the light of the lanterns.
The water was up to his chest and his hair was slicked back wetly from his forehead.
‘Swimming,’ he answered.
‘It's lovely.
The water's much warmer than I thought it would be.’
‘And the Lady Wu?
Has she gone back?’
In answer there was a splashing to their left and a second whoop of laughter.
‘You should come in, you two!’ she yelled.
‘It's marvellous!’
Li Yuan looked about him, puzzled.
Tsu Ma saw and laughed.
‘If you're looking for our clothes, they're in the boat.
It was the Lady Wu's idea.
She told me there were fish in the lake and I wanted to see for myself.’
‘And were there?’
It was Fei Yen.
She had come alongside Li Yuan and was standing there, looking across at Tsu Ma.
He stood straighter in the water, his broad chest glistening wetly in the multicoloured light.
‘Only an eel,’ Wu Tsai answered, coming nearer, her naked shoulders bobbing above the surface of the water.
‘A rather stiff little eel…’
‘Wu Tsai!’
Fei Yen protested, but even Li Yuan was laughing now.
‘They say the god Kung-Kung who brought the Great Flood was an eel,’ Tsu Ma said, scooping water up over his chest and arms as if he were washing.
‘A giant eel.
But look, you two, if you're not going to join us, then perhaps you should let us join you.
Li Yuan…if you would avert your eyes while the Lady Wu gets out and finds her clothes?’
‘Of course…’
Li Yuan turned away, hearing the giggling that went on behind his back as Fei Yen went across to help her cousin.
‘All right,’ Wu Tsai said, after a while.
‘You can turn round now, Prince Yuan.’
He turned back.
Wu Tsai was kneeling in the boat, fastening her silks.
She looked up at him, grinning.
‘You really should have joined us.’
He hesitated, conscious of Tsu Ma, naked in the water close by, and of Fei Yen, crouched there beside the boat, watching him.
‘It wouldn't have been right…’
Wu Tsai shrugged, and climbed up on to the bank.
‘I thought we had made a toast.’
Her eyes flashed mischievously.
‘You know, eternal friends, and all that…’
Tsu Ma had pushed for forward through the water until he was standing just below the deep lip of the bank.
Now he spoke, placing his hands flat on the stone flags at the lake's edge.
‘Prince Yuan is right, Lady Wu.
Forgive me, I wasn't thinking.
It would be most…improper.’
Wu Tsai brushed past Li Yuan provocatively, then glanced back at Fei Yen, smiling.
‘I just thought it would have been fun, that's all.
Something a little different.’
Li Yuan turned angrily, glaring at her, then, biting back the retort that had come to mind, he turned back, looking at Fei Yen.
She was standing now, her head bowed, her whole stance submissive.
He took a step towards her, one hand raised in appeal.
‘You must see how wrong it would have been?’
Her eyes lifted, met his, obedient.
‘Of course, my husband.’
He let his breathing calm, then turned back, looking across at the T'ang.
‘And you, Tsu Ma?
What do you wish?
Should we retire to the pagoda while you dress?’
Tsu Ma laughed, his body dark and powerful in the water.
‘Gods, no, Yuan.
This is much too nice.
I think I'll swim back.
Float on my back a bit and stare up at the stars.’
Yuan bowed his head.
‘Of course.
As you will.
But what will you do when you get to the far shore?’
But Tsu Ma had turned already and was wading out into the deeper water.
He shouted back his answer as he slipped into the blackness.
‘Why, I'll get out of the water, Yuan!
What else should I do?’
At eleven the next morning, Tolonen was standing at the West Window in the Room of the Five Directions in the East Palace at Tongjiang, looking out across the gardens towards the lake.
He had been summoned to this meeting at short notice.
That, in itself, was not unusual; but for once he had been told nothing of the reason for the meeting.
It was that — that sense of unpreparedness — which made him feel restless standing there; made him turn and pace the room impatiently.
He had paused before the great mirror at the far end of the room, straightening the collar of his uniform jacket, when the door behind him opened.
He turned, expecting Li Shai Tung, but it was the Prince, Li Yuan, who entered.
‘Prince Yuan,’ he said, bowing.
Li Yuan came forward, extending an arm to offer the Marshal a seat.
‘Thank you for coming, Knut.
My father will join us later.’
Tolonen bowed again, then sat, staring pointedly at the folder in Li Yuan's lap.
‘Well, Yuan, what is it?’
Li Yuan smiled.
He enjoyed the old man's bluntness — a trait which had grown more pronounced with every year.
‘My father has asked me to talk to you on a certain matter.
When I've finished, he'll come and speak with you himself.
But what I have to say has his full approval.
You can direct any questions — or objections — to me, as if you were speaking to my father.’
‘Objections?’
Tolonen raised his chin.
‘If Li Shai Tung has approved it, why should I have objections?
He has a job for me, neh?’
‘A task, let's say.
Something which he feels you should oversee.’
Tolonen nodded.
‘I see.
And what is this task?’
Li Yuan hesitated.
‘Would you like refreshments while we talk?’
Tolonen smiled.
‘Thank you, Yuan, but no.
Unless your father wishes to detain me, I must be in Nanking three hours from now to meet Major Karr.’
‘Of course.
Then we'll press on.
It would be best, perhaps, if you would let me finish before asking anything.
Some of it is quite complex.
And please, record this if you wish.’
Tolonen bowed his head, then turned his right hand palm upward and quickly tapped out the command on the grid of tiny flesh-coloured blisters at his wrist.
That done he settled back, letting the young Prince speak.
Li Yuan watched the Marshal while he talked, barely referring to the folder in his lap, unless it was to take some diagram from it and hand it to Tolonen.
He watched attentively, noting every frown, every look of puzzlement, every last betraying blink or twitch in the old man's face, anxious to gauge the depth of his feelings.
Tolonen had not smiled throughout the lengthy exposition.
He sat there, grim-faced, his left hand gripping the arm of his chair.
But when Yuan finished, he looked down, giving a great heave of a sigh.
‘Can I speak now, Yuan?’
Tolonen said, his eyes pained, his whole face grave.
‘Of course.
As I said, you must speak to me as if I were my father.
Openly.
As you feel.’
Prepared as he was, Li Yuan nonetheless felt a sudden tightening in his stomach.
He respected Marshal Tolonen greatly; had grown up in the shadow of the old man.
But in this, he knew, they were of a different mind.
Tolonen stared at him a moment, nodding, his lips pressed tightly together, his earnest grey eyes looking out from a face carved like granite.
Then, with a deep sniff that indicated he had considered things long enough, he began.
‘You ask me to speak openly.
Yet I feel I cannot do that without offending you, Li Yuan.
This is, I take it, your idea?’
Li Yuan could sense the great weight of the Marshal's authority bearing down on him, but steeled himself, forcing himself to confront it.
‘It is.’
‘I see.
And yet you command me — speaking with your father's voice — to answer you.
Openly.
Bluntly.’
He sighed.
‘Very well then.
I'll tell you what I feel.
I find this scheme of yours repugnant.’
Li Yuan shivered, but kept his face impassive.
‘And I, Marshal Tolonen.
And I. This is not something I want to do.’
‘Then why?’
‘Because there is no other way.
None that would not result in greater violence, greater bloodshed than that which we are already witnessing.’
Tolonen looked down.
Again he sniffed deeply.
Then he looked up again, shaking his head.
‘No.
Even were the worst to come, this is no path for us.
To put things in men's heads.
To wire them up and treat them like machines.
Achh…’
He leaned forward, his expression suddenly, unexpectedly, passionate.
‘I know what I am, Li Yuan.
I know what I have had to do in the service of my T'ang.
And sometimes I have difficulty sleeping.
But this…this is different in kind.
This will rob men of their freedom.’
‘Or the illusion of freedom?’
Tolonen waved the words aside impatiently.
‘It's no illusion, Prince Yuan.
The freedom to choose — bad or good — that's real.
And the Mandate of Heaven — those moral criteria by which a T'ang is adjudged a good or bad ruler — that too is real.
Take them away and we have nothing.
Nothing worth keeping, anyway.’
Li Yuan sat forward.
‘I don't agree.
If a man is bad, surely it is no bad thing to have a wire in his head-to be able to limit the effects of his badness?
And if a man is good…’
Tolonen interrupted him.
‘You, I, your father — we are good men.
We act because we must — for the good of all.
Yet when we have left this earth, what then?
How can we guarantee that those who rule Chung Kuo after us will be good?
How can we guarantee their motives?
So you see, I'd answer you thus, my prince.
It does not matter if the man with the wire in his head is good or bad.
What matters is the moral standing of the man who holds the wires in his hands, like ten thousand million strings.
Will he make the puppets dance?
Or will he leave them be?’
Li Yuan sat back slowly, shaking his head.
‘You talk of dictatorships, Marshal Tolonen.
Yet we are Seven.’
Tolonen turned his head aside, a strange bitterness in his eyes.
‘I talk of things to be — whether they come in ten years or ten thousand.’
He looked back at Li Yuan, his grey eyes filled with sadness.
‘Whatever you or I might wish, history tells us this-that nothing is eternal.
Things change.’
‘You once thought differently.
I have heard you speaking so myself, Knut.
Was it not you yourself who said we should build a great dam against the floodwaters of Change?’
Tolonen nodded, suddenly wistful, his lips formed into a sad smile.
‘Yes…but this !’
He sat there afterwards, when the Prince had gone, staring down at his hands.
He would do it.
Of course he would.
Hadn't his T'ang asked him to take this on?
Even so, he felt heavy of heart.
Had the dream died, then?
The great vision of a world at peace — a world where a man could find his level and raise his family without need or care.
And was this the first sign of the nightmare to come?
Of the great, engulfing darkness?
He kept thinking of Jelka, and of the grandchildren he would some day have.
What kind of a world would it be for them?
Could he bear to see them wired-made vulnerable to the least whim of their lords and masters?
He gritted his teeth, pained by the thought.
Had it changed so much that even he — the cornerstone — began to doubt their course?
‘Knut?’
He raised his head, then got to his feet hurriedly.
He had been so caught up in his thoughts he not heard the T'ang enter.
‘Chieh Hsia !’
He bowed his head exaggeratedly.
Li Shai Tung sat where his son had been sitting only moments before, silent, studying his Marshal.
Then, with a vague nod of his head as if satisfied with what he had seen, he leaned towards Tolonen.
‘I heard all that passed between you and my son.’
‘Yes,Chieh Hsia .’
‘And I am grateful for your openness.’
Tolonen met his eyes unflinchingly.
‘It was only my duty, Li Shai Tung.’
‘Yes.
But there was a reason for letting Yuan talk to you first.
You see, while my son is, in his way, quite wise, he is also young.
Too young, perhaps, to understand the essence of things: the place of li and ch'i in this great world of ours; the fine balance that exists between the shaping force and the passive substance.’
Tolonen frowned, lowering his head slightly.
‘I'm afraid I don't follow you,Chieh Hsia .’
The T'ang smiled.
‘Well, Knut, I'll put it simply, and bind you to keep this secret from my son.
I have authorised his scheme, but that is not to say it will ever come about.
You understand me?’
‘Not fully, my lord.
You mean you are only humouring Li Yuan?’
Li Shai Tung hesitated.
‘In a way, yes, I suppose you could say I am.
But this idea is deep-rooted in Yuan.
I have seen it grow from the seed, until now it dominates his thinking.
He believes he can shape the world to his conception; that this scheme of his will answer all the questions.’
‘And you think he's wrong?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then why encourage him?
Why authorise this madness?’
‘Because Yuan will be T'ang one day.
If I oppose him now in this, he will only return to it after my death.
And that would be disastrous.
It would bring him into conflict, not only with his fellow T'ang but with the great mass of the Above.
Best then to let him purge it from his blood while he is Prince, neh?
To discover for himself that he is wrong.’
‘Maybe…’
Tolonen took a deep breath.
‘But if you'll forgive me,Chieh Hsia , it still seems something of a gamble.
What if this ‘cure’ merely serves to encourage him further?
Isn't that possible?’
‘Yes.
Which is why I summoned you, Knut.
Why I wanted you to oversee the Project.
To act as brake to my son's ambitions and keep the thing within bounds…
And to kill it if you must.’
Tolonen was staring at his T'ang, realisation coming slowly to his face.
Then he laughed.
‘I see,Chieh Hsia …
I understand!’
Li Shai Tung smiled back at him.
‘Good.
Then when Tsu Ma returns from riding, I'll tell him you have taken the job, yes?’
Tolonen bowed his head, all heaviness suddenly lifted from his heart.
‘I would be honoured,Chieh Hsia .
Deeply honoured.’
Fifteen li north of Tongjiang, at the edge of the T'ang's great estate, were the ruins of an ancient Buddhist monastery that dated from the time of the great Sung dynasty.
They stood in the foothills of the Ta Pa Shan, three levels of cinnabar red buildings climbing the hillside, the once elegant sweep of their grey-tiled roofs smashed like broken mouths, their brickwork crumbling, their doorways cluttered with weed and fallen masonry.
They had stood so for more than two hundred and forty years now, victims of the great Ko Ming purges of the 1960s, their ruin becoming, with time, a natural thing — part of the bleak and melancholy landscape that surrounded them.
On the hillside below the buildings stood the ruin of an ancient moss-covered stupa, its squat, heavy base chipped and crumbling, the steps cut into the face cracked, broken in places.
It was a great, pot-bellied thing, its slender spire like an afterthought tagged on untidily, the smooth curve of its central surface pocked where the plaster had fallen away in places, exposing the brickwork.
In its shadow, in a square of orange brickwork part hidden by the long grass, stood a circular pool.
It had once been a well, serving the monastery, but when the Red Guards had come they had filled it with broken statuary, almost to its rim, and now the water — channelled from the hills above by way of an underground stream — rose to the lip of the well.
With the spring thaw, or when the rains fell heavily in the Ta Pa Shan, the well would overflow, making a small marsh of the ground to the south-west of it.
Just now, however, the land was  dry, the pool a perfect mirror, moss on the statuary below giving it a rich green colour, like a tarnished bronze.
The sky overhead was a cold, metallic blue, while to the north, above the mountains, storm clouds were gathering, black and dense, throwing the furthest peaks into an intense shadow.
To the south the land fell away, slowly at first then abruptly.
A steep path led down into a narrow, deeply eroded valley through which a clear stream ran, swift yet shallow, to the plains below.
At the southern end of the valley where the sky was brighter, a horseman now appeared, his dark mount reined in, its head pulling to one side as it slowed then came to a halt.
A moment later, a second rider came up over the lip of rock and drew up beside the first.
They leaned close momentarily then began to come forward again, slowly, looking about them, the first of them pointing up at the ruined monastery.
‘What is this place?’
Fei Yen asked, looking up to where Tsu Ma was pointing.
‘It looks ancient.’
‘It is.
Li Yuan was telling me about it yesterday.
There used to be two hundred monks here.’
‘Monks?’
He laughed, turning in his saddle to look at her.
‘Yes, monks.
But come.
Let's go up.
I'll explain it when we get there.’
She looked down, smiling, then nudged her horse forward, following him, watching as he began to climb the steep path that cut into the overhang above, his horse straining to make the gradient.
It was difficult.
If it had been wet it would have been impossible on horseback, but he managed it.
Jumping down from his mount, he came back and stood there at the head of the path, looking down at her.
‘Dismount and I'll give you a hand.
Or you can leave your mount there, if you like.
He'll not stray far.’
In answer she spurred her horse forward, willing it up the path, making Tsu Ma step back sharply as she came on.
‘There!’ she said, turning the beast sharply, then reaching forward to smooth its neck.
‘It wasn't so hard…’
She saw how he was looking at her, his admiration clouded by concern, and looked away quickly.
There had been this tension between them all morning; a sense of things unspoken; of gestures not yet made between them.
It had lain there beneath the stiff formality of their talk, like fire under ice, surfacing from time to time in a look, a moment's hesitation, a tacit smile.
‘You should be more careful,’ he said, coming up to her, his fingers reaching up to smooth the horse's flank only a hand's length from her knee.
‘You're a good rider, Lady Fei, but that's not a stunt I'd recommend you try a second time.’
She looked down at him, her eyes defiant.
‘Because I'm a woman, you mean?’
He smiled back at her, a strange hardness behind his eyes, then shook his head.
‘No.
Because you're not that good a rider.
And because I'm responsible for you.
What would your husband say if I brought you back in pieces?’
Fei Yen was silent.
What would he say?
She smiled.
‘All right.
I'll behave myself in future.’
She climbed down, aware suddenly of how close he was to her, closer than he had been all morning, and when she turned, it was to find him looking down at her, a strange expression in his eyes.
For a moment she stood there, silent, waiting for him, not knowing what he would do.
The moment seemed to stretch out endlessly, his gaze travelling across her face, her neck, her shoulder, returning to her eyes.
Then, with a soft laugh, he turned away, letting her breathe again.
‘Come!’ he said briskly, moving up the slope, away from her.
‘Let's explore the place!’
She bent down momentarily, brushing the dust from her clothes, then straightened up, her eyes following him.
‘You asked me what monks were,’ he said, turning, waiting for her to catch up with him.
‘But it's difficult to explain.
We've nothing like them now.
Not since Tsao Ch'un destroyed them all.
There are some similarities to the New Confucian officials, of course— they dressed alike, in saffron robes, and had similar rituals and ceremonies — but in other ways they were completely different.’
She caught up with him.
‘In what way different?’
He smiled and began to climb the slope again, slowly, looking about him all the while, his eyes taking in the ruins, the distant, cloud-wreathed mountains, the two horses grazing just below them.
‘Well, let's just say that they had some strange beliefs.
And that they let those beliefs shape their lives — as if their lives were of no account.’
They had reached the pool.
Tsu Ma went across and stood there, one foot resting lightly on the tiled lip of the well as he looked back across the valley towards the south.
Fei Yen hesitated, then came alongside, looking up at him.
‘What kind of beliefs?’
‘Oh…’
He looked down, studying her reflection in the pool; conscious of the vague, moss-covered forms beneath the surface image.
‘That each one of us would return after death, in another form.
As a butterfly, perhaps, or as a horse.’
‘Or as a man?’
‘Yes…’
He looked up at her, smiling.
‘Imagine it!
Endless cycles of rebirth.
Each new-born form reflecting your behaviour in past lives.
If you lived badly you would return as an insect.’
‘And if well, as a T'ang?’
He laughed.
‘Perhaps…but then again, perhaps not.
They held such things as power and government as being of little importance.
What they believed in was purity.
All that was important to them was that the spirit be purged of all  its earthly weaknesses.
And because of that — because each new life was a fresh chance to live purely — they believed all life was sacred.’
A path led up from where they stood, its stone flags worn and broken, its progress hidden here and there by moss and weed.
They moved on, following it up to the first of the ruined buildings.
To either side great chunks of masonry lay in the tall grasses, pieces of fallen statuary among them.
In the doorway she paused, looking up at him.
‘I think they sound rather nice.
Why did Tsao Ch'un destroy them?’
He sighed then pushed through, into the deep shadow within.
‘That's not an easy question to answer, my lady.
To understand, you would have to know how the world was before Tsao Ch'un.
How divided it was.
How many different forms of religion there were, and every one of them ‘the truth’.’
She stood there, looking in at him.
‘I know my history.
I've read about the century of rebellions.’
‘Yes…’
He glanced back at her, then turned away, looking about him at the cluttered floor, the smoke-blackened walls, the broken ceiling of the room he was in.
There was a dank, sour smell to everything, a smell of decay and great antiquity.
It seemed much colder here than out in the open.
He turned back, shaking his head.
‘On the surface of things the Buddhists seemed the best of all the religious groups.
They were peaceful.
They fought no great holy wars in the name of their god.
Nor did they persecute anyone who disagreed with them.
But ultimately they were every bit as bad as the others.’
‘Why?
If they threatened no one…’
‘Ah, but they did.
Their very existence was a threat.
This place…it was but one of many thousand such monasteries throughout Chung Kuo.
And a small one at that.
Some monasteries had ten, twenty thousand monks, many of them living long into their eighties and nineties.
Imagine all those men, disdainful of states and princes, taking from the land — eating, drinking, building their temples and their statues, making their books and their prayer flags —and giving nothing back .
That was what was so threatening about them.
It all seemed so harmless, so peaceful, but it was really quite insidious-a debilitating disease that crippled the social body, choking its life from it like a cancer.’
Tsu Ma looked about him, suddenly angry, his eyes taking in the waste of it all.
Long centuries of waste.
‘They could have done so much.
For the sick, the poor, the homeless, but such things were beneath their notice.
To purge themselves of earthly desires — that was all they were worried about.
Pain and suffering — what did suffering mean to them except as a path to purity?’
‘Then you think Tsao Ch'un was right to destroy them?’
‘Right?’
He came across to her.
‘Yes, I think he was right.
Not in everything he did.
But in this…yes.
It's better to feed and clothe and house the masses than to let them rot.
Better to give them a good life here than to let them suffer in the vague hope of some better afterlife.’
He placed his right hand against the rounded stone of the upright, leaning  over her, staring down fiercely at her as he spoke, more passionate than she had ever seen him.
She looked down, her pulse quickening.
‘And that's what you believe?’ she asked softly.
‘That we've only this one life.
And nothing after.’
‘Don't we all believe that?
At core?’
She shivered, then looked up, meeting his eyes.
‘One life?’
He hesitated, his eyes narrowing, then reached out and brushed his fingers against her cheek and neck.
‘Tsu Ma…’
He drew his hand back sharply.
‘Forgive me, I…’
He stared at her a moment, his eyes confused, pained.
‘I thought…’
He looked down, shaking his head, then pushed past her.
Outside the sky was overcast.
A wind had blown up, tearing at the grass, rippling the surface of the pool.
Tsu Ma knelt at its edge, his chest heaving, his thoughts in turmoil.
One life …
What had she meant if not that?
What did she want of him?
He turned, hearing her approach.
‘I'm sorry…’ she began, but he shook his head.
‘It was a mistake, that's all.
We are who we are, neh?’
She stared at him, pained by the sudden roughness of his words.
She had not meant to hurt him.
‘If I were free…’
He shook his head, his face suddenly ugly, his eyes bitter.
‘But you're not.
And the Prince is my friend, neh?’
She turned her face from him, then moved away.
The storm was almost upon them now.
A dense, rolling mist lay upon the hills behind the ruins and the wind held the faintest suggestion of the downpour to come.
The sky was darkening by the moment.
‘We'd best get back,’ she said, turning to him.
But he seemed unaware of the darkness at the back of everything.
His eyes held nothing but herself.
She shuddered.
Was he in love with her?
Was that it?
And she had thought…
Slowly he stood, his strong, powerful body stretching, as if from sleep.
Then, turning his head from her, he strode down the slope towards the horses.
On the flight down to Nanking, Tolonen played back the recording, the words sounding clearly in his head.
Listening to his own voice again, he could hear the unease, the bitterness there and wondered what Li Yuan had made of it.
Prince Yuan was a clever one, there was no doubting it, so perhaps he understood why the T'ang had appointed him to oversee the Project rather than someone more sympathetic.
Maybe that was why he had left things unresolved, their talk at an impasse.
But had he guessed the rest of it?
Did he know just how deeply his father was opposed to things?
He sighed, then smiled, thinking of the reunion to come.
He had not seen Karr in more than three years.
Not since he'd seen him off from Nanking back in November ‘03.
And now Karr was returning, triumphant, his success in tracking down and killing Berdichev a full vindication of their faith in him.
Tolonen leaned forward, looking down out of the porthole.
The spaceport was off in the distance ahead of them, a giant depression in the midst of the great glacial plateau of ice — the City's edge forming a great wall about the outer perimeter.
Even from this distance he could see the vast, pitted sprawl of landing pads, twenty li in diameter, its southernmost edge opening out on to Hsuan Wu lake, the curve of the ancient Yangtze forming a natural barrier to the north-east, like a giant moat two li in width.
At the very centre of that great sunken circle, like a vast yet slender needle perched on its tip, was the control tower.
Seeing it, Tolonen had mixed feelings.
The last time he had come to greet someone from Mars it had been DeVore.
Before he had known.
Before the T'ang's son, Han Ch'in, had died and everything had changed.
But this time it was Karr.
And Karr would be the hawk he'd fly against his prey.
So maybe it was fitting that it should begin here, at Nanking, where DeVore had first slipped the net.
Ten minutes later he was down and seated across from a young duty captain as they travelled the fast-link that connected the City to the spaceport.
Things were tight here.
Tighter than he remembered them.
They had banned all transit flights across the port.
Only incoming or outgoing spacecraft were allowed in its air-space.
Anything else was destroyed immediately, without warning.
So this was the only way in — underneath the port.
Karr's ship was docking even as Tolonen rode the sealed car out to the landing bay.
The noise was deafening.
He could feel the vibrations in his bones; juddering the cradle he was strapped into, making him think for a moment that the tiny vehicle was going to shake itself to pieces.
Then it eased and the sound dropped down the register.
With a hiss a door irised open up ahead of him and the car slipped through, coming out into a great sunken pit, in the centre of which stood the squatly rounded shape of the interplanetary craft.
He could see the Tientsin clearly through the transparent walls of the car, its underbelly glowing, great wreaths of mist swirling up into the cold air overhead.
The track curved sharply, taking his car halfway around the ship before it slowed and stopped.
Guards met him, helped him out, standing back, their heads bowed, as he stretched his legs and looked about him.
He smiled, looking back at the craft.
It had come all the way from Mars.
Like a great black stone slapped down upon the great wei chi board of Chung Kuo.
Karr.
He could see the big man in his mind's eye even now, lifting Berdichev and breaking him.
Ending it quickly, cleanly.
Tolonen sniffed.
Yes, in that he and Karr were alike.
They understood how things worked at this level.
It was no good dealing with one's enemies as one dealt with one's friends.
Useless to play by rules that the other side constantly broke.
In war one had to be utterly  ruthless.
To concede nothing-unless concession were a path to victory.
As he watched, an r-shaped gantry-lift moved on its rails across to the craft and attached itself to a portal on its uppermost surface.
He walked towards it, habit making him look about him, as if , even here, he might expect attack.
Karr was in the first lift, packed in with twenty or thirty others.
As the cage descended, Tolonen raised a hand in greeting, but stayed where he was, just back from the others waiting there — maintenance crew, customs men and guards.
Karr was carrying a small briefcase, the handle chained to his arm.
At the barrier he was first in the queue, his Triple-A pass held out for inspection.
Even so, it was some three or four minutes before he passed through.
The two men greeted one another warmly, Tolonen hugging the big man to him.
‘It's good to see you, Gregor.
You did well out there.
I'm proud of you!’
‘Thank you, sir.
But you're looking well yourself.’
Tolonen nodded, then pointed at the briefcase.
‘But what's this?
Don't we pay you enough that you have to go into the courier business?’
Karr leaned closer, lowering his voice.
‘It's my gift for the T'ang.
I didn't want to say anything about it until I got back.
You know how it is.’
Tolonen sighed.
‘I know only too well.
But tell me, what is it?’
Karr smiled.
‘Berdichev's files.
His personal records.
Coded, of course, but I'm sure we can crack them.
If they're what I think they are, we can polish off the Dispersionists for good.’
‘Unless someone's done it already?’
Karr narrowed his eyes.
‘The Executive killings, you mean?’
‘Yes.
It's one of the theories we're working on.
Which is why I wanted you to take over the investigation from young Ebert.
You've the nose for it.’
‘Hmmm…’
Karr looked down.
‘I've read the files.’
‘And?’
‘They make no sense.
There's no real pattern to it.
Good men and bad.
It seems almost random.
Except for the timing of it all.’
‘Yes.
But there has to be a connection.’
‘Maybe…’
Karr's face was clouded a moment, then he brightened.
‘But how's that darling daughter of yours?
She was a little tiger!’
Tolonen's face lit up.
‘Gods, you should see her now, Gregor.
Like Mu Lan, she is.
A regular little warrior princess.
Yes…you must come and train with us some time!’
Karr bowed low.
‘I would be greatly honoured.’
‘Good, then let's…’
Tolonen stopped.
A man was standing just to Karr's right.
Karr turned, reacting to the movement in Tolonen's eyes, then relaxed, smiling.
‘First Advocate Kung!’
Karr gave a small bow and put out his left hand to shake the outstretched hand of the Advocate.
‘I hope all goes well for you.’
‘Thank you, Major.
And your own ventures…
I hope they prove successful.’
The Advocate hesitated, looking to Tolonen.
Karr saw what his hesitation implied and quickly made the introduction.
‘Forgive me.
First Advocate Kung, this is Marshal Tolonen, Head of the Council of Generals.’
Tolonen accepted the Advocate's bow with a tight smile.
He knew this game too well to be caught in the web of obligation.
‘I am delighted to make your acquaintance, Marshal Tolonen,’ Kung said, bowing again.
Then he turned and clicked his fingers.
At once his valet approached, handing him a small case.
‘However, it was you, Major Karr, whom I wanted to see.
I was most grateful for your hospitality on board ship, and wanted to offer you a small token of my appreciation.’
Tolonen smiled inwardly.
He would have to brief Karr afterwards on how to escape from this situation, otherwise First Advocate Kung would be calling upon him for favours from here until doomsday, playing upon the Major's need not to lose face.
‘Thank you, Advocate, but…’
Karr saw the case falling away, Kung raising the handgun, both hands clasping the handle, and reacted at once, straight-arming Tolonen so that the old man went down.
It was not a moment too soon.
The explosion from the big old-fashioned gun was deafening.
But he was already swinging the case at the Advocate's head.
He felt it connect and followed through with a kick to the stomach.
Kung fell and lay still.
There was shouting all about them.
The valet had gone down on his knees, his head pressed to the floor, his whole body visibly shaking.
It was clear he had had nothing to do with the assassination attempt.
Karr turned, looking for further assassins, then, satisfied there were none, looked down at Tolonen.
The Marshal was sitting up, gasping, one hand pressed to his ribs.
Karr went down on one knee.
‘Forgive me, Marshal, I…’
Tolonen waved aside his apology, the words coming from him wheezingly.
‘You…saved my…life.’
‘I wouldn't have believed it.
He was Senior Advocate on Mars.
A highly respected man.’
‘Major!’
The call came from behind Karr.
He turned.
It was one of the spaceport's Security captains.
‘What is it?’ he answered, standing, looking across to where the captain was kneeling over the fallen man.
‘There's no pulse.’
Karr went across and knelt beside Kung, examining the body for himself.
It was true.
Advocate Kung was dead.
Yet the wounds to the head and stomach were minimal.
If he had meant to kill the man…
‘Shit!’ he said, turning to look at Tolonen, then frowned.
‘What is it, sir?’
Tolonen's eyes were wide, staring at the corpse.
As Karr watched him, the old man shuddered.
‘Gods…’ he said softly.
‘It's one of them.’
Karr stared back at him a moment, then his eyes widened, understanding.
‘A copy…’
He turned and looked across at the valet.
The man had been forced to his feet and was being held between two Security men, his head bowed in shame, his hands trembling with fear.
‘You!’
Karr barked at him, getting up and going across to him.
‘Tell me, and tell me fast, did you notice anything different about your master?
Anything unusual?’
The man shook his head abjectly.
‘Nothing, honoured sir.
Believe me.
I knew nothing of his intentions.’
Karr studied the man a moment longer, then waved the guards away.
‘Take him away and interrogate him.
Whatever it takes.
I want the truth from him.’
He turned back.
Tolonen was getting to his feet, one of the guards giving him a hand.
Tolonen turned, smiling his thanks, then put out his hand.
‘Give me your knife, Sergeant.’
The guard did as he was told, then stood back, watching as Tolonen limped slowly across to the corpse.
He met Karr's eyes.
‘If it's like the others…’
Karr nodded.
They both remembered that day when Han Ch'in had been assassinated.
Recalled the team of copy humans who had come in from Mars to kill him.
And now here they were again.
A second wave, perhaps.
Tolonen knelt by the body, setting the knife down at his side.
‘Here,’ Karr said, coming the other side of Kung.
‘I'll do it.’
If it was like the others it would have a metal plate set into its chest.
The real Kung would have been killed months ago.
Tolonen handed Karr the knife, then sat back on his knees, rubbing at his ribs again, a momentary flicker of pain in his face.
‘Okay.
Let's see what it is.’
Karr slit the Advocate's tunic open, exposing the flesh, then, leaning right over the body, he dug deeply into the flesh, drawing the blade across the corpse's chest.
Blood welled, flowed freely down the corpse's sides.
They had not expected that.
But there was something.
Not a plate, as they'd both expected, but something much smaller, softer.
Karr prised the knife beneath it and lifted it out.
It was a wallet.
A tiny black wallet no bigger than a child's hand.
He frowned, then handed it across.
Tolonen wiped it against his sleeve, then turned it over, studying it.
It seemed like an ordinary pouch; the kind one kept tobacco in.
For a moment he hesitated.
What if it was a bomb?
He ought to hand it over to the experts.
But he was impatient to know, for the man — and he was a man, there was no doubting that now — had almost killed him.
He had been that close.
Gently he pressed the two ends of the wallet's rim towards each other.
The  mouth of the pouch gaped open.
He reached in with two fingers, hooking out the thing within.
He stared at it a moment, then handed it across to Karr.
He had known.
The moment before he had opened it, he had known what would be inside.
A stone.
A single white wei chi stone.
Like a calling card.
To let the T'ang know who had killed him.
Tolonen met Karr's eyes and smiled bitterly.
‘DeVore.
This was DeVore's work.’
Karr looked down.
‘Yes, and when he hears about it he'll be disappointed.
Very disappointed.’
Tolonen was quiet a moment, brooding, then he looked back at Karr.
‘Something's wrong, Gregor.
My instincts tell me he's up to something.
While we're here, distracted by this business.
I must get back.
At once.
Jelka…’
Karr touched his arm.
‘We'll go at once.’
DeVore turned in his chair and looked across at his lieutenant.
‘What is it, Wiegand?’
‘I thought you should know, sir.
The Han has failed.
Marshal Tolonen is still alive.’
‘Ah…’
He turned, staring out of the long window again, effectively dismissing the man.
For a while he sat there, perfectly still, studying the slow movement of cloud above the distant peaks, the thin wisps of cirrus like delicate feathers of snow against the rich blue of the sky.
Then he turned back.
He smiled.
Like Wiegand, they would all be thinking he had tried to kill Tolonen, but that wasn't what he'd wanted.
Killing him would only make him a martyr.
Would strengthen the Seven.
No, what he wanted was to destroy Tolonen.
Day by day.
Little by little.
Yes.
Tolonen would have found the stone.
And he would know it was his doing.
There was a secret lift in his room, behind one of the full-length wall charts.
He used it now, descending to the heart of the warren.
At the bottom a one-way mirror gave him a view of the corridor outside.
He checked it was clear, then stepped out.
The room was to the left, fifty ch'i along the corridor, at the end of a cul-de-sac hewn out of the surrounding rock.
At the door he paused and took a small lamp from his pocket, then examined both the locks.
They seemed untouched.
Satisfied, he tapped in the combinations and placed his eye against the indented pad.
The door hissed back.
The girl was asleep.
She lay there, face down on her cot, her long, ash blonde hair spilling out across her naked shoulders.
He had found her in one of the outlying villages.
The physical resemblance had struck him at once.
Not that she would have fooled anyone as she was, but eighteen months of good food and expert surgery had transformed her, making  the thousand yuan he'd paid for her seem the merest trifle.
As she was now she was worth a million, maybe ten.
He closed the door and went across, pulling the sheet back slowly, careful not to wake her, exposing the fullness of her rump, the elegance of her back.
He studied her a moment, then reached down, shaking her until she woke and turned, looking up at him.
She was so like her.
So much so that even her ‘father’ would have had difficulty telling her from the real thing.
DeVore smiled and reached out to brush her face tenderly with the back of his hand, watching as she pushed up against it gratefully.
Yes.
She was nearly ready now.
‘Who are you?’ he asked her gently.
‘Tell me what your name is.’
She hesitated then raised her eyes to his again.
‘Jelka,’ she said.
‘My name is Jelka Tolonen.’
Jelka was kicking for Siang's throat when the far wall blew in, sending smoke and debris billowing across the practice arena.
The shock wave threw her backwards, but she rolled and was up at once, facing the direction of the explosion, seeing at a glance that Siang was dead, huge splinters jutting from his back.
They came fast through the smoke: three men in black clingsuits, breathing masks hiding their features, their heads jerking from side to side, their guns searching.
Ping Tiao assassins.
She knew it immediately.
And acted…
A backflip, then a single-handed grab for the exercise rope, her other hand seeking the wallbars.
The middle assassin fired even as she dropped.
Wood splintered next to her.
She had only to survive a minute and help would be here.
A minute.
It was too long.
She would have to attack.
She went low, slid on her belly, then was up, jumping high, higher than she had ever leaped before, her body curled into a tight ball.
All three were firing now, but the thick smoke was confusing them; they couldn't see properly through their masks.
She went low again, behind Siang, taking a short breath before turning and kicking upward.
One of the men went down, his leg broken.
She heard his scream and felt her blood freeze.
The other two turned, firing again.
Siang's body jerked and seemed to dance where it lay.
But Jelka had moved on, circling them, never stopping, changing direction constantly, dipping low to breathe.
In a moment they would realise what she was doing and keep their fire at floor level.
Then she would be dead.
Unless she killed them first.
The fact that there were two hindered them.
They couldn't fire continuously for fear of killing each other.
As she turned, they had to try to follow her, but the rapidity of her movements, the unpredictability of her changes of direction, kept wrong-footing them.
She saw one of them stumble and took her chance, moving in as he staggered up, catching him beneath the chin with stiffened fingers.
She felt the bones give and moved away quickly, coughing now, the smoke getting to her at last.
Fifteen seconds.
Just fifteen seconds.
Suddenly — from the far end of the arena where the wall had been — there was gunfire.
As she collapsed she saw the last of the assassins crumple, his body lifted once then once again as the shells ripped into him.
And as she passed into unconsciousness she saw her father standing there, the portable cannon at his hip, its fat muzzle smoking.
SHADOWS
Tolonen sat at his daughter's bedside, his eyes brimming with tears.
‘It was all a terrible mistake, my love.
They were after me.’
Jelka shook her head, but a huge lump sat in her throat at the thought of what had happened.
She had spent the last ten days in bed, suffering from shock, the after-reaction fierce, frightening.
It had felt like she was going mad.
Her father had sat with her through the nights, holding her hands, comforting her, robbing himself of sleep to be with her and help her through the worst of it.
Now she felt better, but still it seemed that everything had changed.
Suddenly, hideously, the world had become a mask — a paper-thin veil behind which lay another nightmare world.
The walls were no longer quite so solid as they had seemed, and each white-suited attendant seemed to conceal an assassin dressed in black.
The world had flipped over in her mind.
Was now a thing of menace — a jagged landscape of threat.
It made it no better for her that they had been after her father.
No, that simply made things worse.
Far worse.
For she had had vivid dreams — dreams in which he was dead and she had gone to see him in the T'ang's Great Hall, laid out in state, clothed from head to foot in the white cloth of death.
She stared at him a moment, her eyes narrowed slightly, as if she saw through the flesh to the bone itself, and while he met her staring eyes unflinchingly, something in the depths of him squirmed and tried to break away.
They had been Ping Tiao .
A specially trained cell.
But not Security trained, thank the gods.
He looked down at where his hands held those of his daughter.
The audacity of the Ping Tiao in coming for him had shaken them.
They knew now that the danger was far greater than they had estimated.
The War had unleashed new currents of dissent: darker, more deadly currents that would be hard to channel.
His own investigations had drawn a blank.
He did not know how they would  have known his household routines.
Siang?
It was possible, but now that Siang was dead he would never know.
And if not Siang, then who?
It made him feel uneasy-an unease he had communicated to Li Shai Tung when they were alone together.
‘You must watch yourself,Chieh Hsia ,’ he had said.
‘You must watch those closest to you.
For there is a new threat.
What it is, I don't exactly know.
Not yet.
But it exists.
It's real.’
Bombs and guns.
He was reaping the harvest he had sown.
They all were.
But what other choice had they had?
To lay down and die.
The only other choice.
Tolonen looked at his daughter, sleeping now, and felt all the fierce warmth of his love for her rise up again.
A vast tide of feeling.
And with it came an equally fierce pride in her.
How magnificent she had been!
He had seen the replay from the Security cameras and witnessed the fast, flashing deadliness of her.
He relinquished her hand and stood, stretching the tiredness from his muscles.
They would come again.
He knew it for a certainty.
They would not rest now until they had snatched his breath from him.
His instinct told him so.
And though it was not his way to wait passively for things to come to him, in this he found himself helpless, unable to act.
They were like shadows.
One strove to fight them and they vanished.
Or left a corpse, which was no better.
No, there was no centre to them.
Nothing substantial for him to act against.
Only an idea.
A nihilistic concept.
Thinking this, he felt his anger rise again, fuelled by a mounting sense of impotence.
He would have crushed them if he could.
One by one.
Like bugs beneath his heel.
But how did one crush shadows?
Fei Yen jumped down from her mount, letting the groom lead it away, then turned to face the messenger.
‘Well?
Is he home?’
The servant bowed low, offering the sealed note.
Fei Yen snatched it from him impatiently, moving past him as if he were not there, making her way towards the East Palace.
As she walked she tore at the seal, unfolding the single sheet.
As she'd expected, it was from Li Yuan.
She slowed, reading what he had written, then stopped, her teeth bared in a smile.
He would be back by midday, after four days away on his father's business.
She looked about her at the freshness of the morning, then laughed and, pulling her hair out of the tight bun she had secured it in to ride, shook her head.
She would prepare herself for him.
Would bathe and put on fresh clothes.
Perhaps the new silks he had sent her last week.
She hurried on, exhilarated, the delights of her early morning ride and the joy of his return, coursing like twin currents in her blood.
She was about to go into her rooms when she heard noises further down the  corridor, in the direction of Li Yuan's private offices.
She frowned.
That part of the East Palace was supposed to be off-bounds while Li Yuan was away.
She took two steps down the corridor, then stopped, relieved.
It was only Nan Ho.
He was probably preparing the offices for his master's return.
She was about to turn away, not wishing to disturb the Master of the Inner Chamber, when she realised what it was she had found strange.
There had been voices…
She walked towards him; was halfway down the corridor when he turned.
‘Lady Fei…’
She could see at once that he had not expected her.
But it was more than that.
His surprise in finding her there had not turned to relief as, in normal circumstances, it ought.
No.
It was almost as if he had something to hide.
‘You know Prince Yuan will be here in two hours, Master Nan?’
He bowed his head deeply.
‘He sent word, my lady.
I was preparing things for him.’
‘My husband is fortunate to have such an excellent servant as you, Master Nan.
Might I see your preparations?’
He did not lift his head, but she could sense the hesitation in him and knew she had been right.
‘You wish to see, my lady?’
‘If you would, Master Nan.
I promise not to disturb anything.
I realise my husband has his set ways, and I'd not wish to cause you further work.’
‘They are but rooms, my lady…’
‘But rooms are like clothes.
They express the man.
Please, Master Nan, indulge my curiosity.
I would like to see how Prince Yuan likes his room to be.
It would help me as a wife to know such a thing.’
Nan Ho lifted his head and met her eyes.
‘My lady, I…’
She smiled.
‘Is there some secret, Master Nan?
Something I should know?’
He bowed his head, then backed away, clearly upset by her insistence.
‘Please, my lady.
Follow me.
But remember, I am but the Prince's hands.’
She hesitated, her curiosity momentarily tinged with apprehension.
What could have flustered the normally imperturbable Nan Ho?
Was it some awful thing?
Some aspect of Li Yuan he wanted to keep from her?
Or was it, instead, a surprise present for her?
Something that, in insisting she see it, would spoil Yuan's plans?
For a moment she wondered whether she should draw back.
It was not too late.
Li Yuan would hate it if she spoiled his surprise.
But curiosity had the better of her.
She followed Master Nan, waiting as he unlocked the great double doors again and pushed them open.
She walked through, then stopped dead, her mouth fallen open in surprise.
‘You!’
The two girls had risen from the couch at her entrance.
Now they stood there, their heads bowed, their hands folded in their laps.
She turned, her face dark with anger.
‘What is the meaning of this, Master Nan?
What are these creatures doing here?’
Nan Ho had kept his head lowered, bracing himself against her reaction.
Even so, the savagery of her words surprised him.
He swallowed and, keeping his head low, looked past her at the girls.
‘My master said to bring them here this morning.
I was to…’
Her shriek cut him off.
‘Do you expect me to believe that, Nan Ho?
That on the morning of his return my husband would have two such…low sorts brought to him?’
She shuddered and shook her head, her teeth bared.
‘No…
I don't know what your plan is, Master Nan, but I know one thing, I can no longer trust you in your present position.’
He jerked his head up, astonished, but before he could utter a word in his defence, Fei Yen had whirled about and stormed across to where the two girls stood.
‘And you!’ she began.
‘I know your sort!
Turtles eating barley, that's what you are!
Good-for-nothings!
You hope to rise on your backs,neh ?’
The last word was spat out venomously.
But Fei Yen was far from finished.
‘You!
Pearl Heart…that's your name, isn't it?’
Overwhelmed by the viciousness of the attack, Pearl Heart could only manage a slight bob of her head.
Her throat was dry and her hands trembled.
‘I know why you're here.
Don't think I'm blind to it.
But the little game's over, my girl.
For you and your pimp here.’
Fei Yen shuddered, pain and an intense anger emphasising every word.
‘I know you've been sleeping with my husband.’
Pearl Heart looked up, dismayed, then bowed her head quickly, frightened by the look in Fei Yen's eyes.
‘Well?
Admit it!’
‘It is true, my lady…’ she began, meaning to explain, but Fei Yen's slap sent her sprawling back on to the couch.
She sat, looking up at Fei Yen, her eyes wide with shock.
Sweet Rose was sobbing now, her whole frame shaking.
Fei Yen's voice hissed at her menacingly.
‘Get out…
All of you…
Get out !’
Pearl Heart struggled up, then stumbled forward, taking her sister's arm as she went, almost dragging her from the room, her own tears flowing freely now, her sense of shame unbearable.
Li Yuan…
How her heart ached to see him now; to have him hold her and comfort her.
But it was gone.
Gone forever.
And nothing but darkness lay ahead of them.
Back in her rooms, Fei Yen stood there, looking about her sightlessly, the blackness lodged in her head like a storm trapped between high mountains.
For a while she raged, inarticulate in her grief, rushing about the room uncontrollably, smashing and breaking, the pent-up anger pouring out of her in grunting, shrieking torrents.
Then she calmed and sat on the edge of the huge bed, her respiration normalising, her pulse slowing.
Again she looked about her, this time with eyes that moved, surprised, between the broken shapes that lay littered about the room.
She wanted to hurt him.
Hurt him badly, just as he had hurt her.
But a part of her knew that that was not the way.
She must be magnanimous.
She must swallow her hurt and pay him back with loving kindness.
Her revenge would be to enslave him.
To make him need her more than he needed anything in the whole of Chung Kuo.
More than life itself.
She shuddered then gritted her teeth, forcing down the pain she felt.
She would be strong.
As she'd been when Han had died.
She would deny her feelings and will herself to happiness.
For the sake of her sons.
She went to the mirror, studying herself.
Her face was blotchy, her eyes puffed from crying.
She turned and looked about her, suddenly angered by the mess she had made — by her momentary lapse of control.
But it was nothing she could not set right.
Quickly she went into the next room, returning a moment later with a small linen basket.
Then, on her hands and knees, she worked her way methodically across the floor, picking up every last piece of broken pottery or glass she could find.
It took her longer than she had thought, but it served another purpose.
By the time she had finished she had it clearly in her mind what she must do.
She took the basket back into the dressing-room and threw a cloth over it, then began to undress, bundling her discarded clothes into the bottom of one of the huge built-in cupboards that lined the walls.
Then, naked, she went through and began to fill the huge, sunken bath.
She had decided against the new silks.
Had decided to keep it as simple as she could.
A single vermilion robe.
The robe she had worn that first morning, after they had wed.
While the water steamed from the taps, she busied herself at the long table beneath the bathroom mirror, lifting the lids from the various jars and sniffing at them until she found the one she was searching for.
Yes…
She would wear nothing but this.
His favourite.
Mei hua .
Plum blossom.
She looked at her reflection in the wall-length mirror, lifting her chin.
Her eyes were less red than they'd been, her skin less blotchy.
She smiled, hesitantly at first, then more confidently.
It had been foolishness to be so jealous.
She was the match of a thousand serving girls.
She nodded to her image, determined, her hands smoothing her flanks, moving slowly upward until they cupped and held her breasts, her nipples rising until they stood out rigidly.
She would bewitch him, until he had eyes for nothing but her.
She remembered how he had looked at her-awed, his eyes round in his face — and laughed, imagining it.
He would be hers.
Totally, utterly hers.
Even so, she would have her vengeance on the girls.
And on that pimp, Nan Ho.
For the hurt they had caused her.
Her smile softened.
And after she had made love to him, she would cook for him.
A recipe her grandmother had left to her.
Yes, while he slept she would prepare it for him.
As a wife would.
Li Yuan yawned and stretched as the craft descended, then looked across.
His personal secretary, Chang Shih-sen, was gathering his papers together, softly humming to himself.
‘We've got through a lot of work in the last four days, Chang,’ he said, smiling.
‘I don't think I've ever worked so hard.’
Chang smiled back at him, inclining his head slightly.
‘It is good to work hard, my lord.’
‘Yes…’
Li Yuan laughed, feeling the craft touch down beneath him.
‘But today we rest, neh?
I won't expect to see you until tomorrow morning.’
Chang bowed low, pleased by his master's generosity.
‘As the Prince wishes.’
He turned back, looking out the portal at the activity in the hangar.
A welcoming committee of four servants, led by Nan Ho, was waiting to one side, while the hangar crew busied themselves about the craft.
Chang was right.
He felt good despite his tiredness.
He had spent more than eighty hours scanning files and interviewing, and now all but two of the places on the Project were filled.
If his father agreed, they could go ahead with it within the week.
For one day, however, he would take a break from things.
Would set all cares aside and devote himself to Fei Yen.
He looked down, grinning at the thought of her.
Life was good.
To have important business in one's life and such a woman to return to: that, surely, was all a man could ask for?
And sons…
But that would come.
As surely as the seasons.
He heard the hatch hiss open and looked back at Chang Shih-sen.
‘Go now, Chang.
Put the papers in my study.
We'll deal with them tomorrow.’
Chang bowed his head, then turned away.
Li Yuan sat there a moment longer, thinking over the satisfactions of the last few days, recollecting the great feeling of ch'i , of pure energy, he had experienced in dealing with these matters.
Unlike anything he had ever felt before.
It made him understand things better.
Made him realise why men drove themselves instead of staying at home in the loving arms of their wives.
And yet it was good to come home, too.
Good to have that to look forward to.
‘A balance…’ he said softly, then laughed and climbed up out of his seat, making his way down the short gangway, the three servants standing off to one side of him as he passed, their heads bowed low.
Nan Ho came forward as he reached the bottom of the steps, then knelt and touched his head to the ground.
‘Welcome home, my lord.’
‘Thank you, Master Nan.
But tell me, where is Fei Yen?’
Nan Ho lifted his head fractionally.
‘She is in her chambers, Prince Yuan.
She has given orders for no one to disturb her.
Not even her amah .’
Li Yuan grinned.
‘Ah…’
‘My lord…’
But Li Yuan was already moving past him.
‘Not now, Master Nan.
I must go and see her.’
Nan Ho turned, his extreme agitation unnoticed by the Prince.
‘But my lord…’
‘Later, Nan Ho…’
Li Yuan called back, not turning, breaking into a trot as he crossed the flagged pathway between the hangar and the Northern Palace.
He ran through the palace, past bowing servants, then threw open the doors to her apartments.
She was waiting for him, sat on the huge bed, her legs folded under her, the vermilion robe she had worn on their wedding morning pulled about her.
Her head was lowered in obedience, but there was a faint smile on her cherry lips.
He stood there in the doorway, getting his breath, drinking in the sight of her.
‘My lord?’ she said, looking up at him, her eyes dark like the night, her voice warm, welcoming.
‘My love…’ he said, the words barely a whisper, the scent of plum blossom in the room intoxicating.
Then, closing the doors firmly behind him, turning the great key, he went across to her and sat beside her on the bed, drawing her close.
He drew back, looking at her again, seeing at once the reflection of his love, there in her eyes.
‘I've missed you…’
In answer she shrugged the thin silk robe from her shoulders, then drew his head down into the cushion of her breasts, curling her legs about him.
‘Make love to me, my lord, I beg you.’
Afterwards he lay there, next to her, staring at her in wonder.
‘My love.
My darling little swallow…’
She laughed then drew his face close, kissing him gently, tenderly.
‘Now you know how much I missed you.’
‘And I you…’
She pushed him back and sat up.
‘But you're tired, husband.
Why don't you sleep a while.
And when you wake I'll have a meal ready for you.’
‘But my love, you needn't…’
She put a finger to his lips.
‘I want to.
Besides, I am your wife.’
He made to protest again, but she shook her head.
With a brief laugh he lay back on the bed, closing his eyes.
Within a minute he was asleep.
She studied him a moment, laying her hand softly on his chest, feeling the soft rise and fall of his breath, then gently covered the soft fold of his spent manhood.
She shivered.
He was still such a boy.
She went into the tiny pantry and busied herself, preparing the ingredients she  had had brought from the kitchen only an hour before.
It would be two hours before it was ready.
Time enough to bathe and change again.
She lay there a long time in the bath, soaking, looking through the open door at his sleeping figure on the bed.
He was no bother really.
Such a sweet boy.
And yet…
As she floated there, she found herself remembering the sight of Tsu Ma in the water, his chest bared, his hair slicked back; the presence of his boots planted so solidly on the earth beneath the table; the deep, warm vibration of his voice.
Tsu Ma…
She opened her eyes again.
The boy was still sleeping.
Her husband, the boy.
She shivered, then stirred herself in the water.
It was time she dressed and saw to his meal.
When he woke it was to find her sitting beside him on the bed, watching him.
He turned his head, glancing at his timer, then yawned.
He had slept more than two hours.
He sat up, breathing in deeply.
‘What's that?
It smells delicious.’
She smiled and turned away, returning moments later with a bowl and chopsticks.
He took it from her, sniffed at it, then tucked in, holding the bowl close to his mouth, smacking his lips in appreciation.
‘This is excellent.
What is it?’
She was kneeling by the bed, watching him.
‘It's a recipe of my grandmother's.
Wolfberry stewed with beef.
A tonic for yang energy…’
She laughed at his frown.
‘An aphrodisiac, my husband.
It enhances strength and endurance.’
He nodded enthusiastically.
‘It's good .
Your grandmother was a clever woman, and you, my love, are an excellent cook.’
She looked down, smiling.
‘My husband is too kind.’
He was still a moment, watching her, astonished for the hundredth time by the fragile beauty of her, then began to eat again, realising with a laugh just how hungry he had been.
‘Is there anything else, husband?
Anything I could get for you?’
He lowered the bowl, smiling at her.
‘No.
But that reminds me.
There is something I must do.
One small thing, then the rest of the day is free.
We could go riding if you like.’
She looked back at him, her eyes bright.
‘I'd like that.’
‘Good.
Then I'll call Nan Ho…’
Uncharacteristically, she interrupted him.
‘Forgive me, husband, but that is not possible.’
‘Not possible?’
Li Yuan frowned, then gave a short laugh.
‘I don't understand you.’
She lowered her head, making herself small, submissive.
‘I am afraid I had to dismiss Master Nan.
He…’
‘Dismiss him?’
Li Yuan set the bowl aside and stood, looking down at her.
‘Do I hear you rightly, Fei Yen?
You have dismissed my Master of the Inner Chambers?’
‘I had to, my lord…’
He shook his head, then looked away, past her.
‘Tell me.
Why did you dismiss him?
What did he do?’
She glanced up at him, then bowed her head again.
‘My lord will be angry with me…’
He looked back at her.
‘Have I reason, then, to be angry with you?’
She looked up, meeting his eyes, her own dewed with tears.
He hardened himself against the sight of her; even so he felt himself moved.
He had never seen her as beautiful as at that moment.
‘I am your wife, my prince.
Did I not have good reason to be angry with the man?’
He laughed, utterly confused now.
‘Fei Yen…talk sense.
I don't follow what you're saying.’
She looked down, swallowing, a sudden bleakness in her face that tore at his heart.
‘The girls…
Nan Ho had brought girls…’
A shudder passed through her.
‘Girls for your bed…’
He took a long breath.
So…
She had misunderstood him.
‘Forgive me, my love, but you have no reason to be angry with Nan Ho.
It was not his doing.
I asked him to bring those girls here.
That was the thing I had to do.’
‘And that makes it better?’
Her voice was broken, anguished.
‘How could you, Yuan?
Am I not a good wife to you?
Do I deny you anything?’
She looked up at him, the hurt in her eyes almost too much for him.
When she spoke again, her voice was a mere whisper.
‘Or have you tired of me already?’
He was shaking his head.
‘No…never.
But you mistake me…’
‘Mistake you?’
Sudden anger flared in her eyes.
‘You bring those girls here — girls who have shared your bed — and say I have mistaken you.’
‘Fei Yen…’
‘Then deny it!
Look me in the eyes, husband, and deny that you haven't had them?’
He shivered.
‘It wasn't like that.
I…’
But his hesitation was enough for her.
She tucked her head down bitterly, her hands pulling anxiously at the lap of her dress, then stood angrily.
‘Fei Yen!
You must believe me…’
She glared at him.
’ Believe you ?’
He bristled, suddenly angered that she could think this of him, after all he had done to purify himself for her.
Hadn't he cast the maids off?
Hadn't he denied himself the pleasures of their company this last year?
He shuddered.
‘You had no business dismissing Master Nan!
Who comes or goes in these rooms is my business, not yours!’
She turned away, suddenly very still.
Her voice changed, became smaller and  yet harder than before.
‘Then let a thousand singsong girls come.
Let them be wives to you.
But not Fei Yen…’
He went to her, taking her shoulders gently, wanting, despite his anger, to make things right between them, but she shrugged him off, turning violently to confront him, the fury in her eyes making him take a step back from her.
‘What kind of a woman do you think I am, Li Yuan?
Do you think me like them?
Do you really think I have no pride?’
She drew herself up straighter.
‘Am I not the wife of a great prince?’
‘You know what you are, Fei Yen!’
‘No.
I only know what you would have me be.’
He went to answer her, but she shook her head dismissively, her eyes boring into him.
‘I tried hard, Li Yuan.
Tried to dispel my doubts and tell myself it was Nan Ho.
I tried to be loving to you.
To be a good wife in every way.
And how did you repay me?
By cheating on me.
By bringing in those whores behind my back…’
He felt something snap in him.
This was too much.
To call his girls whores.
Even so, he answered her quietly.
‘Be careful what you say, Fei Yen.
Those girls were my maids.
They took good care of me in my childhood.
I have a great affection for them.’
She laughed scornfully.
‘Whores…’
His bark of anger made her jump.
‘Hold your tongue, woman!’
He stood there commandingly, suddenly very different; all childishness, all concession gone from him.
He was shouting now.
‘It is not your place to criticise me .
I have done nothing wrong.
Understand me?
Nothing!
But you…’
He shivered with indignation.
‘To have the audacity to dismiss Master Nan…
Who in hell's name do you think you are?’
She did not answer.
But her eyes glared back at him, their look wild and dangerous.
‘Nan Ho stays, understand me?
And I shall see the girls, as that's my wish.’
He saw a shudder of pure rage ripple through her and felt himself go cold inside.
Her face seemed suddenly quite ugly; her lips too thin, her nose too brittle, her perfect brow furrowed with lines of anger.
It was as if she were suddenly bewitched, her words spat back at him through a mask of hatred.
‘If that's your wish, so be it.
But do not expect me in your bed, Prince Yuan.
Not tonight.
Nor any other night.’
His laughter was harsh; a bitter, broken sound; the antithesis of laughter.
‘So be it.’
He turned and stormed from the room, slamming the door behind him as he went, his departing footsteps echoing, unrelenting, on the marble tiles.
DeVore was pressed up against the wall, Gesell's knife at his throat.
‘Give me one good reason why I shouldn't kill you?’
DeVore stared back at Gesell, a vague, almost lazy sense of distaste in his eyes.
‘Because I don't know what you're talking about.’
‘You Lying bastard.
You killed those two men.
You must have.
You were the only one outside the central committee who knew what they were doing.
Only you knew how crucial they were to our plans.’
There was a movement behind Gesell.
‘Not the only one…’
Gesell turned.
Mach had come in silently.
He stood there, watching them.
Ascher went across, confronting him, her anger, if anything, more pronounced than Gesell's.
‘I say we kill him.
He's betrayed us.
Spat on us.’
Mach shook his head.
‘He's done nothing.
Let him go.’
‘No !’
Gesell twisted DeVore's collar tighter.
‘Emily's right.
We can't trust him after this.’
Mach pushed past the woman.
‘For the gods’ sakes, let him go, Bent.
Don't you understand?
I killed them.’
Gesell laughed uncertainly.
‘You?’
Mach took the knife from Gesell's hand and sheathed it, then removed his hand from DeVore's collar.
Only then did he turn and look at DeVore, inclining his head slightly.
‘I apologise,Shih Turner.
You must excuse my brother.
He was not to know.’
‘Of course,’ DeVore stretched his neck slightly, loosening the muscles there.
Gesell rounded on Mach.
‘Well?
What the hell's been happening?’
‘I'm sorry, Bent.
I had no time to warn you.
Besides, I wasn't sure.
Not until I'd checked.’
‘Sure of what?’
‘They were Security.
Both of them.
They must have been sleepers.
Records show they left Security five years back-a year before they joined us.’
A slight tightening about DeVore's eyes was the only sign that he was interested, but none of the others in the room noticed it, nor the way he rubbed at his wrist, as if relieving an itch there; they were watching Mach, horrified by this new development.
‘Security…’
Gesell hissed through his teeth.
‘Gods…’
‘There are others, too.
Three more.
In two separate cells.’
‘You made checks?’
Mach nodded.
‘I'm keeping tags on them.
They'll hear what happened.
I want to see what they'll do.
Whether they'll sit tight or run.
If they run I want them.
Alive, if possible.
I want to find out what they're up to.’
Ascher was shaking her head.
‘It doesn't make sense.
If they had their men inside our organisation, why didn't they act over Helmstadt?’
Mach glanced at DeVore, conscious of how much he was giving away simply by talking in front of him, but he'd had no choice.
If Gesell had killed DeVore, they'd have been back to square one.
Or worse: they might have found themselves in a tit-for-tat war with DeVore's lieutenants.
It was almost certain that the man had given orders to that effect before he came here at Gesell's summons.
He turned, facing Ascher.
‘I thought of that.
But that's how it works sometimes.
They're ordered to sit tight until the thing's big enough and ripe enough to be taken.
They obviously thought that Helmstadt was worth sacrificing.’
‘Or that you wouldn't succeed…’
DeVore said.
Mach looked back at him again.
‘Maybe…’
The three men had been an advance squad; trained technicians.
Their job had been to locate the communications nerve-centres surrounding Bremen.
It was a delicate, sensitive job; one upon which the success or failure of the whole attack depended.
The idea was for them to place special devices at these loci -devices that the regular maintenance crews would think were innocuous parts of the complex of delicate wiring.
Those devices would sit there, unused, for months, until the day when the Ping Tiao launched their attack.
Then they would be triggered and Bremen would suffer a massive communications blackout.
That had been the plan.
But now things were in chaos.
Gesell looked down.
‘Do you think they've passed on what they knew?’
Mach shrugged, his expression bitter.
Even killing them had not appeased his anger.
‘I don't know.
I hoped to keep one of them alive for questioning, but they fought hard.
It was as if they'd been ordered not to be taken alive.’
‘That's so.’
Again DeVore entered the conversation.
He moved closer.
‘You should take one of them now, before they hear of it.’
Ascher nodded.
‘I think he's right.
What if they take poison or something?’
Mach shivered, then bowed his head.
‘Okay.
We'll take them now.
But if it's like it was with the others, it won't be easy.’
DeVore narrowed his eyes, studying Mach.
His respect for the man had grown enormously.
Matton and Tucker had been two of his best men; not merely good at their task of infiltrating the Ping Tiao , but good fighters, too.
He was sorry to lose them.
Sorry, too, to have had his network of spies uncovered, his eye amongst the Ping Tiao blinded.
Now he would have to depend upon cruder means — on bribery and blackmail.
Unsatisfactory means.
‘Concentrate on just one of them,’ he said, meeting Mach's eyes.
‘Take him yourself.
Then bind him tightly, so there's no chance of him harming himself.
After that you should do things slowly.
Time, that's all it needs.
Time will break the spirit of any man.
Then you'll find out what you want to know.’
Mach stared back at him steadily.
‘You've done this?’
DeVore nodded.
‘Many times.’
‘Then I'll do as you say.’
DeVore smiled.
‘Good.’
But it would be too late.
As soon as Mach had revealed what he had done, DeVore had pressed the tiny panel at his wrist, opening the channel that switched everything he was saying direct into the heads  of his three surviving agents.
Already his men would have heard his words and taken the appropriate action.
‘And if we discover nothing?’
Gesell asked, looking directly at DeVore.
‘Then we continue.
We must assume now that they know about our plan to attack Bremen, but not when or where we will strike.
Nor how precisely.
Meanwhile it would profit us to seem to change our plans.
To look for other targets.
And let them know…’
Mach looked up again, smiling for the first time since he had entered the room.
‘I like that.
A diversion…’
DeVore nodded and smiled back at him.
‘What does Sun Tzu say?
‘The crux of military operations lies in the pretence of accommodating one's self to the designs of the enemy.’
Well, we shall seem to back off, as if discovered, but in reality we shall continue with our scheme.
If they know nothing of our plans then no harm has been done today.
And even if they do know, they'll not expect us to pursue it after this, neh?’
Mach studied him thoughtfully a moment, then nodded.
‘Yes.
But I must go.
Before they hear…’
Haavikko closed the door behind him then gave a small shudder, staring at the tiny slip of plastic in his hand.
His senior officer had been only too glad to approve his new posting.
From Major Erickson's viewpoint it must have seemed a blessing to be rid of him.
He had been nothing but trouble for the Major.
But now he was Karr's man; part of his special services unit.
Still a lieutenant, but with a future now.
And a friend.
He was meeting Kao Chen in two hours, but first there was one more thing to sort out.
His sister, Vesa.
Vesa had been living in a small apartment in the Mids since their aunt had died a year back.
Wrapped up in his own debauchery he had not known of her plight until recently.
But now he could do something.
The job with Karr brought with it a private living unit in Bremen: four rooms, including the luxury of his own private bathroom.
‘But you'll not be there that often,’ Karr had warned him.
‘Why not move your sister in?’
Vesa had jumped at the idea.
She had held on to his neck and wept.
Only then had he realised how lonely she had been, how great his neglect of her, and he had cried and held her tightly.
‘It's all right,’ he had whispered, kissing her neck.
‘Everything will be all right.’
He tucked the transfer document into his tunic, then hurried along the corridors, taking a crowded lift down to the living quarters in the heart of the great multi-stack fortress.
She was waiting for him in the apartment.
As he came in, she got up from the couch and came across, embracing him, her eyes bright with excitement.
‘This is wonderful, Axel!
We'll be happy here.
I know we will.’
He smiled and held her to him, looking about the room.
The apartment she had been in had been a single room — like his own, spartanly furnished — and she had had to share washing and night-soil facilities.
He gritted his teeth against the shame that welled up at the thought of what he'd let happen to her, then met her eyes again, smiling.
‘We'll get a few bits and pieces, eh?
Brighten things up a bit.
Make it more personal.
More us.’
She smiled.
‘That would be nice.’
He let her go, then stood there, watching her move about the room, disturbed by the thoughts, the memories that insisted on returning to him in her presence.
He kept thinking of the girl in Mu Chua's House of the Ninth Ecstasy; the singsong girl, White Orchid, who had looked so much like Vesa.
He looked down.
But that was all behind him now.
‘I thought I might cook you something…’
He went across to her.
‘Vesa, look…
I'm sorry, but there's something I have to do tonight.
Something urgent.’
She turned and looked at him, her disappointment sharp.
‘But I thought…’
‘I know.
I'm sorry, I…’
‘Is it your new job?’
He swallowed.
‘Yes…’
He hated lying to her, even over something as innocent as this, but it was important that she didn't get involved.
It would be dangerous pinning Ebert down and he didn't want to put her at risk.
Not for a single moment.
She came across and held his arms.
‘Never mind.
Tomorrow night, eh?
We'll celebrate.
I'll cook something special.’
She hesitated, watching his face a moment, then smiled, her voice softening.
‘You know, Axel.
I'm proud of you.
I always have been.
You were always something more to me than just my big brother.
You were like…’
‘Don't…’ he said softly, hurt by her words.
Even so, he could not disillusion her; could not tell her the depths to which he had sunk.
One day, perhaps, but not now.
Maybe when he had nailed Ebert and the truth was out he would tell her everything.
But not before.
Her eyes blazed with her fierce sisterly love of him.
That look, like purity itself, seared him and he let his eyes fall before it.
‘I must go.’
He kissed her brow, then turned away.
He went through to his room and picked up the bag he had packed earlier, then went to the small desk in the corner and took a tiny notebook from the drawer.
‘Your new job…is it dangerous?’ she asked, watching him from the doorway.
He looked back at her.
‘It might be.’
‘Then you'd best have this.’
She placed something in his left hand.
It was a pendant on a chain.
A circle of black and white jade, the two areas meeting in a swirling S shape.
A tai chi , the symbol of the Absolute — of Yin and Yang in balance.
He stared at it a moment, then looked up at her.
‘It was Father's,’ she said to his unspoken question.
‘He left it to me.
But now it's yours.
It will protect you.’
He set his bag down and slipped the pendant over his neck, holding the jade circle a moment between his fingers, feeling the cool smoothness of its slightly convex surface, then tucked it away beneath his tunic.
He leaned forward and kissed her.
‘Thank you…
I'll treasure it.’
‘And Axel?’
He had bent down to lift his bag again.
‘Yes?’
‘Thank you…for all of this.’
He smiled.
Yes, he thought, but I should have done it years ago.
Klaus Ebert poured two brandies from the big decanter then turned back, offering one to his son.
‘Here…’
Hans raised his glass.
‘To you, Father.’
Klaus smiled and lifted his glass in acknowledgement.
He studied his son a moment, the smile never leaving his face, then nodded.
‘There's something I wanted to speak to you about, Hans.
Something I didn't want to raise earlier, while Mother was here.’
Hans raised his eyebrows, then took a deep swig of the brandy.
‘The Company's all right, isn't it?’
His father laughed.
‘Don't you read your reports, Hans?
Things have never been healthier.
We're twice the size we were five years back.
If this continues…’
Hans reached out and touched his father's arm.
‘I read the reports, Father.
But that isn't what I meant.
I've heard rumours about trouble in the mining colonies.’
‘Yes…’
Klaus eyed his son with new respect.
He had only had the reports himself last night.
It was good to see that, with all his other duties, Hans kept himself astride such matters.
He smiled.
‘That's all in hand.
But that's not what I wanted to talk to you about.
It's something more personal.’
Hans laughed, showing his fine, strong teeth.
‘I thought we'd settled that.
The Marshal's daughter seems a fine young woman.
I'm proud of the way she handled those assassins.
She'll make me a good wife, don't you think?’
Klaus nodded, suddenly awkward.
‘Yes…
Which is why I felt I had to speak to you, Hans.
You see, I've been approached by Minister Chuang.’
Hans's look of puzzlement warmed him, reassured him.
He had known at once that it was only vicious rumour.
For his son to be involved in such an unsavoury business was unthinkable.
‘I saw the Minister this morning,’ he continued.
‘He insisted on coming to see me personally.
He was…most distressed.
His wife, you see…’
He hesitated, thinking that maybe he should drop the matter.
It was clear from Hans's face that he knew nothing about the allegations.
Hans was shaking his head.
‘I don't follow you, Father.
Is his wife ill?’
‘Do you know the woman?’
‘Of course.
She's quite a popular figure in social circles.
I've met her…what?…a dozen, maybe fifteen times.’
‘And what do you make of her?’
Hans laughed.
‘Why?’
Then he frowned, as if suddenly making the connection.
He set his glass down, anger flaring in his eyes.
‘What is this?
Is the Minister alleging something between me and his wife?’
Klaus gave the slightest nod, grateful to his son for articulating it; gratified by the anger he saw in his son's face.
‘Well, damn the man!’
Hans continued.
‘And damn his wife!
Is this the way they repay my friendship — with slurs and allegations?’
Klaus reached out and held his son's shoulder.
‘I understand your anger, Hans.
I too was angry.
I told the Minister that I found his allegations incredible.
I said that I would not believe a son of mine could behave as he was alleging you had behaved.’
He shuddered with indignation.
‘Furthermore, I told him either to provide substantive proof of his allegations or be prepared to be sued for defamation of character.’
Hans was staring at his father wide-eyed.
‘And what did the Minister say to that?’
Klaus shivered again, then he gave a small laugh.
‘He was most put out.
He said his wife had insisted it was true.’
‘Gods…
I wonder why?
Do you think…?’
‘Think what?’
Hans let out a long breath.
‘Perhaps I spurned the woman somehow.
I mean, without knowing it…
She's always been one to surround herself with young bucks.
Perhaps it was simply because I've never fawned or flattered her.
Maybe her pride was hurt by that…
Did the Minister say how or why she broke this incredible news to him?
It seems most extraordinary.’
Klaus shook his head.
‘I never thought to ask.
I was so outraged…’
‘Of course.
Perhaps the Minister had had a row with his wife and to wound him she used my name.
After all, you'd not expect the woman to use the name of one of her real lovers, would you?’
Klaus shrugged, out of his depth.
‘I guess not…’
‘Still…the nerve of it!
To drag me into her sordid affairs.
I've a mind to confront her and her husband and have it out with them.’
Klaus's fingers tightened on his son's shoulder.
‘No, Hans.
I'd prefer it if you didn't.
I think it best if we keep the Minister and his wife at a distance.’
‘But Father…’
‘No.
I felt I had to mention it to you, but let this be the end of it.
All right?’
Hans bowed his head.
‘As my father wishes.’
‘Good.
Then let us talk of more pleasant matters.
I hear young Jelka is being sent home tomorrow.
Perhaps you should visit her, Hans.
You could take her a small gift…’
Klaus nodded to himself, then drained his glass.
Yes, it was probably as Hans said: there had been a row and Chuang's wife had used Hans's name to spite her husband.
It was not Minister Chuang's fault.
He had reacted as any man would.
No, the woman was clearly to blame for everything.
In the circumstances it would be inadvisable to allow bad feeling to develop from such shadows.
Worse still to make an enemy of the Minister.
Tomorrow he would send a gift — one of the new range of creatures, perhaps — to smooth things over.
He looked at his son again and smiled, pleased by what he saw.
He could not have made a finer creature in his own vats.
Though he said it himself, Hans was a masterpiece of genetics — the end product of two centuries of breeding.
Like a god, he was.
A king among men.
His smile softened.
It was as the Seven said, there were levels among men, and Hans, his son, was at the pinnacle.
He watched him drain his glass then smile back at him.
‘I must get back.
You know how it is…’
Hans hesitated, then came forward and kissed his father's cheek.
‘But thank you.’
Klaus grinned.
‘For what?
I am your father, Hans.
Who, if not I, should defend you against such slanders?
Besides, who knows you better than I, neh?’
Hans stepped back, then gave a small bow.
‘Even so…’
Klaus lifted his chin, dismissing him.
‘Go on, boy.
Duty calls.’
Hans grinned, then turned away.
When he was gone Klaus Ebert went across to the decanter and poured himself a second brandy.
In times like these he was fortunate to have such a son.
The kind of son a man could be proud of.
A king.
He smiled and raised the glass, silently toasting his absent son, then downed the drink in a single, savage gulp.
Yes, a king among men.
Haavikko was sitting in Wang Ti's kitchen, Kao Chen's two-year-old daughter, Ch'iang Hsin, snuggled in his lap.
Across from him Chen busied himself at his wife's side, preparing the meal.
At his feet their five-year-old, Wu, was waging a ferocious battle between two armies of miniature dragons, their tiny power packs making them seem almost alive.
Looking about him, it was hard to imagine anything quite so different from the world he had inhabited these past ten years — a world as divorced from this simple domesticity as death is from life.
He shuddered, thinking of it.
A world of swirling smoke and smiling wraiths.
Wang Ti turned to him, wiping her hands on a cloth.
‘And your sister, Axel?
How is she?’
He smiled.
‘She's fine, Wang Ti.
Never happier, I'd say.’
She looked at him a moment, as if to read him, then smiled.
‘That's good.
But you need a woman, Axel Haavikko.
A wife.’
Chen laughed and glanced round.
‘Leave the poor boy alone, Wang Ti.
If he wants a wife he'll find one soon enough.
After all, he's a handsome young man.
And if an ugly fellow like me can find a wife…’
Wang Ti shook her head.
‘Ugly is as ugly does.
Never forget that, husband.
Besides, if I close my eyes you are the handsomest of men!’
Husband and wife laughed; real warmth — a strong, self-deprecating humour — in their laughter.
‘Anyway,’ Chen added after a moment, ‘marriage isn't always such a good thing.
I hear, for instance, that our friend Ebert is to be married to the Marshal's daughter.’
Haavikko looked down, his mood changed utterly by the mention of Ebert.
‘Then I pity the girl.
The man's a bastard.
He cares for nothing except his own self-gratification.
Ask anyone who's served with him.
They'll all tell you the same…’
Chen exchanged a brief look with Wang Ti as she set the bowls down on the table, then nodded.
‘Or would, if they weren't so afraid of crossing him.’
Haavikko nodded.
‘That's the truth.
I've been watching him these past few weeks — spying on him, you might say — and I've seen how he surrounds himself with cronies.
A dozen or more of them at times.
He settles all their Mess bills and buys them lavish presents.
In return they suck up to him, hanging on to his every word, laughing on cue.
You know the kind.
It's sickening.
They call him ‘the Hero of Hammerfest’, but he's just a shit.
A petty little shit.’
Chen wiped his hands, then sat down across from Axel, his blunt face thoughtful.
‘I know.
I've seen it myself.
But I can understand it, can't you?
After all, as the world sees it he's a powerful man — a very powerful man — and those sucking up to him are only little men —hsiao jen .
Socially they're nothing without him.
But they hope to grow bigger by associating with him.
They hope to rise on his coat tails.’
Wang Ti had been watching them, surprised by their change of mood.
Gently, careful not to wake the sleeping child, she took Ch'iang Hsin from Haavikko's lap, then turned, facing her husband, the child cradled against her.
‘Why so bitter, husband?
What has the man ever done to you?’
‘Nothing…’
Chen said, meeting her eyes only briefly.
Haavikko looked between the two momentarily, noting the strange movement of avoidance in Chen's eyes, knowing it signified something, then leaned towards him again.
‘There's one particularly vile specimen who hangs about with him.
A man by the name of Fest.
He was a cadet with me, and afterwards he served with Ebert and me under Tolonen.
He's a captain now, of course.
But back then…’
Axel shuddered, then continued, ‘Well, he was partly to blame for my downfall.’
Chen looked past Axel momentarily, lifting his chin, indicating to Wang Ti that she should wait in the other room, then he looked back at Axel, his face creased with concern, his voice suddenly softer, more sympathetic.
‘What happened?’
Haavikko hesitated, then gave a small, bitter laugh.
‘It was different then.
I can see that now.
The world, I mean.
It was shaped differently.
Not just in my head, but in its externals.
You could trust the appearance of things much more.
But even then there were some — Ebert among them — who were made…crooked, you might say.
Twisted .
And it's in their nature to shape others in their own distorted form.’
He glanced up, giving a little shiver, the sheer rawness of the hurt in his eyes making Chen catch his breath.
‘We'd gone down to the Net, the day it happened.
Ebert, Fest and I. We were after the assassins of the T'ang's Minister, Lwo Kang, and had been told to wait for a contact from our Triad connections there.
Well, I didn't know that Ebert had arranged for us to stay in a singsong house.
It began there, I guess.
He had me drugged and I…well, I woke up in bed with one of the girls.
That was the start of it.
It doesn't seem much, looking back, but it's…well, it's like I was clean before then; another person, unsullied, untouched by all those darker things that came to dominate me.’
‘And that's what happened?’
Haavikko gave a bitter laugh.
‘No.
But that was where it began.
I can see that now.
The two things are inseparable.
That and what followed.
They were part of the same process.
Part of the twistedness that emanates from that man.’
‘Ebert, you mean?’
Haavikko nodded.
‘Anyway…
It was later that day.
After we'd found the corpses of the assassins.
After we'd gone to the Pit and seen Karr defeat and kill the adept, Hwa.
Ebert made us go to the dressing-rooms after the fight.
He wanted to take Karr out to supper and share in his victory.
It was something he didn't own, you see, and he wanted to buy it.
But Karr was having none of it.
And then Tolonen arrived and accepted Karr's services as guide.
Oh, it's all linked.
I see that clearly now.
But back then…well, I thought things just happened — you know the saying,Mei fa tzu , it's fate.
But there was a design to it.
A shape.’
Haavikko paused, taking a deep, shuddering breath, then continued.
‘It was as we were coming away from the assassin's apartment.
We were in the sedan: Ebert, Fest and I. Ebert was sounding off, first about Karr and then about the General.
He said things which he would never have dared say to the General's face.
When I called him out for it, Fest came between us.
He told me to forget what was said.
But I couldn't…’
Haavikko was silent a moment, looking down at his hands.
When he looked up again there was a strange sadness in his eyes.
‘I don't regret what I did.
Even now I don't think I would have acted any  other way.
It was just…well, let me tell you.
When I was alone with the General I asked to be transferred.
I felt unclean, you see.
Of course, the old man asked me for my reasons.
But when I tried to avoid giving them he ordered me to tell him what was up.
So I did.
I told him what was said in the sedan.’
Chen let out his breath.
‘I see…’
‘Yes.
You can imagine.
Tolonen was livid.
He called Ebert and Fest back at once.
It wasn't what I wanted — even then I didn't feel it was right to get Ebert thrown out of the force for something he'd said in a heated moment.
But it was out of my hands at that stage.
And then…’
‘Fest backed him up?’
Haavikko nodded.
‘I couldn't believe it.
They were both so convincing.
So much so that for months afterwards I kept asking myself whether I'd been wrong.
Whether I'd imagined it all.
Whether their version of things was really the truth.
It was as if I'd had a bad dream.
But it was one I couldn't wake from.
And it all began back then.
On that day ten years ago.’
A voice came from the shadows of the doorway behind them.
‘I remember that day well.’
The two men looked round, surprised.
There was a figure in the doorway: a giant of a man, his head stooped to clear the lintel, his broad shoulders filling the frame of the door.
Karr.
Chen was up out of his chair at once.
He went across and embraced the big man, smiling fiercely.
‘Gregor!
You should have said you were coming!’
Karr held his friend's arms a moment, smiling down into his face, then he looked back at Axel.
‘Yes.
I remember you well, Axel Haavikko.
I remember you coming to watch me fight that day.
But I never understood until today why you disappeared from things so suddenly.
You have good cause to hate Major Ebert.’
Haavikko looked down, abashed.
‘If I spoke out of turn, Major Karr…’
Karr laughed.
He had put his arm about Chen's shoulders familiarly, like a father about his son's.
‘Here, in Kao Chen's, we have an agreement, and you must be a party to it, Axel.
In these rooms there is no rank, no formality, understand?
Here we are merely friends.
Kao Chen insists on it, and I…’ his smile broadened, ‘Well, as your senior officer, I insist upon it, too.
Here Chen is Chen.
And I am Gregor.’
Karr put out a hand.
Haavikko stood up slowly, looking at the offered hand, hesitant even now to commit himself so far.
But then he looked at Chen and saw how his friend's eyes urged him to take Karr's hand.
He swallowed drily.
‘I'm grateful.
But there's one further thing you should know about me before you accept me here.’
He looked from one to the other.
‘You are good men, and I would have no secrets from you.
You must know what I am.
What I have done.’
‘Go on,’ Karr said, his hand still offered.
Haavikko stared back at Karr, meeting his grey eyes unflinchingly.
‘You heard  me say how it felt as though I were in a bad dream, unable to wake.
Well, ten years I inhabited that nightmare, living it day and night.
But then, a month or so ago, I woke from it.
Again I found myself in bed in a singsong house, and once again a strange girl was lying there beside me.
But this time the girl was dead, and I knew that I had killed her.’
Karr's eyes narrowed.
‘You knew?’
Haavikko shuddered.
‘Yes.
I remember it quite vividly.’
Karr and Chen looked at each other, some sign of understanding passing between them, then Karr looked back at Haavikko.
His hand had not wavered for a moment.
It was still offered.
‘We have all done things we are ashamed of, Axel Haavikko.
Even this thing you say you did — even that does not make you a bad man.
Chen here, for instance.
Would you say he was a good man?’
Haavikko looked at Chen.
‘I would stake my life on it.’
‘Then it would surprise you, perhaps, to learn that Kao Chen was one of the two assassins you were after that day ten years ago.’
Haavikko shook his head.
‘No.
He can't be.
They were dead, both of them.
I saw the kwai's body for myself.’
Karr smiled.
‘No.
That was another man.
A man Chen paid to play himself.
It's something he's not proud of.
Something he'd rather hadn't happened.
Even so, it doesn't make him a bad man.’
Haavikko was staring at Chen now with astonishment.
‘Of course…the scar.’
He moved forward, tracing the scar beneath Chen's left ear with his forefinger.
‘I know you now.
You were the one on film.
With your friend, the small man.
In the Main of Level Eleven.’
Chen laughed, surprised.
‘You had that on film?’
‘Yes…’
Haavikko frowned.
‘But I still don't understand.
If you were one of the killers…’
Karr answered for Chen.
‘Li Shai Tung pardoned Kao Chen.
He saw what I saw at once.
What you yourself also saw.
That Chen is a good man.
An honest man, when he's given the chance to be.
So men are, unless necessity shapes them otherwise.’
‘Or birth…’
Haavikko said, thinking again of Ebert.
‘So?’
Karr said, his hand still offered.
‘Will you join us, Axel?
Or will you let what's past shape what you will be?’
Haavikko looked from one to the other, then, smiling fiercely at him, tears brimming at the corners of his eyes, he reached out and took Karr's hand.
‘Good,’ said Wang Ti, appearing in the doorway.
She moved past them, smiling at Axel, as if welcoming him for the first time.
‘And about time, too.
Come, you three.
Sit down and eat, before dinner spoils.’
Over the meal Karr outlined what had been happening since his return from Mars.
Their one real clue from the Executive killings had led them to a small Ping Tiao cell in the Mids fifty li south of Bremen.
His men were keeping a watch on the comings and goings of the terrorists.
They had strict orders not to let the Ping Tiao know they were being observed, but it was not something they could do indefinitely.
‘I'm taking a squad in tonight,’ Karr said, sitting back from table and wiping at his mouth with the back of his hand.
‘In the small hours.
I want to capture as many of the cell members as possible, so we'll need to be on our toes.’
Chen nodded, his mouth full.
He chewed for a moment, then swallowed.
‘That'll be difficult.
They organise tightly and post guards at all hours.
And then, when you do confront them, they melt away like shadows.
You'll have to corner them somehow.
But even if you do, I've heard they'd rather die than be captured.’
‘Yes…but then, so will most men if they're given no other option.
Sun Tzu is right: leave but one avenue for a man to escape by and his determination to fight to the death will be totally undermined.
He will recognise how sweet life is and cling to it.
So it will be tonight.
I'll offer them a pathway back to life.
If I can capture just one of them, then perhaps we'll get to the bottom of this.’
Haavikko smiled.
The man looked, even ate, like a barbarian, but he thought like a general.
Tolonen had not been wrong all those years ago when he had recognised this in Karr.
Haavikko put his chopsticks down and pushed his bowl away, then reached into his pocket and took the notebook from it.
‘What's that?’
Karr said, lifting his chin.
Haavikko handed it across the table.
‘See for yourself.’
He watched as the big man thumbed through the notebook.
At first Karr simply frowned, not understanding, then, slowly, he began to nod, a faint smile forming on his lips.
Finally he looked up, meeting Axel's eyes.
‘You did this all yourself?’
‘Yes.’
Chen pushed his bowl aside then leaned forward, interested.
‘What is it?’
Karr met his eyes thoughtfully.
‘It's an analysis of the official investigation into Minister Lwo Kang's murder.
And if I'm not mistaken, there are a number of things here that were never included in the findings of the T'ang's committee.’
Karr handed the book across to Chen, then looked back at Haavikko.
‘May I ask why you did this, Axel?’
‘I was ordered to.’
Karr laughed.
‘Ordered to?’
‘Yes, by General Tolonen, shortly before I was dismissed from his service.
He asked me to compile a list of suspects, however improbable.
Men who might have been behind the assassins.
It was a direct order; one he never rescinded.’
Karr stared back at Haavikko, astonished.
‘I see.
But then surely Marshal Tolonen ought to have it?’
Haavikko hesitated, then looked down, shaking his head.
‘I understand,’ Karr said after a moment.
‘And maybe you're right.
After what happened there's no reason why he should trust you, is there?
The Marshal would see it only as an attempt to get back at Ebert.
He'd think you had invented this to discredit your enemies.’
Haavikko nodded, then looked up again, his eyes burning fiercely now.
‘But you two know Ebert.
You know what he is.
So maybe that,’ he indicated the notebook in Chen's hands, ‘incomplete as it is, will help us nail the bastard.’
Chen looked up.
‘He's right, Gregor.
This makes interesting reading.’
‘Interesting, yes, but not conclusive.’
Chen nodded thoughtfully, smiling back at Karr.
‘Exactly.
Even so, it's a beginning.’
‘Something to work on.’
‘Yes…’
Haavikko saw how the two men smiled knowingly at each other and felt a sudden warmth — a sense of belonging — flood through him.
He was alone no longer.
Now there were three of them, and together they would break Ebert, expose him for the sham — the hollow shell — he was.
Karr looked back at him.
‘Is this the only copy?’
‘No.
There's a second copy, among some things I've willed to my sister, Vesa.’
‘Good,’ Karr turned to Chen.
‘In that case, you hang on to that copy, Chen.
I'm giving you two weeks paid leave.
Starting tomorrow.
I want you to follow up some of those leads.
Especially those involving men known to be friends or business acquaintances of the Eberts.’
‘And if I find anything?’
There was a hammering at the outer door to the apartment.
The three men turned, facing it, Kao Chen getting to his feet.
There was an exchange of voices, then, a moment later, Wang Ti appeared in the doorway.
‘It's a messenger for you, Major Karr,’ she said, the use of Karr's rank indicating to them all that the man was within hearing in the next room.
‘I'll come,’ said Karr, but he was gone only a few moments.
When he came back his face was livid with anger.
‘I don't believe it.
They're dead.’
‘Who?’ said Chen, alarmed.
‘The Ping Tiao cell.
All eight of them.’
Karr's huge frame shuddered with indignation, then, his eyes looking inward, he nodded to himself.
‘Someone knew.
Someone's beaten us to it.’
Ebert was standing with his captain, Auden, laughing, his head thrown back, when Karr arrived.
Signs of a heavy fire-fight were everywhere.
Body bags lay off to one side of the big intersection, while the corridors leading off were strewn with wreckage.
Karr looked about him at the carnage, then turned, facing Ebert.
‘Who was it?’ he demanded.
‘Who was what?’
Ebert said tersely, almost belligerently.
‘Was it DeVore?’
Ebert laughed coldly.
‘What are you talking about, Major Karr?
They were Ping Tiao.
But they're dead now.
Eight less of the bastards to worry about.’
Karr went still, suddenly realising what had happened.
‘You killed them?’
Ebert looked at Auden again, a faint smile reappearing.
‘Every last one of them.’
Karr clenched his fists, controlling himself.
‘Is there somewhere we can talk?’ he said tightly.
‘Somewhere private?’
Auden indicated a room off to one side.
‘I'll post a guard.’
‘No need,’ said Karr.
‘We'll not be long.’
When the door closed behind them, Karr rounded on Ebert.
‘You stupid bastard!
Why didn't you report what you were doing?
Who gave you permission to go in without notifying me?’
Ebert's eyes flared.
‘I don't need your permission, Karr…’
Karr leaned in on him angrily.
‘In this instance you did!
Marshal Tolonen put me in charge of this investigation, and while it's still going on, you report to me, understand me, Major Ebert?
Your precipitate action has well and truly fucked things up.
I had this cell staked out.’
Ebert looked up at the big man defiantly, spitting the words back at him.
‘Well, I've simply saved you the trouble, haven't I?’
Karr shook his head.
‘You arrogant bastard.
Don't you understand?
I didn't want them dead.
We were going in tonight.
I wanted at least one of them alive.
Now the whole bloody lot of them will have gone to ground and the gods know when we'll get another chance like this.’
Ebert was glaring back at him, his hands shaking with anger.
‘You're not pinning this on me, Karr.
It's you who've fouled up, not me.
I was just doing my job.
Following up on evidence received.
If you can't keep your fellow officers informed…’
Karr raised his hand, the fingers tensed, as if to strike Ebert in the face, then slowly let the tension ease from him.
Violence would achieve nothing.
‘Did any of our men get hurt?’
There was an ugly movement in Ebert's face.
He looked aside, his voice subdued.
‘A few…’
‘Meaning what?’
Ebert hesitated, then looked back at him again.
‘Four dead, six injured.’
‘Four dead!
Aiya!
What the fuck were you up to?’
Karr shook his head, then turned away, disgusted.
‘You're shit, Ebert, you know that?
How could you possibly lose four men?
You had only to wait.
They'd have had to come at you.’
Ebert glared pure hatred at the big man's back.
‘It wasn't as simple as that…’
Karr turned back.
‘You fucked up!’
Ebert looked away, then looked back, his whole manner suddenly more threatening.
‘I think you've said enough, Karr.
Understand?
I'm not a man to make an enemy of.’
Karr laughed caustically.
‘You repeat yourself, Major Ebert.
Or do you forget our first meeting?’
He leaned forward and spat between Ebert's feet.
‘There!
That might jog your memory.
You were a shit then and you're a shit now.’
‘I'm not afraid of you, Karr.’
‘No…’
Karr nodded.
‘No, you're not a coward, I'll give you that.
But you're still a disgrace to the T'ang's uniform, and if I can, I'll break you.’
Ebert laughed scornfully.
‘You'll try.’
‘Yes, I'll try.
Fucking hard, I'll try.
But don't underestimate me, Hans Ebert.
Just remember what I did to Master Hwa that time in the Pit.
He underestimated me, and he's dead.’
‘Is that a threat?’
‘Take it as you want.
But between men, if you understand me.
You go before the Marshal and I'll deny every last word.
Like you yourself once did, ten years ago.’
Ebert narrowed his eyes.
‘That officer with you…it's Haavikko, isn't it?
I thought I recognised the little shit.’
Karr studied Ebert a moment, knowing for certain now that Haavikko had told the truth about him, then he nodded.
‘Yes, Haavikko.
But don't even think of trying anything against him.
If he so much as bruises a finger without good reason, I'll come for you.
And a thousand of your cronies won't stop me.’
Tsu Ma stood in the courtyard of the stables at Tongjiang, waiting while the groom brought the Arab from its stall.
He looked about him, for once strangely ill at ease, disconcerted to learn that she had ridden off ahead of him.
He had tried to cast her from his mind, to drive from his heart the spell she had cast over him, but it was no use.
He was in love with her.
In love.
He laughed, surprised at himself.
It had never happened to him before.
Never, in all his thirty-seven years.
He had only to close his eyes and the image of her would come to him, taking his breath.
And then he would remember how it was, there on the island in the lantern light; how he had watched her lose herself in the tune she had been playing; how her voice had seemed the voice of his spirit singing, freed like a bird into the darkness of the night.
And later, when he had been in the water, he had seen how she stood behind her husband, watching him, her eyes curious, lingering on his naked chest.
One life?she had asked, standing in the doorway of the ruined temple.
One life?as if it meant something special.
as if it invited him to touch her.
But then, when he had leaned forward to brush her cheek, her neck, she had moved back  as if he had transgressed, and all his knowledge of her had been shattered by her refusal.
Had he been wrong those times?
Had he misjudged her?
It seemed so.
And yet she had sent word to him.
Secretly.
A tiny, handwritten note, asking him to forgive her moodiness, to come and ride with her again.
Was that merely to be sociable — for her husband's sake — or should he read something more into it?
He could still hear her words.
If I were free…
Even to contemplate such an affair was madness.
It could only make for bad blood between the Li clan and himself and shatter the age-old ties between their families.
He knew that.
And yet the merest thought of her drove out all consideration of what he ought to do.
She had bewitched him, robbed him of his senses.
That too, he knew.
And yet his knowledge was as nothing beside the compulsion that drove him to see her again.
To risk everything simply to be with her.
He turned, hearing the groom return leading the Arab.
‘Chieh Hsia.’
The boy bowed, offering the reins.
Tsu Ma smiled and took the reins.
Then, putting one foot firmly in the stirrup, he swung up on to the Arab's back.
She moved skittishly but he steadied her, using his feet.
It was Li Yuan's horse; the horse he had ridden the last time he had come.
He turned her slowly, getting used to her again, then dug in his heels, spurring her out of the courtyard and north, heading out into the hills.
He knew where he would find her: there at the edge of the temple pool where they had last spoken.
She stood there, her face turned from him, her whole stance strangely disconsolate.
Her face was pale, far paler than he remembered, as if she had been ill.
He frowned, disconcerted by something, then, with a shock, recognised the clothes she was wearing.
Her riding tunic was a pink that was almost white, edged with black, her trousers azure blue.
And her hair…her hair was beaded with rubies.
He laughed softly, astonished.
They were the same colours-the same jewels — as those he had worn the first time they had met.
But what did it mean?
She looked up as he approached, her eyes pained, her lips pressed together, her mouth strangely hard.
She had been crying.
‘–I didn't know if you would come.’
He hesitated, then went across to her, standing at her side.
‘You shouldn't be riding out so far alone…’
‘No?’
The anger in her voice took him aback.
He reached into his tunic and took out a silk handkerchief.
‘Here…
What's wrong?’
He watched her dab her cheeks, then wipe her eyes, his heart torn from him by the tiny shudder she gave.
He wanted to reach out and wrap her in his arms, to hold her tight and comfort her, but he had been wrong before.
‘I can't bear to see you crying…’
She looked back at him, anger flashing in her eyes again, then looked down, as if relenting.
‘No…’
She sniffed, then crushed the silk between her hands.
‘No, it's not your fault, Tsu Ma.’
He wet his lips, then spoke again.
‘Where is your husband?’
She laughed bitterly, staring down fixedly at her clenched hands.
‘Husbands!
What is a husband but a tyrant!’
Once more the anger in her face surprised him.
She turned back, staring up at him, her eyes wide, her voice bitter.
‘He sleeps with his maids.
I've seen him.’
‘Ah…’
He looked down into the water, conscious of her image there in front of him.
‘Maybe it's because he's a man.’
‘A man!’
She laughed caustically, her eyes meeting his in the mirror of the pool, challenging him.
‘And men are different, are they?
Have they different appetites, different needs?’
She looked back at the reality of him, forcing him to look back at her and meet her eyes.
‘You sound like my brothers, Tsu Ma.
They think the matter of their sex makes them my superior when any fool can see…’
She stopped, then laughed, glancing at him.
‘You see, even the language we use betrays me.
I would have said, not half the man I am.’
He nodded, for the first time understanding her.
‘Yet it is how things are ordered,’ he said gently.
‘Without it…’
‘I know,’ she said impatiently, then repeated it more softly, smiling at him.
‘I know…’
He studied her a moment, remembering what her cousin, Yin Wu Tsai had said: that she had been born with a woman's body and yet a man's soul.
It was true.
She looked so fragile, so easily broken, and yet there was something robust, something hard and uncompromising, at the core of her.
Maybe it was that that precarious balance in her nature — that he loved.
That sense he had of fire beneath the ice.
Of earthiness beneath the superficial glaze.
‘You're not like other women.’
He said it softly, admiringly, and saw how it brought a movement in her eyes, a softening of her features.
‘And you?
Are you like other men?’
Am I? he asked himself.
Or am I simply what they expect me to be?
As he stared back at her he found he had no answer.
If to be T'ang meant he could never have his heart's desire, then what use was it being T'ang?
Better never to have lived.
‘I think I am,’ he answered after a moment.
‘I have the same feelings and desires and thoughts.’
She was watching him intently, as if to solve some riddle she had set herself.
Then she looked down, away from him, the faintest smile playing on her lips.
‘Yes…but it's the balance of those things that makes a man what he is, wouldn't you say, Tsu Ma?’
He laughed.
‘And you think my balance…different?’
She looked up at him challengingly.
‘Don't you?’
She lifted her chin proudly, her dark eyes wide.
‘I don't really know you, Tsu Ma, but I know this much I know you would defy the world to get what you wanted.’
He felt himself go still.
Then she understood him, too.
But still he held back, remembering the mistake he had made before.
To be rebuffed a second time would be unthinkable, unbearable.
He swallowed and looked down.
‘I don't know.
I…’
She stood abruptly, making him look up at her, surprised.
‘All this talking,’ she said, looking across to where their horses were grazing.
‘It's unhealthy.
Unnatural.’
She looked back at him.
‘Don't you think so?’
He stood slowly, fascinated by the twist and turn of her, her everchanging moods.
‘What do you suggest?’
She smiled, suddenly the woman he had met that first time, laughing and self-confident, all depths, all subtleties gone from her.
‘I know what,’ she said.
‘Let's race.
To the beacon.
You know it?’
He narrowed his eyes.
‘We passed it ten li back, no?’
‘That's it.’
Her smile broadened.
‘Well?
Are you game?’
‘Yes,’ he said, laughing.
‘Why not?
And no quarter, eh?
No holding back.’
‘Of course,’ she answered, her eyes meeting his knowingly.
‘No holding back.’
Fei Yen reined in her horse and turned to look back down the steep slope beneath the beacon.
Tsu Ma was some fifty ch'i back, his mount straining, its front legs fighting for each ch'i of ground.
Her eyes shone and her chest rose and fell quickly.
She felt exhilarated.
It had been a race to remember.
Tsu Ma reined in beside her.
His mount pulled its head back, overexcited by the chase, and he leaned down to smooth it, stroking the broad length of its face.
Then he looked up at Fei Yen, his strong features formed into a smile of pleasure.
‘That was good.
I haven't enjoyed myself so much in years!’
He laughed, a deep, rich laugh that sent a shiver down her spine.
Then he reached out and drew the hair back from where it had fallen across her face.
His hand rested against her cheek.
It was the first time he had touched her.
He withdrew his hand and turned from her, standing in his saddle and looking out across the valley.
They were at the highest point for twenty li about.
To their backs and distant were the foothills of the Ta Pa Shan, but before them was only the plain.
Or what had once been the plain.
In his grandfather's time the City had stretched only as far as Ch'ung Ch'ing.
Now it covered all the lowlands of Sichuan.
From where he looked it glistened whitely in the afternoon sunlight, a  crystalline growth come to within a dozen li of where they were.
He could not see its full extent from where he stood, but knew that it filled the Ch'ang Chiang basin, eight hundred li south to the mountains, a thousand li east to west.
A vast plateau of ice.
He lowered himself in the saddle, then turned, looking back at her.
She was watching him, concerned.
Such a look as a wife gives her man.
Thinking it he smiled and remembered why he'd come.
He climbed down from his mount and went across to her.
‘Come!’ he said, offering her his hand to help her down.
But this time he did not relinquish her.
This time he turned her to face him, enveloping her in his arms.
She looked up at him expectantly, her mouth open, the bottom lip raised, almost brutal in what it implied.
Her eyes seared him, so fierce was their demand.
And her body, where he gripped it, seemed to force itself into him.
It was as he'd thought.
He kissed her, his mouth crushing hers, answering her need with his own.
For a moment they struggled with each other 's clothing, tearing at the lacing, freeing themselves, and then he had lifted her on to him and was thrusting deep into her, her legs wrapped about his back, her pelvis pushing down urgently to meet his movements.
‘My love,’ she said, her dark eyes wide, aroused, her fine, small hands caressing his neck.
‘Oh my love, my lord…’
THE VEILED LIGHT
Li Yuan stood with his father at the centre of the viewing circle, looking down at the great globe of Chung Kuo, one hundred and sixty thousand li below.
Down there it was night.
Lit from within, the great, continent-spanning mass of City Europe glowed a soft, almost pearled white, bordered on all sides by an intensity of blackness.
To the south, beyond the darkness of Chung Hai, the ancient Mediterranean, glowed City Africa, its broad, elongated shape curving out of view, while to the east — separated from City Europe by the dark barrier of the East European Plantations — City Asia began, a vast glacier, stretching away into the cold heart of the immense land mass.
The room in which they stood was dimly lit; the double doors at the top of the steps leading to the T'ang's private rooms were closed.
It was warm in the room, yet, as ever, the illusion of coldness prevailed.
‘What have you decided, Father?’
The T'ang turned to his son, studying him thoughtfully, then smiled.
‘To wait to hear what the Marshal says.
He saw the boy this morning.’
‘Ah…’
Li Yuan glanced at the slender folder he was carrying beneath his arm.
In it were copies of the records Karr had brought back with him from Mars: Berdichev's personal files, taken from the corpse of his private secretary three days before Karr had caught up with Berdichev himself.
It had taken them two weeks to break the complex code, but it had been worth it.
Beside giving them access to a number of secret SimFic files — files which gave them the location of several special projects Berdichev had instigated — they had also contained several items of particular interest.
The first was a detailed breakdown of the events leading up to the assassination of the Edict Minister, Lwo Kang, ten years earlier.
It was similar in many respects to the document Tolonen had brought to Li Shai Tung shortly after the event the papers drawn up by Major DeVore.
That document, and the web of inference and connection it had drawn, had been enough to condemn the Dispersionist, Edmund Wyatt, to death for treason.
But now they knew it for what it was.
Though Wyatt had been against the Seven, he had played no part in the murder  of Minister Lwo.
No, he had been set up by his fellow conspirators.
But Wyatt's death, almost as surely as the destruction of the starship,The New Hope,had brought about the War that followed.
Li Yuan looked back at his father, conscious of how much he had aged in the years between.
The War had emptied him; stripped him of all illusions.
Five years back he would not have even contemplated the Wiring Project.
But times had changed.
New solutions were necessary.
The second file was confirmation of that.
‘About the Aristotle File, Father.
Do we know yet if any copies were made?’
Li Shai Tung looked down past his feet at the blue-white circle of Chung Kuo.
‘Nothing as yet, Yuan.
So maybe we've been lucky.
Maybe it wasn't disseminated.’
‘Perhaps…’
But both knew that the Aristotle File was too important — too potentially damaging to the Seven — for Berdichev to have kept it to himself: for it was no less than the true history of Chung Kuo; the version of events the tyrant Tsao Ch'un had buried beneath his own.
Li Yuan shivered, remembering the day when he had found out the truth about his world; recollecting suddenly the dream he had had — his vision of a vast mountain of bones, filling the plain from horizon to horizon.
The foundations of his world.
‘You know, Yuan, I was standing here the night you were born.
It was late and I was looking down at Chung Kuo, wondering what lay ahead.
I had been dreaming…’
He looked up, meeting his son's eyes.
‘Dreaming, Father?’
The T'ang hesitated, then gave a small shake of his head.
‘No matter…
Just that it struck me as strange.
The boy and all…’
He knew what his father meant.
The third file concerned a boy Berdichev had taken a personal interest in; a Clayborn child from the Recruitment Project for whom Berdichev had paid the extraordinary sum of ten million yuan.
Part of the file was a genotyping — a comparison of the child's genetic material to that of a man alleged to be his father.
The result of the genotyping was conclusive.
The man was the child's father.
And the man's name?
Edmund Wyatt — the person wrongly executed for orchestrating the assassination of the T'ang's minister, Lwo Kang.
That had been strange enough, but stranger yet was a footnote to the file: a footnote that revealed that far from the Aristotle File being the work of Soren Berdichev, as was claimed on the file itself, it had, in fact, been compiled and authored by the boy.
The fact that had struck them both, however, was the date the genotyping had given for the conception of the boy: a date which coincided with a visit Wyatt, Berdichev and Lehmann had made to a singsong house in the Clay.
It was the day Li Yuan had been born.
The day his mother, Lin Yua, had died giving birth to him, three months premature.
It was as if the gods were playing with them.
Taking and giving, and never offering an explanation.
But which was the boy — gift or curse?
On the evidence of the Aristotle File he seemed — potentially, at least— a curse, yet if the reports on him were to be believed, he might yet prove the greatest asset the Seven possessed.
The question that confronted them-the question they had met today to answer was simple: should they attempt to harness his talents or should they destroy him?
There was a banging on the great doors at the far end of the room.
‘Come in!’ the T'ang answered, turning to face the newcomer.
It was Tolonen.
He strode in purposefully then stopped three paces from the T'ang, clicking his heels together and bowing his head.
‘Chieh Hsia.’
‘Well, Knut?
You've seen the boy.
What do you think?’
Tolonen lifted his head, surprised by the abruptness with which the T'ang had raised the matter.
It was unlike him.
He turned briefly to Li Yuan, giving a small bow, then turned back to Li Shai Tung, a smile forming.
‘I liked him,Chieh Hsia .
I liked him very much.
But that's not what you asked me, is it?
You asked me whether I thought we could trust the boy.
Whether we could risk using him in such a delicate area of research.’
‘And?’
Tolonen shrugged.
‘I'm still not certain,Chieh Hsia.
My instinct tends to confirm what was in the file.
He's loyal.
The bond he formed with his tutor, T'ai Cho, for instance, was a strong one.
I think that's inbred in his nature.
But then, there's the fight with the boy Janko to consider and the whole personality reconstruction business subsequent to that.
He's not the same person he was before all that.
We have to ask ourselves how that has affected him.
Has it made him more docile and thus easier to control, or has it destabilised him?
I can't answer that, I'm afraid.
I really can't.’
The T'ang considered a moment, then nodded, smiling at his Marshal.
‘Thank you, Knut.
Your fears are the mirror of my own.
I have already signed the death warrant.
I was merely waiting to hear what you would say…’
‘But, Father…’
Li Yuan started forward, then stepped back, lowering his head.
‘Forgive me, I…’
Li Shai Tung stared at his son a moment, surprised by his interruption, then frowned.
‘Well, Yuan?’
‘A thousand apologies, Father.
I was forgetting myself.’
‘You wished to say something?’
Li Yuan bowed.
‘I…
I merely wished to caution against being too hasty in this matter.’
‘Too hasty?’
The old T'ang laughed and looked across at Tolonen.
‘I've been told I was many things in my life, but too hasty…
What do you mean, Li Yuan?
Speak out.’
‘The boy…’
Li Yuan looked up, meeting his father's eyes.
‘If what is written about the boy is true — if he is but a fraction as talented as is said…well, it would be a great waste to kill him.’
Li Shai Tung studied his son carefully.
‘You forget why we fought the War, Li Yuan.
To contain Change, not to sponsor it.
This boy, Kim.
Look at the mischief he has done already with his ‘talent’.
Look at the file he made.
What is to prevent him making further trouble?’
Li Yuan swallowed, sensing that everything depended on what he said in the next few moments; that his father had not quite made up his mind, even now.
‘With respect, Father, things have changed.
We all know that.
Our enemies are different now; subtler, more devious than ever before.
And the means they use have changed, too.
While we continue to ignore the possibilities of technology, they are busy harnessing it — against us.’
Li Yuan looked down.
‘It's as if the gods have given us a gift to use against our enemies.
We have only to monitor him closely.’
‘It was tried before.
You forget just how clever the boy is.’
Li Yuan nodded.
‘I realise that, Father.
Even so, I think it can be done.’
The T'ang considered a moment, then turned back, facing Tolonen.
‘Well, Knut?
What do you think?’
Tolonen bowed.
‘I think it could be done,Chieh Hsia.
And would it harm to delay a little before a final decision is made?’
The T'ang laughed.
‘Then I am outnumbered.’
Tolonen smiled back at him.
‘Your one is bigger than our two,Chieh Hsia.’
‘So it is.
But I'm not a stupid man.
Nor inflexible.’
He turned, facing his son again.
‘All right, Yuan.
For now I'll leave this in your hands.
You'll arrange the matter of security with Marshal Tolonen here.
But the boy will be your direct responsibility, understand me?
He lives because you wish him to.
You will keep my warrant with you and use it if you must.’
Li Yuan smiled and bowed his head low.
‘As my father wishes.’
‘Oh, and one more thing, Yuan.
It would be best if you saw the boy yourself.’
He smiled.
‘You have two places left to fill on the Wiring Project, I understand.’
‘I was…keeping them in case.’
‘I thought as much.
Then go.
See the boy at once.
And if your view of him confirms the Marshal's then we'll do as you say.
But be careful, Yuan.
Knowledge is a two-edged sword.’
When his son was gone, the T'ang turned back, facing his Marshal.
‘Keep me closely informed, Knut.
Li Yuan is not to know, but I want us to know where Kim is at all times.
Maybe he is what Yuan claims.
But what can be used by us can just as easily be used by our enemies, and I'm loath to see this one fall back into their hands.
You understand me clearly, Knut?’
‘I understand,Chieh Hsia.’
‘Good.
Then let us speak of other matters.
Your daughter, Jelka.
How is she?’
Tolonen's eyes brightened.
‘Much better,Chieh Hsia.
She is back home now.’
Li Shai Tung frowned.
‘Was that wise, Knut?
I mean…to be back where the attack happened.’
‘The doctors thought it best.
And I…well, for all that happened, I felt she would be safest there.’
‘I see.
But she is still not quite as she was, I take it?’
Tolonen looked down, his eyes troubled.
‘Not quite,Chieh Hsia .’
‘I thought as much.
Well, listen to me, Knut.
Knowing how busy you'll be these next few weeks, I've come up with an idea that might put your mind at ease and allow Jelka to come to terms with her experience.’
‘Chieh Hsia?
‘You remember the island your family owned?
Off the coast of Finland?’
‘Near Jakobstad?’
Tolonen laughed.
‘How could I forget?
I spent a month there with Jenny, shortly after we were married.’
‘Yes…’
The two men were silent a moment, sharing the sweet sadness of the memory.
‘Well,’ said Li Shai Tung, brightening, ‘why not take Jelka there for a few weeks?’
Tolonen beamed.
‘Yes!
Of course!’
Then he grew quiet.
‘But as you say, I am far too busy,Chieh Hsia.
Who would look after her?
And then there's the question of passes…’
The T'ang reached out and touched his Marshal's arm.
It was like Tolonen not to abuse the Pass Laws; not to grant permissions for his family or friends.
In all the years he had known him he had not heard of one instance of Tolonen using his position for his own advantage.
‘Don't worry, Knut.
I've arranged everything already.
Passes, supplies, even a special squad to guard her.’
He smiled broadly, enjoying the look of surprise on Tolonen's face.
‘Your brother Jon and his wife have agreed to stay with her while she's there.’
Tolonen laughed, astonished.
‘Jon?’
Then he shook his head, overcome with emotion.
‘I'm deeply grateful,Chieh Hsia.
It will be perfect.
Just the thing she needs.
She'll love it, I know she will.’
‘Good.
Then you'll take her yourself, tomorrow.
After you've sorted out this business with the boy.
And Knut?’
‘Yes,Chieh Hsia.’
‘Don't hurry back.
Stay with her a night.
See her settled in, neh?’
‘Is that an order,Chieh Hsia?’
The T'ang smiled and nodded.
‘Yes, dear friend.
It is an order.’
After Tolonen had gone Li Shai Tung went through to his private rooms.
He bathed and dressed in his evening silks, then settled in the chair beside the carp  pond, picking up the Hung Lou Meng,the Dream of Red Mansions,from where he had discarded it earlier.
For a while he tried to read, tried to sink back down into the fortunes of young Pao-yu and his beloved cousin, Tai-yu, but it was no good; his mind kept returning to the question of the Aristotle File and what it might mean for Chung Kuo.
His son, Li Yuan, had seen it all five years before, in those first few days after he had been told the secret of their world — the Great Lie upon which everything was built.
He remembered how Yuan had come to him that night, pale and frightened, woken by a terrible dream.
Why do we keep the truth from them ?
Yuan had demanded.
What are we afraid of?
That it might make them think other than we wish them to think?
That they might make other choices than the ones we wish them to make ?
Back then he had argued with his son: had denied Yuan's insistence that they were the gaolers of Tsao Ch'un's City, the inheritors of a system which shaped them for ill.
We are our own men,he had said.
But was it so?
Were they really in control?
Or did unseen forces shape them?
He had always claimed to be acting for the best; not selfishly, but for all men, as the great sage Confucius had said a ruler should act.
So he had always believed.
But now, as he entered his final years, he had begun to question what had been done in his name.
Was there any real difference between concealing the truth from a man and placing a wire in his head?
Once he might have answered differently — might have said that the two things were different in kind — but now he was not so certain.
Five years of war had changed him, soured him.
He sighed and looked back down at the page before closing the book.
‘You were right, Pao-yu.
All streams are sullied.
Nothing is ch'ing…nothing pure.’
He stood, then cast the book down on to the chair angrily.
Where had his certainty gone?
Where the clarity of his youth?
He had foreseen it all, sixteen years ago, on that dreadful evening when his darling wife Lin Yua had died giving birth to his second son, Li Yuan.
That night he, too, had woken from an awful dream.
A dream of the City sliding down into the maw of chaos; of dear friends and their children dead, and of the darkness to come.
Such dreams had meaning.
Were voices from the dark yet knowing part of oneself, voices you ignored only at your peril.
And yet they had ignored them.
Had built a System and a City to deny the power of dreams, filling it with illusions and distractions, as if to kill the inner voices and silence the darkness deep within.
But you could not destroy what was inside a man.
So maybe Yuan was right.
Maybe it was best to control it.
Now, before it was too late to act.
For wasn't it better to have peace — even at such a price — than chaos?
He turned, annoyed with himself, exasperated that no clear answer came.
He stared down into the depths of the carp pool, as if seeking the certainty of the past, then shook his head.
‘I don't know…’ he sighed.
‘I just don't know any longer.’
A single carp rose slowly, sluggishly to the surface, then sank down again.
Li Shai Tung watched the ripples spread across the pool, then put his hand up to his plaited beard, stroking it thoughtfully.
And Yuan, his son?
Was Yuan as certain as he seemed?
He had heard reports of trouble between Yuan and Fei Yen.
Had been told that the Prince, his son, had not visited his new wife's bed for several days, and not through pressure of work.
He had been there in the palace at Tongjiang with her, and still he had not visited her bed.
That was not right.
For a couple to be arguing so early in their relationship did not bode well for the future.
He had feared as much — had known the match was ill-conceived — but once more he had refused to listen to the voice within.
He had let things take their course, like a rider letting go the reins.
And if he fell — if his son's unhappiness resulted who could he blame but himself?
Again the carp rose, swifter this time, as if to bite the air.
There was a tiny splash as its mouth lifted above the surface, then it sank down again, merging with the darkness.
Li Shai Tung coiled his fingers through his beard, then nodded.
He would let things be.
Would watch closely and see how matters developed.
But the cusp was fast approaching.
He had told Tolonen otherwise, but the truth was that he was not so sure Li Yuan was wrong.
Maybe it was time to put bit and bridle on the masses — to master events before the whole thing came crashing down on them.
It would not harm, at least, to investigate the matter.
And if the boy, Kim, could help them find a way…
The T'ang turned, then bent down and retrieved the book, finding himself strangely reassured by its familiarity.
He brushed at the cover, sorry that he had treated it so roughly.
It was a book he had read a dozen times in his life; each time with greater understanding and a growing satisfaction.
Things changed, he knew that now, after a lifetime of denying it, but certain things — intrinsic things — remained a constant, for all men at all times.
And in the interplay of change and certainty each man lived out his life.
It was no different for those who ruled.
Yet they had an added burden.
To them was ordained the task of shaping the social matrix within which ordinary men had their being.
To them was ordained the sacred task of finding balance.
For without balance there was nothing.
Nothing but chaos.
It was late afternoon when Li Yuan finally arrived at Bremen.
General Nocenzi had offered his office for the young Prince's use, and it was there, at the very  top of the vast, three-hundred-level fortress, that he planned to meet the boy.
Kim was waiting down below.
He had been there since his early morning session with Tolonen, unaware of how his fate had hung in the balance in the interim, but Li Yuan did not summon him at once.
Instead he took the opportunity to read the files again and look at extracts from the visual record — films taken throughout the eight years of Kim's stay within the Recruitment Project.
They had given the boy the surname Ward, not because it was his name — few of the boys emerging from the Clay possessed even the concept of a family name — but because all those who graduated from the Project bore that name.
Moreover, it was used in the Hung Mao manner-in that curiously inverted way of theirs, where the family name was last and not first.
Li Yuan smiled.
Even that minor detail spoke volumes about the differences in cultures.
For the Han had always put the family first.
Before the individual.
He froze the final image, then shut down the comset and leaned forward to touch the desk's intercom.
At once Nocenzi's private secretary appeared at the door.
‘Prince Yuan?’
‘Have them bring the boy.
I understand there's a Project official with him, too.
A man by the name of T'ai Cho.
Have him come too.’
‘Of course, Excellency.’
He got up from the desk, then went to the window wall and stood there.
He was still standing there, his back to them, when they entered.
T'ai Cho cleared his throat.
‘Your Excellency…?’
Li Yuan turned and looked at them.
They stood close to the door, the boy a pace behind the official.
T'ai Cho was a tall man, more than five ch'i,his height emphasised by the diminutive size of the Clayborn child.
Li Yuan studied them a moment, trying to get the key to their relationship — something more than could be gained from the summaries in the file — then returned to the desk and sat, leaving them standing.
There were no chairs on the other side of the desk.
He saw how T'ai Cho looked about him, then stepped forward.
‘Excellency…’ he began, but Li Yuan raised a hand, silencing him.
He had noticed how the boy's eyes kept going to the broad window behind him.
‘Tell me, Kim.
What do you see?’
The boy was so small; more like a child of eight than a boy of fifteen.
Kim shook his head, but still he stared, his large eyes wide, as if afraid.
‘Well?’
Li Yuan insisted.
‘What do you see?’
‘Outside,’ the boy answered softly.
‘I see outside.
Those towers.
The top of the City.
And there,’ he pointed out past the Prince, ‘the sun.’
He stopped, then shook his head, as if unable to explain.
Li Yuan turned to look where he was pointing, as if something wonderful were there.
But there were only the familiar guard towers, the blunted edge of the City's walls, the setting sun.
Then he understood.
Not afraid…awed.
Li Yuan turned back, frowning, then, trusting to instinct, came directly to the point.
‘I've called you here because you're young, Kim, and flexible of mind.
My people tell me you're a genius.
That's good.
I can use that.
But I've chosen you partly because you're not a part of this infernal scientific set-up.
Which means that you're likely to have a much clearer view of things than most, unsullied by ambition and administrative politics-by a reluctance to deal with me and give me what I want.’
He laced his fingers together and sat back.
‘I want you to join a scientific team.
A team whose aim is to develop and test out a new kind of entertainments system.’
Kim narrowed his eyes, interested but also wary.
‘However, that's not all I want from you.
I want you to do something else for me — something that must be kept secret from the rest of the members of the team, even from Marshal Tolonen.’
The boy hesitated, then nodded.
‘Good.’
He studied the boy a moment, aware all the time of how closely the tutor was watching him.
‘Then let me outline what I want from you.
I have a file here of Rprojects undertaken by the late Head of SimFic, the traitor, Berdichev.
Some are quite advanced, others are barely more than hypotheses.
What I want you to do is look at them and assess — in your considered opinion — whether they can be made to work or not.
More than that, I want you to find out what they could be used for.’
He saw the boy frown and explained.
‘I don't trust the labels Berdichev put on these projects.
What he says they were intended for and what their actual use was to be, were, I suspect, quite different.’
Again the boy nodded.
Then he spoke.
‘But why me?
And why keep these things secret from the Marshal?’
Li Yuan smiled.
It was as they'd said; the boy had a nimble mind.
‘As far as Marshal Tolonen is concerned, these things do not exist.
If he knew of them he would have them destroyed at once, and I don't want that to happen.’
‘But surely your father would back you in this?’
He hesitated, then, looking at the official sternly, said, ‘My father knows nothing of this.
He thinks these files have already been destroyed.’
T'ai Cho swallowed and bowed his head.
‘Forgive me, Highness, but…’
‘Yes?’
Li Yuan kept his voice cold, commanding.
‘As I say, forgive me, but…’
The man swallowed again, knowing how much he risked even in speaking out.
‘Well, I am concerned for the safety of my charge.’
‘No more than I,Shih T'ai.
But the job must be done.
And to answer Kim's other question, he is, in my estimation, the only one who can do it for me.’
Again T'ai Cho's head went down.
‘But, Highness…’
Li Yuan stood angrily.
‘You forget yourself, T'ai Cho!’
He took a breath, calming himself, then spoke again, softer this time.
‘As I said, I too am concerned for Kim's safety.
Which is why, this very day, I interceded on the boy's behalf.’
He picked up the warrant and handed it to T'ai Cho, seeing his puzzlement change to a bewildered horror.
The blood drained from the man's face.
T'ai Cho bowed his head low, one trembling hand offering the warrant back.
‘And you had this rescinded, Highness?’
‘Not rescinded, no.
Postponed.
Kim lives because I wish him to live.
My father has made him my responsibility.
But I am a fair man.
If Kim does as I wish — if he comes up with the answers I want — then I will tear up this document.
You understand, T'ai Cho?’
T'ai Cho kept his head lowered.
‘I understand, Highness.’
Fei Yen was sleeping when he came in.
He stood above her, in partial darkness, studying her features, then turned away, noting her discarded riding clothes there on the floor beside the bed.
He undressed and slipped into the bed beside her, her body warm and naked beneath the silken sheets.
He pressed up close, his hand resting on the slope of her thigh.
In the darkness he smiled, content to lie there next to her.
He was too awake, too full of things, to sleep, even so he lay there quietly, mulling things over, comforted by her warmth, her presence there beside him.
He understood now.
It was only natural for her to be jealous.
It was even possible that some strange, feminine instinct of hers had ‘known’ about his earlier relationship with the girls.
He closed his eyes, listening to her gentle breathing, enjoying the sweet scent of her, the silkiness of her skin beneath his fingers.
After a while he rolled from her and lay there, staring up through layers of darkness at the dim, coiled shape of dragons in the ceiling mosaic, thinking of the boy.
Kim was promising-very promising — and he would make sure he got whatever he needed to complete his work.
And if, at the end of the year, his results were good, he would reward him handsomely.
That was a lesson he had learned from his father.
Such talent as Kim had should be harnessed, such men rewarded well, or destroyed, lest they destroy you.
Control was the key.
Directed interest.
He stretched and yawned.
He had not felt so good in a long time.
It was as if everything had suddenly come clear.
He laughed softly.
It made him feel wonderful — hugely benevolent.
A smile came to his lips as he thought of the thing he had bought Fei Yen that very evening, after he had come from the boy.
A thoroughbred; an Arab stallion bred from a line of champions.
Its pure white flanks, its fine, strong legs, its proud, aristocratic face; all these combined to form an animal so beautiful, he had known at once that she would want it.
He had bought it there and then and had it shipped directly to his stables, here at Tongjiang.
He would take her first thing in the morning to see it.
He smiled, imagining the delight in her face.
Beside him Fei Yen stirred and turned on to her back.
He sat up, then turned, looking down at her.
Slowly, carefully, he drew back the sheet, letting it slip from her body, exposing her nakedness.
For a while he simply looked, tracing the subtle curves of her body, his fingers not quite touching the surface of her flesh.
So delicate she was.
So beautiful.
A perfect sculpture of the living flesh.
Wake up, he thought.
Wake up, my love.
But the wish was unrequited.
Fei Yen slept on.
He lay there a while longer, unable to relax, then got up and put on his robe.
His desire had passed the point where he could lie there and forget it.
He went through into the marbled bathroom and stood there in the shower, letting the cold, hard jets of water purge him.
He stood there a while longer, mindlessly enjoying the flow of water over his limbs.
It was lukewarm now, but still refreshing, like a fall of rain, clearing his mind.
He was standing there, his arms loose at his sides, when she appeared in the doorway.
‘Yuan…?’
He looked up slowly, half-conscious of her, and smiled.
‘You're awake?’
She smiled, looking at him.
‘Of course.
I was waiting for you.’
She slipped off her robe and came to him, stepping into the shower beside him, then gave a small shriek.
‘Why, Yuan!
It's freezing!’
She backed out, laughing.
He laughed, then reached up to cut the flow.
Looking across he saw how her skin was beaded with tiny droplets.
‘Like jewels,’ he said, stepping out.
She fetched a towel then knelt beside him, towelling him, tending to him obediently, as a wife ought.
He looked down, feeling a vague desire for her, but he had doused his earlier fierceness.
She stood to dry his shoulders and his hair, her body brushing against his, her breasts and thighs touching him lightly as she moved about him.
Turning from him she went to the cupboards, returning a moment later with powders and unguents.
‘A treat,’ she said, standing before him, the fingers of one hand caressing his chest.
‘But come, let's go through.’
She laughed, then pushed him through before her.
It was a raw, strangely sexual laugh; one he had not heard from her before.
It made him turn and look at her, as if to find her transformed, but it was only Fei Yen.
‘I've missed you,’ she said as she began to rub oils into his shoulders, his neck, the top of his back.
‘Missed you a lot.’
And as her fingers worked their  way down his spine he shivered, the words echoing in his head.
‘Like breath itself, my husband.
Like breath itself…’
Six hours later and half a world away, in the Mids of Danzig Canton, Marshal Tolonen was standing in the main office of the newly formed Wiring Project.
He had seen for himself the progress that had been made in the three days since he had last visited the laboratories.
Then there had been nothing — nothing but bare rooms: now there was the semblance of a working facility, even though most of the equipment remained in cases, waiting to be unpacked.
Tolonen turned as Administrator Spatz came hurriedly into the room, bowing low, clearly flustered by the Marshal's unannounced arrival.
‘Marshal Tolonen, please forgive me.
I was not expecting you.’
Tolonen smiled inwardly.
No,he thought, you weren't.
And I'll make it my practice in future to call here unannounced.
He drew himself upright.
‘I've come to advise you on the last two appointments to your team.’
He saw how Spatz hesitated before nodding and wondered why that was, then, pushing the thought from his mind, he turned and snapped his fingers.
At once his equerry handed him two files.
‘Here,’ Tolonen said, passing them across.
‘Please, be seated while you study them.’
Spatz bowed, then returned behind his desk, opening the first of the files, running his finger over the apparently blank page, the warmth of his touch bringing the characters alive briefly on the specially treated paper.
After only a minute he looked up, frowning.
‘Forgive me, Marshal, but I thought the last two places were to be filled by working scientists.’
‘That was the intention.’
Spatz looked aside, then looked back up at the Marshal, choosing his words carefully.
‘And yet…well, this man T'ai Cho — he has no scientific background whatsoever.
He is a tutor.
His qualifications…’
Tolonen nodded.
‘I understand your concern,Shih Spatz, but if you would look at the other file.’
Spatz nodded, still uncertain, then set the first file aside, opening the second.
Again he ran his finger over the page.
This time, however, he took his time, working through the file steadily, giving small nods of his head and occasional grunts of surprise or satisfaction.
Finished, he looked up, smiling broadly.
‘Why, the man's record is extraordinary.
I'm surprised I've not heard of him before.
Is he from one of the other Cities?’
Tolonen was staring past Spatz, studying the charts on the wall behind him.
‘You could say that.’
Spatz nodded to himself.
‘And when will he be joining us?’
Tolonen looked back at him.
‘Right now, if you like.’
Spatz looked up.
‘Really?’
He hesitated, then nodded again.
‘Good.
Then there's just one small thing.
A mistake, here on the first page.’
He ran his finger over the top of the page again, then looked up, a bland smile on his lips.
‘The date of birth…’
Tolonen looked away, snapping his fingers.
A moment later his equerry returned.
This time he was accompanied.
‘There's no mistake,’ Tolonen said, turning back.
There was a look of astonishment on Spatz's face.
‘You mean,this is Ward?’
Tolonen looked across at the boy, trying to see him as Spatz saw him; as he himself had first seen him, before he had seen the films that demonstrated the boy's abilities.
Looking at him, it seemed almost impossible that this scrawny, dark-haired creature was the accomplished scientist described in the personnel file, yet it was so.
Berdichev had not been alone in believing the boy was something special.
Spatz laughed.
‘Is this some kind of joke, Marshal?’
Tolonen felt himself go cold with anger.
He glared back at Spatz and saw the man go white beneath the look.
Spatz stood quickly, bowing his head almost to the desktop.
‘Forgive me, Marshal, I did not mean…’
‘Look after him, Spatz,’ Tolonen answered acidly.
‘Allocate a man to take care of him for the next few days until his tutor, T'ai Cho, joins him.’
He shivered, letting his anger drain from him.
‘And you'll ensure he comes to no harm.’
He saw Spatz swallow drily and nodded to himself, satisfied that he had cowed the man sufficiently.
‘Good.
Then I'll leave him in your custody.’
Spatz watched Tolonen go, then turned his attention to the boy.
For a moment he was speechless, still too astonished to take in what it all meant, then he sat heavily and leaned forward, putting his hand down on the summons button.
At once his assistant appeared in the doorway.
‘Get Hammond in here,’ he said, noting the way his assistant's eyes went to the boy.
‘At once!’
He sat back, steepling his hands together, staring across at the boy.
Then he laughed and shook his head.
‘No…’
Now that the first shock was wearing off, he was beginning to feel annoyed, angered by the position he had been put in.
Now he would have to return the money he had been given to put names forward for the vacancies.
Not only that, but in the place of real scientists he had been lumbered with a no-hoper and a child.
What had he done to deserve such a thing?
Who had he angered?
He looked down at his desk, sniffing deeply.
‘So you're a scientist, are you, Ward?’
When the boy didn't answer, he looked up, anger blazing in his eyes.
‘I'll tell  you now.
I don't know what game people higher up are playing, but I don't believe a word of that file, understand me?
And I've no intention of letting you get near anything important.
I may have to nursemaid you, but I'll be damned if I'll let you bugger things up for me.’
He stopped.
There was someone in the doorway behind the boy.
‘You called for me,Shih Spatz?’
‘Come in, Hammond.
I want you to meet our latest recruit, Kim Ward.’
He saw how Hammond glanced at the boy, then looked about the room before finally coming back to him.
‘You mean,you're Ward?’
Hammond asked, unable to hide his surprise.
‘Well, the gods save us!’
He laughed, then offered a hand.
‘I'm Joel Hammond, Senior Technician on the Project.’
Seeing how the boy stared at Hammond's hand a moment before tentatively offering his own, how he studied the meeting of their hands, as if it were something wholly new to him, Spatz understood.
The boy had never been out in society before.
Had never learned such ways.
It made Spatz think.
Made him reconsider what was in the file.
Or, rather, what wasn't.
But he still didn't believe it.
Why, the boy looked nine at the very most.
He could not have done so much in so brief a time.
‘I want you to look after the boy, Hammond.
Until his…guardian arrives.’
‘His guardian?’
Hammond looked at Kim again, narrowing his eyes.
‘T'ai Cho,’ Kim answered, before Spatz could explain.
‘He was my tutor at the Recruitment Project.
He was like a father to me.’
Gods, thought Spatz, more convinced than ever that someone up-level was fucking with him; willing him to fail in this.
A boy and his ‘father’, that was all they needed!
He leaned forward again, his voice suddenly colder, more business-like.
‘Look, Hammond.
Get him settled in.
Show him where things are.
Then get back here.
Within the hour.
I want to brief you more fully, right?’
Hammond glanced at the boy again, giving the briefest of smiles, then looked back at Spatz, lowering his head.
‘Of course, Director.
Whatever you say.’
‘Well, Yuan, can I take it off yet?’
He turned her to face him, then untied the silk from her eyes, letting it fall to the ground.
She looked up at him, wide-eyed, uncertain, then gave a small, nervous laugh.
‘There,’ he said, pointing beyond her, smiling broadly now.
She turned, looking about her at the stables.
The grooms were standing about idly, their jobs momentarily forgotten, watching the young Prince and his bride, all of them grinning widely, knowing what Li Yuan had arranged.
She frowned, not knowing what it was she was looking for, then turned back, looking at him.
‘Go on,’ he said, encouraging her.
‘Down there, in the end stall.’
Still she hesitated, as if afraid, making him laugh.
‘It's a gift, silly.’
He lowered his voice, slightly.
‘My way of saying that I'm sorry.’
‘Down there?’
‘Yes.
Come, I'll show you…’
He took her arm, leading her to the stall.
‘There!’ he said softly, looking down at her.
She looked.
There, in the dimness of the stall, stood the horse he had bought her.
As she took first one, then another slow step towards it, the horse turned its long white head, looking back at her, its huge dark eyes assessing her.
It made a small noise in its nostrils, then lowered its head slightly, as if bowing to her.
He saw the tiny shudder that went through her and felt himself go still as she went up to the horse and began to stroke its face, its flank.
For a moment, that was all.
Then she turned and looked back at him, her eyes wet with tears.
‘He's beautiful, Yuan.
Really beautiful.’
She shivered, looking back at the horse, her hand resting in its mane, then lowered her head slightly.
‘You shouldn't have, my love.
I have a horse already.’
Yuan swallowed, moved by her reaction.
‘I know, but I wanted to.
As soon as I saw him I knew you'd love him.’
He moved closer, into the dimness of the stall itself, and stood there beside her, his hand resting gently on the horse's flank.
She looked up at him, her eyes smiling through the tears.
‘Has he a name?’
‘He has.
But if you want to you can re-name him.’
She looked back at the Arab.
‘No.
Look at him, Yuan.
He is himself, don't you think?
A T'ang among horses.’
He smiled.
‘That he is, my love.
An emperor.
And his name is Tai Huo.’
She studied the Arab a moment longer, then turned back, meeting Li Yuan's eyes again.
‘Great Fire…
Yes, it suits him perfectly.’
Her eyes searched Yuan's face, awed, it seemed, by his gift.
Then, unexpectedly, she knelt, bowing her head until it touched her knees.
‘My husband honours me beyond my worth…’
At once he pulled her up.
‘No, Fei Yen.
Your husband loves you.
I, Yuan, love you.
The rest…’ he shuddered, ‘well, I was mistaken.
It was wrong of me…’
‘No.’
She shook her head, then lifted her eyes to his.
‘I spoke out of turn.
I realise that now.
It was not my place to order your household.
Not without your permission…’
‘Then you have my permission.’
His words brought her up short.
‘Your permission?
To run your household?’
He smiled.
‘Of course.
Many wives do, don't they?
And why not mine?
After all, I have a clever wife.’
Her smile slowly broadened, then, without warning, she launched herself at him, knocking him on to his back, her kisses overwhelming him.
‘Fei Yen!’
There was laughter from the nearby stalls, then a rustling of straw as the watching grooms moved back.
He sat up, looking at her, astonished by her behaviour, then laughed and pulled her close again, kissing her.
From the stalls nearby came applause and low whistles of appreciation.
He leaned forward, whispering in her ear.
‘Shall we finish this indoors?’
In answer she pulled him down on top of her.
‘You are a prince, my love,’ she said softly, her breath hot in his ear, ‘you may do as you wish.’
Joel Hammond stood there in the doorway, watching the boy unpack his things.
They had barely spoken yet, but he was already conscious that the boy was different from anyone he had ever met.
It was not just the quickness of the child, but something indefinable; something that that fool Spatz hadn't even been aware of.
It was as if the boy were charged with some powerful yet masked vitality.
Hammond smiled and nodded to himself.
Yes, it was as if the boy were a compact little battery, filled with the energy of knowing;a veiled light, awaiting its moment to shine out, illuminating the world.
Kim turned, looking back at him, as if conscious suddenly of his watching eyes.
‘What did you do before you came here,Shih Hammond?’
‘Me?’
Hammond moved from the doorway, picking up the map Kim had set down on the table.
‘I worked on various things, but the reason I'm here is that I spent five years with SimFic working on artificial intelligence.’
Kim's eyes widened slightly.
‘I thought that was illegal?
Against the Edict?’
Hammond laughed.
‘I believe it was.
But I was fortunate.
The T'ang is a forgiving man.
At least, in my case he was.
I was pardoned.
And here I am.’
He looked back down at the map again.
‘This is the Tun Huang star chart, isn't it?
I saw it once, years ago.
Back in college.
Are you interested in astronomy?’
The boy hesitated.
‘I was.’
Then he turned, facing Hammond, his dark eyes looking up at him challengingly.
‘Spatz says he's going to keep me off the Project.
Can he do that?’
Hammond was taken aback.
‘I…’
The boy turned away, the fluidity of the sudden movement — so unlike anything he had ever seen before — surprising Hammond.
A ripple of fear passed down his spine.
It was as if the boy was somehow both more and, at the same time, less human than anyone he had ever come across.
For a moment he stood there, his mouth open, astonished, then, like a thunderbolt, it came to him.
He shuddered, the words almost a whisper.
‘You're Clayborn, aren't you?’
Kim took a number of books from the bottom of his bag and added them to the pile on the desk, then looked up again.
‘Yes.
I lived there until I was six.’
Hammond shuddered, seeing the boy in a totally new light.
‘I'm sorry.
It must have been awful.’
Kim shrugged.
‘I don't know.
I can't remember.
But I'm here now.
This is my home.’
Hammond looked about him at the bare white walls, then nodded.
‘Yes.
Yes, I suppose it is.’
He put the chart down and picked up one of the books.
It was Liu Hui's Chiu Chang Suan Shu,his ‘Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art’, the famous third century treatise from which all Han science began.
He smiled and opened it, surprised to find it in the original Mandarin.
Flicking through he noticed the notations in the margin, the tiny, beautifully drawn pictograms in red and black and green.
‘You speak Kuo-yu,Kim?’
Kim straightened the books, then turned, looking back at Hammond.
He studied him a moment, intently, almost fiercely, then pointed up at the overhead camera.
‘Does that thing work?’
Hammond looked up.
‘Not yet.
It'll be two or three days before they've installed the system.’
‘And Spatz?
Does he speak Kuo-yu…
Mandarin?’
Hammond considered a moment, then shook his head.
‘I'm not sure.
I don't think so, but I can check easily enough.
Why?’
Kim was staring back at him, the openness of his face disarming Hammond.
‘I'm not naive,Shih Hammond.
I understand your position here.
You're here on sufferance.
We're alike in that.
We do what we're told or we're nothing.
Nothing.’
Hammond shivered.
He had never thought of it in quite those terms, but it was true.
He set the book down.
‘Yes.
But I still don't follow you.
What is all this leading to?’
Kim picked the book up and opened it at random, then handed it back to Hammond.
‘Read the first paragraph.’
Hammond read it, pronouncing the Mandarin with a slight southern accent, then looked back at Kim.
‘Well?’
‘I thought so.
I saw how you looked at it.
I knew at once that you'd recognised the title.’
Hammond smiled.
‘So?’
Kim took the book back, then set it beside the others on the shelf.
‘How good is your memory?’
‘Pretty good, I'd say.’
‘Good enough to hold a code?’
‘A code?’
‘When you go back, Spatz will order you not to speak to me about anything  to do with the Project.
He'll instruct you to keep me away from all but the most harmless piece of equipment.’
‘You know this?’
Kim looked round.
‘It's what he threatened, shortly before you arrived.
But I know his type.
I've met them before.
He'll do all he can to discredit me.’
Hammond laughed and began to shake his head, then stopped, seeing how Kim was looking at him.
He looked down.
‘What if I don't play his game?
What if I refuse to shut you out?’
‘Then he'll discredit you.
You're vulnerable.
He knows you'll have to do what he says.
Besides, he'll set a man to watch you.
Someone you think of as a friend.’
‘Then what can I do?’
‘You can keep a diary.
On your personal comset.
Something which, when Spatz checks on it, will seem completely innocent.’
‘I see.
But how will you get access?’
‘Leave that to me.’
Kim turned away, taking the last of the objects from the bag and setting it down on the bedside table.
‘And the code?’
Kim laughed.
‘That's the part you'll enjoy.
You're going to become a poet,Shih Hammond.
A regular Wang Wei.’
DeVore sat at his desk in the tiny room at the heart of the mountain.
The door was locked, the room unlit but for the faint glow of a small screen to one side of the desk.
It was late, almost two in the morning, yet he felt no trace of tiredness.
He slept little — two, three hours at most a night — but just now there was too much to do to even think of sleep.
He had spent the afternoon teaching Sun Tzu to his senior officers: the final chapter on the employment of secret agents.
It was the section of Sun Tzu's work that most soldiers found unpalatable.
On the whole they were creatures of directness, like Tolonen.
They viewed such methods as a necessary evil, unavoidable yet somehow beneath their dignity.
But they were wrong.
Sun Tzu had placed the subject at the end of his thirteen-chapter work with good reason.
It was the key to all.
As Sun Tzu himself had said, the reason why an enlightened prince or a wise general triumphed over their enemies whenever they moved why their achievements surpassed those of ordinary men — was foreknowledge.
And as Chia Lin had commented many centuries later, ‘An army without secret agents is like a man without eyes or ears.’
So it was.
And the more one knew, the more control one could wield over circumstance.
He smiled.
Today had been a good day.
Months of hard work had paid off.
Things had connected, falling into a new shape — a shape that bode well for the future.
The loss of his agents amongst the Ping Tiao had been a serious setback, and  the men he had bought from amongst their ranks had proved unsatisfactory in almost every respect.
He had had barely a glimpse of what the Ping Tiao hierarchy were up to for almost a week now.
Until today, that was, when suddenly two very different pieces of information had come to hand.
The first was simply a codeword one of his paid agents had stumbled upon: a single Mandarin character, the indentation of which had been left on a notepad Jan Mach had discarded.
A character that looked like a house running on four legs.
The character yu, the Han word for fish, the symbol of the Ping Tiao.
It had meant nothing at first, but then he had thought to try it as an entry code to some of the secret Ping Tiao computer networks he had discovered weeks before but had failed to penetrate.
At the third attempt he found himself in.
Yu was a new recruitment campaign; a rallying call; a word passed from lip to ear; a look, perhaps, between two sympathetic to the cause.
DeVore had scrolled through quickly, astonished by what he read.
If this were true…
But of course it was true.
It made sense.
Mach was unhappy with what was happening in the Ping Tiao.
He felt unclean dealing with the likes of T'angs and renegade majors.
What better reason, then, to start up a new movement?
A splinter movement that would, in time, prove greater and more effective than the Ping Tiao.
A movement that made no deals, no compromises.
That movement was Yu.
Yu.
The very word was rich with ambivalence, for yu was phonetically identical with the Han word meaning ‘abundance’.
It was the very symbol of wealth, and yet tradition had it that when the fish swam up-river in great numbers it was a harbinger of social unrest.
Yu was thus the very symbol of civil disorder.
And if the file was to be trusted, Yu was already a force to be reckoned with.
Not as powerful yet as the Ping Tiao,nor as rich in its resources, yet significant enough to make him change his plans.
He would have to deal with Mach.
And soon.
The second item had come from Fischer in Alexandria.
The message had been brief — a mere minute and three quarters of scrambled signal — yet it was potentially enough, in its decoded form, to shake the very foundations of the Seven.
He leaned forward and ran the film again.
The first thirty seconds were fairly inconclusive.
They showed Wang Sau-leyan with his Chancellor, Hung Mien-lo.
As Fischer entered, the T'ang turned slightly, disappearing from camera view as the Captain bowed.
‘Are they here?’
Wang asked, his face returning to view as Fischer came out of his bow.
‘Four of them,Chieh Hsia.
They've been searched and scanned, together with their gift.’
‘Good,’ the T'ang said, turning away, looking excitedly at his Chancellor.
‘Then bring them in.’
’ Chieh Hsia…’
DeVore touched the pad, pausing at that moment.
Wang Sau-leyan was still in full view of Fischer's secreted camera, his well-fleshed face split by a grin that revealed unexpectedly fine teeth.
He was a gross character, but interesting.
For all his sybaritic tendencies, Wang Sau-leyan was sharp; sharper, perhaps, than any amongst the Seven, barring the young Prince, Li Shai Tung's son, Yuan.
He sat back, studying the two men for a time, unhappy that he had not been privy to their conversations before and after this important meeting.
It would have been invaluable to know what it was they really wanted from their association with the Ping Tiao.
But Fischer's quick thinking had at least given him an insight into their apparent reasons.
He let the film run again, watching as it cut to a later moment when Fischer had interrupted the meeting to tell the T'ang about the fire.
The camera caught the six men squarely in its lens: Wang Sau-leyan to the left, Hung Mien-lo just behind him, Gesell, Mach and their two companions to the right.
It was an important moment to capture — one that, if need be, could be used against the T'ang of Africa.
But equally important was the moment just before Fischer had knocked then thrown the doors wide; a moment when Wang's voice had boomed out clearly.
‘Then you understand,ch'un tzu,that I cannot provide such backing without some sign of your good intentions.
The smell of burning wheat, perhaps, or news of a whole crop ruined through the accidental pollution of a water source.
I'm sure I don't have to spell it out for you.’
DeVore smiled.
No, there was no need for Wang Sau-leyan to say anything more.
It was clear what he intended.
In exchange for funds he would get the Ping Tiao to do his dirty work — to burn the East European Plantations and create havoc with City Europe's food supplies, thus de-stabilising Li Shai Tung's City.
But would the Ping Tiao take such a radical action?
After all, it was their people who would suffer most from the subsequent food shortages.
Would they dare risk alienating public opinion so soon after they had regained it?
He knew the answer.
They would.
Because Mach was quite prepared to see the Ping Tiao discredited.
He would be happy to see the Yu step into the gap left by the demise of the Ping Tiao.
He was tired of deferring to Gesell.
Tired of seeing his advice passed over.
Well, thought DeVore, pausing the film again, perhaps we can use all these tensions — redirect them and control them.
But not yet.
Not quite yet.
They had broken their meeting temporarily while the fire was dealt with, but when Fischer returned the Ping Tiao had already gone.
Even so, the final forty seconds of the film provided a fascinating little coda on all that had happened.
Wang Sau-leyan was sitting in the far corner of the room, turning the gift the Ping Tiao had given him in his hands, studying it.
It was the tiny jade sculpture of Kuan Yin that DeVore had given Gesell only the week before.
‘It's astonishing,’ Wang was saying.
‘Where do you think they stole it?’
Hung Mien-lo, standing several paces away, looked up.
‘I'm sorry,Chieh Hsia?’
‘This.’
He held the tiny statue up so that it was in clear view of the camera.
‘It's genuine, I'd say.
T'ang dynasty.
Where in hell's name do you think they got their hands on it?’
Hung Mien-lo shrugged, then moved closer to his T'ang, lowering his voice marginally.
‘More to the point,Chieh Hsia,how do you know that they'll do as you ask?’
Wang Sau-leyan studied the piece a moment longer, then looked back at his Chancellor, smiling.
‘Because I ask them to do only what is in their own interest.’
He nodded, then looked across, directly into camera.
‘Well, Captain Fischer, is it out?’
The film ended there, as Fischer bowed, but it was enough.
It gave DeVore plenty to consider.
Plenty to use.
And that was not all.
The day had been rich with surprises.
A sealed package had arrived from Mars: a copy of the files Karr had taken from Berdichev's private secretary.
DeVore smiled.
He had been telling his senior officers the story only that afternoon — the tale of T'sao and the Tanguts.
The Tanguts were northern enemies of the Han, and T'sao, the Han Chief of Staff, had pardoned a condemned man on the understanding that he would swallow a ball of wax, dress up as a monk and enter the kingdom of the Tanguts.
The man did so and was eventually captured and imprisoned by the Tanguts.
Under interrogation he told them about the ball of wax and, when he finally shat it out, they cut it open and found a letter.
The letter was from T'sao to their own Chief Strategist.
The Tangut King was enraged and ordered the execution both of the false monk and his own Chief Strategist.
Thus did T'sao rid himself of the most able man in his enemies' camp for no greater price than the life of a condemned man.
So it was with the boy.
He would be the means through which the Seven would be destroyed; not as Berdichev had imagined, from without, but from within.
The Seven would be the agents of their own destruction.
For the boy carried within him not a ball of wax, but an idea.
One single, all-transforming idea.
DeVore sat back.
Yes, and Li Yuan would fight to preserve the boy, for he honestly believed that he could control him.
But Li Yuan had not the slightest conception of what the boy represented.
No, not even the boy himself understood that yet.
But he had seen it at once, when Berdichev had first shown him the Aristotle File.
The file was a remarkable achievement, yet it was as nothing beside what the boy was capable of.
His potential was astonishing.
Li Yuan might as well try to harness Change itself as try to force the boy's talents to conform to the needs of State.
Li Shai Tung had been right to sign the boy's death warrant.
The old man's gut instincts had always been good.
It was fortunate that the War had undermined his certainty.
The old Li Shai Tung would have acted without hesitation.
But the  old T'ang was effectively dead — murdered along with his son, Han Ch'in, eight years ago.
DeVore nodded to himself, then cleared his mind of it, coming to the final matter.
The report was brief, no more than a single line of coded message, yet it was significant.
It was what he had been waiting for.
He took the tiny piece of crumpled paper from his top pocket and unfolded it.
It had been passed from hand to hand along a chain of trusted men until it came into his own, its message comprehensible only to his eyes.
‘The tiger is restless,’ it read.
He smiled.
The tiger was his codeword for Hans Ebert, the handwriting on the paper that of his man, Auden.
He had recruited Auden long ago — years before he had had the man appointed sergeant under Ebert — but Hammerfest had been a heaven-sent opportunity.
Auden had saved Ebert's life that day, eight years ago, and Ebert had never forgotten it.
Hans Ebert was a selfish young man but curiously loyal to those about him.
At least, to those he felt deserved his loyalty, and Auden was one such.
But it did not do to use all one's pieces at once.
Life was like wei chi in that respect; the master chose to play a waiting game, to plan ahead.
So he with Auden.
But now he was capitalising upon his long and patient preparation.
It had been easy, for instance, for Auden to persuade Ebert into launching the premature attack on the Ping Tiao cell; an attack which had prevented Karr from discovering the links between the terrorists and himself.
But that had been only the start: a test of the young man's potential.
Now he would take things much further and see whether he could translate Ebert's restlessness into something more useful.
Something more constructive.
Yes, but not through Auden.
He would keep Auden dark, his true nature masked from Ebert.
There were other ways of getting to Ebert; other men he trusted, if not as much.
His uncle, Lutz, for instance.
DeVore folded the paper and tucked it back into the pocket.
No.
Auden was part of a much longer game: part of a shape which, as yet, existed in his head alone.
He smiled, then stood, stretching, his sense of well-being brimming over, making him laugh softly.
Then he checked himself.
Have a care, Howard DeVore, he thought.
And don't relax.
It's only a shape you've glimpsed.
It isn't real.
Not yet.
Not until you make it real.
‘But I will,’ he said softly, allowing himself the smallest of smiles.
‘Just see if I don't.’
The pimp was sleeping, one of his girls either side of him.
The room was in semi-darkness, a wall-mounted flatlamp beside the door casting a faint green shadow across the sleeping forms.
It was after fourth bell and the last of the evening's guests had left an hour back.
Now only the snores of the sleepers broke the silence of the house.
Chen slid the door back quietly and slipped into the room.
At once he seemed to merge with the green-black forms of the room.
He hesitated a moment, his eyes growing accustomed to the subtle change in lighting, then crossed the room, quickly, silently, and stood beside the bed.
The pimp was lying on his back, his head tipped to one side, his mouth open.
A strong scent of wine and onions wafted up from him: a tart, sickly smell that mixed with the heavy mustiness of the room.
Yes,thought Chen.
It's him all right.
I'd know that ugly face anywhere.
He took the strip of plaster from the pouch at his belt and peeled off two short lengths, taping them loosely to his upper arm.
He threw the strip down then drew his gun.
Leaning across the girl he placed it firmly against the pimp's right temple.
‘Liu Chang…’ he said softly, as the pimp stirred.
‘Liu Chang, listen to me very carefully.
Do exactly as I say or I'll cover the mattress with your brains, understand me?’
Liu Chang had gone very still.
His eyes flicked open, straining to see the gun then focusing on the masked figure above him.
He swallowed, then gave a tiny, fearful nod.
‘What do you want?’ he began, his voice a whisper, then fell silent, as Chen increased the pressure of the gun against the side of his head.
Chen scowled at him.
‘Shut up, Liu Chang,’ he said, quietly but firmly.
‘I'll tell you when to speak.’
The pimp nodded again, his eyes wide now, his whole body tensed, cowering before the gunman.
‘Good.
This is what you'll do.
You'll sit up very slowly.
Very slowly,understand?
Make a sudden move and you're dead.’
Chen smiled cruelly.
‘I'm not playing games, Liu Chang.
I'd as soon see you dead as let you go.
But my people want answers.
Understand?’
Liu Chang's mouth opened as if to form a question, then clicked shut.
He swallowed deeply, sweat running down his neck, and nodded.
‘Good.
Now up.’
The pimp raised himself slowly on his elbows, Chen's gun pressed all the while against his right temple.
Chen nodded, satisfied, then thrust his right arm closer to the pimp.
‘Take one of the strips of plaster from my arm and put it over the girl here's mouth.
Then do the same with the other.
And get no ideas about wrestling with me, Liu Chang.
Your only chance of living is if you do what I say.’
Again there was that slight movement in the pimp's face — the sign of a question unasked — before he nodded.
As he leaned forward, Chen pushed slightly with the gun, reminding the pimp of its presence, but it was only a precaution — if the file was correct, he should have little bother with the man.
Liu Chang had been an actor in the Han opera  before he became a pimp, more noted for his prowess in bed than his ability with a knife.
Even so, it was wise to take care.
Liu Chang moved back from Chen, then leaned forward again, placing the strip across the sleeping girl's mouth.
It woke her and for a moment she struggled, her hands coming up as if to tear it away.
Then she saw Chen and the gun and grew still, her eyes wide with fear.
‘Now the other.’
He noted the slight hesitation in Liu Chang and pressed harder with the gun.
‘Do it!’
The pimp took the strip and placed it over the other girl's mouth.
She too woke and, after a moment's struggle, lay still.
Good, Chen thought.
Now to business.
‘You're wondering what I want, aren't you, Liu Chang?’
Liu Chang nodded, twice.
‘Yes, well it's simple.
A girl of yours was killed here, a month or two ago.
I'm sure you remember it.
There was a young officer here when it happened.
He thinks he did it.
But you know better than that, don't you, Liu Chang?
You know what really happened.’
Liu Chang looked down, then away; anything but meet Chen's gaze.
He began to shake his head in denial, but Chen jabbed the gun hard against his head, drawing blood.
‘This is no fake I'm holding here, Liu Chang.
You'll discover that if you try to lie to me.
I know you set Lieutenant Haavikko up.
I even know how.
But I want to know the precise details.
And I want to know who gave the orders.’
Liu Chang looked down miserably.
His heart was beating wildly now and the sweat was running from him.
For a moment longer he hesitated, then he looked up again, meeting Chen's eyes.
‘Okay, Liu Chang.
Speak.
Tell me what happened.’
The pimp swallowed, then found his voice.
‘And if I tell you?’
‘Then you live.
But only if you tell me everything.’
Liu Chang shuddered.
‘All right.’
But from the way he glanced at the girls, Chen knew what he was thinking.
If he lived, the girls would have to die.
Because they had heard.
And because Liu Chang could not risk them saying anything to anyone.
In case it got back.
But it doesn't matter, Chen thought, listening as the pimp began his tale; because you're dead already, Liu Chang.
For what you did.
And for what you would do, if I let you live.
Herrick's was forty li east of Liu Chang's, a tiny, crowded place at the very bottom of the City, below the Net.
It was less than an hour since Chen had come from the singsong house; not time enough for anyone to have discovered Liu Chang's body, or for the girls to  have undone their bonds.
Nevertheless he moved quickly down the corridors — shabby, ill-lit alleyways which, even at this early hour, were busy — knowing that every minute brought closer the chance of Herrick being warned.
It was two years since he had last been below the Net, but his early discomfort quickly passed, older habits taking over, changing the way he moved, the way he held himself.
Down here he was kwai again, trusting to his instincts as kwai,and, as if sensing this, men moved back from him as he passed.
It was a maze, the regular patterning of the levels above broken up long ago.
Makeshift barriers closed off corridors, marking out the territory of rival gangs, while elsewhere emergency doors had been removed and new corridors created through what had once been living quarters.
To another it might have seemed utter confusion, but Chen had been born here.
He knew it was a question of keeping a direction in your head, like a compass needle.
Even so, he felt appalled.
The very smell of the place — the same wherever one went below the Net — brought back the nightmare of living here.
He looked about him as he made his way through, horrified by the squalor, the ugliness of everything he saw, and wondered how he had stood it.
At the next intersection he drew in against the left-hand wall, peering around the corner into the corridor to his left.
It was as Liu Chang had said.
There, a little way along, a dragon had been painted on the wall in green.
But it was not just any dragon: this dragon had a man's face; the thin, sallow face of a Hung Mao,the eyes intensely blue, the mouth thin-lipped and almost sneering.
If Liu Chang was right, Herrick would be there now, working.
Like many below the Net, he was a night bird, keeping hours that the great City overhead thought unsociable.
Here there were no curfews, no periods of darkness.
Here it was always twilight, the corridors lit or unlit according to whether or not the local gang bosses had made deals with those Above who controlled the basic facilities like lighting, sanitation and water.
Such thoughts made him feel uneasy, working for the Seven, for it was they, his masters, who permitted the existence of this place.
They who, through the accident of his birth here, had made him what he was —kwai,a hired knife, a killer.
They had the wealth, the power, to change this place and make it habitable for those who wished it so, and yet they did nothing.
Why?
He took a deep breath, knowing the answer.
Because without this at the bottom, nothing else worked.
There had to be this place — this lawless pit — beneath it all.
To keep those above in check.
To curb their excesses.
Or so they argued.
He set the thoughts aside.
This now was not for the Seven.
This was for Axel.
And for himself.
Karr's hunch had been right.
If Ebert had been paying for Axel's debauchery, the chances were that he was behind the death of the girl.
There were ways, Karr had said, of making a man think he'd done something he hadn't: ways of implanting false memories in the mind.
And there were places where one could buy such technology.
Places like Herrick's.
Chen smiled.
He was almost certain now that Karr was right.
Liu Chang had said as much, but he had to be sure.
Had to have evidence to convince Axel that he was innocent of the girl's murder.
Quickly, silently, he moved round the corner and down the corridor, stopping outside the door beside the dragon.
At once a camera above the door turned, focusing on him.
There was a faint buzzing then a voice — tinny and distorted — came from a speaker beside the camera.
‘What do you want?’
Chen looked up at the camera and made the hand sign Liu Chang had taught him.
This, he knew, was the crucial moment.
If Liu Chang had lied to him, or had given him a signal which would tip Herrick off…
There was a pause, then, ‘Who sent you?’
‘The pimp,’ he said.
‘Liu Chang.’
Most of Herrick's business was with the Above.
Illicit stuff.
There were a thousand uses for Herrick's implants, but most would be used as they had on Haavikko — to make a man vulnerable by making him believe he had done something when he hadn't.
In these days of response-testing and truth drugs it was the perfect way of setting a man up.
The perfect tool for blackmail.
Chen looked down, masking his inner anger, wondering how many innocent men had died or lost all they had because of Herrick's wizardry.
‘What's your name?’
‘Tong Chou,’ he said, using the pseudonym he had used in the Plantation that time; knowing that if they checked the records they would find an entry there under that name and a face to match his face.
Apparently they did, for there was a long pause before the door hissed open.
A small man — a Han — stood there in the hallway beyond the door.
‘Come in,Shih Tong.
I'm sorry, but we have to be very careful who we deal with here.
I am Ling Hen,Shih Herrick's assistant.’
He smiled and gave a tiny bow.
‘Forgive me, but I must ask you to leave any weapons here, in the outer office.’
‘Of course,’ Chen said, taking the big handgun from inside his jacket and handing it across.
‘You want to search me?’
Ling Hen hesitated a moment, then shook his head.
‘That will not be necessary.
However, there is one other thing.’
Chen understood.
Again, Karr had prepared him for this.
He took out the three ten thousand yuan ’ chips’and offered them to the man.
Ling smiled, but shook his head.
‘No,Shih Tong.
You hold on to those for the moment.
I just wanted to be sure you understood our house rules.
Liu Chang's briefed you fully, I see.
We don't deal in credit.
Payment's up front, but then delivery's fast.
We guarantee a tailored implant — to your specifications — within three days.’
‘Three days?’
Chen said.
‘I'd hoped…’
Ling lowered his head slightly.
‘Well…
Come.
Let's talk of such matters  within.
I'm sure we can come to some kind of accommodation, neh,Shih Tong?’
Chen returned the man's bow, then followed him down the hallway to another door.
A guard moved back, letting them pass, the door hissing open at their approach.
It was all very sophisticated.
Herrick had taken great pains to make sure he was protected.
But that was to be expected down here.
It was a cut-throat world.
He would have had to make deals with numerous petty bosses to get where he was today, and still there was no guarantee against the greed of the Triads.
It paid to be paranoid below the Net.
They stepped through, into the cool semi-darkness of the inner sanctum.
Here the only sound was the faint hum of the air-filters overhead.
After the stench of the corridors, the clean, cool air was welcome.
Chen took a deep breath then looked about him at the banks of monitors that filled every wall of the huge, hexagonal room, impressed despite himself.
The screens glowed with soft colours, displaying a thousand different images.
He stared at those closest him, trying to make some sense of the complex chains of symbols, then shrugged; it was an alien language, all this, yet he had a sense that these shapes — the spirals and branching trees, the clusters and irregular pyramids-had something to do with the complex chemistry of the human body.
He looked across at the central desk.
A tall, angular-looking man was hunched over one of the control panels, perfectly still, attentive, a bulky wraparound making his head seem grotesquely huge.
Ling turned to him, his voice hushed.
‘Wait but a moment,Shih Tong.
My master is just finishing something.
Please, take a chair, he'll be with you in a while.’
Chen smiled, but made no move to sit, watching as Ling Hen went across to the figure at the control desk.
If Karr was right, Herrick would have kept copies of all his jobs-as a precaution.
But where?
And where was the guard-room?
Or had Herrick himself let them in?
He looked down momentarily, considering things.
There were too many variables for his liking, but he had committed himself now.
He would have to be audacious.
He looked up again and saw that Herrick had removed the wraparound and was staring across at him.
In the light of the screens his face seemed gaunter, far more skeletal than in the dragon portrait on the wall outside.
‘Shih Tong…’
Herrick said, coming across, his voice strong and rich, surprising Chen.
He had expected something thin and high and spiderish.
Likewise his handshake.
Chen looked down at the hand that had grasped his own so firmly.
It was a long, clever hand, like a larger version of his dead companion, Jyan's.
He looked up and met Herrick's eyes, smiling at the recollection.
‘What is it?’
Herrick asked, his hawk-like eyes amused.
‘Your hand,’ Chen said.
‘It reminded me of a friend's hand.’
Herrick gave the slightest shrug.
‘I see.’
He turned away, looking round him at the great nest of screens and machinery.
‘Well…you have a job for me, I understand.
You know what I charge?’
‘Yes…
A friend of mine came to you a few months back.
It was a rather simple thing, I understand.
I want something similar.’
Herrick looked back at him, then looked down.
‘A simple thing?’
He laughed.
‘Nothing I do is simple,Shih Tong.
That's why I charge so much.
What I do is an art form.
Few others can do it, you see.
They haven't the talent, nor the technical ability.
That's why people come here.
People like you,Shih Tong.’
He looked up again, meeting Chen's eyes, his own hard and cold.
‘So don't insult me, my friend.’
‘Forgive me,’ Chen said hastily, bowing his head.
‘I didn't mean to infer…
Well, it's just that I'd heard…’
‘Heard what?’
Herrick was staring away again, as if bored.
‘That you were capable of marvels.’
Herrick smiled.
‘That's so,Shih Tong.
But even your ‘simple things’ are beyond most men.’
He sniffed, then nodded.
‘All right, then, tell me what it was this friend of yours had me do for him, and I'll tell you whether I can do ‘something similar’.’
Chen smiled inwardly.
Yes, he had Herrick's measure now.
Knew his weak spot.
Herrick was vain, over-proud of his abilities.
Well, he could use that.
Could play on it and make him talk.
‘As I understand it, my friend was having trouble with a soldier.
A young lieutenant.
He had been causing my friend a great deal of trouble, so, to shut him up, he had you make an implant of the man committing a murder.
A young Hung Mao girl.’
Herrick was nodding.
‘Yes…
Of course.
I remember it.
In a brothel, wasn't it?
Yes, now I see the connection.
Liu Chang.
He made the introduction, didn't he?’
Chen felt himself go very still.
So it wasn't Liu Chang who had come here in that instance.
He had merely made the introduction.
Then why hadn't he said?
‘So Captain Auden is a good friend of yours,Shih Tong?’
Herrick said, looking at him again.
Auden…?
Chen hesitated, then nodded.
‘Ten years now.’
Herrick's smile tightened into an expression of distaste.
‘How odd.
I had the feeling he disliked Han.
Still…’
‘Do you think I could see the earlier implant?
He told me about it, but…well, I wanted to see whether it really was the kind of thing I wanted.’
Herrick screwed up his face.
‘It's very unusual,Shih Tong.
I like to keep my customers’ affairs discrete, you understand?
It would be most upsetting if Captain Auden were to hear I had shown you the implant I designed for him.’
‘Of course.’
Chen saw at once what he wanted and took one of the chips  from his pocket.
‘Would this be guarantee enough of my silence,Shih Herrick?’
Herrick took the chip, examining it a moment beneath a nearby desk light, then turned back to Chen, smiling.
‘I think that should do,Shih Tong.
I'll just find my copy of the implant.’
Herrick returned to the central desk and was busy a moment at the keyboard, then he returned, a thin film of transparent card held delicately between the fingers of his left hand.
‘Is that it?’
Herrick nodded.
‘This is just the analogue copy.
The visual element of it, anyway.
The real thing is much more complex.
An implant is far more than the simple visual component.’
He laughed coldly, then moved past Chen, slipping the card into a slot beneath one of the empty screens.
‘If it were simply that it would hardly be convincing, would it?’
Chen shrugged, then turned in time to see the screen light up.
‘No,’ Herrick continued.
‘That's the art of it, you see.
To create the whole experience.
To give the victim the feeling of having committed the act, whatever it is.
The smell and taste and touch of it — the fear and the hatred and the sheer delight of doing something illicit.’
He laughed again, turning to glance at Chen, an unhealthy gleam in his eyes.
‘That's what fascinates me, really.
What keeps me going.
Not the money, but the challenge of tailoring the experience to the man.
Take this Haavikko, for instance.
From what I was given on him it was very easy to construct something from his guilt, his sense of self-degradation.
It was easy to convince him of his worthlessness-to make him believe he was capable of such an act.
That, too, is part of my art, you see — to make such abnormal behaviour seem a coherent part of the victim's reality.’
Chen shuddered.
Herrick spoke as if he had no conception of what he was doing.
To him it was merely a challenge — a focus for his twisted genius.
He lacked all feeling for the men whose lives he destroyed.
The misery and pain he caused were, for him, merely a measure of his success.
It was evil.
Truly evil.
Chen wanted to reach out and take Herrick by the throat and choke him to death, but first he had to get hold of the copy and get out with it.
Am image began to form on the screen.
The frozen image of a naked girl, sprawled on a bed, backing away, her face distorted with fear.
‘There's one thing I don't understand,Shih Herrick.
My friend told me that Haavikko took a drink of some kind.
A drug.
But how was the implant put into his head?
He's only a junior officer, so he isn't wired.
How, then, was it done?’
Herrick laughed.
‘You think in such crude terms,Shih Tong.
The implant isn't a physical thing-not in the sense that you mean.
It's not like the card.
That's only storage — a permanent record.
No, the implant was the drug.
A highly complex drug made up of a whole series of chemicals with different reaction times, designed to fire particular synapses in the brain itself — to create, if you like, a false landscape of experience.
An animated landscape, complete  with a predetermined sequence of events.’
Chen shook his head.
‘I don't see how?’
Herrick looked away past him, his eyes staring off into some imaginary distance.
‘That's because you don't understand the function of the brain.
It's all chemicals and electrics, in essence.
The whole of experience.
It comes in at the nerve-ends and is translated into chemical and electrical reactions.
I merely by-pass those nerve-ends.
What I create is a dream.
But a dream more real, more vivid, than reality!’
Chen stared at him, momentarily frightened by the power of the man, then looked back at the screen.
He didn't want to see the girl get killed.
Instinctively, he reached across, ejecting the card, and slipped it into his pocket.
Herrick started forward.
‘What the fuck…?’
Chen grabbed Herrick by the neck, then drew the knife from his boot and held it against his throat.
‘I've heard enough,Shih Herrick.
More than enough, if you must know.
But now I've got what I came for, so I'll be going.’
Herrick swallowed uncomfortably.
‘You won't get out of here.
I've a dozen guards…’
Chen pulled the knife towards him sharply, scoring the flesh beneath Herrick's chin.
Herrick cried out and began to struggle, but Chen tightened his grip.
‘You'd better do as I say,Shih Herrick and get me out of here.
Or you're dead.
And not pretend dead.
Really dead.
One more shit comment from you and I'll implant this knife in the back of your throat.’
Herrick's eyes searched the room, then looked back at Chen.
‘All right.
But you'll have to let me give instructions to my men.’
Chen laughed.
‘Just tell them to open the doors and get out of the way.’
He raised his voice, looking up at one of the security cameras.
‘You hear me,Shih Ling?
If you want to see your boss again, do as I say.
Any tricks and he's dead, and where will you be then?
Runner to some gang boss, dead in a year.’
He waited a moment, searching the walls for sign of some technological trickery.
Then there was a hiss and a door on the far side of the room slid open.
He pressed harder with the knife.
‘Tell them I want to go out the way I came in,Shih Herrick.
Tell them quickly, or you're dead.’
Herrick swallowed, then made a tiny movement of his head.
‘Do as he says.’
They moved out slowly into the corridor, Chen looking about him, prepared at any moment to thrust the knife deep into Herrick's throat.
‘Who are you working for?’
Chen laughed.
‘Why should I be working for anyone?’
‘Then I don't understand…’
No, thought Chen.
You wouldn't, would you?
They came to the second door.
It hissed open.
Beyond it stood four guards, their knives drawn.
‘No further,’ said Ling, coming from behind them.
Chen met Ling's eyes, tightening his grip on Herrick's throat.
‘Didn't you hear me, Ling?
You want your master to die?’
Ling smiled.
‘You won't kill him, Tong.
You can't.
Because you can't get out without him.’
Chen answered Ling's smile with his own, then pulled Herrick closer to him, his knife hand tensed.
‘This is for my friend, Axel.
And for all those others whose lives you have destroyed.’
He heard the cry and looked back, seeing how the blood had drained from Ling's face, then let the body fall from him.
‘Now,’ he said, crouching, holding the knife out before him.
‘Come,Shih Ling.
Let's see what you can do against a kwai.’
