BETWEEN THE WARS
In the 20 years between 1919 and 1939 British town planning, while still resting firmly on public-sector housing-led initiatives undertaken before 1914, proceeded both to consolidate its position as a tool of government and to widen its disciplinary and professional scope.
The planning of British cities entered a new phase as a consequence.
It gained an entrenched footing in local government through the extension of statutory town-planning procedures, which confirmed the bridgehead established before the war; and, largely accidentally rather than by design, the activity of town planning came to involve other forms of public regulation, with the result that its field of concern was enlarged.
Town planning was neither strong nor coherent enough as a discipline and profession for it to stake a claim and take over other intellectual territory; as a movement it was too inwardly diverse to be sufficiently self-willed to embark on aggrandizement in its remit.
Rather, town planning became involved in other environmental and social concerns almost by chance, though its claim for a comprehensive, synoptic view of things perhaps made expansionism inevitable.
The analogy may be of Britain gaining an Empire by accident, and then losing it; this century, town planning has expanded its subject field, as disciplinary boundaries first collided and then were realigned, at a time when the nature of complex environmental problems was reidentified and expressed again in different terms.
A professional cuckoo in the hybrid nest of lawyers, architects, engineers and surveyors was the ultimate beneficiary in a long story of disciplinary realignment.
To continue the analogy: the Empire was lost in a pragmatic adjustment to international reality — in the context of late twentieth-century professional demarcations will town planning be the loser in the redefinition of urban problems and preferences for their solution?
We shall return to this speculation later (see p. 190).
The inter-war period was one of great change in social and economic affairs.
Outwardly Britain may have appeared stable; the class system and its accompanying distribution of wealth remained largely unchallenged.
In politics the Conservatives were in power virtually throughout, though not necessarily always directly in office.
There were two Labour governments but on each occasion Liberal Party support was necessary to form an administration.
The major political event was the split in Ramsay  MacDonald's Cabinet in 1931; the resultant general election returned just 49 Labour MPs to Westminster.
Even in 1935, with Labour gaining 154 seats, the party still had fewer than in 1924.
On the other hand Labour came to power in London in 1934, re-elected in 1937.
Particularly in the 1930s significant shifts in popular attitudes affected political postures, and for a variety of reasons there were calls for increased public sector intervention in a range of national economic and social affairs.
Town planning stood to gain accordingly, even if the years between the wars showed no great practical advance in the design, layout and building of towns over what had been achieved before.
The period therefore was one of consolidation and cautious experiment, the promise of town planning unrealized in the face of Government apathy.
The town planning infant survived, drip-fed from a number of sources: intellectual, artistic, rational, propagandist, reformist, futurist and legislative.
The inter-war years, seemingly uneventful and considered even disappointing for the development of town planning as an activity, did however bring about important changes.
Increasingly, the town planning movement came to be dominated by an institutionalized professional ideology.
Formerly a disparate collection of enthusiastic amateurs, it became a profession with its own cutting edge.
As a body it naturally reflected the dominant interests in society, though it was prone to being strongly buffeted by conflicts of interest in matters of land, property and amenity.
Maturity of outlook over the years led it to have a capacity for assuming an independent role, based on its own inherent values.
All this is important because it meant that by the end of the 1930s British town planning was in a stronger position than would have been thought likely, to respond to the national emergency of physical destruction, which led to an unprecedented period of planned rebuilding.
This is discussed in Chapter 5, but the events of the inter-war years represent an important forerunner, of ultimate significance for the style and nature of plan making in this country.
The context
Enormous changes took place during these years in terms of physical development, which dramatically affected the shape and appearance of cities.
National population growth slowed perceptibly, but the major concentrations of population remained, tightly drawn in conurbations as Geddes described them; ‘Constellations we cannot call them; conglomerations is, alas! nearer the mark at present, but it may sound unappreciative; what of ‘Conurbations’?’
(Geddes, 1915, p. 34).
In these areas two-fifths of the national population resided in areas which he termed: Lancaston (Manchester, Liverpool and Greater Lancashire), the West Riding, the South Riding (Greater Sheffield), Midlandton (Greater Birmingham), South Waleston, Tyne-Wear-Tees, and Clyde-Forth; in all a ‘New Heptarchy’ to accompany Greater London.
These areas retained the nineteenth-century characteristics which had already focused the reformers' minds: they were tight-knit, high-density, congested, smoky, dirty and they presented a scene of old and obsolete buildings.
The challenge of the poverty of environment and of housing conditions remained.
But improvements were to occur, sometimes faster than had been the case before 1914.
For example, with regard to overcrowding, 14 per cent of the population of Great Britain lived at more than two persons to a room in 1921; but this proportion had been halved by 1939.
The major reason for this was a sustained house-building programme, which contributed nearly 4 million dwellings to the national housing stock between the wars.
Of seminal significance, one quarter of these were to provide a new tenure group for British housing: the local authority council house.
Of equal significance was the territorial spread of British cities, which massive new house building in a low-density form implied; the decentralizing city was emerging and, with 2 per cent of the entire area of England changing from rural to urban in the 12 years before 1939, a new interest in land use change was shown, not least by the geographer L. Dudley Stamp.
But the dominant urban feature in the inter-war period was the growth and spread of London.
The many problems demonstrated by the peripheral development of the metropolis, not to mention the long-standing congestion at its core, and its residual stock of poor dwellings, placed London firmly on the planning agenda.
In the nineteenth century it was the squalor and unhealthiness of the northern manufacturing towns, as much as the condition of London's rookeries, that led to measures of sanitary regulation and housing improvement.
Between the wars, however, London's problems became national problems: the failure to cope with the onrush of the speculative builder, the frailty of town-planning legislation, the threat of the loss of open countryside, the need for road improvements, and the inadequacy of a multiple number of local authorities without effective coordination.
It was to these issues that town planning had to respond.
Another change, which was to have implications for the course of British town planning, lay in the shifts of economic fortune between regions.
Britain emerged from war in 1918 both stronger and in a healthier economic state than her European neighbours (Aldcroft, 1986).
There had been loss of shipping and sales of overseas assets, but there was no great disruption and dislocation.
There was some social and political unrest, it is true, but nothing on the scale seen in Poland, Austria, Germany, Belgium and France.
But yet Britain had a poor record of economic achievement in the 1920s, before the world depression marked the years 1929–32.
An economic boom developed in the spring of 1919, but this only lasted a year and when the Bank Rate was hoisted to 7 per cent in April 1920, the short-lived social reform programme was terminated.
A sharp downturn in 1920–1 was aggravated and by the middle of 1921 Britain was experiencing one of the worst recessions in its history, with unemployment rising to 2.4 million in May in that year (22 per cent of the insured labour force).
Labour unrest followed in the coalfields, in the cotton mills and on the railways.
A subsequent economic recovery followed, but unemployment was slow to fall, and 1 million were still out of work in June 1924 (9.2 per cent).
In 1926 the recovery was cut short by severe labour troubles, marked by the General Strike and a prolonged stoppage in the coal industry.
The later 1920s reflected a modest boom but the years demonstrated no great grasp of economic analysis (these were pre-Keynesian days), and problems of currency stabilization and national debt management assumed greatest importance.
The return to the gold standard, which implied maintaining the £/; $ parity, severely limited the range of options for dealing with unemployment because significant monetary expansion would have undermined the balance of payments and would therefore be inconsistent with the fixed parity.
In the event, Britain experienced a fairly modest depression between the years 1929–32, not quite so severe as 1921, but more prolonged.
But this period captured the popular imagination because of the very high unemployment figures, the sudden departure from the gold standard in September 1931 and the drama of political events at the time.
Weakening British exports, as the incomes of the primary producing countries overseas began to fall, came at a time of a downturn in the US economy which greatly aggravated deflationary tendencies.
The US stock-market crash in October 1929 was followed by the international financial crisis in the summer of 1931.
Unemployment rose from 1.2 million (9.5 per cent) in the second quarter of 1929 to 3 million (22.7 per cent ) in the third quarter of 1932.
When it came to recovery, Britain did rather better than many leading competitors.
Between 1932 and the peak of activity in 1937 real income increased by 19 per cent, gross domestic production by 23 per cent , industrial production by nearly 46 per cent and gross fixed investment by 47 per cent .
Exports rose too (by 28 per cent) but the recovery was primarily a home market one.
But even so unemployment problems remained, with the total out of work numbering 1.4 million (just over 9 per cent) in the third quarter of 1937.
The Government stance on monetary and fiscal policy was more relaxed, but the Treasury attitude to public works and reflation by expansionist finance changed only marginally.
However, strong natural growth in building and construction trades, and in the consumer industries, provided upward trends in real incomes, home ownership being one of the areas to benefit.
The national situation was overlain by sharp regional differences within the country from the point of view of depression and capacity for recovery.
Uneven development marked the geography of inter-war Britain (Ward, 1988).
The highest rates of unemployment remained concentrated in areas of heavy industry, including coal mining, mechanical engineering, ship building, textiles, and iron and steel manufacture.
The contraction of these high-cost industries proved traumatic.
Significantly they were located in areas of nineteenth-century development where the coalfields and tidal estuaries had spawned their great cities.
Between the wars, the incidence of regional deprivation heightened the problems of these areas, already afflicted by a backlog of unfit housing, congestion and overcrowding.
Between 1923 and 1939 unemployment rates in these hard-hit industries were high: shipbuilding 38.8 per cent(on average), cotton textiles 20.7 per cent , and coal mining 19.8 per cent .
By comparison the figure for vehicle manufacture was 10 per cent.
The labour force was being restructured: between 1920 and 1938 the coal industry lost 400,000 of its insured workforce; cotton 230,000; iron and steel 185,000; and shipbuilding 150,000.
On  the other hand, more than 600,000 were added to the workforces in chemicals, electrical engineering, vehicles, electricity supply, silk and rayon, and hosiery.
A distinct shift took place from the staple export industries of the last century to a range of industries more closely linked to domestic markets and reliant on new technologies (Cronin, 1984).
The geography of Britain was changing as population and industry were redistributed.
The population of Greater London grew by 2 million between the wars, 1.25 million by inward migration from elsewhere in the country and 0.75 million by natural increase.
People followed jobs and moved from the regions of economic decline to the more buoyant areas, typically the outer parts of Greater London and selected centres in the Home Counties.
Between 1929 and 1936 unemployment averaged 16.9 per cent across Great Britain, but it ranged from 7.8 per cent in the South-east to 30.1 per cent for Wales, 22.7 per cent for the North-east and just under 22 per cent for Scotland and the North-west.
This novel and distinctive economic backcloth to the inter-war years had a number of important consequences for town planning.
Ultimately the regional problem and the changing geography of population and industrial distribution gave the subject field a dramatically widened remit.
Another effect was that it engineered a prevailing mood of despair about the quality of urban and industrial life which in turn bred a determination to rebuild and sweep away the past when the time came — which it did, in the 1940s when town planning was able to assume the mantle of the new provider.
Public housing
The war years themselves provided the occasion for a new venture in State intervention in housing: rent control.
The Rent and Mortgage Restriction Act, 1915, fixed rents at the levels obtaining in 1914, and although it was introduced as a wartime emergency measure, it became politically impossible to repeal after hostilities ceased.
The circumstances of the legislation were that widespread discontent in areas of war industry had resulted from sharply rising rents, and in one locality, Glasgow, a rent strike caused political alarm.
Long before 1914 Glasgow had been a pressure point for confrontation between landlord and tenant: collective tenant complaint was commonplace in a situation dominated by communal tenant blocks, administered by tough ‘factors’ who had extensive powers of eviction and distraint.
In 1915 the attempts of landlords to benefit from housing shortages, exacerbated by the cessation of house building and the influx of munitions workers to the Clyde shipbuilding yards and engineering works.
led to protest.
Melling (1983) has argued that the fight against evictions was not organized by ‘Red Clydeside’ political activists, but was a spontaneous upsurge by Glasgow housewives: women munitions workers and soldiers' wives and mothers who responded to grievance by withholding rent increases.
The dispute threatened to spread to Woolwich, Birmingham, Belfast and other centres of the munitions industry; the legislation of December 1915 was to have a major impact on British housing policy.
An equally long lasting, but more profound government stance came  from the perceived need to prepare plans for post-war reconstruction.
From Lloyd George's Reconstruction Committee, set up in February 1917, came strong support for a Ministry of Health and an extensive housing programme for the working classes, ideas supported later by Christopher Addison as Minister of Reconstruction.
The Report of the Royal Commission on the Housing of the Industrial Population of Scotland (Cmd. 8731, 1917) provided ample justification for a new initiative, in its revelations of the wretched housing conditions inherited from earlier years.
Meanwhile successive years of minimal house building had led to a national housing shortage, variously estimated at between 400,000 and 800,000 dwellings.
In the period before 1910 about 85,000 new houses had been built each year, but after the introduction of Land Values Duties the building rate fell sharply.
The supply problem was further compounded by the fact that during the four years of war only 50,000 dwellings were added to the national stock.
Action was called for in matters both of housing quality and quantity, and of distribution according to need.
Proposals for qualitative improvement in new dwellings came from a committee set up by the Local Government Board; chaired by Sir John Tudor Walters, an MP and Director of the Hampstead Garden Suburb Trust, it dealt with matters relating to building construction and the provision of dwellings for the working class.
The recommendations which flowed from this committee, published in 1919, owed much to one member, Raymond Unwin, and it is from this source that earlier years of experiment in site planning (focusing particularly on density and layout), house design and standards of accommodation finally came to fruition as national policy.
For a quarter of a century Britain's housing received a marked Unwin-inspired imprint.
Unwin's early place in British town planning has already been noted (see pp. 63): at New Earswick, Letchworth and Hampstead, where traditions of vernacular architecture, linked to new forms of residential layout dictated by informality, open space and densities lower than had been the norm, provided both a practical base for a newly developing profession and a rallying cry for the future.
His pamphlet Nothing gained by overcrowding !(1912) may have been based on questionable statistics, but the approach and general philosophy proved increasingly acceptable to informed opinion.
Unwin became a national figure of many parts.
In 1910 he was one of the prime organizers of the Royal Institute of British Architects' International Town Planning Congress (which attracted an astonishing 1,300 delegates); between 1912 and 1914 he was lecturing at the University of Birmingham; and in 1913 he was playing an active role in establishing a Town Planning Institute.
When Thomas Adams left the Local Government Board in 1914, Herbert Samuel, the President, was quick to appoint Unwin as Chief Town Planning Inspector.
The importance of this appointment was quickly recognized.
In 1915 he was seconded to the explosives division of the Ministry of Munitions, to lead an ambitious programme of factory and house building.
The Office of Works had already commenced construction of the attractive Well Hall Estate, Eltham (the design and layout of which owed much to Unwin's book Town planning in practice (1909)), but the building of munitions plants  elsewhere in the country was now promoted.
The largest was at Gretna on the Solway Firth and it became no less than a State-developed new town, south-west of the existing village.
Courtenay Crickmer was the resident architect but Unwin's hand in this early development of a planned settlement with community facilities was well in evidence.
Unwin next joined the Tudor Walters committee of enquiry, providing a major contribution.
Miller (1981) acknowledges that the published report (Cmd. 9191, 1918) reflected Unwin's concepts of housing design, garden suburbs, site selection and survey: ‘the fragmentary experimentation of Letchworth and Hampstead crystallized into statutory house types and area standards, and a density of twelve houses to the acre, paving the way for an unprecedented municipal intervention into the provision of housing’(Miller, 1981, p. 89).
New standards were set for the working-class house in terms of space, WC, bathrooms, sunlight and garden space.
The Committee advocated that the density of dwellings in working-class development should not exceed 12 to the acre in urban areas (8 in rural areas).
Sites for development should be properly surveyed and selected.
In the subsequent layout, road needs and road widths had to be assessed; there should be good access to the rear of houses; the proper orientation of houses should be secured; design elements should incorporate the cul-de-sac, courtyard and green.
Generous space standards should attend the dwellings themselves; each house should have its own garden, large living rooms with a sunny aspect, a first Moor bath, a WC approached under cover, a larder and a coal store.
The Government's own Housing manual (1919) adopted these far-reaching recommendations and the pattern for the whole of the inter-war period was set.
Consideration was given to housing need in two Acts in 1919.
The Housing and Town Planning Act made it obligatory for local authorities to prepare surveys of their housing needs, to draw up plans to deal with them, and to carry out their schemes.
Similar powers in the Housing Act of 1890 had only been permissive and so far only a few councils (notably London) had been active house builders; indeed some, including Birmingham, had regarded the proposition as a matter of last resort.
The Act was passed in July 1919.
In retrospect it was courageous legislation but it had curiously little bite.
All that the legislation provided for was that any loss incurred by the local authorities, as a result of carrying out the regulations, would fall as a charge upon the Exchequer.
Addison was soon persuaded that houses would not be built fast enough without direct subsidy and in December that year a further Housing (Additional Powers) Bill was rushed through all its stages, providing for subsidies (£160 for a four-bedroomed house, E 140 for a four-bedroomed house without a parlour, and £130 for a three-bedroomed house) and empowering local authorities to prohibit luxury and non-essential building.
It was Addison, formerly President of the Local Government Board, but with its demise now the first Minister of Health, who introduced the programme which articulated Lloyd George's election promise to the voters of Wolverhampton in November 1918 that returning soldiers should have ‘homes fit for heroes’.
We might pause at this juncture to ask just why the British Government should assume an obligation to provide decent housing  for the working classes, when in other countries rather different policies were pursued; also why Britain embarked, consciously or otherwise, on a massive shift in housing tenure over the next 50 years and more.
The factors which lay behind both questions have considerably affected British town planning this century, as the transformation of an old order of private landlords to the new pattern of owner-occupied and council estates has occurred.
Daunton asks the searching question: ‘did the private market as it existed in the decades before the First World War fall, or was it pushed?’
(Daunton, 1987, p. 13).
The ‘homes for heroes’ debate has received full attention (Orbach, 1977; Swenarton, 1981), but the circumstantial canvas of historical explanation extends over some years.
The immediate trigger was that during the last period of the war the Ministry of Reconstruction's Housing Advisory Panel, chaired by Lord Salisbury, was successful in establishing the parameters of post-war policy.
The powerful voices of the Fabians, where the Webbs proved insistent campaigners, urged State intervention on a new scale.
The Panel argued that private enterprise, which had hitherto provided 95 per cent of working-class housing, could not be relied upon to meet this task after the war.
Public utility societies and cooperative schemes, which had previously seemed to offer perfectly viable means of providing housing, were discounted in favour of housing by local authorities.
One argument has been that the Government's housing programme was introduced to buy industrial and social peace; it could do this in exchange for really very little, except expense — and when the Treasury found it too costly, the scheme was jettisoned.
But longer-term issues were involved, as reviewed by Daunton (1987).
The political explanation runs as follows.
For many years before 1914 private house owners had been hit by an increasing share of rate levy, at a time when the costs of urban government were rising; from the 1880s landlords found themselves in an increasingly difficult situation as demand fell and the burden of local taxation mounted.
Additionally, private landlords became marginalized politically; industrialists had not extended the housing market and private landlords were drawn largely, though not entirely, from the lower middle class — the very people who found it more and more difficult to establish their position on local councils, bearing in mind, at least, the new element of organized labour via the Trades Councils.
The Liberal Party was more interested in shifting the burden of local taxation onto land and tended to regard house property rents as a secondary matter.
The Conservatives focused their attention more on the needs of agriculture and the church than urban landlords, but there was a strand in Party thinking which accepted the principle of State aid for housing.
All this was before 1914, but the Rent Act, 1915 concentrated the minds wonderfully: State intervention in the provision of working-class housing after the war became much more likely.
Interestingly, the Labour Party came to the view that all working-class housing should be supplied through the local authorities.
In the final analysis the need for a swift response to an immediate housing shortage after the war painted almost inevitably to a large-scale local authority housing programme, rather than face a period of delay while housing associations were geared  up to the task.
It was a crucial decision and town planning in Britain was immeasurably influenced by it.
Lloyd George's Government had embarked on a programme of financing social reform at a time of rapidly rising prices.
As economic problems built up in 1920, so the expenses of the housing programme became evident.
A shortage of building workers and of building materials compounded escalating costs.
In August 1920, the cost of a house which stood at £250 in 1914, had risen to £930 on average.
Only 29,000 houses were completed during the year.
Addison fell in April 1921, castigated by Lloyd George for waste and lavish public expenditure, and the housing scheme was halted.
Two years later, in 1923, houses were still being completed under the Addison Scheme, under contracts concluded before the cutback.
In all, the 1919 legislation was responsible for the completion of nearly 214,000 dwellings, the great majority by local authorities.
In 1923 the Conservative Government once again introduced a subsidy scheme, under Neville Chamberlain, and the programme was developed in 1924 by John Wheatley, Minister of Health in the first Labour Government.
State-sponsored housing began to reach further down the social scale than previously and house building under subsidy began to increase in the later 1920s.
The 1923 Scheme lowered the standards for grant eligibility; the superficial area of houses qualifying for subsidy was also reduced, resulting in smaller houses, let at lower rents.
The Housing Act of 1924 restored the local authorities to their former role as house builders, gave higher subsidies and promised a long-term housing programme.
The Wheatley Act remained in operation until 1933 (though with a reduced subsidy) and an indelible mark had been made on housing policy.
The further reach of State enterprise had been confirmed.
Between 1919 and 1934 nearly 2.5 million dwellings were built in England and Wales, 31 per cent by local authorities; and of the rest (largely by private enterprise) a quarter were subsidized.
Visually and socially the local authority houses also had a decisive impact.
The council estate became a significant feature in patterns of urban growth.
Layouts became standardized and often geometric in design; wide avenues were punctuated (latterly) by roundabouts; and there was an abundance of open space.
The larger estates were heavily criticized for absent or late provision of social and community facilities.
Becontree in south Essex, as an LCC housing estate then the largest local-authority estate in the world, was a working-class suburb adjoining Ilford, unrelated to industrial development, ill-served by transport and lines of communication, and where schools and shops were late in provision.
In Birmingham, Kingstanding, and in Liverpool, Speke, were typical of the one-class, monotone housing estates of the big cities.
Rather different was Wythenshawe, south of Manchester on the Tatton Estate, planned as a satellite and enclosed by an agricultural belt, but not distant enough from the parent city to serve that function.
Development began in 1928, with Barry Parker as consultant; 10 residential neighbourhoods were laid out with a road layout which followed the American practice of parkways.
Slum clearance
The Housing, Town Planning etc.
Act, 1919,(the Addison Act) broke new ground in British housing policy in two related respects: the emphasis on building new dwellings to garden suburb ideals and to a standard hitherto unsurpassed in the public sector; and the neglect of the older slums.
For almost half a century the housing question had been dominated by the problems of insanitary, unfit dwellings and the association with overcrowding and ill health.
Assumptions and practices changed, with far greater hope now reposing in a massive addition to the housing stock in order to at least begin to tackle the problems of overcrowding and health.
Slum dwellers would filter through into better stock, or be rehoused by local authorities in new estates.
These rather simple expectations were not fulfilled however: the worst housed were not necessarily relocated and the new estates were associated in due time with their own problems of overcrowding, poverty and undernourishment.
The term ‘unhealthy areas’ derived from the Housing Act 1875 (the Cross Act) and was retained in common use throughout the inter-war period.
An early example of the recognition of the residual problem was afforded by the setting up of the Unhealthy Areas Committee by Addison in 1919.
A new Birmingham MP in his first year in the House, Neville Chamberlain, was appointed Chairman (Cherry, 1980).
The terms of reference were broadly to consider the principles to be adopted in the clearance of slum areas, but interestingly the Committee's conclusions adopted a city-wide perspective, placing the reconstruction of older areas in the context of territorially diffused urban growth.
Chamberlain was broadly sympathetic to the town planning and garden city movements, and his committee included G.L. Pepler, town planner from the Ministry of Health, and Capt. R.L. Reiss, then Chairman of the Garden Cities and Town Planning Association.
Crucially, their Interim report submitted in March 1920 noted the intimate connection between housing, transport and the ultimate distribution of land uses of all kinds, including residential, commercial and industrial, so that the housing question ‘can only be successfully attacked by the simultaneous consideration of all these aspects over a wide area’.
Compared with nineteenth-century piecemeal projects, such as in Birmingham's central-area redevelopment, or the Boundary Street scheme in East London, the merits of a twentieth-century comprehensive approach to housing reconstruction and urban redevelopment were advocated.
The Interim report considered that there were only two alternative methods of relieving the congestion of London: either by vertical expansion in multi-storey buildings, or by removal of part of the population elsewhere, so achieving lower densities and larger open spaces.
It favoured the second, advocating the establishment of garden cities surrounding London: dispersal and decentralization of both people and employment.
A general plan for the reconstruction of London was required.
The Second and final report , submitted in April 1921, maintained this general line of approach.
Specifically there was a recognition that delays in slum clearance were inevitable, and therefore it was still important to achieve improvements of older houses; local authority acquisition was envisaged to achieve this.
Chamberlain's Reports were submitted at a financially unpropitious time, and although the scale of unfit housing was known to be severe, policies for effective remedies were shelved.
Garside (1988) has shown how in the period 1919–23 civil servants wrestled with the requirement to indicate action, but without generating demands that could not be satisfied.
Government relied on its house-building campaign, postponing action on slum housing, though calling for more information from local authorities to carry out surveys of their areas.
In the years of sharp pruning of public-sector expenditure, and at a time when a comprehensive housing programme embracing improvement, clearance, redevelopment and new building lay beyond the grasp of the Ministry of Health, the most that could be hoped for in the 1920s was the amelioration of a small number of the worst houses.
In the meantime the relatively favoured escaped to the suburbs, leaving behind the very low paid, especially the casually employed.
It took some years for a lobby to emerge, strong enough to bring pressure to bear on the scandal of the continuing presence of the nineteenth-century slums.
E.D. Simon's advocacy was clear (How to abolish the slums , 1929): continue to build new houses and relocate the people.
As ex-Lord Mayor of Manchester and former chairman of that City Corporation's Housing Committee, his experience led him to demonstrate that: The return of a Labour Government in 1929 provided an opportunity for a different approach.
The Housing Act, 1930 (Arthur Greenwood's Act), signalled a move away from State involvement in building additional dwellings, to one of encouraging slum clearance and rebuilding on cleared sites.
Local authorities were given extra subsidies related to the numbers of people displaced and the higher price of central area land.
Even then, however, there was a preference to use the general subsidies for new suburban houses while ever these remained in force.
Slum clearance did not become fully operative until the subsidies were cancelled in 1933.
The major shift in practice came with the Housing Act, 1935.
More was clearly needed, for slum clearance since 1930 was regarded as both too limited in scope and too slow in practice to deal with the scale of the housing problem in the big cities.
The perceived benefits of large-scale redevelopment were looked at again, costs notwithstanding, bearing in mind compulsory acquisition of housing, industrial and commercial property.
There is evidence (Garside, 1988) that ministry officials were influential in their advocacy for a radical, new approach, arguing the merits of large reconstruction schemes such as Kingsway and Aldwych in London and Corporation Street in Birmingham.
They had to settle for much less, however, and an understanding was reached with local authorities, in spite of some early reluctance on their part.
To meet different points of  view and to allay political sensitivities that a radical switch of policy would not imply undue criticism of past failure and neglect, the legislation focused on the establishment and enforcement of an overcrowding standard.
In the event, therefore, the Act did not provide for large-scale planning and redevelopment, but stimulated further direction towards slum clearance by extending new forms of subsidy directed to the rehousing of overcrowded families.
Local authorities were obliged to carry out overcrowding surveys; to prosecute to enforce the standard; and to define what might be regarded as ‘suitable alternative accommodation’.
The system depended on local authority action and interpretation.
A compromise situation had been reached.
Action was being undertaken, but it was far removed from the radical surgery that seemed to be needed.
Official calculations of the number of slum dwellings were continually revised (upwardly) and by 1939 the officially accepted total for England and Wales stood at 472,000.
By that date almost half had been demolished or closed.
But blackspots remained: one third of the total number of houses in Manchester, for example, were classed as unfit at the outbreak of war.
However, there were some spectacular local developments.
The Greenwood Act had provided a special subsidy for flats, and indeed the 1930s produced flat building in British cities in a significant way for the first time.
Only in London and Liverpool was there any tradition of Mat building that went back to the middle of the nineteenth century.
Between the wars, nationally, only about 5 per cent of all subsidized dwellings were in the form of flats; it was 40 per cent in London and 20 per cent in Liverpool.
Greenwood's Act finally coerced a number of local authorities into building flats; in the 1920s the majority of English cities had not undertaken high-density redevelopment, confining their use of housing subsidies to suburban estates.
London and Liverpool continued to build flats and from 1933 (when the Act became widely operative) many cities built a few hundred flats in large estates: by 1939 Newcastle had built 500, Leeds nearly 1,000, Liverpool over 5,000 and Manchester 9,000 (Ravetz, 1974a).
It was in Leeds that perhaps the most remarkable scheme was undertaken: at Quarry Hill, on 26 acres east of the city centre, from 1934 onwards (Ravetz, 1974b).
The site had been in the ownership of the local authority since 1901, but after clearance it was largely empty.
A Labour Council was elected in 1933, and under the political influence of a left-wing cleric the city council adopted different policies from the previous Conservative administration.
Revd Charles Jenkinson, a Christian Socialist, was appointed to a slum parish in the city in 1927; he was elected to the city council in 1930 and his drive on housing questions made Leeds the leading housing authority in the country.
The Quarry Hill scheme contained 930 flats, progressively occupied from 1938 onwards to a (delayed) completion date of 1941.
Designed by the City Architect, R.A.H. Livett who was also Director of Housing.
the scheme was linked to a commitment to prefabrication (with implicit promises of speed and economy) and to the architectural ideals of the Modern Movement an represented in the Karl Marx Hof and other Viennese estates.
A number of innovations were recorded: the use of lifts (though not the first in  British council flats), the first use of the Garchey refuse disposal system in the country, heights up to 8 storeys, private balconies in the flats and emphasis on community provisions including playgrounds, laundry, gardens, shops and community hall.
Elsewhere slum clearance activity was much more piecemeal and avoided spectacular set pieces.
Frequently, the results of clearance activity depended on the strength of key local authority officials and their influence on political decisions.
In Liverpool for example the Director of Housing, Lancelot Keay, was a convert from his previous reliance on wholesale decanting of slum dwellers to the suburbs, to a 10-year rebuilding scheme.
But in practice it was difficult to acquire sufficiently large sites for the proposed schemes.
A number of 5-storey blocks built in brick and concrete were developed, with over 5,500 central-area flats built between 1930 and 1945.
Factors such as location, journey to work, allocation and management policies, cost and personal preference meant that different types of households were accommodated in different housing forms; predictably the low-income groups took the poorest quality housing (Pooley and Irish, 1987).
In the meantime, however, while the general lines of policy with regard to public housing switched in favour of slum clearance, significant new evidence from the medical profession served to cast doubt on some long-held assumptions concerning the importance of the environment in matters of health and fitness.
Over many years considerable advances had been made in urban environmental quality through better housing, lessening of overcrowding and provision of open space: but national medical standards had not risen accordingly.
The claims of the environmentalists had to be looked at again.
Telling evidence came from the Medical Officer of Health for Stockton-on-Tees (G.C.M. M'Gonigle) and his co-author, Kirby (1936).
There was no doubting the state of the country's unfitness.
In the year beginning November 1917 National Service Medical Boards conducted nearly 2.5 million medical examinations in Great Britain: of every nine men, only three were perfectly fit and healthy, while two were on a definitely ‘unfirm plane’ of health and strength, three were incapable of undergoing more than a very moderate degree of physical exertion and the remaining one was a chronic invalid.
The influenza epidemic of 1918/19 seemed to confirm a national state of unfitness: more than 151,000 deaths were recorded, the highest relative to population for any epidemic since the cholera outbreak of 1849.
After the war it was not possible to maintain national service statistics on the earlier scale, but medical records of school children did provide a comparable measure of national health and fitness.
During 1933 1.8 million elementary school children underwent ‘routine’ examinations: 17.3 per cent required immediate medical treatment and a further 14.0 per cent suffering from ailments of a less serious nature, were scheduled ‘for observation’.
In short, nearly one in three possessed physical defects, a figure which took no account of dental problems or defective vision.
The national picture was augmented by detail from Stockton-on-Tees.
In 1927, a district known as the Housewife Lane area was demolished as a slum clearance scheme and its population of 710 (152 families) was moved  to the Mount Pleasant Estate, a self-contained municipal housing estate which had been specially built for the purpose.
In the next five years (1928–32) the crude death-rate of the transferred population increased from 18.75 to 26.71 per 1,000, and by way of explanation M'Gonigle and Kirby observe: ‘It is difficult to come to any other conclusion than that the increased mortality was associated with the dietary deficiencies ’(M'Gonigle and Kirby, 1936, p. 129).
The argument was advanced that three main factors are responsible for man's health or ill-health: nutrition, infection and external environmental factors.
Of these three, bad environment must of course be taken seriously, and it was not suggested that environmental factors did not play an important part in health deterioration, but ‘environment is not the only factor so operative and possibly not the most important one’(M'Gonigle and Kirby, 1936, p. 148).
The debate progressed to a recognition of the importance of diet deficiency, linked to poverty.
Amongst the employed families living on the Mount Pleasant Estate, 51.2 per cent of their total income was claimed by rent and ‘other necessary expenditure’; in unemployed families the figure rose to 60.6 per cent.
Overall, the amounts which these groups of families were able to spend on food were, in three cases out of four, well below the minimum considered necessary by the British Medical Association Nutrition Committee.
On the face of it, so much for slum clearance and planned redevelopment: community health might even be impaired rather than improved.
On the other hand, the issues were now seen broadly in terms of welfare; the physical arrangements of housing and land use had to be part of a wider canvas which tackled poverty and social opportunity.
The scene was set for the activity of town planning to move from environmentalism to welfarism.
Land use planning and pressures for development
A major criticism of the town-planning sections of the 1909 Act had been that the provisions were cumbersome and that as a consequence the operation of town planning schemes was slow and protracted.
The Housing and Town Planning Act, 1919, simplified the procedures for making schemes.
The authority of the Minister of Health (the new Ministry having succeeded the former Local Government Board) was no longer required for the preparation of a scheme; instead, all that was necessary was the resolution of a local council.
But otherwise the main principles of planning law, laid down in 1909, were maintained: future development should accord with an approved town planning scheme; compensation to be payable to landowners injuriously affected; and betterment to be payable to a local authority when an increase in land values accrues as a result of planning proposals.
Compensation and betterment proved thorny issues and were not totally resolved until 1948, and then only temporarily.
Another criticism was the permissive nature of the 1909 Act, but this was removed in the 1919 legislation.
From 1 January 1923 the preparation of schemes was compulsory on all borough and district councils with a  population of more than 20,000.
The schemes, to be prepared within a period of three years from that date, were still to relate to land in course of development, or earmarked for development.
They were little more, therefore, than devices to regulate land development in the suburban areas, to safeguard principal routes of communication and to impart basic characteristics of density, residential character and provision of open space.
Important innovations were introduced by the 1919 Act, which were to have far-reaching implications.
First, it enabled joint Town Planning committees to be established, which assisted in the development of regional planning.
Second, it introduced the practice of Interim Development Control by enabling authorities to give consent to development in advance of the preparation of a scheme.
In this way development was not delayed and working agreements emerged between developer and local council.
This had the effect of statutory town planning taking root in an authority without having to persuade a council as to the merits (and costs) of scheme preparation.
Statutory town planning of a kind therefore got under way after the hiatus of war, with only limited experience to guide it, as summarized by Adshead (1923).
Neither was there all that much political interest behind it if the minimal debate during the passage of the Bill through the House was anything to go by (Cherry, 1974).
But a new profession was to encourage it; new technical practices such as zoning would foster planning method; and outstandingly George Pepler, now Chief Town Planning Inspector at the Ministry of Health proved a tireless advocate and bridge with local authorities (Cherry, 1981).
Wright (1982) confirms his professional entrepreneurship , describing him as ‘a John the Baptist.
He made converts, and prepared the way for the real planning that began with the bombs of 1940–41’(Wright, 1982, p. 9).
Meanwhile, overtones of a moral crusade were maintained by the garden city movement, both at home and overseas in the form of the International Garden Cities and Town Planning Association.
In spite of the hopes of the new legislation, progress in scheme preparation, the show piece of statutory town planning, was still slow.
By 1928 there were still 98 out of 262 urban authorities of 20.000 population size in England and Wales which had not submitted any proposals, in the form of either resolutions, preliminary statements or schemes.
The date for the submission of obligatory schemes had already been extended and the Local Government Act, 1929 extended it again to l January 1934, with power for the Minister to further extend it, but not beyond 31 December 1938.
In Scotland progress measured by submission of schemes was even slower, with only two small schemes in Edinburgh submitted by 1929.
The basis for statutory town planning was changed in the Town and Country Planning Act, 1932.
The origins of this legislation were particularly protracted, and concerned the question of rural amenities; ‘town and country’ now became the customary title for Planning Acts.
The 1932 Act repealed and consolidated almost all general and local enactments relating to planning.
It materially extended the powers of local authorities by authorizing the making of schemes for any land, whether urban or rural, though requiring ministerial approval.
But the Act broke with the 1919  precedent by reverting to making scheme preparation voluntary rather than obligatory.
This move was bitterly attacked by the planning profession, though in the event the process of scheme preparation quickened during the later 1930s; by the end of the decade London and most of the large towns were wholly or almost wholly under planning control.
Even in Scotland there was developing interest, particularly in Glasgow with four major schemes in the 1930s.
A rudimentary system of land-use control had been partially developed by the outbreak of war.
In March 1938 in England and Wales, 24 million acres were under planning control, but only 236,000 acres of this total applied to approved schemes actually operative (92 in number).
The rest of the land was covered by local authority resolutions and draft schemes not yet submitted.
Much has been made of the importance of the 1919 and 1932 Acts in establishing a nationwide system of supervision over building development, based on local authority scheme preparation and the twin sanctions of by-law and planning control.
Together with the hold over council housing, it could be said that there was a measure of guidance and control over suburban building, its location, layout and design, as never before.
True, but in some cases that did not amount to all that much, and while inter-war legislation obviously provided the experience for the post-war Planning Acts which followed, the development of statutory land-use control took place at a time when particular environmental changes seemed to be little affected by formal planning powers.
There are three aspects which deserve attention: the enormous surge of private house building between the wars; the concern over scenic protection; and the search for wider regional, strategic models for planning.
Private housing.
There were a number of preconditions for the advent of mass owner occupation, which first characterized the inter-war years (Ball, 1983).
A gradual growth in owner occupation was already in evidence before 1914, but a spectacular rise was assisted from a number of different directions.
First, during the 1920s it became easier to transfer freehold land, as long-standing solicitor resistance to changes in property law broke down; a series of Property Acts from 1910 to 1925 facilitated the free and rapid transfer of small plots and single dwellings.
Second.
there was an acute housing shortage, for virtually all classes of society, hence speculative house builders were in a unique position to take advantage of this and other conditions.
(For example, the late 1920s and early 1930s were years when building construction was cheap, with a fall in commodity prices.)
Third, the position of landed property was precarious, which depressed land prices, kept farm rents low, and encouraged the selling of land for residential purposes.
Whole farms and landed estates at the edge of urban areas came on to the market; suburban land prices therefore were very low.
There were other factors too to explain the veritable explosion of building for owner occupation.
There was for example the capacity of an expanding middle class to afford their own homes.
The salaried groups  were expanding as employment grew in professional and administrative services; for every two civil servants in 1929 there were three in 1938.
Furthermore, income tax was relatively low; it did not rise above 4s 6d to 5s in the pound during much of this time, and middle-class incomes of £250 p.a. to £1,000 p.a. enjoyed the lowest percentage burden of both direct and indirect taxation combined.
Perhaps more importantly there was the sustained expansion of the building societies, a factor which permitted house purchase at attractive terms.
The 1930s particularly was an era of cheap money.
While the scope for profitable investment in manufacturing industry was limited, the owner-occupied housing market seemed ideal for loan capital.
There was no competition either from demands for overseas investment, and a large-scale property market did not exist.
As a consequence direct mortgage lending to owner occupiers increased sharply.
Ninety-five per cent mortgages were permissible and interest rates were low, falling to 3.25 per cent in 1934.
A new house, costing let us say £480 (higher than the national average cost of houses being built in 1937, then £427), could therefore be purchased for a deposit of £24, with repayments of 13s 6d per week over 20 years.
Some speculative builders boomed in these conditions, few having been active prior to the 1920s, though their characteristics suggest some link or other with housebuilding:
The largest of the 1930s house builders, New Ideal Homesteads, was set up by an ex-local authority surveyor in the late 1920s.
Laing and Costain had been medium and small building firms respectively in the north of England before both moved south to London and prospered…
Taylor Woodrow was set up after the unintended sale of two houses by a 16-year old greengrocer's son and his solicitor uncle.
Wates was a small family concern.
two members of which owned a furniture shop in south London.
Wimpey was a small stone masons and road building firm until acquired in 1919 by an ex-army major with the support of his quarrying merchant father.
(Ball, 1983, p. 34)
The building industry at this time created a distinct suburban environment, with the prevalence of the three-bedroomed, semi-detached house.
As Oliver, Davis and Bentley (1981) remind us: ‘The ‘suburban semi’ is a cliché which summons up a mental picture of rows of red-roofed, roughcast pairs of houses, each with its bay windows, its porched entrance, its ‘third bedroom’above’,(Oliver, Davis and Bentley, 1981, p, 11), recalling images of small front gardens and bigger rear ones, side garages and garden gates.
A boom period of speculative house building peaked between 1928 and 1936 when construction of 118,000 dwellings annually increased to 293,000.
Market saturation caused a subsequent downturn as working-class wage levels proved too low to enable the market to be extended further.
But this was not before State subsidies, both direct and indirect, had first fuelled and then maintained a remarkable period of private development.
State grants to builders initially induced the builders to build; thereafter local authority provision of basic services was readily forthcoming; and in London at least, the Transport Executive spread its underground  (and overground) railway lines north in advance of development.
A sociological revolution was also taking place as the social status of owner occupation proved increasingly compelling.
Linked to the new fashions of semi-detached houses with private gardens, and perhaps a drive and garage for a car, in a setting of more abundant open space, in an environment of modernity where new schools were particularly welcome by a child-rearing local population, and in a social milieu of middle-class respectability, the private building boom created ever-expanding suburban estates.
The territorial expansion of the big cities, and the further metropolitanization of London itself during this period, represents a fascinating period of land-use change and urban transformation.
London was the prime example (Jackson, 1973).
Middlesex bore the brunt of the tide of development where the flat claylands in the centre and west lay open, with accessibility already afforded by railways constructed earlier; its pasture was no longer needed and neither were the market garden plains of the south.
The population of the county increased by 1.64 million between 1921 and 1931, five times the increase for England and Wales, and the highest recorded for any county.
The district of Harrow received the largest influx of any local authority in Greater London between 1921 and 1938 (134,480 persons), though as a percentage increase that for Wembley was greater than for Harrow.
Hayes and Harlington, Ruislip-Northwood and a host of other districts leapt in population size.
By 1939 all but the northern and north-western parts of the county had been built over.
North-west Surrey expanded with equal vigour, particularly around Merton and Morden, which had the benefit of an underground railway service to complement the frequent electric train service elsewhere.
In Essex, development was concentrated in Becontree and around Dagenham, Hornchurch, Romford and Ilford.
Expansion in Kent was slower to materialize but, when it did, Bexley was the main growth point.
On the edge of London, Hertfordshire and Buckinghamshire showed significant growth around Barnet, and particularly Slough, respectively.
Scenic preservation.
Inter-war Britain was notable for a generation which sought to emphasize the principles and practicalities of the protection of natural beauty.
It made its mark on an emergent philosophy of town and country planning (Sheail, 1981).
The desire to return to past simplicities was marked, given the successive disappointments after the war, with slumps and uncertainty.
The appeal of natural beauty may have been strong precisely because it was free of argument and doctrine; it became a common denominator in the drive for moral and spiritual recovery.
So it was that the scenic heritage of coast and countryside took on a special significance.
There was also an urgency to protect and preserve while it was still possible to do so: the countryside was in change and this seemed to invigorate the various lobbies which fought for their special interest: flora, fauna, landscape, outdoor recreation and protection from development.
One of the features of change was the emergence of a unique landscape  along the coast, on the riverside and in the countryside: ‘a makeshift world of shacks and shanties, scattered unevenly in plots of varying size and shape, with unmade roads and little in the way of services’(Hardy and Ward.
1984, p. vii).
These were the ‘plotlands’ of Jaywick Sands, Canvey Island and Peacehaven.
which became bywords for the desecration of the countryside.
The pace of land use change over many areas was certainly striking, and town planning, because of the statutory system which emphasized land use control, was drawn into an imprecise area of wider policy and prescription.
By 1939 one third of all the houses in England and Wales had been built since 1918; and extensive urban land absorption was in evidence particularly in the 1930s.
The geographer L. Dudley Stamp fashioned his land use survey in this context to capture for the first time since the Domesday Book an impression of how the land of Britain was used (or misused).
The town planner with no prior guidelines from the history of his own practice, readily subscribed to the intellectual fashion of preservation.
Certainly there was widespread dismay at the destruction of the countryside.
This was well captured by George Orwell who, in Coming up for air (1939), describes the return of George Bowling, after 18 unimaginative years in insurance and marriage to the joyless Hilda, and now shaken by the fear of a future war, returns to the village of his childhood: Lower Binfield.
Disillusionment was complete: ‘But where was Lower Binfield?
Where was the town I used to know?
It might have been anywhere.
All I knew was that it was buried somewhere in the middle of that sea of bricks’(Orwell, 1939; 1962 edn, p. 117).
One of the most important new groups to emerge during this period was the Council for the Preservation of Rural England (CPRE), formed in 1926 as an initiative in part, of the President of the Town Planning Institute, Patrick Abercrombie.
The Council was merely an umbrella organization for a large and expanding number of countryside and amenity organizations, but it became an invaluable integrator, particularly on the issue of National Parks when it set up its own Standing Committee.
Meanwhile more flamboyant voices were raised.
The architect Clough Williams-Ellis of Port Meirion fame published his influential England and the octopus in 1928 —‘an angry book, written by an angry young man’ as the author confessed in a Preface added to a 1975 edition.
The octopus was urbanization and Williams-Ellis conjured up the vision of the tentacles of urban growth with their strong hold over the countryside.
His target was ‘the spate of mean building all over the country that is shrivelling up the Old England — mean and perky little houses that surely none but mean and perky little souls should inhabit with satisfaction’(p. 15).
A book in similar vein was his edited volume Britain and the beast (1938) in which his assembled contributors reviled the symptoms of Britain in the modern age and offered a nostalgia for the past.
The town planner Thomas Sharp made an eloquent plea in Town and countryside (1932) for the clear separation of urban and rural.
The geographer Vaughan Cornish tried to establish a scientific basis for the study of scenic heritage.
For the popular reader the British countryside held appeal: the new magazine The Countryman was founded in 1927 and from the Batsford press came a stream of  illustrated regional books on the British landscape.
On the face of it, the statutory town-planning system of plan preparation and development control could meet the requirements of this new challenge.
But urban sprawl and rural decay and disfigurement was often taking place in areas where local authorities were weak and where traditions of council control over development had not yet been established.
Possible claims for compensation could not be faced by most councils, and in any case, there still had to be worked out a coherent land use strategy for the development of the urban fringe.
The confusion over the Restriction of Ribbon Development Act 1935 did not help: there were uncertainties between the Ministries of Transport and Health, delay over necessary action and ineffectiveness once it had been taken.
One focus within the countryside lobby was the agitation for a green belt around London.
Local authorities began to acquire properties as a response to the inadequacies of the 1932 Act and even before the LCC announced its green belt scheme in January 1935 some authorities, notably Middlesex and Surrey had commenced acquisition on a large scale (Thomas, 1970).
All authorities had some sort of proposal on paper by that year, derived in part from the regional advisory reports of earlier years.
But authorities had differing aims for the green belt.
Middlesex sought to prevent urban development, with the secondary purpose of preserving amenity and providing recreational facilities.
On the other hand the aim of the LCC was to secure a reserve supply of recreational land within easy access of the urbanized area of London.
The LCC grant aid scheme offered £2 million to local authorities to buy up land for green belt purposes, and a vigorous period of purchase ensued between 1935 and 1939.
The Green Belt (London and Home Counties) Act, 1938, was necessary to legitimate the LCC grant being made available to authorities outside its jurisdiction.
The fact was that the London green belt estates represented probably the largest single initiative by local authorities in the face of the inadequacies of planning legislation prior to 1947.
Local authorities around London simply took matters into their own hands, either by using other legislation such as the Open Space Act, 1906, or by introducing local powers (Sharp, 1986).
Regional planning.
After the First World War the term ‘regional planning’ was used extensively, the new practice representing a significant extension to planning practice.
The term ‘regionalism’ was itself in vogue in a number of related disciplines, particularly geography and sociology.
In a short period of rapid theoretical development the emergent core of regional planning principles and practices strengthened considerably.
Ebenezer Howard's concept of the social city was of course essentially regional in territorial scope, and with the founding of Welwyn Garden City in 1920, the advocates of planned satellites had a second success to record (Purdom, 1925; Macfadyen, 1933).
The Garden City implied the primacy of the central city over a surrounding hinterland, but the subsequent contribution of Patrick Geddes was more explicit, advocating civic and regional surveys to demonstrate the interlinkages between a town and its region.
The linkages were already in evidence from one point of view: road traffic.
As early as 1913 a conference was held of all local authorities in Greater London to plan comprehensively for arterial roads.
Another practical application soon followed, in the field of public administration.
Within geography, where a vigorous regionalist theme was in evidence, the work of C.B. Fawcett was influential in relating town planning to local government hierarchies (Provinces of England , 1919); significantly C.B. Purdom's book The building of satellite towns (1925) was subtitled ‘a contribution to the study of town development and regional planning’.
Purdom, the Financial Director of Welwyn Garden City Ltd, recognizing that satellite towns were part of the process towards city decentralization, postulated the idea of new regional and provincial authorities in order to assist in the more effective development of such settlements.
In this context town planning was a beneficiary of a number of important developments, which gave to the evolving discipline and profession a distinctive recurrent theme, that of a regional perspective.
For central government the region became a convenient administrative unit.
During the First World War a number of Ministries set up regional offices and the newly created Ministry of Health set up nine regions — an experiment to be rudely terminated in 1921 as an economy measure.
As early as 1920 the Ministry set up a committee to study the regional problems of South Wales: the first example in Britain of ad hoc regional planning.
In the event, however, regional-planning practice developed under the aegis of Joint Town Planning Committees (JTPCs).
Under the 1919 Act local authorities were permitted to establish such bodies, and they could be either advisory or executive as the constituent authorities wished.
The setting up of these committees (largely advisory) proved to be a popular and widespread development, though only two in the 1920s were sufficiently large to be considered ‘regional’: the Midlands and the Manchester JTPCs.
But they gave opportunities for the advancement of town planning, facilitating consultancy work and (so ably fostered by Pepler) encouraging individual local authorities to take the first steps in scheme preparation in their own areas.
The JTPCs became instrumental in preparing the ground for district councils to engage fully in the statutory processes .
By 1931 (after 21 years of town-planning legislation) 104 JTPCs had been established and there were very few urban areas not covered at least partially by them (Cherry, 1974).
The notion of regional planning received a great fillip from Unwin's proposals for London prepared between 1929 and 1933.
Unwin's work has to be placed in context not only nationally.
but internationally.
Other big cities in the world were the subject of plans, often decentralist in nature, of which Thomas Adams's Regional plan of New York was a celebrated example, issued in two volumes (1929 and 1931) and backed by eight subject reports.
London had been given no such attention, but The London Society since 1912 had been undertaking work which was brought together in essays edited by Sir Aston Webb (1921).
In one of them Unwin suggested the setting up of an authority to prepare a broad plan; a mile-wide green belt with garden cities beyond would be an essential feature of the strategy.
In November 1927 the Greater London Regional Planning Committee was constituted by the then Minister of Health, Neville Chamberlain.
An advisory body, it had 45 members representing the LCC, the City of London, six county councils, the Standing Joint Committee of Metropolitan Boroughs and 129 local authorities ranging from county boroughs to rural districts.
The area covered the London and Home Counties Traffic Area, more than 1,800 square miles in extent, within 25 miles of Charing Cross.
Unwin was appointed Technical Advisor to the Committee (chaired by Sir Bannister Fletcher, President of the RIBA and representative of the City of London) in January 1929 for two years.
We should note the miniscule operation: Unwin had assigned to the project the part-time services of G. Montagu-Harris (a past president of the TPI), an assistant and three draughtsmen.
But Unwin and his son Edward tackled the challenge with vigour and imagination (Miller, 1981).
By the end of 1929 the First report was published: slim and hastily written it yet established a frame of reference for the London region.
Philosophically and technically town planning demonstrated in Britain, as elsewhere, an operational capacity to conceive and prepare a metropolitan plan, robust enough to stand the test of time.
Unwin's analysis depended on four rings for the Greater London region: belts of population of decreasing density from core to periphery, separated by belts of open space for recreation purposes.
These were expressed in schematic diagrams showing the relationship between building development and open land.
One showed a background of potential building land with reservations of open space upon it; the other reversed the image by suggesting a green setting within which building areas would be reserved in a pattern of satellites.
Of enduring significance was the concept of a green girdle around the perimeter.
Within the total spatial concept, proposals were made for the decentralization of industry and the eradication of ribbon development on main roads.
Two Interim reports were published in January 1931 which further developed the principles, but economic retrenchment cut back the work.
Many local authorities withdrew or reduced their contributions and for a while Unwin financed the continuation of the Committee's work himself to publish a Second and final report in March 1933, which made a more detailed proposal for a narrow green girdle around London.
The Greater London Regional Planning Committee was reconstituted in 1932. and survived as an umbilical cord to commission Abercrombie's work on Greater London 12 years later (see Chapter 5).
Unwin's work mirrored the firmly held decentralist view in town-planning circles (Warren and Davidge, 1930).
Although Welwyn Garden City was only the second (and last) of its kind, in 1920, Howard's propaganda remained persuasive.
Chamberlain's Unhealthy Areas Committee had accepted the principle and Unwin's Greater London Plan offered a spatial model for its attainment.
Meanwhile with the sprawl of burgeoning London, and the perceived frailty of statutory town planning procedures to contain it, pressure for more determined action mounted.
One illustration of this was the organization called the Hundred New Towns Association, formed by the architect A. Trystan Edwards in 1934, which advocated, as  the term suggests, 100 new towns to relieve pressure on the metropolis; the migration of 5 million people was proposed to 100 new settlements: 40 south of a line from the Wash to the Severn, a further 36 to the rest of England, 15 to Scotland and 9 to Wales.
There was a response from Government.
The Interim report of the departmental committee on regional development (Cmd. 3915, 1931) chaired by Lord Chelmsford, had looked at the Reports of the Regional Planning Committees.
Where the Reports had dealt with satellite towns, the Committee was ‘attracted by the possibilities of future usefulness in these forms of development’.
Rather more forthright was the Report of the Departmental Committee on Garden Cities and Satellite Towns , chaired by Lord Marley.
Reporting in 1935 it advocated the fullest adoption of the planned distribution of industry and population based on garden city development.
So far, developments in the field of regional planning related to two matters: the application of statutory procedures on a territorial scale larger than a single local authority, and the pursuance of dispersal and decentralization to form the basis of a spatial model for big city growth.
Little had been said about the other regional aspect represented by unemployment and economic decline in the Special Areas.
The Special Areas (Development and Improvement) Act, 1934, provided for measures of assistance to facilitate the economic development and social improvement of areas affected by industrial depression; it also provided for the appointment of two Commissioners (one for England and Wales, and one for Scotland) to prosecute that assistance.
The Commissioners' annual reports make fascinating reading.
The particularly incisive Third report of the commissioner for the special areas (England and Wales)(Cmd. 5503, 1936) was instrumental in relating the question of the economic and social problems of the Special Areas to the wider issue of planning for the accommodation of growth elsewhere.
The key lay in the uncontrolled growth of London.
The Report of P.M. Stewart, the Commissioner, exposed the problem starkly: By the late 1930s, therefore, the scene was set for town planning to incorporate a wider frame of reference.
Forty years earlier the promise of town planning was that it could address the urban housing problems of the day, but the principles of environmental regulations were now seen to relate to a quite different set of questions: the problems of regional economic development.
The Third report introduced a beguiling relationship: on the one hand, the need to establish new and to expand old industries in the Special Areas, and on the other, the need to control the post-1918 growth of Greater London.
At one and the same time advocacy for dispersal from big cities was related to proposals for planned development in the depressed regions.
Another role for town planning beckoned; it took some years for regional economic planning practice to take coherent shape, but the gauntlet of the conceptual challenge had been thrown down.
In the future, town planning was not just about scheme preparation for coordinated development, or the rational control of land use, or even spatial strategies for cities; it was now to be involved in regional economic affairs, though just how had yet to be demonstrated.
Transport
The question of road traffic was another area which brought town planning a wider frame of reference, by virtue of the profession's overall concern for cities in their totality, and its claim for a comprehensive approach to all major development.
The Arterial Roads Conference for Greater London in 1913 was in fact a regional plan, but the link between transport, city planning and civic design remained imperfect both in principle and practice.
The formation of the Ministry of Transport in 1919 separated the function of traffic and planning in different ministries for half a century.
At the beginning of the First World War there were nearly 140,000 motor cars on British roads.
By March 1918 this figure had dwindled to 78,000, but within two years the number had more than doubled.
In addition there were nearly as many buses and goods vehicles and an even larger number of motor cycles.
The problem was obvious: how to control the fast moving vehicle, to limit the damage it caused both to person and amenity, and to provide new or widened roads in areas of congestion.
The layout of roads was a technical matter for surveyors and engineers, though new highways had town-planning significance.
But for various reasons a specifically town-planning view of the roads question was slow to develop; emphasis seemed to lie elsewhere.
One factor was that although the motor car made up only one third of all motor vehicles, it was yet seen as the crux of the motor problem (Plowden, 1971).
The ‘politics’ of the motor car throughout the inter-war years depended to a large extent on the vigorous leadership given by the private  motorists' main organization, the Automobile Association.
With a membership of 100,000 in 1914 its numbers had doubled by 1924 and again by 1931; it waged vigorous self-interested campaigns on such matters as the petrol tax, the Road Fund, speed limits and compulsory insurance.
Another factor was that the inter-war governments were anxious to cut down expenditure on roads.
It was not until the Trunk Roads Act, 1936 that anything like a national roads strategy was suggested, with a rational division of roads into four: Trunk, Class I, Class II and unclassified — and even then Britain declined to embark on motorway building, in sharp contrast to Germany's autobahns and Italy's autostrada .
Highway expenditure was firmly linked to local government spending.
The most that was achieved was in a few examples of new highway construction (in London the long-standing schemes of the Great West Road and the North Circular came to fruition); and in the bigger cities, there were road-widening schemes, some stretches of dual carriageway and the occasional new project (such as the Headrow in Leeds linked to redevelopment) and some spectacular new projects (such as the new suspension bridge over the Tyne at Newcastle and the Mersey Tunnel at Liverpool/Birkenhead).
Perhaps there was a wider Government view: limiting expenditure on the roads enabled the railways to survive the pressure of growing competition from road transport.
A further aspect is that with public attention focused firmly on the statistics of road accidents, many traffic issues became matters for the Police.
Fatal accidents involving motor vehicles rose from 373 in 1909 to 1,154 in 1913 and to 2,010 in 1920; in 1926 road deaths rose to 4,886 and to 7,300 in 1934 — a figure that would not be reached again until the early 1960s.
For many, the roads debate therefore rested on measures of speed restriction and road safety, but with 2 million motor cars on British roads in 1939, and urban congestion a growing problem, this was scarcely a satisfactory situation.
We remember the 1930s for a set of very general measures, rather than for any inter-professional work on traffic and roads as part of a comprehensive view of urban development and planning.
Instead, more typical of the time was the innovation of painting white lines along the centre of roads, the more extensive installation of traffic lights, the coming into force of the 30 m.p.h. speed limit, the inauguration of driving tests and the innovation of pedestrian crossings marked by the Belisha beacon, named after the Home Secretary of the day, Sir Leslie Hore-Belisha.
But a wider view was emerging, albeit gradually.
In 1934 the Minister of Transport, then Hore-Belisha, inaugurated a comprehensive survey of highway developments required in the London traffic area for the next 30 years, and an Origin and Destination census was conducted in June 1936 at London Docks (note the then fixation in London road-traffic circles of facilitating good road communications to the Docks).
A Highway Development Survey was prepared in 1937 by consultants Sir Charles Bressey (a former Chief Engineer at the Ministry of Transport) and Sir Edwin Lutyens (a leading architect of his day).
A specifically town planning approach to road transport matters was still awaited though there were indications of changing attitudes, particularly in other parts of the world, providing examples for emulation in this country.
For example.
the principles of segregating pedestrians from motor traffic were illustrated by S. Stein and H. Wright in their design for a new city.
Radburn, 16 miles from New York.
Proposed for 25,000 people, the building of the city was stopped because of the economic crisis after two ‘superblock’ units had been constructed, but sufficient was shown that a quite different form of residential layout was possible from that dependent on the provision of estate roads and traditional house frontage.
Later the master plan proposed for London in 1939 by a Committee of the Modern Architectural Research Group (MARS), chaired by Arthur Korn showed traffic considerations as an integral part of the conceptual design.
However, it is fair to conclude that town planning practice had not yet made any significant contribution in Britain to dealing with traffic question; this remained for the future.
A concluding view
Developments in planning history have a frame of reference which is social, political and institutional, rather than technical and professional.
Earlier chapters have demonstrated this assessment, and the inter-war period confirms it.
The town planning movement emerged out of a consideration of housing, health and social betterment; new forms of housing layout and design and planning of the wider environment were the new solutions.
Town planning legislation ushered in a rudimentary form of statutory planning based on local authority scheme preparation and control over building development.
That was the situation at the end of the First World War.
Twenty years later that same movement.
and the legislation which anchored it to statutory process, had secured a firmer foothold and had begun to flirt uncertainly with wider issues.
In 1939 British town planning was poised to expand its traditional remit.
But this was as a result of no great advance in the technical skills available to the discipline, nor of any weight accorded to the profession in recognition of its claims, although the garden city lobby nationally and internationally was vociferous enough and attracted figures of influence.
Rather.
British town planning, both as a movement and as a profession, found that it had a relevance to wider questions to which it could respond.
It had begun to claim a concern for cities as a whole: how they looked, how they functioned and how people lived in them.
However, cities were not all equal; some were in decline economically, others were booming, and town planning was drawn into a view of regional and national spatial distributions of population and industry.
The inter-war period, then, released a set of environmental issues different from the past; the new questions were economic, technological and political.
The discipline and profession of town planning became a beneficiary of this wider frame of social concern.
The perception of urban problems changed; in due time the nature of planning response changed with it, and it is in this context that explanations may be sought as to how and why the tempo and style of the public regulation of the urban environment changed so markedly at this time.
The backcloth to the period is dominated by the restructuring of the  labour force during these years, and the geographic redistribution of the population.
It has been summarized as follows:
It thus mattered a great deal where one Lived and to what sort of job one became initially attached.
For those in growing industries and areas.
regular work and wages combined with falling prices and shorter hours to produce a style of life involving considerable scope for leisure and consumption.
For the many who were tied by reasons of training, sentiment or simple inertia to declining industries stagnant areas.
the period between the wars was marked by bitterness and fear, hunger, ill health and desperation.
(Cronin, 1984 p. 54)
In the nineteenth century the range of urban problems had been perceived as essentially local and place-specific; health, sanitation, housing fitness and environmental squalor related to often quite narrowly defined areas.
They were problems which demanded technical solutions, locally applied.
This is not to deny of course that there were some who saw housing inequalities and poverty unescapably linked to underlying economic and class structures, but essentially nineteenth-century public regulation of the environment was a matter for the local amelioration of a particular problem.
In the twentieth century, and particularly after 1918, spatial inequalities nationally and regionally attracted more attention, and in tackling problems of town growth and redevelopment, a much wider frame of reference became obvious.
Town planning was not just place-specific; it was inescapably linked with questions of distribution and equity.
The nature of the urban crisis, to which town planning was addressed, also changed in that housing solutions increasingly had to be prepared in recognition of public opinion.
The issue now was seen not just in terms of provision of new housing or the simple eradication of the slums as a technical exercise; housing likes and dislikes had now to inform town planning of preferences in provision.
Recognition of this new client awareness came fairly late and it served to liven the ‘flats versus houses’ debate at the end of the 1930s and into the 1940s.
Mass-Observation's inquiry which resulted in the report People's homes (1941) revealed contrasting views from 12 working-class communities.
Five were older working-class neighbourhoods in Birmingham, Fulham, Ilford, Portsmouth and Worcester; three were LCC estates at Becontree, Roehampton and Watling; two were blocks of flats in Fulham and Kentish Town; and Bournville and Letchworth completed the list.
People living in new housing, whether estates, flats or garden cities, were more satisfied with their houses and neighbourhoods than were those living in the older areas, although there was more than a hint at the loss of street-corner sociability.
The powerful drive for new homes and the rejection of the old was confirmed in Bournville Village Trust's own survey When we build again (1941).
This sense of the need to depart from the past was reinforced by a prevailing sense of gloom in certain intellectual quarters about the city; over time this informed the professions of architecture and town planning in particular.
Lewis Mumford's The culture of cities (1938) confirmed a pessimistic scenario with a concept of the rise or fall of cities in six stages.
The rise of the village community was a phase termed ‘Eopolis’, followed by  ‘Polis’, and association of villages.
‘Metropolis’ was where a city merged within its region and ‘Megalopolis’marked the onset of decline through the consequences of size.
‘Tyrranopolis’ was the period of moral decadence and a failure of governments, terminating in ‘Nekropolis’where war, famine and disease racked the city.
In the politically charged and uncertain years of the late thirties this imagery was very powerful.
This cultural context which affected attitudes towards the city and how it might be planned was built up from a number of sources and expressed in the literature of the day (Timms and Kelley. 1985).
T.S.
Eliot's Waste land (1922) offered a vision of urban dereliction and corruption.
James Joyce's Dubliners (1914) portrayed another sordid city and Ulysses (1922) put stress on the futility and anarchy of modern city life.
How different it all was from the romanticism of the Georgian poets; Rupert Brooke, W.H. Davies, Walter de la Mare, John Masefield and others made their escape to the romanticism of the English countryside.
The predominant mood of rural England was replaced by the sharper view of vagrant cosmopolitans like Eliot and Ezra Pound, and of course the European expressionists who came face to face with social realism.
This quite different context allowed some observers of the city to communicate a view about the squalor of the Victorian legacy.
George Orwell in The road to Wigan pier (1937): Another influential observer was J.B. Priestley; his English journey (1934), ‘being a rambling but truthful account of what one man saw and heard and felt and thought during a journey through England during the Autumn of the year 1933’, evoked another angry response to his urban world.
In the Midlands he took a tram in Birmingham: These were years then of a heightened dissatisfaction with our towns and cities, and every-day lives and attitudes of the British people; the social history of the 1930s is one of bitter years (Branson and Heinemann, 1971).
The poverty, unremitting daily grind of hardship, poor food, pawnbroking, unemployment and hopelessness, had all been chronicled before in the London of Henry Mayhew and Charles Booth.
The squalor was still there, but with East London there were now the old industrial towns of the North.
A committee chaired by the Archbishop of York studied the effects of long-term unemployment in six towns: Deptford, Leicester, Rhondda, Crook, Liverpool and Blackburn.
Their report Men without work (1938) gave new insights into poverty, household budgets, working-class life-styles, health and a range of psychological problems.
Even a popular novel of that decade had a title Love on the dole (Walter Greenwood, 1933).
It did not take much to reason that international capitalism had failed and that a new order must replace it.
Jarrow, became ‘the town that was murdered’(Wilkinson, 1939); its industrial history, the recent closure of Palmer's shipyard and the march of 1936 evoked this bitter conclusion from its MP: This sense of failure was accompanied even in the prosperous areas by a disenchantment with what 20 years of new building had achieved.
Betjeman captured the concern in 1938 in his poem Slough : What had appealed so much to a previous generation was no longer a cause for pride.
Observers ridiculed the semi-detached house and the suburban environment with its social sterility.
Uncertainty and unfocused disillusionment can be read into the social restlessness of the later 1930s.
Other countries seemed to be doing so much better.
America had its New Deal, and fascist and communist dictatorships were not slow to publicize their public works-led recovery.
Britain by comparison still relied on the democratic traditions of local government, as fictionally portrayed in Winifred Holtby's South Riding (1936).
Some looked for new political initiatives, particularly from the left: a survey of the ‘condition of Britain' led Cole and Cole (1937) to advocate a Popular Front, with a programme embracing both an international policy of democratic defence and economic collaboration.
For professionals the Modern Movement offered new opportunities.
In  the nineteenth century architects had largely been concerned with special buildings produced for civic, commercial, ecclesiastical and landowner clients.
In the twentieth century the field of concern for architecture broadened to the everyday living environment; housing for example was no longer a question of designing a single house, or even a group, but a whole estate or neighbourhood.
Between the wars the idea of modern architecture was a heroic adventure which could actually improve man's condition.
A powerful imagery of both the physical form of the future city and the shape of the society likely to live there was built up particularly by European architects.
Science and technology would be harnessed and a political dimension was introduced with the belief that the full potential of the new architecture could only be realized if established traditions were overthrown.
The future city was seen as massive, comprehensively and rationally planned, using new materials (steel and concrete), new technology and new forms of energy, particularly electricity.
The accompanying revolutionary fervour for a general reconstruction of society scarcely extended to Britain, and the Modern Movement was strangely muted in this country, where the beaux-arts tradition remained strong.
Plans for British cities were hardly affected by the radical experiments and literature of some other countries.
Britain remained wedded to its Unwin-esque traditions in housing design and layout and to the statutory town planning which we have described.
But in Europe particularly, town planning and architecture were in relative turmoil, invigorated with new concepts (Ostrowski, 1970).
In the Soviet Union the early post-revolutionary years saw a flowering of creativity; Le Corbusier had novel ideas on the construction of cities and from 1922 onwards in presentations, conferences and publications he attracted a world-wide following; and in Germany the social housing programme of the Weimar Bauhaus, directed by Gropius, was architecturally distinctive, and in Frankfurt on Main the housing estates of Ernst May attracted great interest.
In America Clarence Perry was working on the design principles of a ‘neighbourhood unit’, and Frank Lloyd Wright advocated the ultimate in decentralized living in ‘Broadacre City’.
Town-planning ideas were in ferment from another direction too.
The Congrès Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM) had been set up in 1928.
A set of principles of ‘functional’ town planning was established, enshrined in a document drawn up at the fourth congress held aboard a liner cruising between Marseilles and Athens: hence the Athens Charter, 1933.
It formulated a programme for the rational layout of towns, preceded by analytic study.
The Charter had a negligible effect on Britain: it was only published in Greek and French, with Warsaw being the first city for which a plan applying the Charter's principles was drawn up.
By comparison, the British tradition had already been established and was not yet to be moved.
But intellectually, on this and a number of different fronts, town planning was on the frontiers of change.
The circumstances under which the actual change was to take place were cataclysmic, and it is to these that we must now turn.
BRITAIN AT WAR: PLANS FOR RECONSTRUCTION
We have seen that during a period of twenty years between the wars, town planning in Britain consolidated its position in local authority practice, consultant advocacy and professional solidarity, though little was achieved by way of addition to intellectual content or method.
By comparison, the 1940s proved to be a remarkable decade of innovation and advance.
Town planning came into its own through a set of totally new factors, when a remarkable social and political consensus flowered briefly to provide authority and legitimation.
A new planning system was worked out and new research methods forged.
The State took a very considerable leap forward in establishing the rudiments of central planning in land use management, resource allocation and the distribution of population and industry.
In the new activity of urban reconstruction, plans were prepared to sweep away the inadequacies of the past and heal the scars of war damage.
Superficially the story might appear a simple one of challenge and response: aerial bombardment and the need to redevelop provided a situation in which Government at a time of emergency understandably took the initiative.
But it was not as straightforward as that, and we need to unravel the various strands of influence and persuasion.
The chapter unfolds as follows.
First we consider the demands for renewal and redevelopment, as expressed at the very beginning of the war years.
Second we turn to the war itself: the shock of destruction, the determination to rebuild and the emergence of consensus over central direction.
Third: the years of plan making for British cities.
Fourth: new found techniques of operation.
The call for action
Let us recap: intellectually and in terms of technical content town planning had not advanced all that much since the remarkable flowering of the early years of the century.
The underlying approach was still remarkably uncritical and very much a matter of assertion and appeal to reason, the message couched in fairly bland terms and over-reliant on a concept of progress from a philistine past.
Patrick Abercrombie's gentle overview.
Town and country planning , published in 1933 (significantly, in view of the  new interest taken in planning in the wartime years, with a second edition in 1943 and three further reprints by 1945), declared that: Historic examples showed what had been achieved in the past, but Abercrombie stressed the degradation of industrialization which the country had experienced in the nineteenth century.
Enlightenment now revealed what could and should be done, planned town life offering ‘Beauty, Health and Convenience’(p. 104).
This was to be achieved through a theory of civic planning which controlled and guided directions of external growth.
The method relied heavily on prior survey, which was supposed to reveal the directions which the plan should take, the plan being essentially of allocating land (zoning), establishing patterns of communication, ensuring open space provision and giving coherence to community grouping.
It was all a matter of common sense: planning (which was the only possible way forward) or laissez-faire (which had failed).
All this was little more than the Ministry of Health could offer in 1935 as advice for scheme preparation, in guidance which remained in force for the remainder of the decade.
Local authorities should begin with a general review of the area concerned before work on the scheme proceeded, when the essential elements would be established: use zoning, roads, reservations and preservation of trees and protection of woodlands.
Significantly (in comparison with the advice for wartime Britain, and the new planning problem that was then urgently confronted) suggestions for the planning of developed areas were cautious in the extreme and hedged about by restrictions due to liability to compensation.
For the ‘planning of developed areas’(redevelopment) for example, we read: This was hardly encouraging to any local authority, nor suggestive of a planning system which could deliver much.
Town planning, it seemed to say, was an eminently sensible activity, governed by technical considerations, but its achievements would be limited.
In truth, for the most part, town planning at the outbreak of the Second World War had become little more than a token regulatory hand, useful in developing areas, but of little consequence in the existing areas.
Much still rested on the provisions of local Acts for improvement schemes.
The Barlow Report of 1940 (Cmd. 6153) brought the arguments for a more positive planning approach to a new head.
The Third report of the  commissioner for special areas (England and Wales) had provided the opportunity; Barlow now took it.
The Royal Commission on the Distribution of the Industrial Population was set up in 1937; the terms of reference were: The long years of economic depression and high unemployment rates, the sharp divide between favoured and unfavoured regions, and the drift of population from ‘north’ to ‘south’combined to supply the political pressure for enquiry.
The industrialist Sir Montague Barlow was appointed Chairman of the Commission, whose members included Professor Abercrombie, then the most influential academic planner in the country.
The evidence taken by the Commission sustained a generally decentralist line for the further development of big cities, powerful advocacy coming from Frank Pick of the London Passenger Transport Board and Frederic Osborn of the Garden Cities and Town Planning Association.
The need for planned dispersal, the reduction of overcrowding and congestion, and by implication the redevelopment of the central parts of cities was strongly expressed.
The contrast between these recommendations and the then enfeebled state of planning practice was striking.
The consequences of unrestricted outward growth of cities were stark to the observers of the late 1930s.
Barlow summarized: This general statement of disadvantage was reinforced by more specific observations on both social and economic disadvantage.
For example, Barlow observed that the inhabitants of large towns and areas of industrial concentration   Furthermore, there were significant economic disadvantages: In addition , there was the new problem of danger from air attack, and on strategic grounds there was good reason to advocate policies of decentralization and dispersal.
Barlow succeeded in establishing the case for radical, remedial measures to deal with the problems of London and the big cities.
The standard of health in the large towns still lagged behind the country as a whole, in spite of substantial improvements from the last quarter of the nineteenth century onwards; but this disadvantage need not be, Barlow argued, given good planning.
Likewise it was possible to overcome the adverse features of slums and overcrowding, lack of open space, and the smoke, dirt, fog and noise of big cities.
Transport congestion and long journeys to work could also be overcome.
It was all possible (and the problems of the regions could be addressed too) with spatial planning, summed up in two principal objectives: continued and further redevelopment of congested urban areas, where necessary; and decentralization or dispersal, both of industries and industrial population, from such areas.
The package, submitted in 1939, but published in 1940, was well argued, coherent and compelling.
The argument for the adoption of national spatial policies was persuasive, the latest of a long line of advocacy for a programme of urban rebuilding which would consciously reconstruct older areas to different patterns.
The importance of Barlow was that the attitudinal preconditions for urban renewal were established as never before; a tide of opinion had been caught.
The report demonstrated that Britain's cities could and should be improved from the point of view of economic.
social and environmental conditions.
Supportive evidence had been plentiful and even now fresh arguments were forthcoming.
One source was a body working at the time of the publication of Barlow, in association with the National Council of Social Science: the Hygiene Committee of the Women's Group on Public Welfare which met between 1939 and 1942.
Margaret Bondfield, a future Minister of Education.
expressed the hope in a preface that its Report,Our towns: a close-up (1943), would be ‘the last of its kind’.
It represented an attempt of a small group of working professional women to make a nationwide survey of  the conditions of town life in England which might be held responsible for particular characteristics of wartime evacuees.
It highlighted all the issues of the unhealthiness of industrial towns, of poverty, bad housing and squalid environments.
Its conclusions repeated a long-standing cry: Social vision and a collective determination was added to the rational argument of Barlow.
In the context of war the fusion was to be explosive.
A past system had failed; a new approach must succeed.
The failings of the international economic order, the power of the private sector and the strength of individual interests had prevailed too long; corporate interests represented by government and the community sector would replace them.
The vision and the hope of new ways of doing things were there, but they were grounded in little reality as to actual implementation.
The fact was that the activity of town planning had little specific to say about urban reconstruction.
Certainly there were the broad guidelines of dispersal and decentralization.
But on what principles was the redevelopment of the old.
the obsolete and the outworn to proceed?
What kind of central cities were envisaged?
There were merely glimpses here and there.
The Swiss-born architect Charles Edouard Jeanneret, the adopted Frenchman Le Corbusier, proclaimed his new architectural style of tall buildings, but it did not readily strike an echo in Britain.
The Modern Architectural Research Group (MARS) of London architects put forward a scheme in 1938 for the total renewal of London on radical lines, but it was a futurist fantasy.
Occasionally British cities hinted at new urban forms: in Leeds.
the Headrow was a new traffic artery in the central city, and in Birmingham a combination of inner city slum clearance and a long-proposed inner ring road promised much change, while in Coventry a young city architect, Gibson, saw the possibilities of a new central area.
But no coherent approach to the design of the new cities had yet been worked out, even if the problem or compensation, which made the task of land assembly by any local authority almost impossible, could be overcome.
In short, therefore, by 1939 pressure had built up for certain strategic solutions to the problems of London and the big cities.
These solutions implied considerable redevelopment in the central, older parts, but it remained unclear as to just what form of renewal was to be adopted either in land use or visual terms, Town planning as an art form may have taken considerable strides in suburban or garden city situations.
but there had been no practical progression to the redevelopment of commercial areas; there was only a handful of local authorities which seemed capable of making design and environmental advances in planning practice.
There was an enormous gap between the possibilities of radical architecture and  the strategic thinking of a few academic planners on the one hand, and the practical capabilities of planning staffs at local government level, on the other.
But the situation was soon to change.
The war
The onset of hostilities, in particular the incidence of aerial attack on British cities, changed matters very considerably.
The aerial ‘Battle of Britain' having been won by RAF Fighter Command in August-September 1940, the German Luftwaffe switched its attention to the bombing of London and industrial towns.
Between September 1940 and May 1941, 141 major air raids were made on 21 cities.
Night attacks continued in 1942 and day attacks started in 1943.
Altogether there were 85 major raids on London, and eight each on Liverpool/Birkenhead, Birmingham, and Plymouth/Devonport.
The scale of physical destruction was such that of 98,000 dwellings administered by the London County Council in 1939, just 9,250 escaped unscathed.
The vast majority of course needed only minor repair, but 25, 113 were seriously damaged or rendered uninhabitable and 2,487 were totally destroyed (Bullock, 1987, p. 73).
In England and Wales the number of dwellings destroyed or made permanently uninhabitable totalled 475,00.
The bombing was concentrated both in terms of space and time; a small number of East End London boroughs bore the brunt of the damage, typically Stepney and Bermondsey, during the first few weeks of the Blitz in late 1940.
From June 1944 the flying bomb attacks were less concentrated spatially, but even more destructive.
Commercial and manufacturing premises were also widely damaged, and swathes of war-damaged land were for years eloquent testimony to both the urgency of the problem, and of course the potential scope for imaginative solutions.
Moreover, the problem was not confined to one city (London), it was an issue for the whole country: Belfast, Clydeside, Merseyside and a range of industrial and port areas, and city centres as at Sheffield, Coventry, Plymouth, Hull, Bristol and certain cathedral cities.
War damage gave the opportunity to rebuild, and a new social psychology in wartime Britain provided the determination.
There was an overwhelming drive to win the war: Britain was not the aggressor and the country could think of itself once more as a nation with a mission.
Britain stood for political ideals that must prevail if western civilization were not to break down; Britain could carry the torch of freedom, truth, toleration and peace.
The enemy stood for different things and must be defeated.
But if Britain spoke with a moral voice, it had to put its own house in order.
Moral and spiritual renewal went hand in hand with economic and social renewal, and past practices and systems, with which the traumas and the injustices of the inter-war years had been associated.
had to be overturned.
It was increasingly argued that the international capitalist order had-had its day and that post-war recovery would be achieved rather differently, through much greater State involvement.
Planning was winning the war, it would win the peace.
Moreover, greater centralization in  national affairs and a greater exercise of State powers would not be accompanied by any loss of democratic freedoms.
Remarkably , in a short time, war-torn Britain had compulsory direction of labour, it re-established its crippled industries, depressed agriculture was revived, population was relocated (1 million schoolchildren were evacuated) and industry steered.
It was all possible, though it took a war to make it so.
The literature of the time provides ample evidence of a dramatic shift in public attitudes.
The popular press, even a special issue of Picture Post (‘A plan for Britain', 4 January, 1941), the activity of pressure groups and the findings of special conferences: all echoed a determination to rebuild, reconstruct and renew.
One of the popular books at the very outbreak of war captured the mood,Mrs Miniver (1939); an American best seller and subsequently a most successful film, it is said that it hastened America's entry into the war.
In a romantic, rather cloying story of an English family, the authoress Jan Struther (Joyce Anstruther) showed how things had changed: A new community feeling was being expressed and those keen to work for the development of State initiatives were quick to feed on it (Marwick, 1968).
For example, demands for a national enquiry into schemes of social insurance and allied services led to the appointment of an inter-departmental committee of civil servants under William Beveridge; their subsequent report in December 1942 had a major impact; ‘freedom from want’ finally seemed to be a real possibility.
Political change helped to articulate the drive for reform.
Intellectual fascination with communism had been a feature of the 1930s (naturally enough given the gloom and despair of that period) and Communist Party membership surged during the war in response to admiration for the Russian military effort.
But in Britain Marxism still had no more than minimal adherence and we must look rather to the re-emergence of the Labour Party from a decade in the shadows, when it was riven by international faction and uncertainty over international pacifism and rearmament.
Conservatism went into relative eclipse.
while Labour under Clement Attlee was able to wield influence in the coalition government.
After 1942 programmes for economic and social reform after the war began to take shape; they had popular appeal and Labour was identified with them rather more than the Conservatives.
whose ministers sometimes appeared reluctant converts.
Between 1943 and 1945 four Conservatives loyal to the Government were defeated at by-elections by Commonwealth or Independent Socialist candidates, and there was a general tendency for the Conservative share of the vote to fall (Addison.
1977).
A major leftward  swing in British politics was taking place.
The coalition government broke up and in May 1945 Churchill resigned as leader, to be reappointed as head of a ‘caretaker’ government of Conservatives, National Liberals and non-party functionaries.
Parliament was dissolved in June and polling took place in July.
Labour won a massive victory being returned with 393 seats to the Conservatives' 213 and the Liberals' 12.
Attlee's party had markedly broadened its class appeal and won handsomely in ‘white collar’ constituencies in the London suburbs, also in the West Midlands and East Anglia.
Trades Union leaders and the Labour Party successfully projected an image of moderate, social patriots, committed to reform on a broad front.
A new political consensus had emerged, with the promise of a social revolution.
Political change nationally was to make certain things possible, and town planning found itself elevated to a new position of responsibility with regard to city reconstruction.
But much had to be done before any real progress could be made, and essentially this lay in the problem of land acquisition and assembly.
The fact was that the central parts of cities had confused land-use patterns and other features which rendered necessary some new, speedy coordinating hand to control the renewal process.
The problem pointed to local government as the most likely actor.
The City Engineer of Birmingham, H.J. Manzoni, speaking at the 1941 Conference of the Town and Country Planning Association (under its new name, the ‘Garden City’ appellation having been discarded) described the problems of large-scale redevelopment under existing legislation.
In an area of 300 acres he catalogued: This was a sober assessment, and resolution of the ‘beautiful’ problem was far from easy.
It was of course a political problem because it concerned property, land and land values; its resolution was equally a political matter and has proved on more than one occasion to be a fundamental point of divide between Conservative and Labour attitudes.
Inexorably the State was involved in this aspect of environmental planning.
As early as February 1941 the Minister of Works and Buildings (Lord Reith) was being advised that post-war reconstruction would proceed on the basis of some central planning authority (Cullingworth, 1975).
An Expert Committee on Compensation and Betterment had been set up in January under the chairmanship of Mr Justice Uthwatt with terms of  reference ‘to make an objective analysis of the subject of the payment of compensation and recovery of betterment in respect of public control of the use of land’.
In April of the same year it was clear from the interim report of the committee that recommendations would be proposed whereby building development would be controlled throughout the country and that compensation for the public acquisition of land would be set at the standard of 31 March 1939.
It was already being alleged that speculation in bombed cities was going on.
Events moved quickly, though as Cullingworth's history reveals, not without great uncertainty and confusion in Whitehall.
The final report was published in September 1942 (Cmd. 6386).
Meanwhile, in February 1942 town planning powers (except in Scotland) were transferred to the Ministry of Works and Buildings, whose title was changed to the Ministry of Works and Planning.
In January 1943 the Ministry of Town and Country Planning Bill was introduced, providing for the appointment of a Minister whose ‘sole ministerial responsibility is in connection with town and country planning’; the Bill was passed in February and W.S. Morrison was appointed first Minister.
But any notion of a central planning authority, with if not exactly omnipotent powers over other government departments, soon foundered.
In July 1943 the Town and Country Planning (Interim Development) Bill received the Royal Assent, legislation which effectively extended planning control to the whole of the country not so far covered by a planning scheme.
nor by a Resolution to prepare one.
It was now possible to take immediate enforcement action against development prejudicial to a longer-term future; uncontrolled rebuilding would have been very unsatisfactory.
Almost at a stroke Government had moved town planning into a higher gear, with a national system of development control, ubiquitous in operation.
During 1943 and 1944 Government wrestled with the recommendations of the Uthwatt Report; a Town and Country Planning Bill would centre on the level of compensation to be paid for land and property acquired by local authorities, and the procedures to be followed.
The political battle lines were drawn (Cherry, 1982).
In November 1944 the Town and Country Planning Bill passed through all its stages, but the political objections to the compensation provisions caused great difficulty to the end.
Local authorities were now permitted to buy land, simply and expeditiously for certain planning purposes, notably in areas of extensive war damage, and areas of bad layout and obsolete development.
Quickly dubbed the ‘blitz and blight Act’, it was the resolution to Manzoni's ‘beautiful problem’.
These new sweeping powers opened the door to planned redevelopment on an extensive scale, an important forerunner to the Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, which effectively set up the post-war statutory planning system.
During the war when so much was happening in terms of national legislation, the extension of planning powers and the marked widening of Government involvement in affairs of land and development.
there was a growing acknowledgement in professional and related circles as to the new place of town planning in national affairs and its potential for post-war recovery.
An influential research study from the Bournville Village   Trust in Birmingham,When we build again (1941), proclaimed the message that it was vital to ensure that the redevelopment of cities should not perpetuate the faults of the old cities.
Town planning was more than ever seen as a standard bearer for recovery, and the determination to rebuild pervaded the planning literature of the day.
For the lay reader, Geoffrey  Boumphrey's Town and country tomorrow (1940) had three sections: ‘Things as they are’, ‘Things as they could be’ and ‘Things as they should be’, and the contrasts were made to speak for themselves.
It was argued that Britain stood at a historic point; a new urban future was at hand.
The confidence was breathtaking: Beauty, convenience and comfort lay in the promise of new ways of doing things in rationally planned large towns, where the public would now be protected ‘from the results of selfish or short-sighted exploitation’(Boumphrey, 1940, p. 152).
Another commentary on the future, published in the same year came from a professional, Thomas Sharp (1940).
His highly successful Town planning which in the Pelican Books series cost 6d. and sold a quarter of a million copies, was a technician's plea for the quality of urban townscape as a worthy setting for community.
The subtlety of his disagreement with the garden city lobby may have been lost on many, but the message in his final chapter was clear and unequivocal: ‘Plan we must’.
The language belonged to a forthright, dogmatic man, but it captured the spirit of the time: confidence, determination, a radical zeal for rebuilding.
Another view of the need to rebuild British cities came from an old school: the garden city movement.
The onset of war and the urban destruction that followed breathed new spirit into a flagging crusade.
Suddenly the urgency of new building was on the national agenda and the question was double-edged: what sort of dwellings, and where would they be built?
The satellite solution in the hands of the British garden city tradition had the answer to both.
It was significant then that F.J. Osborn's New towns after the war , first published in 1918, was revised and reissued in 1942 with little amendment.
Again, change was in the air; the chance had to be seized; it was now or never.
The challenge to sweep away the old was unmistakable.
These three publications, and their extracts, have been chosen deliberately to give a flavour of the planning viewpoint of the time, from very different perspectives.
As a conscious exercise in boosting public morale at a difficult time there was a real danger of over-indulgence in wishful thinking; it would be a cruel delusion to anticipate too many rabbits out of the hat, only to be fobbed off by the patter of the conjurer.
But even the most hardened, seasoned observers, aligned with no particular planning faction and having seen it all before as civil servants, could demonstrate sober conviction as to the power, promise and reasonableness of planning as a State activity.
Sir Gwilym Gibbon (1942), a former Permanent Secretary, in Reconstruction and town and country planning had no doubts as to the efficacy of good planning and the need to follow important principles in the redevelopment that was to come.
By the end of the war the British public seemed ready to accept the  notion of planning as a State activity, and warmed to the particular promise of town planning.
with its profession harnessed to the requirements of government.
It recognized the need to rebuild the nation's cities and to sweep away the old, guided by principles of economic, social and spiritual renewal, though there was no commitment yet to any one particular model of urban design and it was ignorant, so far, as to just how it would all be done and with what consequences.
But in any event the hand of the State in the exercise of rebuilding had become uncontestable.
Towards the end of the war the expectations of reform reached new peaks; the increasing prospect of peace focused the mind.
The most strident voice was that of the decentrists in the garden city/ new town tradition.
One has only to read the correspondence of F.J. Osborn with Lewis Mumford over these years (Hughes, 1971) to appreciate the single-minded zeal that could be generated for the attainment of the  new Jerusalem.
One example of this was a remarkable collection of essays, compiled by Elizabeth and Gilbert Glenn McAlister (1945).
‘Positive planning’ would open up a dream future: The nation was to be planned, as the McAllisters' distinguished contributions proceeded to demonstrate: towns, agriculture, land use, industry, transport, fuel, homes, the arts and planners themselves.
As the Archbishop of York observed: ‘they have shown that it [planning]should embrace the whole country, and that without it we cannot make the best use of the limited space in our small island’(p. 160).
An old campaigner maintained his position too.
E.D. Simon, Chairman of Manchester Housing Committee (1919–23) and Parliamentary Secretary of the Ministry of Health (1931) was confident of being able to rebuild Britain within 20 years: ‘If we can tackle the problems of peace with anything like the same sense of purpose, the same devotion, and the same efficiency as we have shown during the war, the Rebuilding of Britain will be child's play’(Simon, 1945, p. 228).
It seemed self-evident that in the welter of these breathtaking claims, the case for planning no longer needed to be argued.
Nobody had criticized the Government for ‘planning’ the Normandy invasions, as Simon tersely argued, so it was perfectly reasonable for the Government to continue to plan after the war.
Furthermore, the political economists had a relatively easy time pointing to the failings of the economic system of earlier years in terms of disorganization and inefficiency and the imperfections of the free market (Cole, 1945).
The contrary arguments were there, and indeed cogently argued, but were almost silenced by the clamour for State socialism.
Friedrich Hayek, an Austrian economist living in England, issued a seminal warning: full employment, social security and freedom from want could not be had unless they came as by-products of a system that released the free energies of individuals; furthermore planning created not certainty, but uncertainty.
The Road to serfdom (1944) carried a standard that was unfurled again a generation later.
In the meantime the anti-planners were relatively few, though titles like Ordeal by planning (Jewkes, 1948), a furious onslaught on the experiences of the recent past, fuelled the deep-seated convictions of the political Right.
Plan making
We must now turn to see how these ideas were translated into practice via the great wartime plans.
Some of these proved to be classics in their own right and became accepted as models for others to follow.
Two names stood out: Patrick Abercrombie and William Holford, and their work in respect of London deserves close examination.
A plan for London was long overdue.
Throughout the inter-war period there had been no effective plan, merely Unwin's work and sporadic activity in the preparation of statutory planning schemes by the London boroughs.
In 1941 Lord Reith, as Minister of Works and Buildings, asked the LCC for a reconstruction plan for the County of London; this was undertaken by the LCC architect, J.H. Forshaw, in conjunction with Patrick Abercrombie, then professor of Town Planning at University College, London.
Their County of London Plan was published in 1943.
The authors identified three options before them: first, ‘planning’, starting again with no preconditions; second, total dispersal; and third, ‘conditioned yet comprehensive planning’— retaining the old structure and making it work under modern conditions.
Forshaw and Abercrombie opted for the third.
The garden city lobby alleged that the vested interests of London had worked against a decentralist approach, for which it had been striving for many years, and F.J. Osborn acknowledged in correspondence with Lewis Mumford that the Plan was a bitter disappointment to him and the Town and Country Planning Association (TCPA):
the work was done, not in Abercrombie's private office, but in the LCC office, with the maximum daily influence of the old point of view and at very close quarters with the housing and planning schemes already on the table and in the files in 1939.
Though I was, having expected one of the great historic documents of planning, bitterly disappointed with the Plan when I first studied it, I now think that in the circumstances Abercrombie did as well as any man, of the type who can survive in planning practice, could have done.
But it was quite impossible for the TCPA or me to bless the Plan unreservedly.
We applauded its general boldness and frame-work, and in very plain terms objected to its housing standards and to its ‘back pedalling’ on industrial and business decentralisation.
(Hughes, 1971, p. 45)
The County of London Plan was not radical but it was honest, pragmatic and logical enough.
Its major weakness was not of its own making; rather it lay in the narrow geographical confines to which it was addressed: the Administrative County of London, whereas territorially what was in fact London spread far wider than that.
Forshaw and Abercrombie focused on four major problems: traffic congestion, poor housing, inadequacy and maldistribution of open spaces, and land use intermixture — what they termed ‘indeterminate zoning’.
Almost as a throw-away they added a fifth, the outward sprawl characteristic of outer London.
For solutions they thought that London could be considered from three points of view: as a community — where people live, work and play; as a metropolis — the seat of Government and a great cultural and commercial centre; and as a machine — of locomotion.
A number of detailed policies were proposed.
With regard to reconstruction and decentralization of congested areas, the Plan contemplated the conservation or creation of communities which would be divided into smaller neighbourhoods of between 6,000 and 10,000 persons, related to the elementary school and the area it served.
In this way the social and functional structure for London became a constellation of residential areas, in map form appearing as eggs in a basket, against a backcloth of open space.
For the centre of the metropolis the aim was to define the function of the various component parts and, while making them more efficient and dignified, to free them from damaging intrusion.
The answer lay in a ‘fast motor ring road’, to which the principal radial roads of London would connect; within the ring, ‘tunnel-cross-roads’ would be essential.
It was acknowledged that within the heart of London there were areas which required remodelling and these would offer opportunities ‘for a fine architectural treatment’.
One of these was Piccadilly Circus, the authors observing that: ‘here the architectural setting becomes a major consideration, although this must not preclude a satisfactory traffic solution’(para. 32)— an almost prophetic comment, bearing in mind the events relating to Piccadilly in the 1960s (see p. 168).
Two areas in particular required renewal, it was thought, namely the West End and the south bank of the river.
The concept of London and the machine revolved round two problems: journeying to work and the obsession with the notion of through traffic from West London via the centre to the docks.
The plan therefore built on the proposals put forward in 1937 by Sir Charles Bressey and Sir Edwin Lutyens for London's traffic, and proposed to add to the two already partly-built outer ring roads (the North and South Orbital and the North and South Circular) with two corresponding inner rings —‘the fast traffic ring-road an
So much for the County of London.
A plan for Greater London was also commissioned, this time carried out by a small team led by Abercrombie.
The territorial spread and regional significance, up to 30 miles or so beyond the LCC boundary, now provided the occasion for a planning study of seminal importance, updating that by Unwin of ten years past.
Beyond the compact unity of the City of London and the LCC (and its constituent metropolitan boroughs) there lay a multiplicity of administrative units, extending over almost 2,600 square miles divided amongst no less than 143 local authorities, nearly every one of which had a planning scheme prepared or in course of preparation, independently of its neighbours.
Additionally there was a vast number of statutory authorities ranging from the Port of London Authority to the Thames Conservancy, Drainage and Hospital Boards, Gas, Electric Supply.
Railway and Canal Companies.
The challenge for coordinated planning could not have been greater.
The Greater London Regional Planning Committee, set up in 1927, and which Raymond Unwin had served, came to an end in 1931; it was replaced in 1937 by a Standing Conference on London Regional Planning.
In 1942 Lord Reith asked the Standing Conference if they would agree to his appointing an expert to prepare an Outline Plan and Report for Greater  London.
Abercrombie was appointed to work in collaboration with the Technical Committee.
So while the County of London Plan was still in preparation, Abercrombie was at work on his wider remit.
The Greater London Plan 1944 was actually published in 1945.
It was a very different report indeed.
All plans are based on assumptions and Abercrombie disarmingly revealed five.
The first followed the Barlow Report in assuming that ‘no new industry shall be admitted to London and the Home Counties except in special cases’.
The second concerned the scale of decentralization of people and industry from a congested centre.
A recommended density of 136  persons per acre (up to 200 in parts) would involve the decentralization of 618,000 people, to which would be added a further 415,000 people for decanting from overcrowded places outside the LCC, giving a total of 1,033,000 in all.
This figure would increase to 1,232,750 should a density of 100 persons per acre be adopted for the central area.
Either way, it was a figure of about 1.25 million that was implied, for a further 214,000 was added in order to allow for a measure of free choice.
The third assumption was that the population of the whole area would not increase, but would be somewhat reduced.
Fourth, the Port of London would continue to be one of the world's great ports.
Lastly, it was assumed that new powers for planning would become available, including powers for the control of land values.
The plan fell into place.
Functionally it was an interlocking web of economic and social purpose of great imagination: a masterly bringing together of a number of town planning themes.
The overall design for Greater London took shape in the form of concentric rings according to population numbers and density, industrial location and use of open land for agriculture and recreation.
The inner ring comprised the older areas built up to around the turn of the century, which because of their high density and lack of open space required ‘decentralizing’, involving 415,000 persons.
The second ring was in effect suburban London, representing the ribboning, scatter and sporadic development of the inter-war years.
by no means an exact circle, it had an approximate radius of 12 miles from Charing Cross, though with a few wedges penetrating into inner London, most notably at Totteridge and Mill Hill.
Aiming at densities of 50 persons per acre, the area would receive no additional population.
The third ring included most of the land already acquired for green belt purposes under the 1938 Act, but it would also include other open land, not necessarily in public ownership but permanently safeguarded against building.
Within this green zone, which included old towns like Watford and Reigate and new communities such as Hornchurch and Upminster in the east and Banstead and Orpington in the south, there would be no further urban expansion except for very special cases.
The outer country ring would be the chief reception area for overcrowded London.
A more generous expansion of existing centres would be permitted and the zone would provide the sites for eight new satellites (ten sites being suggested), while the general character of a prevailing agricultural use would be secured.
Overall, the figures of population movement are summarized as in Table 5.1
Ten years earlier Unwin had faced the alternative to London's outward spread: either a continuous zone of free entry at varying degrees of density, its continuity broken by areas of public open space; or a continuous green background as the setting for occasional development.
Abercrombie followed Unwin in advocating the second alternative for the two outer rings, and in fact his plan put great store on both the scenic aspect of regional open space and the detailed design which would knit the whole together into a continuous system by footpaths, riverside walks and bridleways.
Overall it offered a strategic solution to many of London's problems — though, as it was realized later, only if the world would stand   still long enough for desirable change to be effected without being overtaken by other events.
Schematically the concentric form for Greater London was compelling: clear, easy to understand.
and appealing in its simplicity.
This time Osborn was much more generous in his comments to Mumford: ‘a far better statement of the problem than the LCC Plan…
It is so great an advance on any other big regional plan that one must be enthusiastic about its general pattern’(Hughes, 1971, pp. 71–2).
With regard now to transport, Abercrombie built on the work contained in the County of London Plan .
He took the ten radials, previously selected, and projected a system of ‘express arterial roads’, including a new outer ring (the D ring), placed on the inner edge of the green belt.
In other words a dart board, or spider's web design was superimposed on his concentric rings: ten radials and two rings, the inner (B ring) within the LCC boundary, the outer (D ring) just outside the built-up area.
There were of course three other rings: the North and South Orbital (E), the North and South Circular (C) and the A ring, which connected the terminal railway stations.
Thirty years later London's traffic planners were to be haunted by the ghosts of these proposals.
Just as in the County of London Plan , the Greater London Plan (GLP ) included some detailed design examples of redeveloped areas and new communities.
Essentially, however, both plans were land use and transport strategies, the GLP particularly magisterial in its approach.
It seemed to represent the last word as a model for other cities to follow.
For Glasgow, for example, the parallels were obvious.
Abercrombie and Matthew's Clyde Valley Regional Plan 1946 followed the principle of decentralization from redevelopment areas, thus meeting the long-standing problem of overcrowding, congestion and unfitness of dwellings (Wannop, 1986).
The Clyde Valley Regional Planning Committee had been constituted in 1943, and Abercrombie was appointed Principal Consultant; Robert Matthew was his deputy.
Population dispersal followed the Greater London model: town expansion and the building of three new towns (East Kilbride, Cumbernauld and Bishopton), and the possibility of a fourth at Houston, and a green belt covering the agricultural land in the middle and lower Clyde basins.
Later, for the West Midlands, two plans also followed the decentralist model, though this time without any requirement for new towns:Conurbation (1948), produced by the West Midlands Group on Post-war Reconstruction, and the West Midlands Plan (1948), prepared for the Minister of Town and Country Planning by Abercrombie and local consultant Herbert Jackson.
The authors of Conurbation were particularly interesting in their treatment of the urban fringe.
In the 1930s the beginnings of a green belt for Birmingham were contained on land to the south of the city, provided by the Bournville Village Trust.
A rather different strategic view from London now emerged: But regional strategies were one thing, detailed design for redevelopment was another.
A number of commissioned reports provided opportunities for consultants to bring together the disciplines of planning, architecture, and road engineering to suggest new forms of urban layout.
New life was breathed into the practice of civic design: Abercrombie's plans for Plymouth, Hull and Edinburgh, and Sharp's plans for Oxford and Exeter were notable products of the genre.
But even where local issues were paramount, Abercrombie, for one, could not resist the wider regional view.
At Plymouth, for example, where in 1941 he was invited to prepare a redevelopment plan for the city, in cooperation with the City Engineer, H. Paton Watson, his starting point was that he should not be constrained by local authority boundaries: in his view Plymouth extended six miles and more beyond the city centre and should be planned on that basis.
What followed was a proposed 40 per cent increase in shopping provision with a new central area layout replacing the haphazard medieval street pattern (though elsewhere in the city, in the Barbican area, the old intimacy was retained).
It was the plan for the City of London (1947), presented to the Court of Common Council by consultants Charles Holden and William Holford, Professor of Town Planning at Liverpool University, which took the furthest strides in design proposals.
Though only 677 acres in extent, the area was one of great complexity, and heavy war damage meant that about one third of the pre-war commercial and industrial floor space was  destroyed.
Significantly their Plan, in the form of a final report (1947), was published in a book The City of London (1951), which was subtitled ‘a record of destruction and survival’.
Against a long-term plan of redevelopment (perhaps 30 years, and therefore with inherent flexibility) Holden and Holford sketched a 10-year programme for definite action.
For rebuilding, it was recommended that existing clauses governing the height and site coverage of buildings should be reviewed; a revised table of heights and angles of set-back was put forward and a new code of daylighting adopted.
Streets.
from sub-arterial to local should be classified according to function.
New thoroughfares were proposed, together with a variety of measures for street widening, parking and design of intersections.
Functionally the whole city was proposed as a ‘one-use zone’ for offices and business premises, but secondary uses such as shops, public buildings, light industry and warehouses could be admitted according to detailed location and access.
There was an emphasis on precinct development, notably around St Paul's Cathedral, and the city churches.
A Declaratory Order covering 270 acres was proposed with a view to designating extensively war-damaged land, subject to compulsory purchase; this was required for essential improvements to be carried out over the next 15 years.
The Minister subsequently approved the Order for all but 40 of the acres applied for.
It is impossible to do full justice to the elegance and sensitivity of this volume which contained the final report.
It had a depth and penetration which separated it from most other consultants' reports of the time.
Moreover it is important to appreciate the breakthrough in planning methodology which Holden and Holford effected.
The key was the institution of a density control based on a normal limit of floor space five times as great as the plot on which building was to take place.
This was the ‘standard plot ratio’.
Before the war there had been 85 million square feet of floor space; in 1947 it was 59 million.
Much would depend on the way in which floor-space control would operate, and the relaxations from the standard ratio.
In the event the plot ratio proved to be one of the major devices whereby the city was prevented from turning into a miniature New York (Cherry and Penny, 1986).
Techniques and methods
Notwithstanding the success of the new generation of plans, much remained to be done in fashioning the methodological tools which the planners needed to engage seriously in the job of urban reconstruction.
Here we have to turn to developments in design practice, road layout and housing.
One of the key people to chart the course of reconstruction and development practice was William Holford (Cherry and Penny, 1986).
After early work on the design and building of hostels for the Ministry of Supply, Holford was recruited to the Reconstruction Group to serve Lord Reith at the Ministry of Works; his job, together with that of a team assembled under him and a career civil servant, H.L.G. Vincent, was no less than to  secure an immediate strengthening of the planning system and the encouragement of planning work in local authorities.
In fact it took some time to make effective progress, in part because of institutional changes; Lord Portal replaced Lord Reith, and in 1943 a separate Ministry of Town and Country Planning was set up.
Another problem was the uncertainty surrounding city-centre planning, when it was apparent that there was little likelihood of an early resolution of the financial, administrative and political issues involved.
But local authorities were anxious to make a start on tackling their blitzed areas, though central area redevelopment was a matter where they were almost entirely without expertise.
There was merely conventional wisdom about such questions as principles of road design, use zoning, building heights and controls over the external appearance of buildings .
The Ministry's technical guidance was urgently required.
While road layout and zoning problems may have sufficed as techniques for suburban planning, centre reconstruction (three dimensional as opposed to two) required something more.
Holford supervised a small team in the Ministry of Town and Country Planning which prepared the advisory handbook on The redevelopment of central areas (1947).
The key instrument of control became the Floor Space Index (FSI), a disarmingly simple measure which expressed the relationship between the curtilage of a site and the Moor area of the buildings erected on it.
The derivation was made by calculating the usable floor area of the individual building and dividing the sum by the total area of the site, including (where appropriate) half the width of the adjoining streets.
The full power of the FSI was seen in the practice of development control.
An index value could be fixed by a local authority for a particular planning area; in other words no development within an area zoned for office use should exceed a certain value as measured by the index.
When a development proposal was submitted, the maximum permissible floor space was calculated by multiplying the area of the site by the FSI applicable, and consent given on condition that the area of floor space should not be exceeded.
In other words, it became possible for the intensity of development to be determined in advance by a local authority.
The index was also a flexible tool, allowing certain freedom to both architect and developer: for example for a ground area of 10,000 sq.
ft and an FSI at 2, either the site could be covered at two storeys to yield the permitted 20,000 sq.
ft, or the same floor space could be obtained on a smaller part of the site by building higher, and so releasing land for car parking and other uses.
With tall buildings a daylighting indicator was a further safeguard against very high structures.
The handbook, available to local authorities in advance of publication, was well received.
It represented something new, sophisticated yet practical: guidance of great utility by the Ministry on how to handle problems of redevelopment, which gave a common, technical template to urban centres with similar problems.
A framework of procedures was suggested, beginning with surveys, both local and regional.
The next stage was a matter of taking ‘the main decisions’, particularly in respect of land-use zones, the amount and distribution of accommodation and the main street layout; a hierarchical road system and tightly drawn ring roads were made a  feature in the generalized depiction of city-centre plan (actually it was the reverse image of the town centre of Leicester).
Then followed guidance on layout and development: streets, car parks, street blocks, the control of the external appearance of buildings, and open spaces and street planting.
Finally there was guidance on a phased programme of realization: first and later stages of redevelopment.
Throughout, the ideal of comprehensive planning was thoroughly endorsed, although there was little acknowledgement of the economic issues for the redevelopment process.
The handbook must be seen as a major step forward in British planning method, and although the results were slow to be realized, one city at least, Coventry, perhaps shows in plan form what the authors might have envisaged.
The second guidance was in respect of roads, and much needed to be done in this regard.
The highway development survey commissioned for Greater London in 1936, and carried out by Sir Charles Bressey and Sir Edward Lutyens, addressed the problem of the flow of commercial traffic in London, but said nothing about the reduction of central area congestion nor about the relation between traffic circulation, land use or environmental design.
The breakthrough came from an unlikely source: an Assistant Commissioner of Police at Scotland Yard, Alker Tripp.
Road traffic had long been a matter for the police because of the very great concern over road accidents.
Perhaps it was appropriate, therefore, for a police administrator with considerable experience of controlling traffic movement in a big city to provide a new perspective: that of bringing road planning and town planning together.
His book Town planning and road traffic (Tripp, 1942) proved of seminal importance.
Tripp's starting point may have been road accidents, but his overall grasp of the problem took him into wider fields.
More than 68,000 persons were killed and more than 2 million injured on British roads in the 10 years prior to the outbreak of war, but Tripp was able to advocate not just improvements to major roads as one way of reducing the number of fatalities and accidents, but complete road systems.
‘The whole trouble originates in unsuitable layout; the problem is fundamentally one of design and planning’(Tripp, 1942, p. 16): this was his starting point.
The principles fell into place: There were two major features to Tripp's proposals: the acknowledgement of a hierarchy of roads and the creation of precincts in urban layouts.
He saw three classes of road: arterial, sub-arterial and local.
The arterial road was to be reserved for heavy traffic between towns; restricted points of access to twin carriageways would permit no building frontages, no standing vehicles and no pedestrians.
The local road, including country lanes and town roads, was to be reserved only for traffic which had business in the locality; it should be designed to discourage through traffic.
The sub-arterial road was to be an intermediate class of road designed to link up the main arterials to the local roads.
Such a hierarchy confirmed that the ideal town plan was a gigantic cart wheel with several rims, a loose arrangement of radials and circular ring roads: a feature which Abercrombie stressed for London.
For smaller cities tight inner ring roads were advocated, Tripp suggesting that in a city of 100,000 population the radius of the inner ring road would probably be a quarter to half a mile, while in a city of a million, the radius would be a mile or more.
Tripp's ideas for reformed urban layouts focused on ‘pockets’ or ‘precincts’of local roads from which through traffic would be deflected.
Within towns they would be little systems of shopping, business, industrial and residential streets.
He took his example from the Inns of Court, London, an enclave where general traffic had been excluded.
From Tripp and the applied work of Abercrombie it was a logical step to an official stance of the Ministry of War Transport.
A Departmental Committee, having been appointed in 1943, published its report in 1946:Design and layout of roads in built-up areas .
It was not so much a guidance note as a review; the Committee's terms of reference had been to consider the design and layout most appropriate to various types of roads in built-up areas, with due regard to safety, the free Mow of road traffic, economy and the requirements of town planning, and to make recommendations.
The broad lines of advice had in fact already been established: the deflection of arterial traffic from built-up areas as far as practicable; failing this, traffic should be either elevated or sunken when passing through urban areas; vehicles, cyclists and pedestrians should be segregated on important traffic routes; frontage access should be restricted; fly-over crossings should be provided.
Importantly, however, the report gave weighty endorsement to the principle of inner, intermediate, and outer ring roads.
Such advice was fully taken in the preparation of the first generation of development plans in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
The techniques of urban renewal remained to be filled in with regard to housing design and layout.
The Tudor Walters Report (1918) had shaped the form of housing after World War I; it was the Dudley Report (1944) which performed the same function after World War II.
Early in 1942 two committees were set up by the Central Housing Advisory Committee to report to the Minister of Health (the minister responsible for housing) on the question of post-war housing rebuilding.
One (the Burt Committee) looked at the solution of prefabrication and other forms of non-traditional construction.
The other (a Committee under the chairmanship of Lord Dudley) laid down the forms and the space and equipment standards for post-war housing, and in conjunction with a team from the Ministry of Town and Country Planning, examined matters such as housing layout and densities.
This was published as The design of dwellings (1944).
The report was by no means as radical as that of Tudor Walters a quarter of a century earlier; rather it confirmed the pre-war ideal, emphasizing the virtues of family life and the design of houses most likely to foster those virtues (Bullock, 1987).
However, the Committee did emphasize the need for a much wider range of accommodation than had been provided before the war, and so they were drawn into the sharp debate about densities and preferences as between flats and houses — and  this is where the link with the Ministry of Town and Country Planning proved so important.
To accommodate the different types of housing required, the Committee recommended a range of densities: from 30 persons per acre for suburban development to 100 persons per acre for town centres, rising to a maximum of 120 for the largest cities.
Building flats seemed inevitable it these higher densities were to be achieved.
At densities of 120 persons per acre it was estimated that between 25 per cent and 30 per cent of the population would have to be flat dwellers.
These were statistical norms, but what would the post-war housing layouts actually look like?
Concepts or neighbourhood planning prevailed.
Mixed layouts of flats and houses were advocated for an area of different types of household with a range of facilities for local use, including schools, shops, open space and a community centre.
Abercrombie and Forshaw had already applied this model in the County of London Plan , and before the war the idea had been fed from at least two sources: from the continent there were the large building blocks of Vienna and elsewhere with their community facilities.
and from America there was the wider practice of according suburban districts a measure of identification as neighbourhoods of 5,000 to 10,000 people.
Before the war Young's study of life at Becontree (1934) and Durant's study of the LCC's Watling Estate (1939) had both been critical of the lack of social and community facilities.
During the war the National Council of Social Service (NCSS) strongly recommended neighbourhood planning and the Dudley Committee suitably responded.
Finally, the architecture of mixed development was put forward officially in the Housing manual 1944 .
Prepared jointly by the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Works, with advice from the Ministry of Town and Country Planning on matters of site planning and layout, it was intended for the guidance of local authorities — who, it was presumed would be undertaking most of the post-war redevelopment.
It was unexceptional, and largely reproduced ideas already incorporated in the Dudley Report and the County of London Plan .
In practice, for inner London at least, a trend was set for forms of mixed residential development in which blocks of flats were conspicuous: Churchill Gardens Estate, Pimlico, designed by Powell and Moya, contained 2,000 dwellings which combined eight-storey blocks of flats and maisonettes and three-storey terraces of housing and flats at an overall density of 200 persons per acre; and the Somerford Grove Estate in Hackney, another layout of flats and houses, designed by Gibberd at a density 104 persons per acre.
While the flats versus houses issue remained hotly disputed, London at least demonstrated in schemes shortly after the end of the war that the flat combined with mixed development would be an essential ingredient of post-war central cities.
And so the components of post-war redevelopment fell into place: central area design to a comprehensive plan; ring roads and a functional road layout; new standardized housing forms; the neighbourhood unit; overall the dispersed, decentralized city.
New powers for speedy land assembly, for plan making and the control of development were given to local authorities,consummated subsequently in the Town and Country Planning Act.
1947.
The planner was elevated to the role of a coordinating ‘technician-craftsman’; the practice of civic design as perceived by Holford would ‘elevate the plan from technical, functional competence to the level at which it might cater for the cultural, emotional and aesthetic needs of a civilised society’(Cherry and Penny, 1986, p. 158).
The next 40 years were to show how far this ideal would be achieved.
THE POST-WAR LEGACY
The period since 1945, a stretch of rather more than 40 years, may be considered as a whole.
though in fact during that time the unfolding story of the public regulation of the urban environment has been far from one of even continuity.
Its unifying feature has been the consistency of the form of statutory town planning derived from the Town and Country Planning Act 1947 and its successors, primarily the Acts of 1968 and 1971.
This legislation ensured that the whole of Britain has been subject to compulsory land planning based on the application of two simple practices: the preparation (including revision and updating) of plans for the future allocation of land uses, and the control of development to accord with the provisions of those plans.
The system has been flexible and robust enough to respond to changing conditions and circumstances, and there has been sufficient political and institutional stability with regard to attitudes towards, and assumptions about, planning during much of the period to give some measure of consistency to public policies and programmes.
The period began with town planning elevated in the public mind by virtue of the favourable reception accorded to the various plans for city reconstruction drawn up during the war years and immediately afterwards.
Both the proposals and the practice met the spirit of the age: new cities planned to be environmentally attractive, socially acceptable and economically viable gained support from both public opinion and commercial interests.
The period continued in the 1950s with the operation of the planning system proving capable of responding to a range of local situations, before, in the 1960s, it had to cope with the pressures of a housing boom, commercial redevelopment, a feared city thrombosis through increase in traffic circulation, and renewed problems from regional disparities.
In the 1970s differences within cities became more pronounced than those between regions and the focus shifted to dissatisfaction with forms of public provision, particularly housing, and to concern over inner city decline.
In the 1980s a change in political attitudes affected a long-standing commitment to public-sector plan making, and different policy initiatives have sought to reduce local authority provision of housing and play down other forms of local planning.
This is not an easy period to encapsulate in a short chapter, and in any case there is abundant literature, none more comprehensive than  Cullingworth (1988).
However, to maintain the balance and the style of the account of earlier periods, we can adopt a similar approach.
The principles and practice of plan making, and the various ways in which government, both local and central, has intervened in environmental affairs, have always been dependent on the context of the time: political, institutional, social, economic and technological.
We begin therefore with an outline of the political background and an indication of the nature of urban and regional change during the period.
We then consider the objectives and operation of the post-war planning system.
The various aspects of planned development then unfold: housing, new towns and expanded towns, aesthetics of control, transportation, regional strategies and inner-city planning.
We conclude with an overview.
Political background
Clement Attlee became Prime Minister in July 1945.
His administrations (1945–50; 1950–1) completed and consolidated the work of the coalition government in establishing a managed economy and expanding the welfare state.
The notion of town planning and its profession of technically qualified practitioners inevitably stood to be beneficiaries in this context.
Attlee's Labour Party had broken out of the ghetto of solidly working-class support, its 1945 victory being based on the electoral sympathy of a broad section of the middle class.
In.the general election Labour won 79 seats for the first time; it carried 10 out of 13 seats in Birmingham, 9 out of 10 in Manchester and 48 out of 62 in London.
With enormous gains in the white-collar suburbs, Labour became the party of bureaucrats, administrators and a progressive intelligentsia, all predisposed to seeing a greater share of public control over an increasing range of national affairs.
The National Insurance Act, 1946, implemented the Beveridge plan, though with some modification.
The nationalization programme quickly accounted for the Bank of England (May 1946), coal (January 1947), electricity (April 1948), gas and railways (both May 1948).
A National Health Service was introduced in July 1948.
Steel nationalization followed in February 1951.
In the middle of all this, the New Towns Act, 1946, and the Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, took their logical place.
But the physical direction of the economy through manpower planning did not last all that long, and after 1947 the financial budget was restored as the principal means of economic guidance.
However, the Conservative Party in opposition made it clear that they too would maintain a strong central guidance over the economy, when returned to power.
The two main political parties had converged and when the Conservatives won the general election of October 1951, the main lines of economic policy were maintained.
The continuity was impressive, brought about by a reformed style of capitalism on the one hand and a moderate Labour Party and a cautious trades union movement on the other.
Political sentiment was captured and articulated by a band of upper-middle-class reformers of the kind earlier represented by Beveridge and Keynes.
Socially concerned professional people came into their own: these  were the days of professional experts; architects and planners were typical of the humane technocrats who had won the war and had a vision of the skills to win the peace.
Politically the Conservatives integrated many of Labour's demands into their own pragmatic philosophy.
But these demands had first found expression in a world of thought provided by non-socialist intelligentsia, first in the 1930s and increasingly during the war.
These were the conditions of a new consensus; far-reaching proposals for redistribution and public control over private interests, which could have been dangerously aligned to one political party, became shared by both main parties.
In these circumstances it might have been expected that town planning would be guaranteed a fair wind for many years while the consensus survived.
In a sense this was so, but on the other hand the activity of town planning soon got bogged down in a technical bureaucracy, losing the dash and verve which sustained it during the 1940s.
Plans for the better distribution of population and employment were still needed, but one academic observer reported in 1957: After 13 years the Conservatives lost office; in the general election of October 1964 Harold Wilson won power with a slender majority of four over the other parties.
In March 1966 Labour was returned with a massively increased majority: 100 over the Conservatives, 97 overall.
In June 1970 Labour surprisingly lost and an eventful six years of Wilson administrations came to an end.
During this time many aspects of town planning received a considerable boost, particularly in local authority house building, the development of regional strategies, new policies for the disadvantaged regions, transportation and a new attempt to control the land market.
More money was available for State development projects and an emphasis was given to science-led growth.
The 1970s are more difficult to categorize from the point of view of planning and national politics.
After the administration of Edward Heath (1970–4), Labour replaced the Conservatives again, winning two elections in 1974, and Wilson returned to power for two years until he was succeeded on his retirement by James Callaghan.
The Labour government fell in May 1979, thrown off course by labour and economic problems, and Margaret Thatcher and the New Right gained office, to be re-confirmed in power in 1983 and 1987.
The most significant development in this period was the profound shift in attitudes towards the State: against the exercise of public control and more sympathetic towards the operation of the free market.
It was increasingly argued that unnecessary State control of personal and community affairs was wrong in principle, serving merely to  weaken the capacity of the individual to enhance life chances; arguments not heard for perhaps half a century were rehearsed.
Environmentally it was reasoned that the consequences of State control have often been unpalatable: where were the beautiful cities that had been promised?
Planning, after all, did not always solve problems; it could also create them.
Moreover the massiveness of the planning machine, and the insensitivities of the bureaucrats who operated it, were surely counter-productive.
The inefficiency of State power in regulating development and in providing guidance for the future was compared unfavourably with more adaptive private market intelligence.
The free market had virtues too long eclipsed by slavish conformity to collective ideals that no longer seemed relevant.
Pressure for ‘retreat from government’ gathered pace across the western world: opposition to rates and taxes, resentment of the over-abundance of officials, attacks on State waste and inefficiency.
In these circumstances the conditions for unquestioned support for the statutory town planning system, which had lasted for over 30 years, were now considered debatable.
It was no longer obvious that public-sector environmental planning of the old style need be maintained.
The town planning ship ran into choppy waters and it remains in uncertain seas.
The other political factor against which town planning has to be seen in context in the post-war period relates to the local government and the institutional setting it has provided.
The twentieth century had already seen the steadily increasing scope of local government.
The dual nature of British governance (local and central), in spite of the inbuilt tensions, had proved durable and effective.
The system of counties and districts, and county boroughs, established before the end of the nineteenth century, had provided an acceptable setting for the exercise of local powers by local authorities over the control and regulation of the environment.
During the 1930s there was a general belief in a vigorous system of local self-government and the maintenance of free democratic institutions (Young, 1985).
A book published in 1935,A century of municipal progress (edited by Laski, Jennings and Robson) as the title implies, had a tone which was optimistic and self-confident — in sharp contrast to the many threats to world peace at that time, indicative of a breakdown of effective law and order elsewhere: the Japanese invasion of Manchuria, the rise of Hitler, the failure of the Disarmament Conference, the progressive decline of the League of Nations, the assault on Abyssinia and the Spanish Civil War.
In Britain local government could bask in a sound record of development of urban public services.
The arguments for the increasing assumption of public responsibility for matters hitherto considered more appropriate to the private domain were largely won, it being held that private enterprise and voluntary organizations were either inadequate or inefficient in supplying local services.
All this stood town planning well, as we have seen in Chapter 4, when the early forms of the statutory planning system were established.
The wealth and power of the Victorian cities and the civic pride expressed in their impressive town halls, first enabled them to pioneer public services; later it permitted them to build up teams of technical staff and take on a range of tasks of increasing complexity and sensitivity.
In the 1930s, for example, planning had become involved in the problems of servicing development and mediating between conflicting interests as to how land should be used: an important operational advance from the earlier bridgehead of scheme preparation and interim development control.
After 1945, and with the Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, local authorities were the natural agency for the discharge of town planning powers.
It could have been different (as it was with New Towns) but it was not: town planning was massively buttressed throughout the post-war period by becoming an integral part of local government.
While local councils were popular, all was well, even though town planning was often seen as yet another irksome irritant in the exercise of personal choice.
But within a few years of the end of the war, responsibility for trunk roads, gas, electricity, national assistance and hospital services had been transferred from local to central government control.
In 1974 further functions were taken away: 10 regional water authorities became responsible for water supply and sewerage.
So we had a paradox: local government was losing functions, yet the continued exercise of monopoly power by local authorities attracted increasing opposition.
Special interest groups, particularly in regard to roads, housing and the protection of amenities clashed with established practices of local government, and planning policies were less and less understood.
When it came to slum clearance, opposition came not from slum landlords but from the residents themselves.
Finally, as local authorities needed more and more Exchequer money to deal with urban problems of environmental decline and a welter of economic and social problems, new tensions in central-local relations unfolded in the 1980s.
Local government ceased to be regarded as an indispensable deliverer of services; it had become part of the intractable problem of the late twentieth-century urban crisis.
The promise of town planning itself was tarnished in this context.
Another development, within local authorities.
served to weaken the traditional view of town planning as a place-orientated, coordinating activity for corporate affairs at the local scale.
In the late 1960s and early 1970s there were significant shifts in British local government towards public policy making, during which time the role of the statutory Development Plan was weakening.
The emphasis now was on lessons learned from American experience with PPBS (planning-programming-budgeting-systems.)
Local authorities took to the fashion of developing management and political processes, and institutional structures, which would make them more able to plan, control and review their activities, commensurate with their resources.
Policy planning was rethought, and local land-use planning had a rather different context (Hambleton, 1986).
Tinkering with local government boundaries did not seem to help either, although it was clearly necessary from time to time to take steps to match the changing facts of social geography to local authority boundaries and status.
The Attlee government baulked at local government reform by boundary revision, the Local Government Boundary Commission which it had set up, proving to be of short-lived duration.
Between 1949 and 1953 Ealing, Ilford and Luton failed in their bids to achieve county borough status, but in 1957 a Royal Commission on local government in London was  appointed and, by the Local Government Act, 1958, a series of commissions was set up to consider the problems of particular localities, particularly those of the major English conurbations.
The major recommendation of the former came to fruition: the establishment of an enlarged Greater London Council to replace the old London County Council.
New enlarged county boroughs for Luton, Solihull, Teesside and Torbay were established, together with a rationalization of boundaries in the West Midlands conurbation.
Much more was to follow: a Royal Commission chaired by Sir John Maud (later Lord Redcliffe Maud) recommended the creation of a small number of two-tier authorities for the metropolitan areas of England (plus Hampshire) with the remainder of the country divided into 52 single-tier, unitary authorities.
An influential minority report by Derek Senior advocated a map involving solely two-tier regional authorities, 35 in number.
In the event, although the Labour government opted for the two-tier metropolitan counties (without Hampshire), the returning Conservatives (in 1970) went further, establishing a two-tier county-district relationship elsewhere in place of the unitary authorities.
The operative date was April 1974.
In Scotland the pattern followed was for Regional Councils and constituent Districts.
Nonetheless there were certain similarities: Glasgow was a District in the massive Strathclyde Region; Birmingham a dominant District in the West Midlands County.
A new pattern of inter-authority rivalry ensued and in the upheaval town planning was a loser.
A new fractiousness between authorities, together with an indication of a sharp increase in the politicization of local government, diminished the standing of British local government, and many of its services suffered.
In many cases the professional certainties of a former generation of town planners were overridden by strident political voices and the activity fell increasingly into some disrepute.
Finally, in April 1986 the Greater London Council and the metropolitan county councils in England were abolished: the last formal vestiges of strategic planning over the old conurbation areas were removed.
Changes in urban geography
Abercrombie and fellow practitioners who prepared plans for the reconstruction of British cities after the war, and planning officers up and down the country who drew up the first batch of development plans after 1948, worked to a common assumption: once the new urban land use pattern had been established, city form and structure would settle down into a steady state.
Their plans were strategic in the sense that an idealized future (say 20 years hence) was projected which would accommodate all assumptions as to likely change: there would be no great population growth (why should there be?— the 1930s had been a decade of population stagnation, if not decline); inter-war regional drift would be halted; the housing shortage would be made good; the necessary population redistributions would be implemented, so reducing densities to an acceptable level in the inner districts; areas for suburban expansion would be identified and selected against a background of open space and protected countryside; lines for  improved road communication would be safeguarded and the commercial areas,particularly town centres, would be better defined and made architectural show-pieces.
Above all, urban Britain would be ‘contained’(Hall et al .,
1973) and its internal structure managed over time to a determined land use pattern.
How different it was all to be, and the marvel of it is that the plans prepared in the period after 1945 proved as robust as they did for so long.
The fact is that urban Britain faced not a period of standstill but of dramatic growth and reordering.
The context for the drawing up of plans and the management of on-going change proved quite different.
Since the war urban Britain has experienced a rate of change unparalleled since the early days of the Industrial Revolution.
A radically new urban experience was presented: whereas in the nineteenth century the major urban change was in the formation of tight-knit, high-density conurbations, and between the wars it was in the first flowering of low-density peripheral suburbanization, the second half of the twentieth century has seen metropolitanization as the essential phenomenon.
Plan making in Britain and other schemes for the public regulation of the urban environment have responded successively to these three phases of urban change.
Statistical analysis by Hall et al .
(1973) on the 1951, 1961 and 1966 Censuses revealed the early post-war experience, based on an examination of population change in new geographical units (‘building blocks’): these were the Standard Metropolitan Labour Area (SMLA) and the Metropolitan Economic Labour Area (MELA).
Hall et al .
identified that in the period 1951–66 two different spatial tendencies were operating in England.
One was regional: the metropolitan dynamism of the South-east and the Midlands compared with the sluggish tendencies of Lancashire and Yorkshire.
The other, particularly striking in the South-east was a local decentralization effect, with very rapid growth on the outer periphery of London.
There was a clear tendency for population to decentralize from the core of the metropolitan areas to the ring; in 1931 71 per cent of the total metropolitan population of England and Wales was found in metropolitan cores, whereas in 1966 the proportion was 60 per cent.
So far, employment had shown less tendency to migrate from the central cities, but this process was soon to quicken.
By the middle 1960s the new urban map of Britain was being consolidated.
Metropolitan clusters were clearly in evidence with their own internal dynamics of change dominated by a trend to loosen and shed population from the core to the periphery.
The primary concentration consisted of London and the 25 contiguous SMLAs, in a dispersed area extending up to 60 miles from the centre, containing nearly 37 per cent of the population of England and Wales on less than 10 per cent of the land area.
A second concentration was represented by the 40 SMLAs occupying the East and West Midlands, Lancashire and the West Riding of Yorkshire: another 33 per cent of the population of the country on 14 per cent of the land area.
With the break between the two concentrations, soon to be filled in by Milton Keynes and Northampton's expansion, a virtually unbroken stretch of metropolitan areas promised to stretch from Sussex to North Lancashire.
Elsewhere metropolitan Britain existed in isolated outliers: including the Hampshire coast, parts of East Anglia, Bristol/Bath, North-east England, South Wales and the South Devon coast.
In Scotland the central valley was filling in with massive expansions particularly around Glasgow, while growth around Edinburgh, Dundee and Aberdeen maintained a long-standing pattern.
Metropolitan Britain had arrived.
It was already clear that Britain's early post-war experience bore similarity to that of the United States, and it was not too long before it was evident that Britain's experience was part of a wider set of tendencies to be seen not only in Europe but also in other world urban systems.
Hall and Hay (1980) identify 539 separate metropolitan areas in the 15 countries of western and central Europe.
Their study shows that between 1950 and 1975 an already urban continent underwent further urbanization, with metropolitan areas gaining over 39 million people.
During this period the pattern and timing of change was striking.
In the 1950s European population was still concentrating into metropolitan cores (perhaps in part as a process of adjustment to rebuilt cities), but by the 1960s a reversal had taken place, with people decentralizing from cores to rings, a process which accelerated in the 1970s.
Britain was the fastest to decentralize. suggesting perhaps that it is in an advanced stage of industrial-urban evolution compared with much of Europe, though behind the trends observed for the United States.
In the process we have observed, two new urban phenomena have come to the fore: the outer city and the inner city, both urban environments with distinct challenges for planned regulation.
Herington (1984) has drawn attention to the quite different urban form now represented by the dynamic periphery of the dispersed city, with its suburban nodes, its declining reliance on the central city, its dependence on private transport and its monotone socio-economic composition.
Hall (1981) has described the deprivation and disadvantage now characterizing the inner city, confirmed by a series of reports commissioned by the Economic and Social Research Council (Cherry, 1987).
The facts of economic change have helped to produce a new urban crisis situation.
After a boom period in the 1950s and 1960s, when real wages grew by more than a quarter between 1950 and 1965, and when earnings rose by more than 40 per cent, the later 1960s ushered in years of intermittent depression.
London has seen the disappearance of more than three quarters of a million manufacturing jobs in 20 years: an aggregate figure masking stagnation and decline in an inner south-east zone, and growth in the west, in part related to Heathrow Airport, as a ‘high-tech’ crescent (Hall et al .,
1987).
During the same period Glasgow and its conurbation have gone from being an industrial city with 60 per cent of its labour in manufacturing to a service centre with 60 per cent of its labour in service occupations.
The West Midlands has seen a remarkable economic collapse: Birmingham and Coventry were second and third only to London in the growth of new jobs between 1951 and 1961, but between 1970 and 1983 relative earnings in the West Midlands fell from being the highest to being the lowest of any region.
With economic change has come the emergence of both areas and social  groups of disadvantage, which have attracted the attention of analysts and observers with an intensity accorded to the social and environmental problems of deprived London a century ago.
In London an area forming an arc east of Charing Cross, from Lambeth through Docklands to Islington now represents a major concentration of deprivation, the dominant characteristics being high rates of unemployment (racially concentrated), high population density, a poverty of housing stock and a disadvantaged environment for a population with its distinctive sub-class of welfare dependents.
In the West Midlands, Birmingham's area of deprivation extends in a boomerang-shaped district around the city from the north west in Handsworth to the east in Small Heath and to the south in Sparkbrook.
Overall, then, we can say that profound changes have occurred in the form, shape and structure of British cities since the war.
We are now confronted with the phenomenon of the post-industrial city, with a quite different set of problems for public regulation (Young and Mills, 1983).
Meanwhile the process of ‘de-industrialization’, typified by the shift of employment from manufacturing to service industries and the related growth of female participation in the labour force, and of white-collar as opposed to manual occupations, has been accompanied by fundamental changes in the location of economic activity, both locally and regionally.
Significant trends are now working their way through the specific conditions prevailing in different cities and regions in Britain (Goddard and Champion, 1983).
Slow, though sustained, improvements in economic performance and rates of unemployment from late 1986 onwards will not reverse the urban changes which have taken place.
Latest census figures (1981) confirm the pattern established over the last 20 years.
In the decade 1971–81 the population flight from the cities continued.
A preference for country living is clear, and in some remoter rural districts there was even a significant growth in population.
The absolute loss of population from the cores of Greater London, Greater Manchester and Merseyside was less than in the previous decade, but population growth is now firmly identified with smaller towns and accessible settlements in the countryside.
Data assembled by Chisholm (1983) for local authorities in England and Wales for the last inter-censal decade illustrates this point conclusively (see Table 6. 1).
The relative population positions of Inner and Outer London in the 20-year period 1961–81 has been compared by Morrison (1982).
Inner London lost 1 million inhabitants and Outer London 30,000 in a global decline for Greater London of more than 1.25 million.
In every one of the 13 Inner London Boroughs the population decrease exceeded 10 per cent between 1971 and 1981; in Kensington and Chelsea the actual decrease was almost 29 per cent.
On the other hand, while all the 19 Outer London Boroughs also lost population in only two cases (Brent and Richmond) did the decreases exceed 10 per cent(10.2 per cent and 10.4 per cent respectively).
The pattern of population redistribution around the country's metropolitan regions is best seen as an evolving one (Champion, 1983), though the broad picture is one of absolute loss of population from the older urban cores in favour of the newer suburbs and (increasingly) the surrounding towns.
The inter-censal decade 1961–71 saw some very heavy losses: Liverpool recorded a population loss of 18.2 per cent of its population in the 1960s, Manchester 17.9 per cent, Newcastle upon Tyne 17.6 per cent and Birmingham 8.6 per cent — much higher than the losses of the 1950s.
Population redistribution trends in the 1970s were affected by both changing demographic and economic factors: Scotland and the Northern Region improved on their earlier poor out-migration losses, while in-migration surged in the less urbanized regions of southern Britain, such as East Anglia and the South-west.
The cores of the metropolitan regions continued to lose population, though the gains registered by the surrounding counties were rather more subdued.
Overall, in the 1970s the main areas of rapid population growth tended to lie just beyond the traditional suburban counties: in southern England as a broad arc to the north of the Home Counties from Norfolk to Northamptonshire and Buckinghamshire.
The planning machine
In Chapter 5 we saw that two people were pre-eminent in influencing the ways in which planning after the war would be determined.
One was Abercrombie, who left an enduring stamp on broad strategy, as reflected in his regional plans for Greater London, Clydeside and the West Midlands, and his city plans for Plymouth, Hull and Edinburgh.
The other was Holford, who, as head of a technical department within the Ministry of Town and Country Planning, fundamentally altered the technical basis of planning, and later as an academic consultant prepared plans with a distinctive contribution to civic design.
Meanwhile, in his final years before retirement, Pepler contributed to procedures, bringing his experience to bear for over a quarter of a century on government departments and officials in them, and between local and central government.
Together with advice and guidance on housing, neighbourhood development and the layout of roads, this amounted to a total visualization of urban form at a regional scale.
Abercrombie's broad-brush strategy was now filled in with the complementary prescriptions for design at the local scale, both central areas and residential districts.
It is difficult to over-estimate what a transformation in the scope and purpose of physical planning this represented, far surpassing anything that had been achieved before.
The garden city ideal as expressed at Letchworth and Welwyn, the garden suburb at Hampstead, Bournville and Wythenshawe , the planned estate either suburban or redeveloped, or the MARS group's proposals for London just before the war were no more than partial concepts by comparison.
A total comprehensive view was now available complete with a repertoire of techniques for implementation.
Moreover there was an established wisdom about it all.
However, it demanded an administrative and political will, and the cultivation of inter-departmental and inter-disciplinary cooperation, for the integrated development strategy to succeed.
Experience was quickly to show that these conditions were not forthcoming; neither have they been realized throughout the post-war period.
Whitehall officials have often found the concept of regional planning complex and imprecise, discovering  that the necessary coordination between departments could not be relied upon.
Moreover, the lack of precision and the subtlety of the overall vision of the city development strategy, as Holford outlined, was not all that easy to articulate either, or to communicate to others with conviction (Cherry and Penny, 1986).
The Holford concept was not an Abercrombie-like statement; it was sensitive to local conditions and circumstances, it relied on process rather than programme, it was pragmatic, and it was a social art, informed by knowledge, technique and values.
Holford's planners had to have a broad cultural background and were to be ‘enablers’, building up from research and synthesis to a design end-product.
This was too vague and imprecise.
Most local authority staff found it difficult to interpret, seeking more specific guidance.
The Holfordian approach to civic design withered on the vine and the operation of planning for the most part relapsed into a much more mundane, bureaucratic system based on plan making and development control, guided by adherence to normative values and adherence to scientific criteria — ironically of the kind that Holford's team in the ministry had drawn up.
The nub of the technical job to be done was the control of land use.
This had already been established in the White Paper,The control of land use ,(Cmd. 6537) in 1944, with the unequivocal statement: But this matter was part of a wider exercise.
For many years both during and after the war the government wrestled with the principles of post-war reconstruction, and it was not until 1947 that the mammoth Town and Country Bill passed into law.
It began as a Bill primarily to deal with the recommendations of the Uthwatt Report (1942) and the question of compensation and betterment was the cause of most of the indecision and uncertainty.
The resultant financial provisions of the 1947 Act need not detain us too much, save to summarize the radically different position plan making experienced compared with the earlier situation.
Whereas the problem of payment of compensation by local authorities to a developer refused planning consent had always proved a great obstacle to effective control, the new situation was that where land was developed, the increase in its value resulting from the grant of planning permission was secured for the community by the imposition of a development charge (equivalent to 100 per cent of the increase in value), to be assessed and collected by a Central Land Board.
Landowners refused permission to  develop land were not entitled to compensation, because the development value of the land had been invested in the State.
(To be more explicit: landowners were to be compensated for lost development value as it existed in 1948, out of a fund for £300 million reserved for this purpose.)
The actual stages whereby the financial provisions of the 1947 Act were decided were extremely tortuous (Cullingworth, 1975) and the interplay of forces within the Government, between ministers and between officials had their effect too on the much more straightforward development plan provisions.
One interesting aspect was that during the war the lines of debate were largely settled by civil servants; the effective opposition was not a political party, but the Treasury and other departments who saw themselves threatened by a new, upstart Ministry of Town and Country Planning.
The detail of planning legislation by and large fell to a number of able officials who had a remarkably free hand.
A major problem was what to include in the Bill and what to leave out.
After the 1944 Act, issues including both the Control of land use White Paper and the restriction of ribbon development had to be taken into account.
The Act introduced a new development plan system as successor to that based on planning schemes: obligatory but more flexible, the plan was intended to outline a basic framework of future land use against which development proposals might be considered.
All development was brought under control; with certain exceptions, it was made subject to the permission of the local planning authority.
Only the larger authorities — counties and county boroughs — were entrusted with planning powers, with the consequence that 1,441 planning authorities were reduced to 145.
The Act required these authorities to submit their plans to the Minister by July 1951.
Only 22 managed to meet this date, but by 1955 a good submission record meant that about half the country's plans had been approved, and the bulk by the end of the decade.
Land-allocation maps were the main feature of plan preparation, no longer simply for land in course of development but for the whole of a local authority area.
But the system was bifurcated, because side by side with the making of development plans went the granting (or refusal, or granting with conditions) of planning permission for development.
The system is a remarkable one and says much for our political culture: land ownership of itself conferred no right to develop; development could only take place if a developer had obtained planning consent, and if permission was refused there was no payment of compensation.
It was through the control of land use that post-war cities would be given their orderly structure; major activity zones, such as residential, commercial, industrial and open space, would be sharply separated from each other.
Furthermore, the careful delineation of neighbourhoods.
typically of 10,000 population size with their standard provision of schools, open space and shops, and with roads deflecting through traffic to the edge of the residential area, also served to impart a new spatial order to the urban environment.
But by the early 1960s planners were being charged with an over-obsession with neatly packaged land parcels, and this came to a head with Jane Jacobs (1961), an American journalist married to an architect, living in New York.
Her thesis was that cultural and physical diversity was  important in the life of a city, and she charged planners with pursuing policies which had the effect of eradicating it.
The argument held that in the past, cities had been regarded as disorganized complexities, and that the objective of planning was to impose rational patterns of simplicity; Jacobs saw cities as organized complexities, and hoped to keep them lively, diverse and intense.
Her model was Greenwich Village, New York, not readily transferable to British urban experiences, but her book Death and life in great American cities struck a chord in British planning.
Jacob's strictures served as a reminder that neat and tidy land use arrangements may have been over-emphasized.
Great diversity was important; a city after all was more than a set of carefully structured spatial patterns, it was a social system where environmental disorder might have a place in reflecting cultural diversity.
The pendulum of opinions swung back, if only a little.
These various basic principles which underpinned the planning machine have survived throughout the post-war period.
The resolution of the problem of compensation and betterment, which has changed on a number of occasions according to political philosophy, has not affected the system of plan and control.
However, in the 1960s there was a major revision of the provisions for plan making in order to meet alleged deficiencies of the 1947 system which had emerged: slowness, alienation of the public, a focus on land use detail rather than broad strategy, and an increasing difficulty in using two-dimensional land use maps to represent three-dimensional, multi-use development proposals.
The Minister of Housing and Local Government (as his Planning Ministry had been called since 1951), Richard Crossman, set up a Planning Advisory Group in 1964, chaired by a civil servant, I.V.
Pugh, with members drawn from local government.
Its Report The future of development plans , published in 1965, recommended changes, basically that a number of different types of plans should replace the development plan and the comprehensive development area plans.
The need for flexibility in plan making was stressed; something more than land use maps were required and they had to be more responsive to the rapid changes then being experienced in the 1960s in terms of economic and social trends, population forecasts and traffic growth.
The recommendations were largely followed in the Town and Country Planning Act, 1968, which established a two-tier system of plan making: structure plans as statements of intent and broad policy relating to spatial development, and major objectives in housing, employment and traffic; and a variety of local plans to show detailed proposals in respect of small areas.
There was another feature of the legislation, in that it provided for new ways of involving the public in plan preparation.
With the old development plans, an appeals system entailed a confrontation between an appellant and the local authority over a disputed proposal, before an inspector appointed by the minister.
With the new structure plan/local plan system, the preparation of planning proposals was done in two stages: draft and final, with exposure to public consultation.
A further refinement is that the Secretary of State (through a panel of inspectors) conducts an examination in public into the proposals, rather than adjudicates on objections in an appeal system.
The late 1960s threw up extensive demands for public  bodies to be more open and responsive to community groups and sectional interests; the demand was for plan making to be a negotiable activity between interested parties, rather than a matter of technical decisions handed down from a monopoly elite in government.
The Report of a government-appointed committee, chaired by Arthur Skeffington MP,People and planning (1969) was sympathetic to these demands and advocated new ways in which community involvement in planning might be conducted.
Some of the early structure plans were extraordinarily ambitious in their scope: land use plans promised just for a little while to become all-embracing social, economic and ‘physical’ documents, with a further clear relationship to transportation matters.
But comprehensive data collection ran ahead of a capacity for meaningful analysis, and prescriptive content was disappointing.
In any case the years of growth came to an end in the 1970s: structure plans, ideal documents perhaps for broad-brush indication of options in spatial development, became less and less suitable to cope with a ‘no change’ situation.
This is an over-statement, but combined with an increasing preference by Government to curtail the content of structure plans, and recently by a Government less disposed to plan making by the public sector anyway, to withdraw structure plans all together, the heady days of 1960s optimism were lost.
More than 40 years' experience of the planning system has established a powerful plan-making bureaucracy in central and local government.
The basic ingredients were provided by the painstaking but imaginative experimentation in the 1940s based on Abercrombie's grand strategy, Pepler's attention to procedures and Holford's team's introduction of new techniques.
The consistency of application since then has been remarkable, the benefits being seen in a lengthy, unbroken period during which time there has been a sustained management of urban change: plan making under constant review covering the whole of urban Britain, and control of development by public and private bodies in the community interest.
But that sounds rather grand, and the reality is rather different.
Planning policies tend to run behind developments and trends, and all too often the planning machine has given the impression of existing more for the benefit of those who run it (professionals and politicians) than those who are served by it.
However, the fact is that for approaching half a century British cities have been publicly regulated by a system designed to guide, shape and control the form and appearance of the urban environment.
Housing
The circumstances of war-time Britain had the effect of giving weight to policy resolutions by the State as to where and how people should live.
It was a culmination of measures going back to the middle of the nineteenth century, but more particularly government experience since the 1890s. and above all, a shift in attitudes towards State-provided housing.
The housing of post-war Britain represented a major aspect of planned development after 1945.
As we have seen, the ideals of private suburbia were deeply rooted, particularly in England, and in design terms the Unwinesque tradition of vernacular cottage architecture and the predilection for low-density layouts had been articulated in the inter-war council estate.
Meanwhile private inter-war suburbia had its distinctive style where the semi-detached house was dominant.
Rather grander still was the villadom of the well-to-do.
The then editor of The Architectural Review , J.M. Richards, offered an affectionate description of the English suburb in The castles on the ground (1946), which instead of pouring scorn on suburban taste, took more seriously the needs it fulfilled and the impulses that created it.
It confirmed an underlying tension between public and private housing interests.
‘Ewbank'd inside and Atco'd out, the English suburban residence and the garden which is an integral part of it stand trim and lovingly cared for’(Richards, 1946; 1973 edn, p. 13).
The private suburb gave to its inhabitants two important things: a sense of belonging to a fairly sympathetic world and an outlet for idealistic and creative instincts.
It meant that the keynote had to be informality and so the idea of a planned suburbia was almost a contradiction in terms.
But there were very different opinions being canvassed at the end of the war.
At the extreme from Richards stood Sir Charles Reilly, Professor of Architecture at Liverpool.
In 1944 he was appointed planning consultant to Birkenhead and that year sketched out an estate plan ‘of houses round greens, as in pre-Industrial Revolution England, and the greens themselves arranged like the petals of a Mower round a community building, the modern equivalent of the village inn’(Wolfe, 1945, p. 10).
This scheme became known as the Reilly Plan and attracted considerable political comment.
For the Labour and Communist Parties this approach to community planning as against ordinary suburban planning held much appeal; the plan created a physical setting in which neighbourly cooperation was likely to develop.
in distinction to the perceived isolationism of the normal suburb.
In the event, post-war council-house architecture and estate layout has been much more pragmatic and the course of their evolving styles not without its many surprises.
Britain ended the war with 475,000 houses either destroyed, or so badly damaged that they were made permanently uninhabitable.
During the six years of war 2 million marriages had taken place and there was a severe housing shortage.
A public-sector housing drive was quickly mounted, based on a continuation of rent control and subsidized council housing that was no longer restricted to slum clearance but extended to meet general needs.
The production of prefabricated, temporary houses was begun.
The general understanding was that to all intents and purposes the State would now be responsible for the nation's housing stock — its quality, quantity and distribution.
As Aneurin Bevan, Minister of Health (responsible for housing) remarked:
If we are to plan, we have to plan with plannable instruments.
and the speculative builder, by his very nature, is not a plannable instrument…
We rest the full weight of the housing programme upon the local authorities.
because their programmes can be planned, and because in fact we can check them if we desire to (Bevan, cited in Donnison and Ungerson, 1982, p. 142)
The design, layout, methods and materials were tightly controlled in a flow  of instruction and exhortation to local authorities.
The Housing manual of 1944 laid primary emphasis on the provision of three-bedroom, two-storey houses.
The Housing manual 1949 gave advice on a wider range of dwelling types; prepared with the assistance of a sub-committee of the Central Housing Advisory Committee and a panel of architects appointed by the Associations of Local Authorities, this Ministry of Health publication, lavishly illustrated, offered a variety of designs based on the standard of 900–950 square feet for three-bedroomed houses, an advance on the 1944 standard.
It contained advice on site selection.
layout, landscape, roads, architectural treatment, standards of accommodation, house planning, services.
equipment and construction.
The manual was a complete guide to the building of six types of dwellings: the kitchen-living room house, the working kitchen house, the dining kitchen house, old people's dwellings, three-storey terrace houses and flats and maisonettes.
There was no suggestion that local authorities should slavishly copy standard designs, but council-house architecture nevertheless received a considerable stamp of uniformity.
By 1951 the Labour government had built 900,000 houses, falling short of its target of 240,000 dwellings a year.
The Housing (Financial and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act.
1946, increased the Exchequer subsidy to £16 10s per house for 60 years; a rate contribution of £5 10s was also required.
This trebled the money value of subsidies compared with 1939.
Local authority house building was suitably stimulated and in 1948 more than 190,000 council houses were completed (compared with the previous highest total of 121,000 in 1939).
The Conservatives (returned in 1951) promised 300,000 houses a year and in 1953 319,000 were in fact built, followed by 348,000 the next year.
These higher totals were obtained through more generous subsidies and a stimulus to private building.
This success suggested that the general housing shortage was now considerably eased, and attention returned to slum clearance.
The Housing Repairs and Rents Act, 1954, reduced subsidies for general needs, but retained them for clearance of slums; two years later subsidies for general needs were totally abolished, leaving the general housing need to be met by private enterprise.
Subsidies were resumed in 1961 and thereafter had a chequered history with changing problems in housing supply and differing political judgements (Burnett, 1978).
The attack on the slums proved a very significant event in post-war urban planning.
The Census of 1951 showed that many houses lacked amenities with which the council house since 1919 had been equipped.
One third of the dwelling stock of England and Wales was then more than 80 years old, and 37 per cent of all households lacked a fixed bath, 8 per cent a wc (another 13 per cent were required to share), 6 per cent piped water (another 14 per cent sharing) and 6 per cent a kitchen sink.
A huge backlog of unfit dwellings was apparent, and in the event the period between the mid-1950s and mid-1970s wrought a major transformation.
In England and Wales 1,165,000 houses were demolished or closed in the period 1955–74, in a massive programme of compulsory purchase whereby local authorities considerably extended their council-land holdings.
Between 1945 and 1954 just 90,000 in total had been cleared, an average of 9,000  per year, but from 1961 onwards the annual total demolished was never less than 61,000 (with the exception of 1974, when the number fell to 41,000); the years of greatest activity were 1966–72.
In Scotland, a further 296,000 houses were demolished or closed in the period 1955–74, making nearly 1.5 million in total for Great Britain (Cherry, 1976).
Community disturbance was considerable, with very high annual transference rates of people from slum housing to alternative accommodation of very different style, quality, location and community setting.
Sociologists' strictures about loss of familiarity due to the disruption to social life, as in the study of Bethnal Green (Young and Wilmott, 1957), at first went largely unheeded, though their conclusions were unmistakable: Abercrombie's Greater London Plan had now to be looked at in rather a different light.
and much more was to be heard of the Bethnal Green survey and its implications.
First-hand experience suggested that something was wrong: in Birmingham, for example, the Vicar of redeveloped Ladywood concluded that ‘we had forgotten the people’(Power.
1965).
But for the record, in England and Wales in the period 1955–74. 3,116,000 persons were moved as a result of clearances; in 1968, the record year for demolition, nearly 189,000 were rehoused.
This was a phenomenal period of renewal, embarked upon by the Conservatives and maintained with vigour by Labour.
All major urban areas participated with enthusiasm, with political support to professional interests to engage in this activity: not only local authority housing, architecture and planning departments, which bolstered political pride in identification with a popular value of sweeping away the past and building anew, but also the construction industry which had the windfall of long-term contracts.
The pace of slum clearance slackened in the early 1970s, local authority programmes having survived for some years through their own momentum.
National economic problems led to restrictions on capital expenditure, and in any case the sustained attack on the number of unfit dwellings had significantly reduced the scale of the problem.
But the end of slum clearance came more with a change in values: away from demolition, to conservation and rehabilitation.
A Ministry of Housing and Local Government enquiry into the Deeplish district of Rochdale (1966) indicated a surprising level of satisfaction with even the poorest houses.
The insensitivity of the  local authority machine encouraged the build-up of community resistance to, and a political rethink about, wholesale clearance.
In Liverpool, it was held that the politics of redevelopment showed the insensitivity of the urban renewal process (Muchnick, 1970).
Norman Dennis (1970) showed how in Sunderland a change in attitude led to a hardening resistance to slum clearance; another study charted the conflict between a local community and a city planning department, Newcastle (Davies, 1972).
One local politician in London (Taylor, 1973) was driven to reflect on the need to preserve identity and to design to an intimate human scale.
One London community, centred on Tolmer's Square, battled against property developers (Wates, 1976).
Clearance switched to a policy of improvement.
Powers for house improvement had long been available, local authorities being enabled to improve council housing and give discretionary grants to private owners for improvement of individual properties.
In the 1960s the tactic of improvement switched from individual properties to whole areas (Thomas, 1986).
The Housing Act, 1969, overcame the previous cumbersome procedures and introduced the idea of General Improvement Areas; the Housing Act, 1974, introduced Housing Action Areas.
The number of improvement grants approved in England and Wales rose sharply from 156,000 in 1970 to a record 360,000 in 1973, to fall again to 231,000 in 1974 and decline thereafter.
The comparable figures for Scotland showed a similar pattern: 23,000 (1970), 92,000 (1973) and 68,000 (1974).
But no sooner had this new approach been introduced than criticisms were mounted: not only the costs and slowness of improvement schemes, but also the social conflicts inherent in gentrification when improvement benefited not the original occupant but an incomer where areas of working-class housing (particularly in London) were transformed into desirable enclaves for higher-income households.
Post-war housing policy has also had a major visual impact through different approaches to the architectural style of dwellings provided in the public sector.
In particular, the mixed development of multi-storey and tower blocks came to dominate large areas of British towns and cities (Horsey, 1988).
Post-war architects, amongst whom Frederick Gibberd was soon prominent, popularized a style which drew on many influences.
Mixed development met the sociological dictates of urbanity and community; it met the planning critics of inter-war sprawl; and it met architectural requirements of variety in materials (concrete, brick, wood, pebbles and strong colours).
One inspiration came from Scandinavia, as reflected in early work which included the LCC Alton East Estate, Gibberd's work at Harlow and Gibson's Tile Hill Estate at Coventry.
Another came from Le Corbusier and pre-war German and Dutch architecture, which gave us the LCC's Roehampton Lane (Alton West) Estate; this latter style tended to predominate in the 1950s.
Mixed development implied an increased variety of house types, with a breakaway from the traditional semi-detached, as suggested in the Ministry's Flats and houses ,(1958).
With an emphasis on design and economy the Ministry advised on the density of residential areas, showing how schemes of varying densities could be fitted to the same unit area of land.
There was  a consequential revival of terraced housing, with maisonettes in four-storey blocks and flats in a variety of shapes: T, Y and cruciform.
Meanwhile the idea of traffic-free residential areas, as on Radburn lines (see p. 103) was also encouraged.
But the most significant development was the increase in the number of flats built by local authorities.
Tall blocks (five or more storeys) accounted for 26 per cent of all local authority buildings in 1966, though by 1970 the figure had fallen to 10 per cent in the aftermath of the Ronan Point disaster in 1968, in the London Borough of Newham when, following a gas explosion, a structural failure resulted in partial collapse.
The actual reasons for the popularity (albeit relatively short-lived) of the high-rise phase are many: it was architecturally fashionable; it may have suited municipal prestige; it answered immediate problems of increasing density as the big cities ran out of building land within their own boundaries; and it met the spurious argument about saving agricultural land (mounted by the farming lobby and the Conservative-dominated shire counties).
New subsidy arrangements increased the grant payable to blocks over six storeys.
But a reaction against high rise was quickly mounted and the additional subsidy was withdrawn in 1967.
Of all British cities Glasgow has the largest number of council flats in high blocks: 33,600 in blocks of five or more storeys (almost twice the total of its nearest challenger, Birmingham), the majority resulting from a compressed ‘burst’ of construction in the 1960s.
The origins of this boom, in contrast to London's espousal of mixed development, have been traced by Horsey (1988).
All cities have different records in this respect and they all merit individual research if we are to piece together the various aspects of post-war urban development (Manchester's Moss-side development was different from Sheffield's Park Hill estate of ‘streets in the sky’, and different again from Newcastle's development at Byker, with its famous ‘wall’).
In Glasgow a fortuitous coalition of interests between a new Convenor or Housing Committee, a principal housing officer and a flamboyant local designer produced a remarkable decade of high-rise building, which included the highest blocks in Europe at Red Road.
Baldornock.
The nature and extent of housing programmes in the post-war years has therefore been of great significance for urban form, community life and degrees of individual happiness.
Both the design and location of public authority houses have been very considerably affected, while the private sector has been responsive to market demands.
(The Parker Morris Report,Homes for today and tomorrow (1961), recommended standards for all new houses, whether public or private, more space and better heating being the overriding considerations: the recommendations were mandatory for New Town housing in 1967 and for local authorities in 1969, but not for the private sector.)
But after 40 years of post-war public sector housing there is now evidence of widespread rejection, and some community groups are looking to the promise of community architecture (Wates and Knevitt, 1987).
The origin of this new movement lay in the protestations of community-based voluntary groups concerned with their perceptions of the anti-social effects of conventional architecture and planning.
Calls for citizen participation in planning encouraged groups to undertake practical work, and in  1974 the first self-help General Improvement Area was completed, at Black Road, Macclesfield.
In recent years, of particular importance has been the professional conversion of the Royal Institute of British Architects, through their president, Rod Hackney, who has been able to persuade the Prince of Wales to his cause.
In the late 1980s we now see town planning and architecture — shapers of the housing environment — charged with professional disrepute: once the great hope of being effective providers of an environment of social purpose, the two professions have been derided for giving the public the wrong thing, and in the wrong manner.
They have been savaged by Alice Coleman et al .
(1985) who, terming post-war public housing rather satirically as ‘Utopia’, asks:
Why should Utopia have been such an all-pervading failure.
when it was envisaged as a form of national salvation? it was conceived in compassion but has been born and bred in authoritarianism, profligacy and frustration, it aimed to liberate people from the slums but has come to represent an even worse form of bondage, it aspired to beautify the urban environment, but has been transmogrified into the epitome of ugliness.
Its redemption.
after 40 years, is not only a matter of improving the buildings, but also of winning the hearts and minds of those who create and control them.
(Coleman et al .,
1985. p. 180)
Warning shots in this attack had been fired earlier; for example, by Pearl Jephcott and Hilary Robinson (1971).
following their research into the extent of resident satisfaction with high-rise blocks in Glasgow; and by Oscar Newman (1972), who studied the relationship between design and crime and vandalism in New York.
Coleman's work was a logical extension, aiming to see which forms of design and layout were most associated with ‘lapses in civilised behaviour’.
Over a period of five years, between 1979 and 1984.
Coleman and her team studied over 4,000 blocks of flats and a slightly larger number of houses in two areas of London (Southwark and Tower Hamlets) and, for comparison, a council estate on the south-east side of Oxford, all in the context of a regard for flats and houses in many settings elsewhere.
Her findings have attracted considerable attention, which cannot be summarized here.
But consider one aspect: fifteen design variables were identified which affected the behaviour of residents, especially children and users of blocks of flats.
Litter, graffiti, vandal damage, the numbers of children in care, urine and excrement pollution all became more common as the design values worsened within each variable.
Coleman bluntly blames features of Utopian design as the chief factor in many aspects of social decline in new or redeveloped areas.
Although her wide-ranging attacks on the public housing-building ‘industry’ go further than her data alone would justify, the story of post-war public housing seems to have come full circle.
New Towns, Expanded Towns and Green Belts
The idea of New Towns has a long pedigree, but it received its twentieth-century fillip through the garden city movement (Osborn and Whittick, 1963).
The propagandists for New Towns had powerful voices during the war and Abercrombie's Greater London Plan 1944 embraced the principle in the strategy of decentralization.
But the fact remains that the Labour Party manifesto of 1945 contained nothing about New Towns.
Yet within nine months of taking office the Government had introduced a New Towns Bill, which took precedence over the promised measure on compensation and betterment (Cullingworth, 1979).
In response to Abercrombie's plan, Stevenage was identified by an inter-departmental committee as a potential first experiment; W.S. Morrison, Minister of Town and Country Planning, appeared sympathetic, but the fall of the Caretaker Government intervened.
Lewis Silkin succeeded as Minister and it is largely through his influence that New Towns in Britain gained their significant role in post-war planning.
In part to by-pass probable reluctance by his Government colleagues to any priority for New Towns, he appointed a departmental committee, chaired by Lord Reith, with the following terms of reference: Appointed in October 1945 the committee worked quickly, producing three Reports.
An Interim report (Cmd. 6759, March 1946) emphasized that a New Towns programme should be a matter for central Government: the location of a New Town should be a Government decision and that a new agency should be set up to plan and develop the town (it was not to be a matter for local authorities).
The agency should have powers of compulsory purchase and therefore the site of the town should be publicly owned.
Finance for development should come from the central Government.
Central coordination would keep the location of industry in step with development.
Finally, the case being so clear, a recommendation was made to proceed immediately with Stevenage.
The die was cast.
A Second interim report (Cmd. 6794), published in April 1946 spelled out the points in greater detail, but additionally referred to the community aspects of settlement.
The Final report (Cmd. 6876) was published in July, dealing with various planning principles, including the question of size: a population of between 30,000 and 50,000 was thought desirable.
Moreover the towns were to be of diverse and balanced social composition:
Silkin's Bill received an unopposed second reading in May; for the Conservatives W.S. Morrison gave it general support.
It was unopposed at the third reading in July, though Lord Hinchingbrooke thought it ‘a State experiment in the life and happiness of our people and in my opinion like all  State experiments, it will work havoc, bitterness and grave social damage’(Cullingworth, 1979, p. 25).
Royal assent was given to the Bill in August.
The New Towns Act, 1946, provided for the designation of sites for New Towns; the setting up of development corporations for their development; and it gave them the range of powers they would use.
The New Towns programme quickly unfolded, not only for London but for other parts of the country.
Projects for London began with Stevenage, designated in November 1946 under the provisions of the Town and Country Planning Act, 1932.
This designation was not without its local hostility; the validity of the designation order was challenged by a residents' protection society and the High Court held in favour of the objectors.
The Court of Appeal reversed this judgement and the reversal was upheld by the House of Lords in July 1947.
Then in chronological order came the following: Hemel Hempstead (1947) replacing Redbourn as proposed in the Abercrombie plan, was designed to fill in the area between Harpenden, St Albans and Remel Hempstead itself; Harlow (1947), 23 miles north-east of London, expanded a small settlement of 4,500 people; Crawley (1947), a town of 9,500 population, lay astride the Brighton Road, 30 miles south of London; Hatfield and Welwyn Garden City (both 1948) lay very close to each other 18–20 miles north of London (Welwyn was already a sizable town of 18,500 inhabitants); Basildon (1949) met rather different objectives, planned not only to accommodate overspill but to tidy up an untidy area of shack development between London and Southend; Bracknell (1949) replaced Abercrombie's proposal for White Waltham, three miles south-west of Maidenhead, west of London.
The New Town device for planned urban development was utilized for other purposes elsewhere.
Aycliffe (1947), north of Darlington.
adjacent to a major trading estate was designated to act as a regional growth magnet for South Durham.
Peterlee (1948), near Hartlepool, aimed to provide a central node for dispersed mining settlements in East Durham.
In Scotland, East Kilbride (1947) was a New Town on the London model, as an overspill centre for Glasgow, but Glenrothes (1948) had a function akin to Peterlee, as a collector point for the East Fife coalfield, on the lines advocated in the Regional Plan for Central and South-east Scotland (Mears, 1948).
Cwmbran (1949), adjoining Newport, was seen as a focus for new development in South Wales.
Corby (1950) was different again.
designed for substantial housing development for the expanding steel works there.
The precise factors which weighed in Silkin's mind in this programme of designations are reviewed by Cullingworth (1979); also the factors in the rejection of some proposals which finally did not feature in the list.
The fact is that the New Towns were quickly seen as jewels in planning's crown.
This, after all, was the age of centralist planning; the State was the wise, beneficent steersman to a nobler future.
New Towns would be civilized, attractive, agreeable places in which to live, with all the richness of community life which the new social order would bring.
They answered three insistent demands in the early post-war years.
First, they were a rational answer to the unplanned metropolis of the inter-war period; we had long since passed the time of asking whether the State should build houses, now it was a question of determining precisely where the nation should locate its dwelling stock.
Second, it was a logical way, as indicated in the scientifically precise plans of war-time Britain, of organizing the huge scale of building development that demand dictated would occur anyway.
Third, New Towns constituted experiments in social engineering — well in  tune with the psychological requirements for post-war reconstruction.
The first phase of New Town building survived early tribulations, particularly the economic crisis of 1947 and the cutback on public expenditure.
There was Treasury alarm at mounting financial commitments and Silkin received no consistent enthusiasm from his colleagues for his proposals.
In any case the number of dwellings actually completed by 1950 was pathetically small, and housing shortages were felt acutely elsewhere.
Alternative proposals for town development reflect these concerns.
Dalton succeeded Silkin as Minister in February 1950 and initiated another method of organizing arrangements for overspill from the big cities, without quite the extravagant implications of new corporations which Silkin's schemes had required.
Dalton proposed to introduce a Bill to give financial help to local authorities to carry out major town expansion in their own areas to relieve overcrowding in the areas of other authorities.
But the Labour government fell in October 1951 and the Conservatives took up office.
Macmillan became Minister of Housing and Local Government (the term ‘Town and Country Planning’ having now been dropped) and soon introduced a Bill in very similar terms.
The Town Development Act received the royal assent in August 1952.
Progress on arrangements for the voluntary transfer of those in housing need from the big cities to the smaller surrounding townships was at first very slow.
But in due time the contribution to population redistribution was significant enough, particularly dispersal from London, with a total of 55,000 dwellings built in no less than 32 towns including Basingstoke.
Swindon, Huntingdon, Thetford, Haverhill, Wellingborough.
Andover, Witham, Aylesbury and Houghton Regis (listed in order of number of dwellings built under the Act).
Birmingham had its reception areas at Tamworth (pre-eminently), but also Daventry, Droitwich, Lichfield and elsewhere, with a total of 13,500 dwellings constructed.
Manchester had modest arrangements with Macclesfield and Winsford; Liverpool had major schemes at Winsford (again) and Ellesmere Port; Wolverhampton built at Wednesfield and Seisdon; Salford had a major involvement with Worsley; Newcastle upon Tyne expanded at Killingworth and Cramlington; Bristol utilized Warmley; and Walsall also took up the provisions of the Act.
In Scotland there were 42 reception areas, for Glasgow, where about 38,000 people were housed, the major schemes being at Linwood, Johnstone, Erskine and Kirkintilloch.
The history of these various expansions has occasionally been recorded, none showing better than that by Harloe (1975), in his study of Swindon, how local personalities (in that case, Murray John, the dynamic Town Clerk) could do so much to determine particular courses of action.
The Town Development Act, 1952, did not apply to Scotland and it became necessary to cope with Glasgow's housing problem by means of a second New Town.
This was at Cumbernauld (1956), 15 miles to the north-east of the city on the Stirling Road, another addition to the heart of the industrial belt between Forth and Clyde.
After this, a Town Development Act for Scotland was enacted in 1957, and the schemes noted above were prepared.
But the housing problems of the big cities would not go away.
The pressure on local councils to obtain building land to cope with housing demand, and the force of demographic forecasts which by the end of the 1950s were  being revised upwards, resulted in a series of dog-fights between the large urban authorities and the shire counties, in which the Ministry inevitably became involved.
Lymm in Cheshire was refused as an overspill site for Manchester; Birmingham's proposal to develop at Wythall in Worcestershire was similarly rejected.
Ultimately another wave of New Towns was designated, first by the Conservative government and then by Labour, until a halt was called in the early 1970s.
The London County Council (1961) had wanted a New Town at Hook, in Hampshire, planning a compact settlement designated for universal car ownership and complete pedestrian segregation, but Hampshire County Council preferred major town-expansion schemes at Andover and Basingstoke, and the proposal failed to come to fruition.
The new generation therefore began at Skelmersdale (1961).
inland from Liverpool and   Southport, already with a population of 10,000, designated for the relief of North Merseyside.
Dawley (1963), later expanded and renamed Telford, situated between Wolverhampton and Shrewsbury, was to accommodate pressure from the West Midlands, but it also served the purpose of tidying up the old mining and industrial area of Oakengates and Wellington.
Redditch (1964), a flourishing old town in its own right, became the second and last New Town for the Midlands.
Runcorn (1964), another sizeable township of 28,000 population, followed for Merseyside and in the same year Washington largely filled in the gap between South Tyneside and Sunderland.
A further phase of New Town designation ensued, with designations for substantially increased target population figures to a quarter of a million or more.
Milton Keynes (1967) embraced the existing settlements of Bletchley, Stony Stratford, Wolverton and New Bradwell, in addition to 13 villages; the constellation neatly filled in the North Buckinghamshire area between London and Birmingham.
Peterborough (1967), where three townships each of 20,000–30,000 population have been developed to the west of the cathedral city, and Northampton (1968) also thicken up this previously relatively empty part of England.
Warrington (1968) was another addition for Merseyside where three areas of publicly owned, derelict land were available: an RAF recruiting station (Padgate), an American Air Base (Burtonwood) and a Royal Ordinance factory (Risley).
Finally for England, a proposal for Ipswich being withdrawn, Central Lancashire New Town (1970) had a designated area of 55 square miles, embracing Preston, Chorley and Leyland.
In Wales, Newtown (1967) was a small proposal situated between Birmingham and Aberystwyth, intended to revitalize mid-Wales.
For South Wales, Llantrisant had already received the Royal Mint, but its New Town designation was withdrawn.
In Northern Ireland, Craigavon, Antrim, Ballymena and Londonderry were all designated between 1965 and 1969, following the Belfast Regional Survey and Plan carried out for Stormont by Professor Robert Matthew (Murie, 1973).
In Scotland, Livingstone (1962), 15 miles west of Edinburgh, but basically for Glasgow overspill, was intended to create a new focus of industrial activity in the East Central belt.
Irvine (1966), located in the west between Ayr and Glasgow, offered hopes of industrial expansion based on the old town.
Stonehouse, also for Glasgow, was designated in 1972, but after the building of the first houses, was aborted in 1976: a vivid illustration of a change in priorities, for resources were to be channelled into the renewal of inner Glasgow (the Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal — GEAR — scheme).
The advent of the inner city debate meant the end of New Town designations for the foreseeable future.
Britain has 28 New Towns, therefore, created for a variety of different purposes, of varying population sizes and environmental design.
Their distinctive features have been chronicled (with evident pride) by Schaffer (1970) and Evans (1972); the first because, as a civil servant, he had been much associated with the programme, the second because it was written for the Town and Country Planning Association, long the champions of planned dispersal.
When first designated, the areas already had a population of 945,000; now they contain rather more than 2 millions.
Hence they  have only contributed in a limited way to post-war housing, but they have been a major feature of a commitment to planned decentralization, even though, as Aldridge (1979) concludes, by the end it was a programme without a policy.
Various factors conspired to maintain the momentum of the New Towns, once launched by Silkin; they became significant contributors to housing programmes and then effective instruments in promoting regional development.
We cannot leave this section on New Towns and town development without reference to green belts, which give shape to redistribution policies and concepts of ‘containing’ urban Britain.
The green belt has been a popular subject for academic observers (Mandelker, 1962; Thomas, 1970; Munton, 1983; and Elson, 1986) and there is little new to be said.
Promoted nationally by ministerial circular in 1955, approved belts now cover nearly 11 per cent of England, an area similar to that devoted to urban development, and greater than is covered by either National Parks or Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
This is the legacy of Howard's Social City, other similar advocacy at the turn of the century, and Unwin's and Abercrombie's Plans for London.
Green belts were made feasible by the land use planning system established by the Town and Country Planning Act, 1947: local authorities were obliged to prepare development plans showing land use allocations and, because of the compensation provisions, green belts could be included at no direct cost to local authorities.
The threat of peripheral urban development on a huge scale persuaded Duncan Sandys (Minister of Housing and Local Government) to issue Circular 42 in August 1955 asking planning authorities outside London to consider establishing clearly defined green belts — issued apparently against the advice of senior civil servants, who took the view that while the designation of green belts was easy, the real problem was where development should be located.
Thirty years on, this remains a pertinent question, but in the meantime the limits of urban development have been rigorously held in check by this planning device.
By 1963 the first round of green belt submissions had been vetted by the Ministry and controls were in operation around most of our major cities.
Over the next six years green belts fell out of ministerial favour, but rehabilitation followed in 1970.
Today, major green belts surround the main conurbations of Birmingham-Coventry, West Yorkshire and South Yorkshire, Greater Manchester, Merseyside, Cheshire and South-east Lancashire and, of course, London; elsewhere sizeable green belts have been approved for North-east Lancashire, South-east Dorset, Bristol-Bath, Tyneside, Nottingham-Derby, Oxford, Stoke, Luton-Dunstable, Cambridge and Cheltenham-Gloucester.
Aesthetic control
As with legislation in 1909 and 1932, the Town and Country Planning Act, 1947, gave powers to local authorities to control development in terms of its appearance, and its siting in relation to its surroundings.
There was little elaboration as to how this was to be achieved, save occasional guidance  notes; otherwise there was reliance on the all-embracing, but rather vague idea of protecting ‘amenity’(Punter, 1987).
But development in post-war Britain would be on a rather firmer footing.
The redevelopment of central areas (1946) gave to the new planning authorities a fresh kit of tools, including use-classes, plot ratios, daylight factors, sight lines and parking standards.
The Housing manual 1944 was one of a series giving guidance on new housing followed by the Manual of 1949 and Houses (1952).
They helped to popularize, particularly in the first generation New Towns, a brick-and-tile vernacular architecture which evolved from a Scandinavian style, eminently suitable for standard components and standard layouts set by cost targets.
A compendium design guide came with Design in town and village (1953): Thomas Sharp wrote on the English village, Frederick Gibberd on the design of residential areas and William Holford on design in city centres.
‘Design’ meant the arrangement of the various parts of a developed area — buildings, roads, spaces — so that they functioned properly, could be built economically and gave pleasure to look at and be in.
In other words, it was appreciated that the appearance of an area develops from its function and the way it is built; it is not something which is applied afterwards.
Civic design was as much concerned with the spaces between buildings as with the appearance of the buildings themselves, and the same held for the design of residential areas.
To quote Holford in Design in town and village: Holford saw design as a social art, a view which encouraged the impression that the designer within the town planning profession, if not the profession as a whole, was really the grand integrator of the fashioning of the built environment.
The prototype and test-bed for the new approach was to been seen first in some of the New Towns, particularly Harlow, where the design of the neighbourhood units provided a classic model to follow.
A little later it appeared in city-scale work, as at Coventry where the axial shopping mall, exploiting its fall in levels to provide two tiers of shops, made a striking feature.
Elsewhere, local authority treatment could descend to little more than fashionable mediocrity.
As Esher (1981) reminds us: ‘the monuments of that era, Plymouth and Exeter, Bristol and Hull, with their shopping boulevards and bowls of flowers and shrubby roundabouts and patterned paving and utility brick or Portland stone facades, dated very rapidly’(p. 45).
Evidence of design capability was limited.
The special issue of the Architectural Review in 1955, entitled ‘Outrage’, written by Ian Nairn, strongly attacked the visual products of planning.
He was particularly severe on the fragmentation of planning control as exercised by a variety of planning authorities, their insensitive reliance on planning standards and by-law regulation, and also the failures of advertisement control.
The theme continued in the issue of the Architectural Review entitled ‘Counter Attack’, published in 1957. this time highlighting those agents and elements  exempted from aesthetic control.
At the same time it gave encouragement to local amenity groups to press for improvements.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government responded to architectural pressure by setting up an Urban Planning Group within the Ministry, which proceeded to produce a series of planning bulletins in the early 1960s to update advice on town-centre redevelopment.
Meanwhile, Gordon Cullen in a popular book,The concise townscape (1961), showed the fun and drama to be had from the way towns and cities actually looked, popularizing the word ‘townscape’ as the art of giving visual coherence and organization to the jumble of buildings, streets and spaces that make up the urban environment
If public regulation and control could not achieve success, then perhaps the lobby and pressure of special interest groups might.
The founding of the Victorian Society in 1959 reflected the growing anxiety about the destruction of nineteenth-century buildings, but the earlier founding of the Civic Trust in 1957 as an independent charity to promote the development of public taste and awareness for better design suggested an even broader concern, that of urban conservation.
Duncan Sandys' initiative in creating this body (not without some alarm expressed by his senior officials in the Ministry of Housing and Local Government) was soon to pay dividends, because it directly fostered the subsequent founding of a large number of local societies (1,200, ultimately by the mid-1980s).
Many of these became directly involved in local conservation or planning issues: promotional as in the Magdalene Street ‘face-lift’ at Norwich in 1959, or confrontational in many battles connected with redevelopment schemes.
Duncan Sandys was to figure again.
this time in promoting a Private Members' Bill, which came to the statute book as the Civic Amenities Act, 1967.
This advocated the idea of the conservation of coherent areas of townscape, rather than simply the preservation of individual buildings: from negative control to creative promotion.
The Act provided for the designation of conservation areas, and this proved a popular initiative by those many local authorities which contained areas of special architectural or historic interest.
A higher standard of planning control could be applied to these designated areas, with special consideration given to the height and bulk of buildings, materials, colours, vertical or horizontal emphasis and the grain of design.
But outside these specially protected areas concern mounted at the architectural ravages of commercial development, particularly in association with new highway requirements.
The redevelopment of Piccadilly Circus became a major cause célèbre in the 1950s and 1960s (Cherry and Penny, 1986).
In 1952 Jack Cotton, a Birmingham property developer, bought the Cafe Monico on the north side of the Circus; the LCC owned the adjacent site of Piccadilly Mansions.
A deal was struck whereby the LCC obtained part of the Monico site for road improvements; Cotton would have permission to redevelop.
He was persuaded to buy up the remaining freeholds of the Monico block in order to promote an acceptable redevelopment scheme; this took shape as a podium, a tall block and a large advertisement panel.
At Cotton's press conference in October 1959 the drawings exhibited showed an advertisement 100 ft in height for an imaginary soft drink, reading ‘Snap Plom for Vigour’.
To many this brashness spoke volumes about the form which urban redevelopment was taking.
A public inquiry lasted 18 days; the Inspector (Colin Buchanan) recommended against and in May 1960 the Minister issued his decision rejecting the application.
The Piccadilly Inquiry in many ways was a turning point in confirming the frailty of the planning system in dealing with the aesthetics of a major proposal of this kind.
But perhaps worse was to come, because for many years the redevelopment of the Circus dragged on indecisively through revised traffic calculations, and scheme after scheme was prepared afresh.
Throughout the country the property boom (Marriott, 1967) of the fifties and sixties, posed a set of new challenges for aesthetic control, and has continued to do so since.
In effect.
it spelled the demise, short-lived though it was, of the practice of comprehensive civic design by local authorities.
In principle, a working system for the effective regulation of the new buildings and environments in schemes of planned redevelopment had promised so much, but the cultured hand of the architect planners, working in a consensus situation where good manners and taste would prevail, proved unequal to the task; commercial brashness and greed proved too strong.
London became a ‘paper metropolis’ as office construction changed the skyline of the City; and all major towns experienced a demand for shops, offices, hotels and entertainment complexes in a central area investment scramble.
Office building, in fact, became a feature of strategic location policy.
The Location of Offices Bureau, set up in 1963, was a public agency given the task of persuading the business community that office dispersal from London was to its advantage.
Briefly, office development permits were required for new offices in London.
The Bureau was closed down in 1979 and an interesting experiment in State control over the geography of office location came to an end (Manners and Morris, 1986).
Perhaps it was with a sense of relief that local authorities turned to a more manageable problem in the 1970s: a new approach to the control of residential areas.
This was highlighted by Essex County Council's Design guide for residential areas (1973), with a format that was followed, if not exactly copied, by a host of other authorities throughout the country.
To conclude this section, it is clear that the approaches to aesthetic control in post-war urban Britain began well, though they soon attracted the hostility first of architects and then of the lay public.
The new scale of architecture has since posed insuperable problems; and the earlier view that town planning could provide a protective shield of refinement over new development and so avoid the brash, the banal and the ugly, was not to be.
Esher (1981) has suggested that Britain has experienced three ‘Rebuilds’: the Enlightenment, the Industrial Revolution and the Welfare State: ‘fashioned by wartime social democrats in England, which would for the first time in history build cities that were not dramatizations of privilege and poverty’(p. 278).
He goes on:
the Third Rebuild turns out to have been as essential, as submissive to political and financial circumstances, as its predecessors.
And like them it has no end, dissolving into a new period.
taken over by a new generation…which  welcomes the unemphatic, the intimate and the affectionate as the creative product of our limitations.
(p. 297)
Transport
From the point of view of highway planning the post-war period began with the Ministry of War Transport's Report Design and layout of roads in built-up areas (1946).
The general principles of the road patterns, earlier enunciated by Alker Tripp, and demonstrated in strategic form by Abercrombie for Greater London as a gigantic cartwheel of spokes and ring roads, with several rims, were accepted.
Holden and Holford's City of London Plan put the seal on the principles of precinct planning and the canalization of traffic, crucial aspects of redevelopment which were soon to be seen in Coventry, Plymouth and elsewhere.
But the simple mix of ring roads, precincts and a general improvement in the design of road junctions, and an adherence to standard highway widths, building lines and sight-lines did not prove adequate for long, although it was not until the 1960s that the opportunities for a radical revision of policy and method were presented.
Traffic volumes soon rose after the war, and in 1949 the number of motor cars in use once more exceeded 2 million, the 1939 figure.
By 1957 this figure had doubled to 4 million and by 1961 had trebled to 6 million.
The motor age had arrived and by the end of the 1950s one and a quarter million new vehicles were being registered every year.
A planner, Colin Buchanan, who during the 1950s had had somewhat of a chequered career as an inspector in the Ministry of Town and Country Planning (Bruton, 1981), argued that a new situation had arisen which called for a fresh approach.
Buchanan saw that new urban arrangements were needed unless the new mobility were surrendered or drastically restrained.
But it took some time before any clear view emerged as to what these new arrangements should be.
In the meantime there was no great political thrust for change, and in any case public expenditure restraints were tight.
The ten-year road plan announced in 1946 by Alfred Barnes, Minister of Transport, which sought a comprehensive reconstruction of principal national routes, with 800 miles of motorways, was soon abandoned with enforced financial cutbacks.
During the 1950s pressure for road improvements mounted; the British Roads Federation, which represented road construction interests, joined forces with professional lobbies, motor manufacturers and traders, while the TUC aligned with the employers'  associations for more spending.
The culmination was that in 1957 the then Minister of Transport, Harold Watkinson, announced a programme of large projects: the motorway age had arrived.
In the first batch, the Preston by-pass (1958) and the Lancaster and Maidstone by-passes (1960) formed not only part of the national motorway pattern but also constituted important local features in the urban environment.
Over the next few years the planning of urban motorways had considerable impact on the metropolitan areas of the West Midlands, Greater Manchester, Merseyside and Greater Glasgow, and the M4, snaking across West London, was the longest road viaduct in Europe.
Later, with the construction of the M25 as an orbital route around London, Abercrombie's outer ring had come to fruition.
Basically, however, British cities ‘got by’ for a surprisingly long time.
The conventional wisdom about ‘ring and spoke’ road patterns survived, as indicated by the commencement of Birmingham's inner ring road (Smallbrook Ringway) in 1957.
Traffic flows generally speeded up as highway improvements were carried out and congestion spots, often alleged to be caused by fixed-track trams, were removed.
During the 1950s British urban roads managed to carry heavy and patently increasing traffic volumes through a variety of incremental schemes.
The Road Traffic Act, 1956, permitted the installation of parking meters in spite of vigorous opposition from the roads lobby.
(The then Minister, Boyd Carpenter, only secured his Bill because he promised to use the proceeds from the meters for the provision of new off-street car parks.)
The Roads and Road Improvement Act, 1960, introduced the traffic warden, with new penalties for parking offences, in the context of an unresolved debate about road pricing: payment for road space in the interests of rationalizing the use of roads.
New traffic management schemes were introduced, including an extension of one-way systems, restrictions over right-hand turns, and the no-entry box junction.
Additionally, through development control powers, the granting of planning permission for buildings was made conditional upon provision of parking spaces, particularly significant for central area commercial development.
Buchanan's call for a new approach was timely, when a new political opportunity opened up.
Ernest Marples became Minister of Transport and succeeded in establishing a new level of priority for road and transport matters.
In 1961 he set up a working group, in the Ministry, ‘to study the long term development of roads and traffic in urban areas and their influence on the urban environment’; the leader was Colin Buchanan.
A steering group, chaired by Sir Geoffrey Crowther (and including among its members Sir William Holford), was appointed to act alongside it and to give an independent opinion on the recommendations of the study group, as they emerged.
The Buchanan Report,Traffic in towns was published in 1963, attended by extensive publicity; it proved to be one of the major planning documents of the decade.
The general principle was established in terms of societal choice:
Buchanan's study group recommended two kinds of roads: distributors designed tor movement and access roads to serve buildings.
Overall, there would be a hierarchical network of primary, district and local distributors, linked, in urban areas, by an urban motorway system.
This network permitted the concept of environmental areas, seen not as homogeneous precincts (as in Tripp's model of 20 years earlier) but as ‘rooms’, of mixed use if necessary, in a town where it was important to maintain the quality of environment.
In these areas there would be little vehicle penetration, allowing primacy of movement to the pedestrian.
Case studies of alternative schemes were prepared for settlements of different sizes and conditions: Newbury, Norwich, Leeds and Central London.
The term ‘traffic architecture’ was coined to capture the idea of building and circulation systems designed together as a single, comprehensive process, albeit with huge cost implications.
In order to implement the recommendations, it was suggested that development plans in urban areas should be supplemented by transportation plans, which would assess the main movement needs in the future and show how these would be shared by various forms of transport, including the car.
Public transport policies were required; there should be a comprehensive parking policy; and urban traffic flows should be regulated in a scheme of total traffic management.
The Buchanan Report showed what sort of cities were needed and how to get them.
It outlined a set of principles and indicated how they would work in particular instances.
A new approach to central area redevelopment was implied if the argument was accepted, that if we were to have any chance of living with the car, then a different type of city was needed.
The steering committee urged that the traffic problem should be met ‘without confusion over purpose, without timidity over means, and above all without delay’(para 55).
In fact, wholesale reconstruction on the lines advocated by Buchanan's comprehensive approach has not been followed.
Costs proved horrendous and design implications frightening; plans for Piccadilly Circus foundered in the 1960s with continuing uncertainty about estimates of anticipated traffic flows, The major cities engaged in a series of land use transportation studies, but pragmatism prevailed, with interest shown in opportunities offered by new transport technology such as new fixed-track systems.
There was a general recognition that different cities could tackle the competing needs of cars and public transport in a variety of different ways.
World-wide differences in approach could be seen, but British cities (notably London) came to reply on a strategy of traffic limitations.
This implied vigorous control of parking in the centre, high-capacity rail links to the suburbs, an efficient rail-based distribution system within the centre, bus-priority measures for short-distance distribution, and a general strategy of decentralization to sub-centres.
The link between urban form and transport was never clearer, but realizable solutions seemed as far away as ever.
Glasgow, Liverpool, Newcastle and Leeds pressed on with their extensive highway systems, but other cities abandoned them and by the mid-1970s an urban road policy in the context of an explicit town planning framework was stood on its head.
Urban road construction took a back seat as new interest was shown in restrictions on existing road usage, possibilities of upgrading public transport (as suggested by the introduction of the metro for Tyne-Wear), and policies on subsidized fares.
In a sense, however, the problem identified by Buchanan may have passed.
The working group forecast 19 million cars (27 million vehicles) on British roads by 1980 and 30 million cars (40 million vehicles) by 2010.
In 1963 there had been 10.5 million vehicles, so what was involved was a doubling within 10 years and nearly a trebling within 20 years.
This forecast rate of increase simply did not materialize, and once again British cities got by with incremental adjustments, while an accelerated process of decentralization helped to transfer traffic flows from the centre to a series of nodes within the city region.
The other factor was public opinion, and pressure from opposition groups began to mount.
Concrete flyovers, wholesale clearance for new routes, and concern over noise and lead pollution, were seen as affronts to living conditions; in the environmentally conscious 1970s new highway planning became politically beleaguered.
There were furious debates in respect of schemes for Oxford and Bath, but the biggest single reversal of policy concerned London, where for many years three ringways had been in mind.
Ringway One was an inner ring road running largely through working-class areas of housing stress.
Ringways Two and Three threatened the middle-class outer suburbs.
Ringway Two fell from favour and Ringway Three was replaced by the Orbital M25.
Ringway One remained; dubbed as the ‘London Motorway Box’, it attracted hostility from the anti-roads lobby and the Inner London Boroughs.
The Heath government fell in 1974 and the Box largely fell at the same time.
High inflation rates in the early period of the Wilson government settled it: new primary roads for London could not be afforded.
Radical urban restructuring involving major highway schemes was at an end.
Regional strategies
Britain's pursuit of regional economic policies since the war, which by ‘stick and carrot’ incentives have steered or, more likely, encouraged forms of economic development to the disadvantaged regions, have had an indirect effect of the physical environment of many towns and cities.
Trading estates have been laid out, factories built and resources in unspecified ways recirculated as investment for related development.
Other policies too have had significance for towns in regions which have benefited, as, for example, from New Town and town-expansion programmes, motorway building and aid to particular industries such as coal, textiles and shipbuilding.
Regional strategies in a direct land use planning sense have contributed to urban change in selected areas.
The spirit of decentralization policies, first outlined as a national principle in the Barlow Report (1940) and then made explicit in Abercrombie's Greater London Plan 1944 , has been maintained.
For some time the advisory plans for London, the West Midlands and the Clyde Valley sufficed, the belief being that the development plans would fill in the detail and provide working arrangements to secure the intended redistributive objectives.
But the regional thrust lost ground, symbolically with the closure of the Ministry's regional offices after 1954.
A new awareness of regional questions emerged in the early 1960s as land use pressures mounted: a substantial rise in numbers of both population and households was forecast; the numbers of vehicles on the roads was rising fast; countryside pressures on recreation sites was being felt; and (as an immediate problem) the cities ran out of housing land within their boundaries.
New strategies for regional distribution were called for, and a fresh interest in the regions was shown by Whitehall.
A Northern Housing Office of the Ministry was opened in 1962 and a year later a Newcastle regional office was set up, with both housing and planning functions.
A stream of regional studies followed throughout the 1960s and into the 1970s.
The first was The south-east study (1964) which put forward broad-based regional proposals covering the period to 1981 of a kind not seen since the end of the war.
The White Paper,London-Employment: Housing: Land (Cmnd 1952, 1963) had explained: The scene was set.
Whereas Barlow and Abercrombie had assumed that the problem was distribution of population and employment; the issue for the 1960s was also growth .
The south east study , 20 years after Abercrombie, proved a major restatement.
A population increase of about 3.5 million was forecast in the South-east in the period 1961–81, just over 1 million of which would be from net inward migration, the remainder in the form of natural increase.
The heart of the strong population growth lay in London itself and an overspill of about 1 million people was expected.
Since London was not able to accommodate its own natural increase, it meant that the whole of the 3.5 million population growth had to be found elsewhere — a population increase of well over a third for the area outside London.
The problem was compounded by employment growth in London.
Over the seven years 1955–62 the average annual increase in jobs in the London conurbation was 42,000; over the next three years, 1959–62, the average  increase amounted to over 63,000.
The 300,000 extra jobs created over the seven-year period was in proportional terms close to the rate of employment growth in England and Wales, but for the South-east as a whole the rate was much higher.
The region was booming, particularly in service employment, where 80 per cent of the additional jobs had been found.
Housing, transport and locational problems were clearly of great magnitude, the greatest pressures of land shortage being felt on the periphery, where encroachments into the green belt were likely to be strongly resisted.
A strategy of developing centres of growth, alternative to and well clear of London was selected, to be achieved in two ways.
Local planning authorities would have to allocate much more land in their development plans in order to accommodate well over 2 million additional population by 1981.
For the remainder, between 1 million and 1.25 million, a second generation of new and expanded towns was advocated, on a much bigger scale than those then being built (see page 165).
Major cities might develop in the Southampton-Portsmouth area, around Bletchley and around Newbury.
New Towns might be built at Ashford and Stansted.
Large-scale town-expansion schemes could be based on Ipswich, Northampton, Peterborough and Swindon.
Additions could be made to existing New Towns around London, particularly Stevenage and Harlow, but also at Basildon, Crawley and Hemel Hempstead, and also to a dozen other towns in the South-east, all of which offered scope for an expansion of at least 30,000 population: Aylesbury, Banbury, Bedford, Chelmsford, Colchester, Hastings, Maidstone, Medway Towns, Norwich, Poole, Reading and Southend.
This major statement concerning the regional distribution of urban growth was followed by two other studies, published by the newly formed, but short-lived Department of Economic Affairs:The West Midlands (1965) and The North West (1965), the latter accompanied by an appendix,The problems of Merseyside .
They were largely concerned with population and household predictions over the period to 1981 and the possibilities that existed for redistribution.
In England and Wales the regional initiative passed partly to the newly established Regional Economic Planning Councils.
They proceeded with great energy to produce their own regional reports, though long before their demise in 1979 they had lost their force, located in no-man's land between central and local government.
Nonetheless between 1966 and 1974, 16 reports of regional significance were published, covering whole regions (sometimes twice) and parts of regions.
But, in addition, the Central Unit for Environmental Planning (within the Ministry) published feasibility studies for Humberside (1969) and Severnside (1971) and there were various reports by consultants, for example Buchanan's South Hampshire study (1966).
The minister, Richard Crossman, set up sub-regional studies, conducted by joint teams from local authorities, as in the Coventry-Solihull-Warwickshire study (1971).
The South-east Joint Planning Team published reports in 1970,(Strategic plan for the South East ), and 1976,(Strategy for the South East ), and elsewhere in the country regional strategy teams worked in particular areas.
In Scotland, a survey and plan for the Lothians (1966) was followed by a  similar study for Grangemouth-Falkirk (1968); expansion plans for the Central Borders (1968) and Tayside (1970) were followed by a strategy for South-west Scotland (also 1970) and a West-central Scotland Plan (1974).
In Wales, Deeside (1970) and Mid-Wales (1973) were the subject of regional reports.
In Northern Ireland, the Belfast Regional Survey and Plan (1963), prepared by consultant Robert Matthew, adopted the general redistributive policies over a city-region scale for overspill population to satellite centres; it was updated and revised by Stormont's own Regional physical development strategy (1975).
The growth phase came to an end, though population and employment dispersal continued, and the period of the regional planning reports was concluded.
In areas of extreme pressure, notably outer metropolitan London, housebuilders' associations continue to complain that insufficient land has been allocated to meet housing demands.
The London and South East Regional Planning Conference (SERPLAN) regularly monitor trends and it seems likely that an adequate supply of building land is available, but only on the basis of five-year forecasts.
In the meantime proposals have been submitted for private-sector mini New Towns in the green belt around London and beyond.
The regional question has degenerated into ad hoc regional study — on-going analysis of the demand-supply equation for land release.
The time seems ripe to move again from regional study to regional plan: analysis to prescription, particularly in view of the impact of the Channel Tunnel.
The inner city question
For one reason or another the inner city has always been a target for public regulation and control.
In the nineteenth century the problem was ill-health, sanitation, poor housing, overcrowding and social disorder,; between the wars it was diet, hygiene and the slums; in the mid 1960s it had become deprivation; a current thread throughout was an unfit dwelling stock and environmental disadvantage.
After the war, city plans promised reform through housing programmes and a coordinated approach to land-use planning.
It was believed that continued high rates of building construction and enlightened social welfarism would produce a trickle-down effect to gradually remove all residual problems.
The 1961 Census presented small-area statistics for the first time, repeated at a 10 per cent sample for 1966.
By 1971 the facts of central area deprivation were clear enough and a set of disjointed and somewhat tentative initiatives in the older, inner parts of our big cities unfolded (Home, 1982).
The Local Government Act, 1966, gave grants to local authorities with substantial numbers of Commonwealth immigrants, to be spent on such matters as education and child care.
In 1967–8 Education Priority Areas programmes were specifically area-based and targeted on the inner city and other deprived areas.
In 1968 an urban programme was established under the Home Office, and over the years several thousand small-scale projects, put up by local authorities and voluntary organizations, were approved for capital expenditure.
The Community  Development Programme (CDP) followed in the period 1969–76, with 12 local projects established in deprived neighbourhoods aimed at new ways of meeting peoples' needs in local communities.
After 1970 the newly created Department of the Environment, under Secretary of State Peter Walker, began to take more of a lead on urban problems, and in 1972 three inner area studies were commissioned: Small Heath, Birmingham; Stockwell, South London; and Liverpool.
Consultants' findings were published in one summary form,Inner area studies: Liverpool, Birmingham and Lambeth (1977).
It emphasized the problem of housing and jobs, but beyond looking at forms of area management and pleas for much financial help, the reports did not give all that clear a lead on policy.
In 1972–3 three pilot projects covering Sunderland, Oldham and Rotherham had earlier looked at the issues concerned with a ‘total approach’ to urban management.
In retrospect, this was a highly creative period, when the politics of urban changes were very much in flux (McKay and Cox, 1979); the initiatives were largely ineffective except in as much that the period paved the way for the legislation, and the further, more focused action, that followed.
The resolution of economic and social problems in the context of housing policy and land planning failed to materialize in any comprehensive sense.
A search was in progress for new forms of intervention in the environment, the objectives being social, economic and institutional, and the traditional armoury of statutory town planning seemed weak, if not irrelevant.
However, in practice, local authority planning staffs were increasingly involved in inner city planning, particularly with housing schemes, renewal projects and the chairing and coordination of multi-departmental teams.
The reasons for Government initiative in this area, however disjointed during this period 1966–77, are rather obscure.
Prime Minister Wilson may have borrowed the idea of President Johnson's Poverty Programme in the USA; the Wilson government may have also found it both easy and necessary to respond to an admittedly wayward Conservative politician, Enoch Powell, and his inflammatory exclamations on the prospect of racial conflict.
There was certainly the influence of pressure groups such as Shelter (representing the homeless and badly housed) and Child Poverty Action Group.
But it seems more likely that on this occasion a handful of key politicians and civil servants actually took the lead; Peter Walker at the Department of the Environment (DOE) and Robert Carr, Home Secretary (the Home Office set up the Urban Deprivation Unit in 1972), were clearly influential, and Derek Morrell was a key official over CDP in the Home Office.
The Government White Paper,Policy for the inner cities (1977, Cmnd 6845) proposed to revamp existing inner city programmes, transfer Home Office initiatives to the DOE and expand the programme brief to include not only social projects but also industrial, environmental and recreational matters.
Funding for the urban programme was to be significantly increased.
Special local/central government ‘partnerships’ were to be set up in the larger cities to supervise the implementation of programmes.
In Scotland special help was proposed, including further support for the  Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal project.
The White Paper represented an important policy shift; dispersal policies, pre-eminent for 30 years were now secondary to a switch of resources to inner areas.
The White Paper was followed by the Inner Urban Areas Act, 1978.
It gave additional powers to local authorities with severe inner area problems and the provisions only applied to three types of designated districts.
First, there were districts containing special areas: these were the partnership areas in Birmingham, London (seven Boroughs: Greenwich, Hackney, Islington, Lambeth, Lewisham, Newham, Southwark and Tower Hamlets), Liverpool, Manchester, Salford, Newcastle upon Tyne and Gateshead.
Second, there were the districts containing Inner Area Programmes: the Programme Authority Areas in a further 15 authorities in England.
A third category simply covered other districts in 14 authorities in England and five in Wales.
(The Act did not apply to Scotland, which followed its own procedures for extensive housing renewal and had the show-piece of the Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal (GEAR) project to show for it).
But in England and Wales a total of 48 designated areas had new powers to make loans and grants for industrial building (economic regeneration soon became the most important feature) and to declare improvement areas.
The partnership areas soon attracted most attention because of the joint administrative arrangements which were required between central and local government.
No such partnership arrangements extended to the second category of districts, though they were invited to draw up programmes; in the case of the third category, local authorities simply made use of the powers of the Act.
The years since the 1978 Act have seen a succession of inner city initiatives.
New programme authorities and designated districts have been announced.
The machinery of the partnerships has been simplified.
There is greater emphasis on the role of the private sector in schemes for inner-city revival, as reflected in the setting up of two Urban Development Corporations in 1981 (London Docklands and Merseyside) and the introduction of the Urban Development Grant in 1982 as a lever to private investment.
Four more Urban Development Corporations have been announced: at Trafford Park (Greater Manchester), Teesside, the West Midlands and Tyne and Wear.
Successful garden festivals have been held in Liverpool (1984), Stoke (1986) and Glasgow (1988).
Tourism potential is being realized and a variety of local economic initiatives have been established.
Enterprise Zones were introduced in two rounds (1981 and 1983), enabling legislation being provided by the Local Government, Planning and Land Act, 1980.
A planning agreement is prepared by the local authority concerned, with aims to simplify statutory planning controls; this agreement is then complemented by a number of financial aid provisions with a primary emphasis on tax relief.
The general idea behind them was that they would provide a setting for vigorous entrepreneurs, capable of generating an industrial renaissance.
The sites selected were largely vacant and under-used; the lower Swansea Valley was formerly heavily polluted by mineral-processing industries, and elsewhere the closure of major manufacturing plants created large and unoccupied sites.
Now with 27 designated sites, with representation in all the countries of the United  Kingdom, but none bigger than 900 acres in size, they were unlikely to do that, but derelict land and buildings have been brought back to productive use and new jobs have been created.
Returning specifically to inner city matters, the urban programme now constitutes the major thrust of planning policy for environmental recovery, but it has long since over-ridden traditional procedures in schemes for housing and redevelopment.
The inner city partnerships prepare annual inner area programmes, on a rolling three-year basis which is agreed by a partnership committee, chaired by a Department of the Environment Minister.
The committee includes representatives of local authorities, health authorities, Government departments and the voluntary and private sector.
Considerable resources are now channelled to the partnerships each year.
The programme authorities and the designated districts receive smaller allocations.
Each partnership authority has a different spending pattern, but overall expenditure on social projects such as recreation and personal social services accounts for rather more than two-fifths of the total; that on economic projects, such as site works, accounts for about a third; and that on environmental projects, such as restoration of derelict land and housing, for a quarter.
Recent approaches to inner city renewal have relied very heavily on institutional innovations and tighter targeting of expenditure patterns.
Some of the work carried out is directly related to housing and the appearance of the physical environment, and therefore very much in the traditional planning scope.
But much of the activity is now broadly economic and social; just where town planning, in the sense established during the post-war years, now actually begins and ends is questionable.
The search for comprehensive solutions to complex urban problems has once again defied disciplinary and professional boundaries.
Town planning as we know it today was created out of the initiatives taken to tackle the problems of the late Victorian city, particularly its housing and environmental inequalities; the late twentieth-century urban crisis is once again calling for a re-assembly of skills and methods of approach which cut across established ways of doing things.
In this situation ‘making plans’ becomes a very different exercise.
