2
October 14th?
It's the seventh night.
I keep on thinking the same thing.
If only they knew.
If only they knew.
Share the outrage.
So now I'm trying to tell it to this pad he bought me this morning.
His kindness.
Calmly.
Deep down I get more and more frightened.
It's only surface calm.
No nastiness, no sex thing.
But his eyes are mad.
Grey with a grey lost light in them.
To begin with I watched him all the time.
I thought it must be sex, if I turned my back I did it where he couldn't spring at me, and I listened.
I had to know exactly where he was in the room.
Power.
It's become so real .
I know the H-bomb is wrong.
But being so weak seems wrong now too.
I wish I knew judo.
Could make him cry for mercy.
This crypt-room is so stuffy, the walls squeeze in, I'm listening for him as I write, the thoughts I have are like bad drawings.
Must be torn up at once.
Try try try to escape.
It's all I think of.
A strange thing.
He fascinates me.
I feel the deepest contempt and loathing for him, I can't stand this room, everybody will be wild with worry.
I can sense their wild worry.
How can he love me?
How can you love someone you don't know?
He wants desperately to please me.
But that's what madmen must be like.
They aren't deliberately mad, they must be as shocked in a way as everyone else when they finally do something terrible.
It's only this last day or two I could speak about him so.
All the way down here in the van it was nightmare.
Wanting to be sick and afraid of choking under the gag.
And then being sick.
Thinking I was going to be pulled into some thicket and raped and murdered.
I was sure that was it when the van stopped, I think that was why I was sick.
Not just the beastly chloroform.
(I kept on remembering Penny Lester's grisly dormitory stories about how her mother survived being raped by the Japanese, I kept on saying, don't resist, don't resist.
And then someone else at Ladymont once said that it takes two men to rape you.
Women who let themselves be raped by one man want to be raped.)
I know now that wouldn't be his way.
He'd use chloroform again, or something.
But that first night it was, don't resist, don't resist.
I was grateful to be alive.
I am a terrible coward, I don't want to die, I love life so passionately, I never knew how much I wanted to live before.
If I get out of this, I shall never be the same.
I don't care what he does.
So long as I live.
It's all the vile unspeakable things he could do.
I've looked everywhere for a weapon, but there's nothing of any use, even if I had the strength and skill.
I prop a chair against the iron door every night, so that at least I shall know if he tries to get in without my hearing.
Hateful primitive wash-stand and place.
The great blank door.
No keyhole.
Nothing.
The silence.
I've got a little more used to it now.
But it is terrible .
Never the least sound.
It makes me feel I'm always waiting.
Alive.
Alive in the way that death is alive.
The collection of books on art.
Nearly fifty pounds' worth, I've added them up.
That first night it suddenly dawned on me that they were there for me .
That I wasn't a haphazard victim after all.
Then there were the drawers full of clothes — shirts, skirts, dresses, coloured stockings, an extraordinary selection of weekend-in-Paris underwear, night-dresses.
I could see they were about my size.
They're too large, but he says he's seen me wear the colours.
Everything in my life seemed fine.
There was G.P.
But even that was strange.
Exciting.
Exciting.
Then this.
I slept a little with the light on, on top of the bed.
I would have loved a drink, but I thought it might be drugged.
I still half expect the food to be doped.
Seven days ago.
It seems like seven weeks.
He looked so innocent and worried when he stopped me.
He said he'd run over a dog.
I thought it might be Misty.
Exactly the sort of man you would not suspect.
The most unwolf like.
Like falling off the edge of the world.
There suddenly being an edge.
Every night I do something I haven't done for years.
I lie and pray.
I don't kneel, I know God despises kneelers.
I lie and ask him to comfort M and D and Minny, and Caroline who must feel so guilty and everyone else, even the ones it would do good to suffer for me (or for anyone else).
Like Piers and Antoinette.
I ask him to help this misery who has me under his power.
I ask him to help me.
Not to let me be raped or abused and murdered.
I ask him for light.
Literally.
Daylight.
I can't stand the absolute darkness.
He's bought me nightlights.
I go to sleep with one glowing beside me now.
Before that I left the light on.
Waking up is the worst thing.
I wake up and for a moment I think I'm at home or at Caroline's.
Then it hits me.
I don't know if I believe in God.
I prayed to him furiously in the van when I thought I was going to die (that's a proof against , I can hear G.P. saying).
But praying makes things easier.
It's all bits and pieces.
I can't concentrate.
I've thought so many things, and now I can't think of one.
But it makes me feel calmer.
The illusion, anyway.
Like working out how much money one's spent.
And how much is left.
October 15th
He has never had any parents, he's been brought up by an aunt.
I can see her.
A thin woman with a white face and a nasty tight mouth and mean grey eyes and dowdy beige tea-cosy hats and a thing about dirt and dust.
Dirt and dust being everything outside her foul little back-street world.
I told him he was looking for the mother he'd never had, but of course he wouldn't listen.
He doesn't believe in God.
That makes me want to believe.
I talked about me.
About D and M, in a bright little matter-of-fact voice.
He knew about M.
I suppose the whole town knows.
My theory is that I have to unmartyr him.
The time in prison.
Endless time.
The first morning.
He knocked on the door and waited ten minutes (as he always does).
It wasn't a nice ten minutes, all the consoling thoughts I'd scraped together during the night ran away and I was left alone.
I stood there and said, if he does, don't resist, don't resist.
I was going to say, do what you like, but don't kill me.
Don't kill me, you can do it again.
as if I was washable.
Hard-wearing.
It was all different.
When he came in he just stood there looking gawky and then at once, seeing him without a hat on, I knew who he was.
I suppose I memorize people's features without thinking.
I knew he was the clerk from the Town Hall Annexe.
The fabulous pools win.
His photo in the paper.
We all said we'd seen him about.
He tried to deny it, but he went red.
He blushes at everything.
Simple as sneezing to put him on the defensive.
His face has a sort of natural ‘hurt’ set.
Sheepish.
No, giraffish Like a lanky gawky giraffe.
I kept on popping questions, he wouldn't answer, all he could do was look as if I had no right to ask.
as if this wasn't at all what he'd bargained for.
He's never had anything to do with girls.
With girls like me, anyway.
A lilywhite boy.
He's six feet.
Eight or nine inches more than me.
Skinny, so he looks taller than he is.
Gangly.
Hands too big, a nasty fleshy white and pink.
Not a man's hands.
Adam's apple too big, wrists too big, chin much too big, underlip bitten in, edges of nostrils red.
Adenoids.
He's got one of those funny inbetween voices, uneducated trying to be educated.
It keeps on letting him down.
His whole face is too long.
Dull black hair.
It waves and recedes, it's coarse.
Stiff.
Always in place.
He always wears a sports coat and flannels and a pinned tie.
Even cuff-links.
He's what people call a ‘nice young man’.
Absolutely sexless (he looks).
He has a way of standing with his hands by his side or behind his back, as if he doesn't know what on earth to do with them.
Respectfully waiting for me to give my orders.
Fish-eyes.
They watch.
That's all.
No expression.
He makes me feel capricious.
Like a dissatisfied rich customer (he's a male assistant in a draper's).
It's his line.
The mock-humble.
Ever-so-sorry.
I sit and eat my meals and read a book and he watches me.
If I tell him to go, he goes.
He's been secretly watching me for nearly two years.
He loves me desperately, he was very lonely, he knew I would always be ‘above’ him.
It was awful, he spoke so awkwardly, he always has to say things in a roundabout way, he always has to justify himself at the same time.
I sat and listened.
I couldn't look at him.
It was his heart.
Sicked up all over the hideous tangerine carpet.
We just sat there when he had finished.
When he got up to go I tried to tell him that I understood, that I wouldn't say anything if he would take me home, but he backed away out.
I tried to look very understanding, very sympathetic, but it seemed to frighten him.
The next morning I tried again, I found out what his name  was (vile coincidence!),
I was very reasonable, I looked up at him and appealed, but once again it just frightened him.
At lunch I told him I could see he was ashamed of what he was doing, and that it wasn't too late.
You hit his conscience and it gives, but it doesn't hurt him at all.
I am ashamed, he says; I know I ought, he says.
I told him he didn't look a wicked person.
He said, this is the first wicked thing I've ever done.
It probably is.
But he's been saving up.
Sometimes I think he's being very clever.
He's trying to enlist my sympathy by pretending he's in the grip of some third thing.
That night I tried not being decent, being sharp and bitchy, instead.
He just looked more hurt than ever.
He's very clever at looking hurt.
Putting the tentacles of his being hurt around me.
His not being my ‘class’.
I know what I am to him.
A butterfly he has always wanted to catch.
I remember (the very first time I met him) G.P. saying that collectors were the worst animals of all.
He meant art collectors, of course.
I didn't really understand, I thought he was just trying to shock Caroline — and me.
But of course, he is right.
They're anti-life, anti-art, anti-everything.
I write in this terrible nightlike silence as if I feel normal.
But I'm not.
I'm so sick, so frightened, so alone.
The solitude is unbearable.
Every time the door opens I want to rush at it and out.
But I know now I must save up my escape attempts.
Outwit him.
Plan ahead.
Survive .
October 16th
It's afternoon.
I should be in life class.
Does the world go on?
Does the sun still shine?
Last night, I thought — I am dead.
This is death.
This is hell.
There wouldn't be other people in hell.
Or just one, like him.
The devil wouldn't be devilish and rather attractive, but like him.
I drew him this morning.
I wanted to get his face, to illustrate this.
But it wasn't any good, and he wanted it.
Said he would pay TWO HUNDRED guineas for it.
He is mad.
It is me.
I am his madness.
For years he's been looking for something to put his madness into.
And he found me.
I can't write in a vacuum like this.
To no one.
When I draw I always think of someone like G.P. at my shoulder.
All parents should be like ours, then sisters really become sisters.
They have to be to each other what Minny and I are.
Dear Minny.
I have been here over a week now, and I miss you very much, and I miss the fresh air and the fresh faces of all those people I so hated on the Tube and the fresh things that happened every hour of every day if only I could have seen them — their freshness, I mean.
The thing I miss most is fresh light.
I can't live without light.
Artificial light, all the lines lie, it almost makes you long for darkness.
I haven't told you how I tried to escape.
I thought about it all night, I couldn't sleep, it was so stuffy, and my tummy's all wrong (he tries his best to cook, but it's hopeless).
I pretended something was wrong with the bed, and then I just turned and ran.
But I couldn't get the door shut to lock him in and he caught me in the other cellar.
I could see daylight through a keyhole.
He thinks of everything.
He padlocks the door open.
It was worth it.
One keyholeful of light in seven days.
He foresaw I would try and get out and lock him in.
Then I treated him for three days with a view of my back and my sulky face.
I fasted.
I slept.
When I was sure he wouldn't come in I got up and danced about a bit, and read the art books and drank water.
But I didn't touch his food.
And I brought him to terms.
His condition was six weeks.
A week ago six hours would have been too much.
I cried.
Brought him down to four weeks.
I'm not less horrified at being with him.
I've grown to know every inch of this foul little crypt, it's beginning to grow on me like those coats of stones on the worms in rivers.
But the four weeks seem less important.
I don't seem to have any energy, any will, I'm constipated in all ways.
Minny, going upstairs with him yesterday.
First, the outside air, being in a space bigger than ten by ten by twenty (I've measured it out), being under the stars, and breathing in wonderful wonderful, even though it was damp and misty, wonderful air.
I thought I might be able to run.
But he gripped my arm and I was gagged and bound.
It was so dark.
So lonely.
No lights.
Just darkness.
I didn't even know which way to run.
The house is an old cottage.
I think it may be timbered outside, indoors there are a lot of beams, the floors all sag, and the ceilings are very low.
A lovely old house really, done up in the most excruciating women's magazine ‘good taste’.
Ghastliest colour-clashes, mix-up of furniture styles, bits of suburban fuss, phoney antiques, awful brass ornaments.
And the pictures!
You wouldn't believe me if I described the awfulness of the pictures.
He told me some firm did all the furniture choosing and decorating.
They must have got rid of all the junk they could find in their store-rooms.
The bath was delicious.
I knew he might burst in (no lock on the door, couldn't even shut it, there was a screwed-in bit of wood).
But somehow I knew he wouldn't.
And it was so lovely to see a bathful of hot water and a proper place that I  almost didn't care.
I made him wait hours.
Just outside.
He didn't seem to mind.
He was ‘good’.
Nothing makes him mind.
But I've seen a way to get a message out.
I could put a message in a little bottle down the place.
I could put a bright ribbon round it.
Perhaps someone would see it somewhere some day.
I'll do it next time.
I listened for traffic, but there was none.
I heard an owl.
And an aeroplane.
If only people knew what they flew over.
We're all in aeroplanes.
The bathroom window was boarded up.
Great screws.
I looked everywhere for a weapon.
Under the bath, behind the pipes.
But there's nothing.
Even if I found one I don't know how I'd use it.
I watch him and he watches me.
We never give each other a chance.
He doesn't look very strong, but he's much stronger than me.
It would have to be by surprise.
Everything's locked and double-locked.
There's even a burglar-alarm on my cell door.
He's thought of everything.
I thought of putting a note in laundry.
But he doesn't send any.
When I asked him about sheets, he said, I buy them new, tell me when you want some more.
Down-the-place is the only chance.
Minny, I'm not writing to you, I'm talking to myself.
When I came out, wearing the least horrid of the shirts he'd bought for me, he stood up (he'd been sitting all the time by the door).
I felt like the girl-at-the-ball-coming-down-the-grand-staircase.
I knocked him over.
I suppose it was seeing me in ‘his’ shirt.
And with my hair down.
Or perhaps it was just shock at seeing me without the gag.
Anyway I smiled and I wheedled and he let me be without the gag and he let me look round.
He kept very close to me.
I knew that if I made the slightest false step he would leap at me.
Upstairs, bedrooms, lovely rooms in themselves, but all fusty, unlived-in.
A strange dead air about everything.
Downstairs what he (he would) called ‘the lounge’ is a beautiful room, much bigger than the other rooms, peculiarly square, you don't expect it, with one huge crossbeam supported on three uprights in the middle of the room, and other crossbeams and nooks and delicious angles an architect wouldn't think of once in a thousand years.
All massacred, of course, by the furniture.
China wild duck on a lovely old fireplace.
I couldn't stand it, I got him to retie my hands in front and then I unhooked the monsters and smashed them on the hearth.
That hurt him almost as much as when I slapped his face for not letting me escape.
He makes me change, he makes me want to dance round him, bewilder him, dazzle him, dumbfound him.
He's so slow, so unimaginative, so lifeless.
Like zinc white.
I see it's a sort of tyranny he has over me.
He forces me to be changeable, to act.
To show off.
The hateful tyranny of weak people.
G.P. said it once.
The ordinary man is the curse of civilization.
But he's so ordinary that he's extraordinary.
He takes photographs.
He wants to take a ‘portrait’ of me.
Then there were his butterflies, which I suppose were rather beautiful.
Yes, rather beautifully arranged, with their poor little wings stretched out all at the same angle.
And I felt for them, poor dead butterflies, my fellow-victims.
The ones he was proudest of were what he called aberrations!
Downstairs he let me watch him make tea (in the outer cellar), and something ridiculous he said made me laugh — or want to laugh.
Terrible.
I suddenly realized that I was going mad too, that he was wickedly wickedly cunning.
Of course he doesn't mind what I say about him.
That I break his miserable china duck.
Because suddenly he has me (it's mad, he kidnapped me) laughing at him and pouring out his tea, as if I'm his best girl-friend.
I swore at him.
I was my mother's daughter.
A bitch.
There it is, Minny.
I wish you were here and we could talk in the dark.
If I could just talk to someone for a few minutes.
Someone I love.
I make it sound brighter so much brighter than it is.
I'm going to cry again.
It's so unfair.
October 17th
I hate the way I have changed.
I accept too much.
To begin with I thought I must force myself to be matter-of-fact, not let his abnormality take control of the situation.
But he might have planned it.
He's getting me to behave exactly as he wants.
This isn't just a fantastic situation; it's a fantastic variation of a fantastic situation.
I mean, now he's got me at his mercy, he's not going to do what anyone would expect.
So he makes me falsely grateful.
I'm so lonely.
He must realize that.
He can make me depend on him.
I'm on edge, I'm nowhere near as calm as I seem (when I read what I've written).
It's just that there's so much time to get through.
Endless endless endless time.
What I write isn't natural.
It's like two people trying to keep up a conversation.
It's the very opposite of drawing.
You draw a line and you know at once whether it's a good or a bad line.
But you write a line and it seems true and then you read it again later.
Yesterday evening he wanted to take a photograph of me.
I let him take several.
I think, he may be careless, someone may see me lying around.
But I think he lives quite alone.
He must do.
He must have spent all last night developing and printing them (as if he'd go to the chemist's!
I don't think).
Flashlit me's on glossy paper.
I didn't like the flashlight.
It hurt my eyes.
Nothing has happened today, except that we have come to a sort of agreement about exercise.
No daylight yet.
But I can go in the outer cellar.
I felt sulky so I was sulky.
I asked him to go away after lunch and I asked him to go away after supper, and he went away both times.
He does everything he's told.
He's bought me a record-player and records and all the things  on the huge shopping-list I gave him.
He wants to buy things for me.
I could ask for anything.
Except my freedom.
He's given me an expensive Swiss watch.
I say I will use it while I am here and give it back when I go.
I said I couldn't stand the orangeady carpet any more and he's bought me some Indian and Turkish rugs.
Three Indian mats and a beautiful deep purple, rose-orange and sepia white-fringed Turkish carpet (he said it was the only one ‘they’ had, so no credit to his taste).
It makes this cell more liveable in.
The floor's very soft and springy.
I've broken all the ugly ashtrays and pots.
Ugly ornaments don't deserve to exist.
I'm so superior to him.
I know this sounds wickedly conceited.
But I am .
And so it's Ladymont and Boadicea and noblesse oblige all over again.
I feel I've got to show him how decent human beings live and behave.
He is ugliness.
But you can't smash human ugliness.
Three nights ago was so strange.
I was so excited at leaving this crypt.
I felt so nearly in complete control.
It suddenly seemed all rather a grand adventure, something I'd one day soon be telling everyone about.
A sort of chess-game with death I'd rather unexpectedly won.
A feeling that I had run a terrible risk and now everything was going to be all right.
That he was going to let me go, even.
Mad.
I have to give him a name.
I'm going to call him Caliban.
Piero.
I've spent the whole day with Piero, I've read all about him, I've stared at all the pictures in the book, I've lived them.
How can I ever become a good painter when I know so little geometry and mathematics?
I'm going to make Caliban buy me books.
I shall become a geometrician.
Shattering doubts about modern art.
I thought of Piero standing in front of a Jackson Pollock, no, even a Picasso or a Matisse.
His eyes.
I can just see his eyes.
The things Piero says in a hand.
In a fold in a sleeve.
I know all this, we've been told it and told it and I've said it.
But today  I really felt it.
I felt our whole age was a hoax, a sham.
The way people talk and talk about tachism and cubism and this ism and that ism and all the long words they use — great smeary clots of words and phrases.
All to hide the fact that either you can paint or you can't.
I want to paint like Berthe Morisot, I don't mean with her colours or forms or anything physical, but with her simplicity and light.
I don't want to be clever or great or ‘significant’ or given all that clumsy masculine analysis.
I want to paint sunlight on children's faces, or flowers in a hedge or a street after April rain.
The essences.
Not the things themselves.
Swimmings of light on the smallest things.
Or am I being sentimental?
Depressed.
I'm so far from everything.
From normality.
From light.
From what I want to be.
October 18th
G.P. — You paint with your whole being.
First you learn that.
The rest is luck.
Good resolution: I must not be fey.
This morning I drew a whole series of quick sketches of bowls of fruit.
Since Caliban wants to give, I don't care how much paper I waste.
I ‘hung’ them and asked him to choose which one was best.
Of course he picked all those that looked most like the wretched bowl of fruit.
I started to try to explain to him.
I was boasting about one of the sketches (the one I liked best).
He annoyed me, it didn't mean anything to him, and he made it clear in his miserable I'll-take-your-word-for-it way that he didn't really care.
To him I was just a child amusing herself.
Blind, blind, other world.
My fault.
I was showing off.
How could he see the magic and importance of art (not my art, of art ) when I was so vain?
We had an argument after lunch.
He always asks me if he may stay.
Sometimes I feel so lonely, so sick of my own thoughts, that I let him.
I want him to stay.
That's what prison does.
And there's escape, escape, escape.
The argument was about nuclear disarmament.
I had doubts, the other day.
But not now.
Dialogue between Miranda and Caliban.
M (I was sitting on my bed, smoking.
Caliban on his usual chair by the iron door, the fan was going outside ).
What do you think about the H-bomb?
C. Nothing much.
M. You must think something.
C. Hope it doesn't drop on you.
Or on me.
M. I realize you've never lived with people who take things seriously, and discuss seriously.
(He put on his hurt face .)
Now let's try again.
What do you think about the H-bomb?
C. If I said anything serious, you wouldn't take it serious.
(I stared at him till he had to go on .)
It's obvious.
You can't do anything.
It's here to stay.
M. You don't care what happens to the world?
C. What'd it matter if I did?
M. Oh, God.
C. We don't have any say in things.
M. Look, if there are enough of us who believe the bomb is wicked and that a decent nation could never think of having it, whatever the circumstances, then the government would have to do something.
Wouldn't it?
C. Some hope, if you ask me.
M. How do you think Christianity started?
Or anything else?
With a little group of people who didn't give up hope.
C. What would happen if the Russians come, then?
(Clever point, he thinks .)
M. If it's a choice between dropping bombs on them, or having them here as our conquerors — then the second, every time.
C (check and mate ).
That's pacifism.
M. Of course it is, you great lump.
Do you know I've walked all the way from Aldermaston to London?
Do you know I've given up hours and hours of my time to distribute leaflets and address envelopes and argue with miserable people like you who don't believe anything?
Who really deserve the bomb on them?
C. That doesn't prove anything.
M. It's despair at the lack of (I'm cheating, I didn't say all these things — but I'm going to write what I want to say as well as what I did ) feeling, of love, of reason in the world.
It's despair that anyone can even contemplate the idea of dropping a bomb or ordering that it should be  dropped.
It's despair that so few of us care.
It's despair that there's so much brutality and callousness in the world.
It's despair that perfectly normal young men can be made vicious and evil because they've won a lot of money.
And then do what you've done to me.
C. I thought you'd get on to that.
M. Well, you're part of it.
Everything free and decent in life is being locked away in filthy little cellars by beastly people who don't care.
C. I know your lot.
You think the whole blooming world's all arranged so as everything ought to be your way.
M. Don't be so wet.
C. I was a private in the army.
You can't tell me.
My lot just do what they're told (he was really quite worked up for him ) and better look out if they don't.
M. You haven't caught up with yourself.
You're rich now.
You've got nothing to be hurt about.
C. Money doesn't make all that difference.
M. Nobody can order you about any more.
C. You don't understand me at all.
M. Oh, yes I do.
I know you're not a teddy.
But deep down you feel like one.
You hate being an underdog, you hate not being able to express yourself properly.
They go and smash things, you sit and sulk.
You say, I won't help the world.
I won't do the smallest good thing for humanity.
I'll just think of myself and humanity can go and stew for all I care.
(It's like continually slapping someone across the face — almost a wince .)
What use do you think money is unless it's used?
Do you understand what I'm talking about?
C. Yes.
M. Well?
C. Oh…you're right.
As always.
M. Are you being sarcastic again?
C. You're like my Aunt Annie.
She's always going on about  the way people behave nowadays.
Not caring and all that.
M. You seem to think it's right to be wrong.
C. Do you want your tea?
M (superhuman effort ).
Look, for the sake of argument, we'll say that however much good you tried to do in society, in fact you'd never do any good.
That's ridiculous, but never mind.
There's still yourself.
I don't think the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament has much chance of actually affecting the government.
It's one of the first things you have to face up to.
But we do it to keep our self-respect, to show to ourselves, each one to himself or herself, that we care.
And to let other people, all the lazy, sulky, hopeless ones like you, know that someone cares.
We're trying to shame you into thinking about it, about acting.
(Silence — I shouted ) Say something!
C. I know it's evil.
M. Do something, then!
(He gawped at me as if I'd told him to swim the Atlantic .)
Look.
A friend of mine went on a march to an American air-station in Essex.
You know?
They were stopped outside the gate, of course, and after a time the sergeant on guard came out and spoke to them and they began an argument and it got very heated because this sergeant thought that the Americans were like knights of old rescuing a damsel in distress.
That the H-bombers were absolutely necessary — and so on.
Gradually as they were arguing they began to realize that they rather liked the American.
Because he felt very strongly, and honestly, about his views.
It wasn't only my friend.
They all agreed about it afterwards.
The only thing that really matters is feeling and living what you believe — so long as it's something more than belief in your own comfort.
My friend said he was nearer to that American  sergeant than to all the grinning idiots who watched them march past on the way.
It's like football.
Two sides may each want to beat the other, they may even hate each other as sides, but if someone came and told them football is stupid and not worth playing or caring about, then they'd feel together.
It's feeling that matters.
Can't you see?
C. I thought we were talking about the H-bomb.
M. Go away.
You exhaust me.
You're like a sea of cotton wool.
C. (he stood up at once ).
I do like to hear you talk.
I do think about what you say.
M. No, you don't.
You put what I say in your mind and wrap it up and it disappears for ever.
C. If I wanted to send a cheque to the…this lot…what's the address?
M. To buy my approval?
C. What's wrong with that?
M. We need money.
But we need feeling even more.
And I don't think you've got any feeling to give away.
You can't win that by filling in a football coupon.
C (there was an awkward silence ).
See you later, then.
(Exit Caliban.
I hit my pillow so hard that it has looked reproachful ever since .)
(This evening — as I knew I would and could — I coaxed and bullied him, and he wrote out a cheque for a hundred pounds, which he's promised to send off tomorrow.
I know this is right.
A year ago I would have stuck to the strict moral point.
Like Major Barbara.
But the essential is that we have money.
Not where the money comes from, or why it is sent.)
October 19th
I have been out.
I was copying all the afternoon (Piero) and I was in the sort of mood where normally I have to go out to the cinema or to a coffee-bar, anywhere.
But out.
I made him take me by giving myself to him like a slave.
Bind me, I said, but take me.
He bound and gagged me, held my arm, and we walked round the garden.
Quite a big one.
It was very dark, I could just make out the path and some trees.
And it is very lonely.
Right out in the country somewhere.
Then suddenly in the darkness I knew something was wrong with him.
I couldn't really see him, but I was suddenly frightened, I just knew he wanted to kiss me or something worse.
He tried to say something about being very happy; his voice very strained.
Choked.
And then, that I didn't think he had any deep feelings, but he had.
It's so terrible not being able to speak.
My tongue's my defence with him, normally.
My tongue and my look.
There was a little silence, but I knew he was pent up.
All the time I was breathing in beautiful outdoor air.
That was good, so good I can't describe it.
So living, so full of plant smells and country smells and the thousand mysterious wet smells of the night.
Then a car passed.
So there is a road which is used in front of the house.
As soon as we heard the engine his grip tightened.
I prayed the car would stop, but its lights just swept past behind the house.
Luckily I'd thought it out before.
If I ever try to escape, and fail, he'll never let me out again.
So I must not jump at the first chance.
And I knew, out there, that he would have killed me rather than let me get away.
If I'd tried to run for it.
(I couldn't have, anyway, he held my arm like a vice.)
But it was terrible.
Knowing other people were so near.
And knew nothing.
He asked me if I wanted to go round again.
But I shook my head.
I was too frightened.
Back down here I told him that I had to get the sex business cleared up.
I told him that if he suddenly wanted to rape me, I wouldn't resist, I would let him do what he liked, but that I would never speak to him again.
I said I knew he would be ashamed of himself, too.
Miserable creature, he looked ashamed enough as it was.
It was ‘only a moment's weakness’.
I made him shake hands, but I bet he breathed a sigh of relief when he got outside again.
No one would believe this situation.
He keeps me absolutely prisoner.
But in everything else I am mistress.
I realize that he encourages it, it's a means of keeping me from being as discontented as I should be.
The same thing happened when I was lameducking Donald last spring.
I began to feel he was mine, that I knew all about him.
And I hated it when he went off to Italy like that, without telling me.
Not because I was seriously in love with him, but because he was vaguely mine and didn't get permission from me.
The isolation he keeps me in.
No newspapers.
No radio.
No TV.
I miss the news terribly.
I never did.
But now I feel the world has ceased to exist.
I ask him every day to get me a newspaper, but it's one of those things where he sticks his heels in.
No reason.
It's funny, I know it's no good asking.
I might just as well ask him to drive me to the nearest station.
I shall go on asking him, all the same.
He swears blind that he sent the CND cheque, but I don't know.
I shall ask to see the receipt.
Incident.
Today at lunch I wanted the Worcester sauce.
He hardly ever forgets to bring anything I might want.
But no Worcester sauce.
So he gets up, goes out, undoes the padlock  holding the door open, locks the door, gets the sauce in the outer cellar, unlocks the door, re-padlocks it, comes back.
And then looks surprised when I laugh.
He never gives the locking-unlocking routine a miss.
Even if I do get out into the outer cellar unbound, what can I do?
I can't lock him in, I can't get out.
The only chance I might have is when he comes in with the tray.
Sometimes he doesn't padlock the door back first.
So if I could get past him then, I could bolt him in.
But he won't come past the door unless I'm well away from it.
Usually I go and take the tray.
The other day I wouldn't.
I just leant against the wall by the door.
He said, please go away.
I just stared at him.
He held out the tray.
I ignored it.
He stood there undecided.
Then he bent very cautiously, watching my every move, and put the tray down in the doorway.
Then went back into the outer cellar.
I was hungry.
He won.
No good.
I can't sleep.
It's seemed a funny day.
Even for here.
He took a lot more photos of me this morning.
He really enjoys it.
He likes me to smile at the camera, so twice I pulled shocking faces.
He was not amused.
Then I put my hair up with one hand and pretended I was a model.
You ought to be a model, he said.
Quite serious.
He didn't realize I was guying the whole idea.
I know why he likes the photographing business.
He thinks it makes me think he's artistic.
And of course he hasn't a clue.
I mean he gets me in focus, and that's all.
No imagination.
It's weird.
Uncanny.
But there is a sort of relationship between us.
I make fun of him, I attack him all the time, but he senses when I'm ‘soft’.
When he can dig back and not make me angry.
So we slip into teasing states that are almost friendly.
It's partly because I'm so lonely, it's partly deliberate (I want to make him relax, both for his own good and so that one day he may make a mistake), so it's part weakness, and part cunning, and part  charity.
But there's a mysterious fourth part I can't define.
It can't be friendship, I loathe him.
Perhaps it's just knowledge.
Just knowing a lot about him.
And knowing someone automatically makes you feel close to him.
Even when you wish he was on another planet.
The first days.
I couldn't do anything if he was in the room.
I pretended to read, but I couldn't concentrate.
But now I sometimes forget he's here.
He sits by the door and I read in my chair, and we're like two people who've been married years.
It is not that I have forgotten what other people are like.
But other people seem to have lost reality.
The only real person in my world is Caliban.
It can't be understood.
It just is .
October 20th
It's eleven o'clock in the morning.
I've just tried to escape.
What I did was to wait for him to unbolt the door, which opens outwards.
Then to push it back as violently as possible.
It's only metal-lined on this side, it's made of wood, but it's very heavy.
I thought I might hit him with it and knock him out, if I did it at just the right moment.
So as soon as it began to move back, I gave it the biggest push I could manage.
It knocked him back and I rushed out, but of course it depended on his being stunned.
And he wasn't at all.
He must have taken the force of it on his shoulder, it doesn't swing very smoothly.
At any rate he caught my jumper.
For a second there was that other side of him I sense, the violence, hatred, absolute determination not to let me go.
So I said, all right, and pulled myself away and went back.
He said, you might have hurt me, that door's very heavy.
I said, every second you keep me here, you hurt me.
I thought pacifists didn't believe in hurting people, he said.
I just shrugged and lit a cigarette.
I was trembling.
He did all the usual morning routine in silence.
Once he rubbed his shoulder in rather an obvious way.
And that was that.
Now I'm going to look properly for loose stones.
The tunnel idea.
Of course I've looked before, but not really closely, literally stone by stone, from top to bottom of each wall.
It's evening.
He's just gone away.
He brought me my food.
But he's been very silent.
Disapproving.
I laughed out loud when he went away with the supper-things.
He behaves exactly as if I ought to be ashamed.
He won't be caught by the door trick again.
There aren't any  loose stones.
All solidly concreted in.
I suppose he thought of that as well as of everything else.
I've spent most of today thinking.
About me.
What will happen to me?
I've never felt the mystery of the future so much as here.
What will happen?
What will happen.?
It's not only now, in this situation.
When I get away.
What shall I do?
I want to marry, I want to have children, I want to prove to myself that all marriages needn't be like D and M's.
I know exactly the sort of person I want to marry, someone with a mind like G.P.'s, only much nearer my own age, and with the looks I like.
And without his one horrid weakness.
But then I want to use my feelings about life.
I don't want to use my skill vainly, for its own sake.
But I want to make beauty.
And marriage and being a mother terrifies me for that reason.
Getting sucked down into the house and the house things and the babyworld and the child-world and the cooking-world and the shopping-world.
I have a feeling a lazy-cow me would welcome it, would forget what I once wanted to do, and I would just become a Great Female Cabbage.
Or I would have to do miserable work like illustrating, or even commercial stuff, to keep the home going.
Or turn into a bitchy ginny misery like M (no, I couldn't be like her).
Or worst of all be like Caroline, running along pathetically after modern art and modern ideas and never catching up with them because she's someone quite different at heart and yet can never see it.
I think and think down here.
I understand things I haven't really thought about before.
Two things.
M. I've never really thought of M objectively before, as another person.
She's always been my mother I've hated or been ashamed of.
Yet of all the lame ducks I've met or heard of, she's the lamest.
I've never given her enough sympathy.
I haven't given her this last year (since I left home) one half of the consideration I've given the beastly creature upstairs just this last week.
I feel that I could overwhelm her with love now.
Because I haven't felt so sorry for her for years.
I've always  excused myself-I've said, I'm kind and tolerant with everyone else, she's the one person I can't be like that with, and there has to be an exception to the general rule.
So it doesn't matter.
But of course that's wrong.
She's the last person that should be an exception to the general rule.
Minny and I have so often despised D for putting up with her.
We ought to go down on our knees to him.
The other thing I think about is G.P.
When I first met him I told everyone how marvellous he was.
Then a reaction set in, I thought I was getting a silly schoolgirl hero-pash on him, and the other thing began to happen.
It was all too emotional.
Because he's changed me more than anything or anybody.
More than London, more than the Slade.
It's not just that he's seen so much more life.
Had so much more artistic experience.
And is known.
But he says exactly what he thinks, and he always makes me think.
That's the big thing.
He makes me question myself.
How many times have I disagreed with him?
And then a week later with someone else I find I'm arguing as he would argue.
Judging people by his standards.
He's chipped off all (well, some of, anyway) my silliness, my stupid fussy frilly ideas about life and art, and modern art.
My feyness.
I've never been the same since he told me how he hated fey women.
I even learnt the word from him.
List of the ways in which he has altered me.
Either directly.
Or confirmed alterations in progress.
I.
If you are a real artist, you give your whole being to your art.
Anything short of that, then you arc not an artist.
Not what G.P. calls a ‘maker’.
2.
You don't gush.
You don't have little set-pieces or set-ideas you gush out to impress people with.
3.
You have to be Left politically because the Socialists are  the only people who care, for all their mistakes.
They feel , they want to better the world.
4.
You must make , always.
You must act, if you believe something.
Talking about acting is like boasting about pictures you're going to paint.
The most terrible bad form.
5.
If you feel something deeply, you're not ashamed to show your feeling.
6.
You accept that you are English.
You don't pretend that you'd rather be French or Italian or something else.
(Piers always talking about his American grandmother.)
7.
But you don't compromise with your background.
You cut off all the old you that gets in the way of the maker you.
If you're suburban (as I realize D and M are — their laughing at suburbia is just a blind), you throw away (cauterize) the suburbs.
If you're working class, you cauterize the working class in you.
And the same, whatever class you are, because class is primitive and silly.
(It's not only me.
Look at that time Louise's boy-friend — the miner's son from Wales — met him, and how they argued and snarled at each other, and we were all against G.P. for being so contemptuous about working class people and working-class life.
Calling them animals, not human beings.
And David Evans, all white and stammering, don't you tell me my father's a bloody animal I've got to kick out of the way, and G.P. saying I've never hurt an animal in my life, you can always make out a case for hurting human beings, but human animals deserve every sympathy.
And then David Evans coming up to me last month and actually admitting it had changed him, that evening.)
8.
You hate the political business of nationality.
You hate everything, in politics and art and everything else, that is not genuine and deep and necessary.
You don't have any time for silly trivial things.
You live seriously.
You don't go to silly films, even if you want to; you don't read cheap newspapers; you don't listen to trash on the wireless and the telly; you don't waste time talking about nothing.
You use your life.
I must have always wanted to believe in those things; I did believe in them in a vague sort of way, before I met him.
But he's made me believe them; it's the thought of him that makes me feel guilty when I break the rules.
If he's made me believe them, that means he's made a large part of the new me.
If I had a fairy godmother — please, make G.P. twenty years younger.
And please, make him physically attractive to me.
How he would despise that!
It's odd (and I feel a little guilty) but I have been feeling happier today than at any time since I came here.
A feeling all will turn out for the best.
Partly because I did something this morning.
I tried to escape.
Then, Caliban has accepted it.
I mean if he was going to attack me, he'd surely do it at some time when he had a reason to be angry.
As he was this morning.
He has tremendous self-control, in some ways.
I know I also feel happy because I've been not here for most of the day.
I've been mainly thinking about G.P.
In his world, not this one here.
I remembered so much.
I would have liked to write it all down.
I gorged myself on memories.
This world makes that world seem so real, so living, so beautiful.
Even the sordid parts of it.
And partly, too, it's been a sort of indulging in wicked vanity about myself.
Remembering things G.P. has said to me, and other people.
Knowing I am rather a special person.
Knowing I am intelligent, knowing that I am beginning to understand life much better than most people of my age.
Even knowing that I shall never be so stupid as to be vain about it, but be grateful, be terribly glad (especially after this) to be alive, to be who I am — Miranda, and unique.
I shall never let anyone see this.
Even if it is the true, it must sound vain.
Just as I never never let other girls see that I know I am pretty; nobody knows how I've fallen over myself not to take that  unfair advantage.
Wandering male eyes, even the nicest, I've snubbed.
Minny: one day when I'd been gushing about her dress when she was going out to a dance.
She said, shut up.
You're so pretty you don t even have to try.
G.P. saying, you've every kind of face.
Wicked.
October 21st
I'm making him cook better.
Absolute ban on frozen food.
I must have fruit, green vegetables.
I have steak.
Salmon.
I ordered him to get caviare yesterday.
It irritates me that I can't think of enough rare foods I haven't had and have wanted to have.
Pig.
Caviare is wonderful.
I've had another bath.
He daren't refuse, I think he thinks ‘ladies’ fall down dead if they don't have a bath when they want one.
I've put a message down the place.
In a little plastic bottle with a yard of red ribbon round it.
I hope it will become unrolled and someone may see it.
Somewhere.
Some time.
They ought to find the house easily enough.
He was silly to tell me about the date over the door.
I had to end by saying THIS IS NOT A HOAX.
Terribly difficult not to make it sound like a silly joke.
And I said anyone ringing up D and telling him would get £25.
I'm going to launch a bottle on the sea (hmm) every time I have a bath.
He's taken down all the brass gewgaws on the landing and stairs.
And the horrible viridian-orange-magenta paintings of Majorcan fishing-villages.
The poor place sighs with relief.
I like being upstairs.
It's nearer freedom.
Everything's locked.
All the windows in the front of the house have indoor shutters.
The others are padlocked.
(Two cars passed tonight, but it must be a very unimportant road.)
I've also started to educate him.
Tonight in the lounge (my hands tied, of course) we went through a book of paintings.
No mind of his own.
I don't think he listens half the time.
He's thinking about sitting near me and straining to be near without touching.
I don't know if it's sex, or fear that I'm up to some trick.
If he does think about the pictures, he accepts everything I  say.
If I said Michelangelo's David was a frying-pan he'd say ‘I see.’
Such people.
I must have stood next to them in the Tube, passed them in the street, of course I've overheard them and I knew they existed.
But never really believed they exist.
So totally blind.
It never seemed possible.
Dialogue.
He was sitting still looking at the book with an Art-Is Wonderful air about him (for my benefit, not because he believes it, of course).
M. Do you know what's really odd about this house?
There aren't any books.
Except what you've bought for me.
C. Some upstairs.
M. About butterflies.
C. Others.
M. A few measly detective novels.
Don't you ever read proper books — real books?
(Silence .)
Books about important things by people who really feel about life.
Not just paperbacks to kill time on a train journey.
You know, books?
C. Light novels are more my line.
(He's like one of those boxers.
You wish he'd lie down and be knocked out .)
M. You can jolly well read The Catcher In The Rye .
I've almost finished it.
Do you know I've read it twice and I'm five years younger than you are?
C. I'll read it.
M. It's not a punishment.
C. I looked at it before I brought it down.
M. And you didn't like it.
C. I'll try it.
M. You make me sick.
Silence then.
I felt unreal, as if it was a play and I couldn't remember who I was in it.
And I asked him earlier today why he collected butterflies.
C. You get a nicer class of people.
M. You can't collect them just because of that.
C. It was a teacher I had.
When I was a kid.
He showed me how.
He collected.
Didn't know much.
Still set the old way.
(Something to do with the angle of the wings.
The modern way is to have them at right angles .)
And my uncle.
He was interested in nature.
He always helped.
M. He sounds nice.
C. People interested in nature always are nice.
You take what we call the Bug Section.
That's the Entomological Section of the Natural History Society back home.
They treat you for what you are.
Don't look down their noses at you.
None of that.
M. They're not always nice.
(But he didn't get it .)
C. You get the snob ones.
But they're mostly like I say.
A nicer class of people than what you…what I meet…met in the ordinary way.
M. Didn't your friends despise you?
Didn't they think it was cissy?
C. I didn't have any friends.
They were just people I worked with.
(After a bit he said, they had their silly jokes.)
M. Such as?
C. Just silly jokes.
I didn't go on.
I have an irresistible desire sometimes to get to the bottom of him, to drag things he won't talk about out of him.
But it's bad.
It sounds as if I care about him and his miserable, wet, unwithit life.
When you use words.
The gaps.
The way Caliban sits, a certain bowed-and-upright posture — why?
Embarrassment?
To spring at me if I run for it?
I can draw it.
I can draw his face and his expressions, but words are all so used, they've been used about so many other things and people.
I write ‘he smiled’.
What does that mean?
No more than a kindergarten poster  painting of a turnip with a moon-mouth smile.
Yet if I draw the smile…
Words are so crude, so terribly primitive compared to drawing, painting, sculpture.
‘I sat on my bed and he sat by the door and we talked and I tried to persuade him to use his money to educate himself and he said he would but I didn't feel convinced.’
Like a messy daub.
Like trying to draw with a broken lead.
All this is my own thinking.
I need to see G.P.
He'd tell me the names of ten books where it's all said much better.
How I hate ignorance!
Caliban's ignorance, my ignorance, the world's ignorance!
Oh, I could learn and learn and learn and learn.
I could cry, I want to learn so much.
Gagged and bound.
I'll put this to bed where it lives under the mattress.
Then I'll pray to God for learning.
October 22nd
A fortnight today.
I have marked the days on the side of the screen, like Robinson Crusoe.
I feel depressed.
Sleepless.
I must, must, must escape.
I'm getting so pale.
I feel ill, weak, all the time.
This terrible silence.
He's so without mercy.
So incomprehensible.
What does he want?
What is to happen?
He must see I'm getting ill.
I told him this evening that I must have some daylight.
I made him look at me and see how pale I am.
Tomorrow, tomorrow.
He never says no outright.
Today I've been thinking he could keep me here for ever.
It wouldn't be very long, because I'd die.
It's absurd, it's diabolical but there is no way of escape.
I've been trying to find loose stones again.
I could dig a tunnel round the door.
I could dig a tunnel right out.
But it would have to be at least twenty feet long.
All the earth.
Being trapped inside it.
I could never do it.
I'd rather die.
So it must be a tunnel round the door.
But to do that I must have time.
I must be sure he is away for at least six hours.
Three for the tunnel, two to break through the outer door.
I feel it is my best chance, I mustn't waste it, spoil it through lack of preparation.
I can't sleep.
I must do something.
I'm going to write about the first time I met G.P.
Caroline said, oh, this is Miranda.
My niece.
And went on telling him odiously about me (one Saturday morning shopping in the Village) and I didn't know where to look, although I'd been wanting to meet him.
She'd talked about him before.
At once I liked the way he treated her, coolly, not trying to hide he was bored.
Not giving way before her, like everyone  else.
She talked about him all the way home.
I knew she was shocked by him, although she wouldn't admit it.
The two broken marriages and then the obvious fact that he didn't think much of her.
So that I wanted to defend him from the beginning.
Then meeting him walking on the Heath.
Having wanted to meet him again, and being ashamed again.
The way he walked.
Very self-contained, not loosely.
Such a nice old pilot-coat.
He said hardly anything, I knew he really didn't want to be with us (with Caroline) but he'd caught us up; he can't have spotted from behind who we were, he was obviously going the same way.
And perhaps (I'm being vain) it was something that happened when Caroline was going on in her silly woman-of-advanced-ideas way — just a look between us.
I knew he was irritated and he knew I was ashamed.
So he went round Kenwood with us and Caroline showed off.
Until she said in front of the Rembrandt, ‘Don't you think he got the teeniest bit bored halfway through — I mean I never feel I feel what I ought to feel.
You know?’
And she gave him her stupid listen-to-me laugh.
I was looking at him and his face suddenly went minutely stiff, as if he'd been caught off guard.
It wasn't done for me to see, it was the minutest change in the set of his mouth.
He just gave her one look.
Almost amused.
But his voice wasn't.
It was icy cold.
I must go now.
Goodbye.
The goodbye was for me.
It wrote me off.
Or it said — so you can put up with this?
I mean (looking back on it) he seemed to be teaching me a lesson.
I had to choose.
Caroline's way, or his.
And he was gone, we didn't even answer, and Caroline was looking after him, and shrugging and looking at me and saying, well, really.
I watched him go out, his hands in his pockets.
I was red.
Caroline was furious, trying to slide out of it.
(‘He's always like that, he does it deliberately.’)
Sneering at his painting all the  way home (‘second-rate Paul Nash' — ridiculously unfair).
And me feeling so angry with her, and sorry for her at the same time.
I couldn't speak.
I couldn't be sorry for her, but I couldn't tell her he was right.
Between them Caroline and M have every quality I hate in other women.
I had a sort of despair for days afterwards, thinking how much of their rotten, pretentious blood I must have in me.
Of course, there are times when I like Caroline.
Her briskness.
Her enthusiasm.
Her kindness.
And even all the pretentiousness that's so horrid next to the real thing — well, it's better than nothing.
I used to think the world of her when she came to stay.
I used to love staying with her.
She backed me up when there was the great family war about my future.
All that till I lived with her and saw through her.
Grew up.
(I'm being a Hard Young Woman.)
Then a week later I ran into the lift at the Tube and he was the only other person there.
I said hallo, too brightly.
Went red again.
He just nodded as if he didn't want to speak, and then at the bottom (it was vanity, I couldn't bear to be lumped with Caroline) I said, I'm sorry my aunt said that at Kenwood.
He said, she always irritates me.
I knew he didn't want to talk about it.
As we went towards the platforms, I said, she's frightened of seeming behind the times.
Aren't you?— and he gave me one of his dry little smiles.
I thought, he doesn't like me playing at ‘us’ against ‘her’.
We were passing a film poster and he said, that's a good film.
Have you seen it?
Do.
When we came out on the platform, he said, come round one day.
But leave your bloody aunt at home.
And he smiled.
A little infectious mischievous smile.
Not his age, at all.
Then he walked off.
So by-himself.
So indifferent.
So I did go round.
One Saturday morning.
He was surprised.
I had to sit in silence for twenty minutes with him and the weird Indian music.
He got straight back on to the divan and lay with his eyes shut, as if I shouldn't have come and I felt I ought never  to have come (especially without telling C), and I felt as well that it really was a bit much, a pose.
I couldn't relax.
At the end he asked me about myself, curtly, as if it was all rather a bore.
And I stupidly tried to impress him.
Do the one thing I shouldn't.
Show off.
I kept on thinking, he didn't really mean me to come round.
Suddenly he cut me short and took me round the room and made me look at things.
His studio.
The most beautiful room.
I always feel happy there.
Everything in harmony.
Everything expressing only him (it's not deliberate, he hates ‘interior decoration’ and gimmicks and Vogue ).
But it's all him.
Toinette, with her silly female House and Garden ideas of austere good taste, calling it ‘cluttered’.
I could have bitten her head off.
The feeling that someone lives all his life in it, works in it, thinks in it, is it.
And we thawed out.
I stopped trying to be clever.
He showed me how he gets his ‘haze’ effect.
Tonksing gouache.
With all his little home-made tools.
Some friends of his came in, Barber and Frances Cruikshank.
He said, this is Miranda Grey I can't stand her aunt, all in one breath, and they laughed, they were old friends.
I wanted to leave.
But they were going for a walk, they had come in to make him go with them, and they wanted me to go too.
Barber Cruikshank did; he had special seduction eyes for me.
Supposing aunt sees us, said G.P. Barber's got the foulest reputation in Cornwall.
I said, she's my aunt.
Not my duenna.
So we all went to the Vale of Health pub and then on to Kenwood.
Frances told me about their life in Cornwall and I felt for the first time in my life that I was among people of an older generation that I understood, real people.
And at the same time I couldn't help seeing Barber was a bit of a sham.
All those funny malicious stories.
While G.P. was the one who led us into all the serious things.
I don't mean that he wasn't gay, too.
Only he has this strange twist of plunging straight into what matters.
Once when he was away getting drinks, Barber asked me how long I'd known G.P.
Then he said, I wish to God I'd met someone like G.P. when I was a student.
And quiet little Frances said, we think he's the most wonderful person.
He's one of the few.
She didn't say which few, but I knew what she meant.
At Kenwood G.P. made us split.
He took me straight to the Rembrandt and talked about it, without lowering his voice, and I had the smallness to be embarrassed because some other people there stared at us.
I thought, we must look like father and daughter.
He told me all about the background to the picture, what Rembrandt probably felt like at that time, what he was trying to say, how he said it.
as if I knew nothing about art.
as if he was trying to get rid of a whole cloud of false ideas I probably had about it.
We went out to wait for the others.
He said, that picture moves me very much.
And he looked at me, as if he thought I might laugh.
One of those flashes of shyness he has.
I said, it moves me now, too.
But he grinned.
It can't possibly.
Not for years yet.
How do you know?
He said, I suppose there are people who are purely moved by great art.
I never met a painter who was.
I'm not.
All I think of when I see that picture is that it has the supreme mastery I have spent all my life trying to attain.
And shall not.
Ever.
You're young.
You can understand.
But you can't feel that yet.
I said, I think I do.
He said, then that's bad.
You should be blind to failure.
At your age.
Then he said, don't try to be our age.
I shall despise you if you do.
He said, you're like a kid trying to see over a six-foot wall.
That was the first time.
He hated me for attracting him.
The Professor Higgins side of him.
Later, when the Cruikshanks came out, he said, as they walked towards us, Barber's a womanizer.
Refuse to meet him if he asks.
I gave him a surprised look.
He said, smiling at them, not you, I can't stand the pain for Frances.
Back in Hampstead I left them and went on home.
All the way back there I'd realized that G.P. was making sure Barber Cruikshank and I shouldn't be left alone.
They (Barber) asked me to come to see them if I was ever in Cornwall.
G.P. said, see you one day.
as if he didn't care whether he did or not.
I told Caroline I'd met him by chance.
He had said he was sorry (lie).
If she'd rather I didn't see him, I wouldn't.
But I found him very stimulating to be with, full of ideas, I needed to meet such people.
It was too bad of me, I knew she would do the decent thing if I put it like that.
I was my own mistress — and so on.
And then she said, darling, you know I'm the last person to be a prude, but his reputation…there must be fire, there's so much smoke.
I said, I'd heard about it.
I could look after myself.
It's her own fault.
She shouldn't insist on being called Caroline and treated like a girl in so many ways.
I can't respect her as an aunt.
As a giver of advice.
Everything's changing.
I keep on thinking of him: of things he said and I said, and how we neither of us really understood what the other meant.
No, he understood, I think.
He counts possibilities so much faster than I can.
I'm growing up so quickly down here.
Like a mushroom.
Or is it that I've lost my sense of balance?
Perhaps it's all a dream.
I jab myself with the pencil But perhaps that's a dream, too.
If he came to the door now I should run into his arms.
I should want him to hold my hand for weeks.
I mean I believe I could love him in the other way, his way, now.
October 23rd
The curse is with me.
I'm a bitch to C. No mercy.
It's the lack of privacy on top of everything else.
I made him let me walk in the cellar this morning.
I think I could hear a tractor working.
And sparrows.
So daylighty, sparrows.
An aeroplane.
I was crying.
My emotions are all topsy-turvy, like frightened monkeys in a cage.
I felt I was going mad last night, so I wrote and wrote and wrote myself into the other world.
To escape in spirit, if not in fact.
To prove it still exists.
I've been making sketches for a painting I shall do when I'm free.
A view of a garden through a door.
It sounds silly in words.
But I see it as something very special, all black, umber, dark, dark grey, mysterious angular forms in shadow leading to the distant soft honey-whitish square of the light-filled door.
A sort of horizontal shaft.
I sent him away after supper and I've been finishing Emma .
I am Emma Woodhouse.
I feel for her, of her and in her.
I have a different sort of snobbism, but I understand her snobbism.
Her priggishness.
I admire it.
I know she does wrong things, she tries to organize other people's lives, she can't see Mr Knightley is a man in a million.
She's temporarily silly, yet all the time one knows she's basically intelligent, alive.
Creative, determined to set the highest standards.
A real human being.
Her faults are my faults: her virtues I must make my virtues.
And all day I've been thinking — I shall write some more about G.P. tonight.
There was the time I took some of my work round for him to look at.
I took the things I thought he would like (not just the clever-clever things, like the perspective of Ladymont).
He didn't say a thing as he looked through them.
Even when he was looking at the ones like the Carmen at Ivinghoe ) that I think are my best (or did then).
And at the end he said, they're not much  good.
In my opinion.
But a bit better than I expected.
It was as if he had turned and hit me with his fist, I couldn't hide it.
He went on, it's quite useless if I think of your feelings in any way at all.
I can see you're a draughtsman, you've a fairish sense of colour and what-not, sensitive.
All that.
But you wouldn't be at the Slade if you hadn't.
I wanted him to stop but he would go on.
You've obviously seen quite a lot of good painting.
Tried not to plagiarize too flagrantly.
But this thing of your sister — Kokoschka, a mile off.
He must have seen my cheeks were red because he said, is all this rather disillusioning?
It's meant to be.
It nearly killed me.
I know he was right; it would have been ridiculous if he hadn't said exactly what he thought.
If he'd just kind-uncled me.
But it hurt.
It hurt like a series of slaps across the face.
I'd made up my mind that he would like some of my work.
What made it worse was his coldness.
He seemed so absolutely serious and clinical.
Not the faintest line of humour or tenderness, even of sarcasm, on his face.
Suddenly much, much older than me.
He said, one has to learn that painting well — in the academic and technical sense — comes right at the bottom of the list.
I mean, you've got that ability.
So have thousands.
But the thing I look for isn't here.
It just isn't here.
Then he said, I know this hurts.
As a matter of fact, I nearly asked you not to bring this round.
But then I thought…there's a sort of eagerness about you.
You'd survive.
You knew they wouldn't be any good, I said.
I expected just about this.
Shall we forget you brought them?
But I knew he was challenging me.
I said, tell me in detail what is wrong with this.
And I gave him one of the street scenes.
He said, it's quite graphic, well composed, I can't tell you details.
But it's not living art.
It's not a limb of your body.
I don't expect you to understand this at your age.
It can't be taught you.
You either have it one day, or you don't.
They're  teaching you to express personality at the Slade — personality in general.
But however good you get at translating personality into line or paint it's no go if your personality isn't worth translating.
It's all luck.
Pure hazard.
He spoke in fits and starts.
And there was a silence.
I said, shall I tear them up? and he said, now you're being hysterical.
I said, I've got so much to learn.
He got up and said, I think you've got something in you.
I don't know.
Women very rarely have.
I mean most women just want to be good at something, they've got good-at minds, and they mean deftness and a flair and good taste and what-not.
They can't ever understand that if your desire is to go to the furthest limits of yourself then the actual form your art takes doesn't seem important to you.
Whether you use words or paint or sounds.
What you will.
I said, go on.
He said, it's rather like your voice.
You put up with your voice and speak with it because you haven't any choice.
But it's what you say that counts.
It's what distinguishes all great art from the other kind.
The technically accomplished buggers are two a penny in any period.
Especially in this great age of universal education.
He was sitting on his divan, talking at my back.
I had to stare out of the window.
I thought I was going to cry.
He said, critics spiel away about technical accomplishment.
Absolutely meaningless, that sort of jargon.
Art's cruel.
You can get away with murder with words.
But a picture is like a window straight through to your inmost heart.
And all you've done here is build a lot of little windows on to a heart full of other fashionable artists' paintings.
He came and stood beside me and picked out one of the new abstracts I'd done at home.
You're saying something here about Nicholson or Pasmore.
Not about yourself.
You're using a camera.
Just as trompe-l'oeil is mischannelled photography, so is painting in someone else's style.
You're photographing here.
That's all.
I'll never learn, I said.
It's to unlearn, he said.
You've nearly finished the learning.
The rest is luck.
No, a little more than luck.
Courage.
Patience.
We talked for hours.
He talked and I listened.
It was like wind and sunlight.
It blew all the cobwebs away.
Shone on everything.
Now I write down what he said, it seems so obvious.
But it's something in the way he says things.
He is the only person I know who always seems to mean what he says when he talks about art.
If one day you found he didn't, it would be like a blasphemy.
And there is the fact that he is a good painter, and I know he will be quite famous one day, and this influences me more than it should.
Not only what he is, what he will be.
I remember later he said (Professor Higgins again), you don't really stand a dog's chance anyhow.
You're too pretty.
The art of love's your line: not the love of art.
I'm going to the Heath to drown myself, I said.
I shouldn't marry.
Have a tragic love affaire .
Have your ovaries cut out.
Something.
And he gave me one of his really wicked looks out of the corners of his eyes.
It wasn't just that.
It was frightened in a funny little-boy way, too.
as if he'd said something he knew he shouldn't have, to see how I would react.
And suddenly he seemed much younger than me.
He so often seems young in a way I can't explain.
Perhaps it's that he's made me look at myself and see that what I believe is old and stuffy.
People who teach you cram old ideas, old views, old ways, into you.
Like covering plants with layer after layer of old earth; it's no wonder the poor things so rarely come up fresh and green.
But G.P. has.
I didn't recognize it as fresh-green-shootiness for a long time.
But now I do.
October 24th
Another bad day.
I made sure it was bad for Caliban, too.
Sometimes he irritates me so much that I could scream at him.
It's not so much the way he looks, though that's bad enough.
He's always so respectable, his trousers always have creases, his shirts are always clean.
I really think he'd be happier if he wore starched collars.
So utterly not with it.
And he stands.
He's the most tremendous stander-around I've ever met.
Always with that I'm-sorry expression on his face, which I begin to realize is actually contentment.
The sheer joy of having me under his power, of being able to spend all and every day staring at me.
He doesn't care what I say or how I feel — my feelings are meaningless to him — it's the fact that he's got me.
I could scream abuse at him all day long; he wouldn't mind at all.
It's me he wants, my look, my outside; not my emotions or my mind or my soul or even my body.
Not anything human .
He's a collector.
That's the great dead thing in him.
What irritates me most about him is his way of speaking.
Cliché after cliché after cliché, and all so old-fashioned, as if he's spent all his life with people over fifty.
At lunch-time today he said, I called in with regard to those records they've placed on order.
I said, Why don't you just say, ‘I asked about those records you ordered?’
He said, I know my English isn't correct, but I try to make it correct.
I didn't argue.
That sums him up.
He's got to be correct, he's got to do whatever was ‘right’ and ‘nice’before either of us was born.
I know it's pathetic, I know he's a victim of a miserable nonconformist suburban world and a miserable social class, the horrid timid copycatting genteel in-between class.
I used to think D and M's class the worst.
All golf and gin and bridge and cars and the right accent and the right money and having been to the right school and hating the arts (the theatre being a pantomime at Christmas and ‘Hay Fever’ by the Town Rep  Picasso and Bartók dirty words unless you wanted to get a laugh).
Well, that is foul.
But Caliban's England is fouler.
It makes me sick, the blindness, deadness, out-of-dateness, stodginess and, yes, sheer jealous malice of the great bulk of England.
G.P. talks about the Paris rat.
Not being able to face England any more.
I can understand that so well.
The feeling that England stifles and smothers and crushes like a steamroller over everything fresh and green and original.
And that's what causes tragic failures like Matthew Smith and Augustus John — they've done the Paris rat and they live ever after in the shadow of Gauguin and Matisse or whoever it may be — just as G.P. says he once lived under the shadow of Braque and suddenly woke up one morning to realize that all he had done for five years was a lie, because it was based on Braque's eyes and sensibilities and not his own.
Photography.
It's all because there's so little hope in England that you have to turn to Paris, or somewhere abroad.
But you have to force yourself to accept the truth — that Paris is always an escape downwards (G.P.'s words)— not saying anything against Paris, but you have to face up to England and the apathy of the environment (these are all G.P.'s words and ideas) and the great deadweight of the Calibanity of England.
And the real saints are people like Moore and Sutherland who fight to be English artists in England.
Like Constable and Palmer and Blake.
Another thing I said to Caliban the other day — we were listening to jazz — I said, don't you dig this? and he said, in the garden.
I said he was so square he was hardly credible.
Oh, that, he said.
Like rain, endless dreary rain.
Colour-killing.
I've forgotten to write down the bad dream I had last night.
I always seem to get them at dawn, it's something to do with the stuffiness of this room after I've been locked in it for a night.
(The relief — when he comes and the door is open, and the fan on.
I've asked him to let me go straight out and breathe the cellar air, but he always makes me wait till I've had breakfast.
As I think he might not let me have my half-hour in midmorning if he let me go out earlier, I don't insist.)
The dream was this.
I'd done a painting.
I can't really remember what it was like but I was very pleased with it.
It was at home.
I went out and while I was out I knew something was wrong.
I had to get home.
When I rushed up to my room M was there sitting at the pembroke table (Minny was standing by the wall — looking frightened, I think G.P. was there, too, and other people, for some peculiar reason) and the picture was in shreds — great long strips of canvas.
And M was stabbing at the table top with her secateurs and I could see she was white with rage.
And I felt the same.
The most wild rage and hatred.
I woke up then.
I have never felt such rage for M — even that day when she was drunk and hit me in front of that hateful boy Peter Catesby.
I can remember standing there with her slap on my cheek and feeling ashamed, outraged, shocked, everything…but sorry for her.
I went and sat by her bed and held her hand and let her cry and forgave her and defended her with Daddy and Minny.
But this dream seemed so real, so terribly natural.
I've accepted that she tried to stop me from becoming an artist.
Parents always misunderstand their children (no, I won't misunderstand mine), I knew I was supposed to be the son and surgeon poor D never was able to be.
Carmen will be that now.
I mean I have forgiven them their fighting against my ambition for their ambitions.
I won, so I must forgive.
But that hatred in that dream.
It was so real.
I don't know how to exorcize it.
I could tell it to G.P.
But there's only the slithery scratch of my pencil on this pad.
Nobody who has not lived in a dungeon could understand  how absolute the silence down here is.
No noise unless I make it.
So I feel near death.
Buried.
No outside noises to help me be living at all.
Often I put on a record.
Not to hear music, but to hear something .
I have a strange illusion quite often.
I think I've become deaf.
I have to make a little noise to prove I'm not.
I clear my throat to show myself that everything's quite normal.
It's like the little Japanese girl they found in the ruins of Hiroshima.
Everything dead; and she was singing to her doll.
October 25th
I must must must escape.
I spent hours and hours today thinking about it.
Wild ideas.
He's so cunning, it's incredible.
Foolproof.
It must seem I never try to escape.
But I can't try every day, that's the trouble.
I have to space out the attempts.
And each day here is like a week outside.
Violence is no good.
It must be cunning.
Face-to-face, I can't be violent.
The idea makes me feel weak at the knees.
I remember wandering with Donald somewhere in the East End after we'd been to the Whitechapel and we saw a group of teddies standing round two middle-aged Indians.
We crossed the street, I felt sick.
The teddies were shouting, chivvying and bullying them off the pavement on to the road.
Donald said, what can one do, and we both pretended to shrug it off, to hurry away.
But it was beastly, their violence and our fear of violence.
If he came to me now and knelt and handed me the poker, I couldn't hit him.
It's no good.
I've been trying to sleep for the last half-hour, and I can't.
Writing here is a sort of drug.
It's the only thing I look forward to.
This afternoon I read what I wrote about G.P. the day before yesterday.
And it seemed vivid.
I know it seems vivid because my imagination fills in all the bits another person wouldn't understand.
I mean, it's vanity.
But it seems a sort of magic, to be able to call my past back.
And I just can't live in this present.
I would go mad if I did.
I've been thinking today of the time I took Piers and Antoinette to meet him.
The black side of him.
No, I was stupid, stupid.
They'd come up to Hampstead to have coffee and we were to go to the Everyman, but the queue was too long.
So I let them bully me into taking them round.
It was vanity on my part.
I'd talked too much about him.
So that they began to hint that I couldn't be so very friendly if I was afraid to take them round to meet him.
And I fell for it.
I could see he wasn't pleased at the door, but he asked us up.
And oh, it was terrible.
Terrible .
Piers was at his slickest and cheapest and Antoinette was almost parodying herself, she was so sex-kittenish.
I tried to excuse everyone to everyone else.
G.P. was in such a weird mood.
I knew he could withdraw, but he went out of his way to be rude.
He could have seen Piers was only trying to cover up his feeling of insecurity.
They tried to get him to discuss his own work, but he wouldn't.
He started to be outrageous.
Four-letter words.
All sorts of bitter cynical things about the Slade and various artists — things I know he doesn't believe.
He certainly managed to shock me and Piers, but of course Antoinette just went one better.
Simpered and trembled her eyelashes, and said something fouler still.
So he changed tack.
Cut us short every time we tried to speak (me too).
And then I did something even more stupid than the having gone there in the first place.
There was a pause, and he obviously thought we would go.
But I idiotically thought I could see Antoinette and Piers looking rather amused and I was sure it was because they felt I didn't know him as well as I'd said.
So I had to try to prove to them that I could manage him.
I said, could we have a record, G.P.?
For a moment he looked as if he would say no, but then he said, why not?
Let's hear someone saying something.
For a change.
He didn't give us any choice, he just went and put a record on.
He lay on the divan with his eyes closed, as usual, and Piers and Antoinette obviously thought it was a pose.
Such a thin strange quavering noise, and such a tense awkward atmosphere had built up; I mean it was the music on top of everything else.
Piers started to smirk and Antoinette had a fit of — she can't giggle, she's too slinky, her equivalent — and I  smiled.
I admit it.
Piers cleaned out his ear with his little finger and then leant on his elbow with his forehead on outstretched fingers — and shook his head every time the instrument (I didn't know what it was then) vibrated.
Antoinette half-choked.
It was awful.
I knew he would hear.
He did.
He saw Piers cleaning his ears again.
And Piers saw himself being seen and put on a clever sort of don't-mind-us smile.
G.P. jumped up and turned off the player.
He said, you don't like it?
Piers said, have I got to like it?
I said, Piers, that wasn't funny.
Piers said, I wasn't making a noise, was I?
Have we got to like it?
G.P. said, get out.
Antoinette said, I'm afraid I always think of Beecham.
You know.
Two skeletons copulating on a tin roof?
G.P. said (frightening, his face, he can look devilish) first, I'm delighted that you should admire Beecham.
A pompous little duckarsed bandmaster who stood against everything creative in the art of his time.
Second, if you can't tell that from a harpsichord, Christ help you.
Third (to Piers), I think you're the smuggest young layabout I've met for years and you (me) are these your friends?
I stood there, I couldn't say anything, he made me furious, they made me furious and anyhow I was ten times more embarrassed than furious.
Piers shrugged, Antoinette looked bewildered, but vaguely amused, the bitch, and I was red.
It makes me red again to think of it (and of what happened later — how could he?).
Take it easy, said Piers.
It's only a record.
I suppose he was angry, he must have known it was a stupid thing to say.
You think that's only a record, G.P. said.
Is that it?
It's just a record?
Are you like this stupid little bitch's aunt — do you think Rembrandt got the teeniest bit bored when he painted?
Do you think Bach made funny faces and giggled when he wrote that?
Do you?
Piers looked deflated, almost frightened.
Well, DO YOU? shouted G.P.
He was terrible.
Both ways.
He was terrible, because he had started it all, he had determined to behave in that way.
And wonderfully terrible, because passion is something you never see.
I've grown up among people who've always tried to hide passion.
He was raw.
Naked.
Trembling with rage.
Piers said, we're not as old as you are.
It was pathetic, feeble.
Showed him up for what he really is.
Christ, said G.P.
Art students.
ART students.
I can't write what he said next.
Even Antoinette looked shocked.
We just turned and went.
The studio door slammed behind us when we were on the stairs.
I hissed a damn-you at Piers at the bottom and pushed them out.
Darling, he'll murder you, said Antoinette.
I shut the door and waited.
After a moment I heard the music again.
I went up the stairs and very slowly opened the door.
Perhaps he heard, I don't know, but he didn't look up and I sat on a stool near the door until it was finished.
He said, what do you want, Miranda?
I said, to say I'm sorry.
And to hear you say you're sorry.
He went and stared out of the window.
I said, I know I was stupid, I may be little, but I'm not a bitch.
He said, you try (I think he didn't mean, you try to be a bitch).
I said, you could have told us to go away.
We would have understood.
There was a silence.
He turned to look at me across the studio.
I said, I'm very sorry.
He said, go home.
We can't go to bed together.
When I stood up, he said, I'm glad you came back.
It was decent of you.
Then he said, you would.
I went down the stairs and he came out behind me.
I don't  want to go to bed with you, I'm speaking about the situation.
Not us.
Understand?
I said, of course I understand.
And I went on down.
Being female.
Wanting to make him feel I was hurt.
As I opened the bottom door he said, I've been hitting it.
He must have seen I didn't understand, because he added, drinking.
He said, I'll telephone you.
He did, he took me to a concert, to hear the Russians play Shostakovich.
And he was sweet .
That's just what he was.
Even though he never apologized.
October 26th
I don't trust him.
He's bought this house.
If he lets me go he'll have to trust me.
Or he'll have to sell it and disappear before I can (could) get to the police.
Either way it would be unlike him.
It's too depressing.
I have to believe he'll keep his word.
He spends pounds and pounds on me.
It must be nearly two hundred already.
Any book, any record, any clothes.
He has all my sizes.
I sketch what I want, I mix up the colours as a guide.
He even buys all my underwear.
I can't put on the black and peach creations he bought before, so I told him to go and get something sensible at Marks and Spencer.
He said, can I buy a lot together?
Of course it must be agony for him to go shopping for me (what does he do at the chemist's?), so I suppose he prefers to get it all over in one go.
But what can they think of him?
One dozen pants and three slips and vests and bras.
I asked him what they said when he gave the order and he went red.
I think they think I'm a bit peculiar, he said.
It was the first time I've really laughed since I came here.
Every time he buys me something I think it is proof that he's not going to kill me or do anything else unpleasant.
I shouldn't, but I like it when he comes in at lunch-time from wherever he goes.
There are always parcels.
It's like having a perpetual Christmas Day and not even having to thank Santa Claus.
Sometimes he brings things I haven't asked for.
He always brings flowers, and that is nice.
Chocolates, but he eats more of them than I do.
And he keeps on asking me what I'd like him to buy.
I know he's the Devil showing me the world that can be mine.
So I don't sell myself to him.
I cost him a lot in little things, but I know he wants me to ask for something big.
He's dying to make me grateful.
But he shan't.
An awful thought that came to me today: they will have  suspected G.P.
Caroline is bound to give the police his name.
Poor man.
He will be sarcastic and they won't like it.
I've been trying to draw him today.
Strange.
It is hopeless.
Nothing like him.
I know he is short, only an inch or two more than me.
(I've always dreamed tall men.
Silly.)
He is going bald and he has a nose like a Jew's, though he isn't (not that I'd mind if he was).
And the face is too broad.
Battered, worn; battered and worn and pitted into a bit of a mask, so that I never quite believe whatever expression it's got on.
I glimpse things I think must come from behind; but I'm never very sure.
He puts on a special dry face for me sometimes.
I see it go on.
It doesn't seem dishonest, though, it seems just G.P.
Life is a bit of a joke, it's silly to take it seriously.
Be serious about art, but joke a little about everything else.
Not the day when the H-bombs drop, but the ‘day of the great fry-up’.
When the great fry-up takes place.’
Sick, sick.
It's his way of being healthy.
Short and broad and broad-faced with a hook-nose; even a bit Turkish.
Not really English-looking at all.
I have this silly notion about English good looks.
Advertisement men.
Ladymont men.
October 27th
The tunnel round the door is my best bet.
I feel I must try it soon.
I think I've worked out a way of getting him away.
I've been looking very carefully at the door this afternoon.
It's wood faced with iron on this side.
Terribly solid.
I could never break it down or lever it open.
He's made sure there's nothing to break and lever with, in any case.
I've begun to collect some ‘tools’.
A tumbler I can break.
That will be something sharp.
A fork and two teaspoons.
They're aluminium, but they might be useful.
What I need most is something strong and sharp to pick out the cement between the stones with.
Once I can make a hole through them it shouldn't be too difficult to get round into the outer cellar.
This makes me feel practical.
Businesslike.
But I haven't done anything.
I feel more hopeful.
I don't know why.
But I do.
October 28th
G.P. as an artist.
Caroline's ‘second-rate Paul Nash’— horrid, but there is something in it.
Nothing like what he would call ‘photography’.
But not absolutely individual.
I think it's just that he arrived at the same conclusions.
And either he sees that (that his landscapes have a Nashy quality) or he doesn't.
Either way, it's a criticism of him.
That he neither sees it nor says it.
I'm being objective about him.
His faults.
His hatred of abstract painting — even of people like Jackson Pollock and Nicholson.
Why?
I'm more than half convinced intellectually by him, but I still feel some of the paintings he says are bad are beautiful.
I mean, he's too jealous.
He condemns too much.
I don't mind this.
I'm trying to be honest about him, and about myself.
He hates people who don't ‘think things through’ and he does it.
Too much.
But he has (except over women) principles.
He makes most people with so-called principles look like empty tin cans.
(I remember he once said about a Mondrian —‘It isn't whether you like it, but whether you ought to like it’— I mean, he dislikes abstract art on principle.
He ignores what he feels .)
I've been leaving the worst to last.
Women.
It must have been about the fourth or fifth time I went round to see him.
There was the Nielsen woman.
I suppose (now) they'd been to bed together.
I was so naive.
But they didn't seem to mind my coming.
They needn't have answered the bell.
And she was rather nice to me in her glittery at-home sort of way.
Must be forty — what could he see in her?
Then a long time after that, it was May, and I'd been the night before, but he was out (or in bed with someone?) and that evening he was in and alone, and we talked some time (he was telling me about John Minton) and then he put on an Indian record and we were quiet.
But he didn't shut his eyes that time, he was looking at me and I was  embarrassed.
When the raga ended there was a silence.
I said, shall I turn it? but he said, no.
He was in the shadow, I couldn't see him very well.
Suddenly he said, Would you like to come to bed?
I said, no I wouldn't.
He caught me by surprise and I sounded foolish.
Frightened.
He said, his eyes still on me, ten years ago I would have married you.
You would have been my second disastrous marriage.
It wasn't really a surprise.
It had been waiting for weeks.
He came and stood by me.
You're sure?
I said, I haven't come here for that.
At all.
It seemed so unlike him.
So crude.
I think now, I know now, he was being kind.
Deliberately obvious and crude.
Just as he sometimes lets me beat him at chess.
He went to make Turkish coffee and he said through the door, you're misleading.
I went and stood in the kitchen door, while he watched the vriki.
He looked back at me.
I could swear you want it sometimes.
How old are you?
I said.
I could be your father.
Is that what you mean?
I hate promiscuity, I said.
I didn't mean that.
He had his back turned to me.
I felt angry with him, he seemed so irresponsible.
I said, anyhow, you don't attract me that way in the least.
He said, with his back still turned, what do you mean by promiscuity?
I said, going to bed for pleasure.
Sex and nothing else.
Without love.
He said, I'm very promiscuous then.
I never go to bed with the people I love.
I did once.
I said, you warned me against Barber Cruikshank.
I'm warning you against myself now, he said.
He stood watching the vriki.
You know the Ashmolean Uccello?
‘The Hunt’?
No?
The design hits you the moment you see it.
Apart from all the other technical things.
You know it's faultless.
The  professors with Middle-European names spend their lives working out what the great inner secret is, that thing you feel at the first glance.
Now, I see you have the great inner secret, too.
God knows what it is.
I'm not a Middle-European professor, I don't really care how it is.
But you have it.
You're like Sheraton joinery.
You won't fall apart.
He spoke it all in a very matter-of-fact voice.
Too.
It's hazard, of course, he said.
The genes.
He lifted the vriki off the gas-ring at the last possible moment.
The only thing is, he said, there's that scarlet point in your eye.
What is it?
Passion?
Stop?
He stood staring at me, the dry look.
It's not bed, I said.
But for someone?
For no one.
I sat on the divan and he on his high stool by the bench.
I've shocked you, he said.
I was warned.
By aunt?
Yes.
He turned and very slowly, very carefully, poured the coffee into the cups.
He said, all my life I've had to have women.
They've mostly brought me unhappiness.
The most has been brought by the relationships that were supposed to be pure and noble.
There he pointed at a photo of his two sons — that's the fine fruit of a noble relationship.
I went and got my coffee and leant against the bench, away from him.
Robert's only four years younger than you are now, he said.
Don't drink it yet.
Let the grounds settle.
He didn't seem at ease.
as if he had to talk.
Be on the defensive.
Disillusion me and get my sympathy at the same time.
He said, lust is simple.
You reach an understanding at once.
You both want to get into bed or one of you doesn't.
But love.
The women I've loved have always told me I'm selfish.
It's what makes them love me.
And then be disgusted with me.
Do you know what they always think is selfishness?
He was scraping the glue away from a broken Chinese blue-and-white bowl he'd bought in the Portobello Road, and repaired, two fiendishly excited horsemen chasing a timid little fallow-deer.
Very short-fingered, sure hands.
Not that I will paint in my own way, live in my own way, speak in my own way — they don't mind that.
It even excites them.
But what they can't stand is that I hate them when they don't behave in their own way.
It was as if I was another man.
People like your bloody aunt think I'm a cynic, a wrecker of homes.
A rake.
I've never seduced a woman in my life.
I like bed, I like the female body, I like the way even the shallowest of women become beautiful when their clothes are off and they think they're taking a profound and wicked step.
They always do, the first time.
Do you know what is almost extinct in your sex?
He looked sideways at me, so I shook my head.
Innocence.
The one time you see it is when a woman takes her clothes off and cannot look you in the eyes (as I couldn't then).
Just that first Botticelli moment of the first time of her taking her clothes off.
Soon shrivels.
The old Eve takes over.
The strumpet.
Exit Anadyomene.
Who's she?
I asked.
He explained.
I was thinking, I shouldn't let him talk like this, he's drawing a net round me.
I didn't think it, I felt it.
He said, I've met dozens of women and girls like you.
Some I've known well, some I've seduced against their better nature and my better nature, two I've even married.
Some I've hardly known at all, just stood beside them at an exhibition, in the Tube, wherever.
After a while he said, you've read Jung?
No, I said.
He's given your species of the sex a name.
Not that it helps.
The disease is just as bad.
Tell me the name, I said.
He said, you don't tell diseases their names.
Then there was a strange silence, as if we'd come to a full stop, as if he'd expected me to react in some other way.
Be more angry or shocked, perhaps.
I was shocked and angry afterwards (in a peculiar way).
But I'm glad I didn't run away.
It was one of those evenings when one grows up.
I suddenly knew I had either to behave like a shocked girl who had still been at school that time the year before; or like an adult.
You're a weird kid, he said at last.
Old-fashioned, I said.
You'd be a bloody bore if you weren't so pretty.
Thank you.
I didn't really expect you to go to bed with me, he said.
I know, I said.
He gave me a long look.
Then he changed, he got out the chess-board and we played chess and he let me beat him.
He wouldn't admit it, but I am sure he did.
We hardly said anything, we seemed to communicate through the chessmen, there was something very symbolic about my winning.
That he wished me to feel.
I don't know what it was.
I don't know whether it was that he wanted me to see my ‘virtue’ triumph over his ‘vice’, or something subtler, that sometimes losing is winning.
The next time I went he gave me a drawing he had done.
It was of the vriki and the two cups on the bench.
Beautifully drawn, absolutely simple, absolutely without fuss or nervousness, absolutely free of that clever art-student look the drawings of simple objects I do have.
Just the two cups and the little copper vriki and his hand.
Or a hand.
Lying by one of the cups, like a plaster cast.
On the back he wrote,Après , and the date.
And then,pour ‘une’ princesse lointaine .
The ‘une ’ was very heavily underlined.
I wanted to go on about Toinette.
But I'm too tired.
I want to smoke when I write, and it makes the air so stuffy.
October 29th
(Morning.)
He's gone into?
Lewes.
Toinette.
It was a month after the evening of the record.
I ought to have guessed, she had been purring over me for days, giving me arch looks.
I thought it was something to do with Piers.
And then one evening I rang the bell and then I noticed the lock was up, so I pushed the door open and looked up the stairs, at the same time as Toinette looked down round the door.
And we were looking at each other.
After a moment she came out on the landing and she was dressing.
She didn't say anything, she just gestured me to come up and into the studio and what was worst, I was red, and she was not.
She was just amused.
Don't look so shocked, she said.
He'll be back in a minute.
He's just gone out for…but I never heard what it was, because I went.
I've never really analysed why I was so angry and so shocked and so hurt.
Donald, Piers, David, everyone knows she lives in London as she lived in Stockholm — she's told me herself; they've told me.
And G.P. had told me what he was like.
It was not just jealousy.
It was that someone like G.P. could be so close to someone like her — someone so real and someone so shallow, so phoney, so loose.
But why should he have considered me at all?
There's not a single reason.
He's twenty-one years older than I am.
Nine years younger than D.
For days afterwards it wasn't G.P. I was disgusted with, but myself.
At my narrow-mindedness.
I forced myself to meet, to listen to Toinette.
She didn't crow at all.
I think that must have been G.P.'s doing.
He ordered her not to.
She went back the next day.
She said it was to say she was sorry.
And (her words), ‘It just happened.’
I was so jealous.
They made me feel older than they were.
They were like naughty children.
Happy-with-a-secret.
Then  that I was frigid.
I couldn't bear to see G.P.
In the end, it must have been a week later, he rang me up again one evening at Caroline's.
He didn't sound guilty.
I said I was too busy to see him.
I wouldn't go round that evening, no.
If he had pressed, I would have refused.
But he seemed to be about to ring off, and I said I'd go round the next day.
I so wanted him to know I was hurt.
You can't be hurt over a telephone.
Caroline said, I think you're seeing too much of him.
I said, he's having an affaire with that Swedish girl.
We even had a talk about it.
I was very fair.
I defended him.
But in bed I lay and accused him to myself.
For hours.
The first thing he said the next day was (no pretending) has she been a bitch to you?
I said, no.
Not at all.
Then, as if I didn't care, why should she?
He smiled.
I know what you're feeling, he seemed to say.
It made me want to slap his face.
I couldn't look as if I didn't care, which made it worse.
He said, men are vile.
I said, the vilest thing about them is that they can say that with a smile on their faces.
That is true, he said.
And there was silence.
I wished I hadn't come, I wished I'd cut him out of my life.
I looked at the bedroom door.
It was ajar, I could see the end of the bed.
I said, I'm not able to put life in compartments yet.
That's all.
Look, Miranda, he said, those twenty long years that lie between you and me.
I've more knowledge of life than you, I've lived more and betrayed more and seen more betrayed.
At your age one is bursting with ideals.
You think that because I can sometimes see what's trivial and what's important in art I ought to be more virtuous.
But I don't want to be virtuous.
My charm (if there is any) for you is simply frankness.
And experience.
Not goodness.
I'm not a good man.
Perhaps morally I'm younger even than you are.
Can you understand that?
He was only saying what I felt.
I was stiff and he was supple, and it ought to be the other way round.
The fault all mine.
But I kept on thinking, he took me to the concert, and he came back here to her.
I remembered times when I rang the bell and there had been no answer.
I see now it was all sexual jealousy, but then it seemed a betrayal of principles.
(I still don't know it's all muddled in my mind.
I can't judge.)
I said, I'd like to hear Ravi Shankar.
I couldn't say, I forgive you.
So we listened to that.
Then played chess.
And he beat me.
No reference to Toinette, except at the very end, on the stairs, when he said, it's all over now.
I didn't say anything.
She only did it for fun, he said.
But it was never the same.
It was a sort of truce.
I saw him a few times more, but never alone, I wrote him two letters when I was in Spain, and he sent a postcard back.
I saw him once at the beginning of this month.
But I'll write about that another time.
And I'll write about the strange talk I had with the Nielsen woman.
Something Toinette said.
She said, he talked about his boys and I felt so sorry for him.
How they used to ask him not to go to their posh prep school, but to meet them in the town.
Ashamed to have him seen.
How Robert (at Marlborough) patronizes him now.
He never talked to me about them.
Perhaps he secretly thinks I belong to the same world.
A little middle-class boarding-school prig.
(Evening.)
I tried to draw G.P. from memory again today.
Hopeless.
C sat reading The Catcher In the Rye after supper.
Several times I saw him look to see how many pages more he had to read.
He reads it only to show me how hard he is trying.
I was passing the front door tonight (bath) and I said, well, thank you for a lovely evening, goodbye now.
And I made as if to open the door.
It was locked, of course.
It seems stuck, I said.
And he didn't smile, he just stood watching me.
I said, it's only a joke, I know, he said.
It's very peculiar — he made me feel a fool.
Just by not smiling.
Of course G.P. was always trying to get me into bed.
I don't know why but I see that more clearly now than I ever did at the time.
He shocked me, bullied me, taunted me — never in nasty ways.
Obliquely.
He didn't ever force me in any way.
Touch me.
I mean, he's respected me in a queer way.
I don't think he really knew himself.
He wanted to shock me — to him or away from him, he didn't know.
Left it to chance.
More photos today.
Not many.
I said it hurt my eyes too much.
And I don't like him always ordering me about.
He's terribly obsequious, would I do this, would I oblige by…no he doesn't say ‘oblige’.
But it's a wonder he doesn't.
You ought to go in for beauty comps, he said when he was winding up his film.
Thank you, I said.
(The way we talk is mad, I don't see it till I write it down.
He talks as if I'm free to go at any minute, and I'm the same.)
I bet you'd look smashing in a wotchermercallit, he said.
I looked puzzled.
One of those French swimming things, he said.
A bikini?
I asked.
I can't allow talk like that, so I stared coldly at him.
Is that what you mean?
To photograph like, he said, going red.
And the weird thing is, I know he means exactly that.
He didn't mean to be nasty, he wasn't hinting at anything, he was just being clumsy.
As usual.
He meant literally what he said.
I would be interesting to photograph in a bikini.
I used to think, it must be there.
It's very deeply suppressed, but it must be there.
But I don't any more.
I don't think he's suppressing anything.
There's nothing to suppress.
October 30th
A lovely night-walk.
There were great reaches of clear sky, no moon, sprinkles of warm white stars everywhere, like milky diamonds, and a beautiful wind.
From the west.
I made him take me round and round, ten or twelve times.
The branches rustling, an owl hooting in the woods.
And the sky all wild, all free, all wind and air and space and stars.
Wind full of smells and far-away places.
Hopes.
The sea.
I am sure I could smell the sea.
I said (later, of course I was gagged outside), are we near the sea?
And he said, ten miles.
I said, near Lewes.
He said, I can't say.
as if someone else had strictly forbidden him to speak.
(I often feel that with him — a horrid little cringing good nature dominated by a mean bad one.)
Indoors it couldn't have been more different.
We talked about his family again.
I'd been drinking scrumpy.
I do it (a little) to see if I can get him drunk and careless, but so far he won't touch it.
He's not a teetotaller, he says.
So it's all part of his warderishness.
Won't be corrupted.
M. Tell me some more about your family.
C. Nothing more to tell.
That'd interest you .
M. That's not an answer.
C. It's like I said.
M. As I said.
C. I used to be told I was good at English.
That was before I knew you.
M. It doesn't matter.
C. I suppose you got the A level and all that.
M. Yes, I did.
C. I got O level in Maths and Biology;
M (I was counting stitches — jumper — expensive French wool ).
Good, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen…
C. I won a prize for hobbies.
M. Clever you.
Tell me more about your father.
C. I told you.
He was a representative.
Stationery and fancy goods.
M. A commercial traveller.
C. They call them representatives now.
M. He got killed in a car-crash before the war.
Your mother went off with another man.
C. She was no good.
Like me.
(I gave him an icy look.
Thank goodness his humour so rarely seeps out .)
M. So your aunt took you over.
C. Yes.
M. Like Mrs Joe and Pip.
C. Who?
M. Never mind.
C. She's all right.
She kept me out of the orphanage.
M. And your cousin Mabel.
You've never said anything about her.
C. She's older than me.
Thirty.
There's her older brother, he went out to Australia after the war to my Uncle Steve.
He's a real Australian.
Been out there years.
I never seen him.
M. And haven't you any other family?
C. There's relations of Uncle Dick.
But they and Aunt Annie never got on.
M. You haven't said what Mabel's like.
C. She's deformed.
Spastic.
Real sharp.
Always wants to know everything you've done.
M. She can't walk?
C. About the house.
We had to take her out in a chair.
M. Perhaps I've seen her.
C. You haven't missed much.
M. Aren't you sorry for her?
C. It's like you have to be sorry for her all the time.
It's Aunt Annie's fault.
M. Go on.
C. She like makes everything round her deformed too.
I can't explain.
Like nobody else had any right to be normal.
I mean she doesn't complain outright.
It's just looks she gives, and you have to be dead careful.
Suppose, well, I say not thinking one evening, I nearly missed the bus this morning, I had to run like billy-o, sure as fate Aunt Annie would say, think yourself lucky you can run.
Mabel wouldn't say anything.
She'd just look.
M. How vile!
C. You had to think very careful about what you said.
M. Carefully.
C. I mean carefully.
M. Why didn't you run away?
Live in digs?
C. I used to think about it.
M. Because they were two women on their own.
You were being a gent.
C. Being a charley, more like it.
(Pathetic, his attempts at being a cynic .)
M. And now they're in Australia making your other relations miserable.
C. I suppose so.
M. Do they write letters?
C. Yes.
Not Mabel.
M. Would you read one to me one day?
C. What for?
M. I'd be interested.
C (great inner struggle ).
I got one this morning.
I've got it on me.
(A lot of argy-bargy, but in the end he took the letter from out of his pocket .)
They're stupid.
M. Never mind.
Read it out.
All of it.
He sat by the door, and I knitted, knitted, knitted — I can't remember the letter word for word, but it was something like this: Dear Fred (that's the name she calls me by, he said, she  doesn't like Ferdinand — red with embarrassment).
Very pleased to have yours and as I said in my last it's your money, God has been very kind to you and you mustn't fly up in the face of his kindness and I wish you had not taken this step, your Uncle Steve says property's more trouble than it's worth.
I notice you don't answer my question about the woman to clean.
I know what men are and just remember what they say cleanliness is next to godliness.
I have no right and you have been very generous, Fred, Uncle Steve and the boys and Gertie can't understand why you didn't come here with us, Gert only said this morning that you ought to be here, your place is with us, but don't think I am not grateful.
I hope the Lord will forgive me but this has been a great experience and you wouldn't know Mabel, she is brown in the sun here, it is very nice, but I don't like the dust.
Everything gets dirty and they live in a different way to what we do at home, they speak English more like Americans (even Uncle Steve) than us.
I shan't be sorry to get home to Blackstone Rd, it worries me to think of the damp and the dirt, I hope you did what I said and aired all the rooms and linen like I said and got a good cleaning woman in like I said the same as with you, I hope.
Fred I am worried with all that money you won't lose your head, there are a lot of clever dishonest people (she means women, he said) about these days, I brought you up as well as I could and if you do wrong it's the same as if I did.
I shan't show this to Mabel she says you don't like it.
I know you are over age (over 21, she means, he said) but I worry about you because of all that happened (she means me being an orphan, he said).
We liked Melbourne, it is a big town.
Next week we are going to Brisbane to stay with Bob again and his wife.
She wrote a nice letter.
They will meet us at the station.
Uncle Steve, Gert and the children send their love.
So does Mabel and your everloving.
Then she says I needn't worry about money, it's lasting very  well.
Then she hopes I got a woman who will work, she says the young ones don't clean proper nowadays.
(There was a long silence then .)
M. Do you think it's a nice letter?
C. She always writes like that.
M. It makes me want to be sick.
C. She never had any real education.
M. It's not the English .
It's her nasty mean mind.
C. She took me in.
M. She certainly did.
She took you in, and she's gone on taking you in.
She's made an absolute fool out of you.
C. Thank you very much.
M. Well, she has!
C. Oh, you're right.
As per usual.
M. Don't say that!
(I put down my knitting and closed my eyes .)
C. She never bossed me about half as much as you do.
M. I don't boss you.
I try to teach you.
C. You teach me to despise her and think like you, and soon you'll leave me and I'll have no one at all.
M. Now you're pitying yourself.
C. It's the one thing you don't understand.
You only got to walk into a room, people like you, and you can talk with anyone, you understand things, but when…
M. Do shut up.
You're ugly enough without starting to whine.
I picked up my knitting and put it away.
When I looked round he was standing there with his mouth open, trying to say something.
And I knew I'd hurt him, I know he deserves to be hurt, but there it is, I've hurt him.
He looked so glum.
And I remembered he'd let me go out in the garden.
I felt mean.
I went to him and said I was sorry and held out my hand, but he wouldn't take it.
It was queer, he really had a sort of dignity, he was really hurt (perhaps that was it) and showing it.
So I  took his arm and made him sit down again, and I said, I'm going to tell you a fairy story.
Once upon a time (I said, and he stared bitterly bitterly at the floor) there was a very ugly monster who captured a princess and put her in a dungeon in his castle.
Every evening he made her sit with him and ordered her to say to him, ‘You are very handsome, my lord.’
And every evening she said, ‘You are very ugly, you monster.’
And then the monster looked very hurt and sad and stared at the floor.
So one evening the princess said, ‘If you do this thing and that thing you might be handsome,’ but the monster said, ‘I can't, I can't.’
The princess said, ‘Try, try.’
But the monster said, ‘I can't, I can't.’
Every evening it was the same.
He asked her to lie, and she wouldn't.
So the princess began to think that he really enjoyed being a monster and very ugly.
Then one day she saw he was crying when she'd told him, for the fiftieth time, that he was ugly.
So she said, ‘You can become very handsome if you do just one thing.
Will you do it?’
Yes, he said, at last, he would try to do it.
So she said, then set me free.
And he set her free.
And suddenly, he wasn't ugly any more, he was a prince who had been bewitched.
And he followed the princess out of the castle.
And they both lived happily ever afterwards.
I knew it was silly as I was saying it.
Fey.
He didn't speak, he kept staring down.
I said, now it's your turn to tell a fairy story.
He just said, I love you.
And yes, he had more dignity than I did then and I felt small, mean.
Always sneering at him, jabbing him, hating him and showing it.
It was funny, we sat in silence facing each other and I had a feeling I've had once or twice before, of the most peculiar closeness to him —not love or attraction or sympathy in any way.
But linked destiny.
Like being shipwrecked on an island a raft — together.
In every way not wanting to be together.
But together.
I feel the sadness of his life, too, terribly.
And of those of  his miserable aunt and his cousin and their relatives in Australia.
The great dull hopeless weight of it.
Like those Henry Moore drawings of the people in the Tubes during the blitz.
People who would never see, feel, dance, draw, cry at music, feel the world, the west wind.
Never be in any real sense.
Just those three words, said and meant.
I love you.
They were quite hopeless.
He said it as he might have said, I have cancer.
His fairy story.
October 31st
Nothing.
I psycho-analysed him this evening.
He would sit so stiffly beside me.
We were looking at Goya's etchings.
Perhaps it was the etchings themselves, but he sat and I thought he wasn't really looking at them.
But thinking only of being so close to me.
His inhibition.
It's absurd.
I talked at him as if he could easily be normal.
as if he wasn't a maniac keeping me prisoner here.
But a nice young man who wanted a bit of chivvying from a jolly girl-friend.
It's because I never see anyone else.
He becomes the norm.
I forget to compare.
Another time with G.P.
It was soon after the icy douche (what he said about my work).
I was restless one evening.
I went round to his flat.
About ten.
He had his dressing-gown on.
I was just going to bed, he said.
I wanted to hear some music, I said.
I'll go away.
But I didn't.
He said, it's late.
I said I was depressed.
It had been a beastly day and Caroline had been so silly at supper.
He let me go up and made me sit on the divan and he put on some music and turned out the lights and the moon came through the window.
It fell on my legs and lap through the skylight, a lovely slow silver moon.
Sailing.
And he sat in the armchair on the other side of the room, in the shadows.
It was the music.
The Goldberg Variations .
There was one towards the end that was very slow, very simple,very sad, but so beautiful beyond words or drawing or anything but music, beautiful there in the moonlight.
Moon-music, so silvery, so far, so noble.
The two of us in that room.
No past, no future.
All intense deep that-time-only.
A feeling that everything must end, the  music, ourselves, the moon, everything.
That if you get to the heart of things you find sadness for ever and ever, everywhere; but a beautiful silver sadness, like a Christ face.
Accepting the sadness.
Knowing that to pretend it was all gay was treachery.
Treachery to everyone sad at that moment, everyone ever sad, treachery to such music, such truth.
In all the fuss and anxiety and the shoddiness and the business of London, making a career, getting pashes, art, learning, grabbing frantically at experience, suddenly this silent silver room full of that music.
Like lying on one's back as we did in Spain when we slept out looking up between the fig-branches into the star-corridors, the great seas and oceans of stars.
Knowing what it was to be in a universe.
I cried.
In silence.
At the end he said, now can I go to bed?
Gently, making fun of me a little bit, bringing me back to earth.
And I went.
I don't think we said anything.
I can't remember.
He had his little dry smile, he could see I was moved.
His perfect tact.
I would have gone to bed with him that night.
If he had asked.
If he had come and kissed me.
Not for his sake, but for being alive's.
November 1st
A new month, and new luck.
The tunnel idea keeps nagging at me, but the difficulty till now has been something to dig the concrete out with.
Then yesterday as I was doing my prison-exercise in the outer cellar I saw a nail.
A big old one, down against the wall in the far corner.
I dropped my handkerchief so that I could get a closer look.
I couldn't pick it up, he watches me so closely.
And it's awkward with bound hands.
Then today, when I was by the nail (he always sits on the steps up), I said (I did it on purpose) run and get me a cigarette.
They're on the chair by the door.
Of course he wouldn't.
He said, what's the game?
I'll stay here, I won't move.
Why don't you get them yourself?
Because sometimes I like to remember the days when men were nice to me.
That's all.
I didn't think it would work.
But it did.
He suddenly decided that there wasn't anything I could possibly do, nothing I could pick up.
(He locks things away in a drawer when I come out here.)
So he went through the door.
Only a second.
But I stooped like lightning and got the nail up and into my skirt pocket — specially put on — and I was standing exactly as he left me when he jumped back.
So I got my nail.
And made him think he could trust me.
Two birds with one stone.
Nothing.
But it seems a tremendous victory.
I've started putting my plan into effect.
For days I've been telling Caliban that I don't see why D and M and everyone else should be left in the dark about whether I still exist.
At least he could tell them I'm alive and all right.
Tonight after supper I told him he could buy paper from Woolworths and use gloves and so on.
He tried to wriggle out of it, as usual.
But I kept at him.
Every objection I squashed.
And in the end I felt he really was beginning to think he might do it for me.
I told him he could post the letter in London, to put the  police off the track.
And that I wanted all sorts of things from London.
I've got to get him away from here for at least three or four hours.
Because of the burglar alarms.
And then I'm going to try my tunnel.
What I've been thinking is that as the walls of this cellar (and the outer one) are stones — not stone then behind the stones there must be earth.
All I have to do is to get through the skin of stones and then I shall be in soft earth (I imagine).
Perhaps it's all wild.
But I'm in a fever to try it.
The Nielsen woman.
I'd met her twice more at G.P.'s, when there were other people there — one was her husband, a Dane, some kind of importer.
He spoke perfect English, so perfect it sounded wrong.
Affected.
I met her one day when she was coming out of the hairdresser's and I'd been in to make an appointment for Caroline.
She had on that special queasy-bright look women like her put on for girls of my age.
What Minny calls welcome-to-the-tribe-of-women.
It means they're going to treat you like a grown-up, but they don't really think you are and anyhow they're jealous of you.
She would take me for coffee.
I was silly, I should have lied.
It was all rhubarb, about me, about her daughter, about art.
She knows people and tried to dazzle me with names.
But it's what people feel about art that I respect.
Not what or who they know.
I know she can't be a lesbian, but she clings like that to one's words.
Things in her eyes she doesn't dare tell you.
But wants you to ask her to.
You don't know what's gone on and what still goes on between G.P. and me, she seemed to say.
I dare you to ask me.
She talked on and on about Charlotte Street in the late ‘thirties and the war.
Dylan Thomas.
G.P.
He likes you, she said.
I know, I answered.
But it was a shock.
Both that she should know (had he told her?) and that she wanted to discuss it.
I know she did.
He's always fallen for the really pretty ones, she said.
She wanted terribly to discuss it.
Then it was her daughter.
She said, she's sixteen now.
I just can't get across to her.
Sometimes when I talk to her I feel like an animal in a zoo.
She just stands outside and watches me.
I knew she'd said it before.
Or read it somewhere.
You can always tell.
They're all the same, women like her.
It's not the teenagers and daughters who are different.
We haven't changed, we're just young.
It's the silly new middle-aged people who've got to be young who've changed.
This desperate silly trying to stay with us.
They can't be with us.
We don't want them to be with us.
We don't want them to wear our clothes-styles and use our language and have our interests.
They imitate us so badly that we can't respect them.
But it made me feel, that meeting with her, that G.P. did love me (want me).
That there's a deep bond between us — his loving me in his way, my liking him very much (even loving him, but not sexually) in my way — a feeling that we're groping towards a compromise.
A sort of fog of unsolved desire and sadness between us.
Something other people like the N woman) couldn't ever understand.
Two people in a desert, trying to find both themselves and an oasis where they can live together.
I've begun to think more and more like this — it is terribly cruel of fate to have put these twenty years between us.
Why couldn't he be my age, or me his?
So the age thing is no longer the all-important factor that puts love right out of the question but a sort of cruel wall fate has built between us.
I don't think any more, the wall is between us, I think, the wall keeps us apart.
November 2nd
He produced the paper after supper, and dictated an absurd letter that I had to write out.
Then the trouble started.
I had prepared a little note, written in my smallest writing, and I slipped it into the envelope when he wasn't looking.
It was very small, and in the best spy stories wouldn't have been noticed.
He did.
It upset him.
Made him see things in the cold light of reality.
But he was genuinely shocked that I should be frightened.
He can't imagine himself killing or raping me, and that is something.
I let him have his pet, but in the end I went and tried to be nice to him (because I knew I must get him to send that letter).
It was a job.
I've never known him in such a huff.
Wouldn't he call it a day, and let me go home?
No.
What did he want to do with me then?
Take me to bed?
He gave me such a look, as if I was being really disgusting.
Then I had an inspiration.
I acted a little charade.
His oriental slave.
He likes me to play the fool.
The stupidest things I do he calls witty.
He has even got in the habit of joining in, stumbling after me (not that I'm very dazzling) like a giraffe.
So I got him to let me write another letter.
He looked in the envelope again.
Then I talked him into going to London, as my plan requires.
I gave him a ridiculous list of things (most of them I don't want, but it'll keep him busy) to buy.
I told him it was impossible to trace a letter posted in London.
So he finally agreed.
He likes me to wheedle, the brute.
One request — no, I don't ask him for things, I order them.
I commanded him to try and buy a George Paston.
I gave him a list of galleries where he might find things by G.P.
I even tried to get him to go to the studio.
But as soon as he heard it was in Hampstead, he smelt a rat.
He wanted to know if I knew this George Paston.
I said, no, well, just by name.
But it didn't sound very convincing; and I was afraid he wouldn't buy any of his pictures anywhere.
So I said, he's a casual friend of mine, he's quite old, but he's a very good painter, and he badly needs money and I should very much like some of his pictures.
We could hang them on the walls.
If you bought straight from him we wouldn't be paying money to the galleries, but I can see you're frightened to go, I said, so there's an end to it.
Of course he didn't fall for that .
He wanted to know if G.P. was one of these paintpot-at-the-wall chaps.
I just gave him a look.
C. I was only joking.
M. Then don't.
After a bit, he said, he would want to know where I came from and all.
I told him what he could say, and he said he'd think about it.
Which is Calibanese for ‘no’.
It was too much to expect; and there probably won't be anything in any of the galleries.
And I don't worry because I'm not going to be here this time tomorrow.
I'm going to escape.
He'll go off after breakfast.
He's going to leave my lunch.
So I shall have four or five hours (unless he cheats and doesn't get all I've asked, but he's never failed before).
I felt sorry for Caliban this evening.
He will suffer when I am gone.
There will be nothing left.
He'll be alone with all his sex neurosis and his class neurosis and his uselessness and his emptiness.
He's asked for it.
I'm not really sorry.
But I'm not absolutely unsorry.
November 4th
I couldn't write yesterday.
Too fed up.
I was so stupid.
I got him away all yesterday.
I had hours to escape.
But I never really thought of the problems.
I saw myself scooping out handfuls of soft loamy earth.
The nail was useless, it wouldn't dig the cement properly.
I thought it would crumble away.
It was terribly hard.
I took hours to get one stone out.
There wasn't earth behind, but another stone, a bigger one, chalk, and I couldn't even find where its edge was.
I got another stone out of the wall, but it didn't help.
There was the same huge stone behind.
I began to get desperate, I saw the tunnel was no good.
I hit violently at the door, I tried to force it with the nail, and managed to hurt my hand.
That's all.
All I had at the end was a sore hand and broken fingernails.
I'm just not strong enough, without tools.
Even with tools.
In the end I put the stones back and powdered (as well as I could) the cement and mixed it with water and talcum powder to camouflage the hole.
It's typical of the states I get in here I suddenly told myself that the digging would have to be done over a number of days, the only stupid thing was to expect to do it all in one.
So I spent a long time trying to hide the place.
But it was no good, little bits fell out, and I'd started in the most obvious place, where he's bound to spot it.
So I gave up.
I suddenly decided it was all petty, stupid, useless.
Like a bad drawing.
Unrescuable.
When he came at last, he saw it at once .
He always sniffs round as soon as he enters.
Then he started to see how far I had gone.
I sat on the bed and watched him.
In the end I threw the nail at him.
He's cemented the stones back.
He says it's solid chalk behind all the way round.
I wouldn't speak to him all the evening, or look at the things  he'd bought, even though I could see one of them was a picture-frame.
I took a sleeping-pill and went to bed straight after supper.
Then, this morning (I woke up early) before he came down, I decided to pass it off as something unimportant.
To be normal.
Not to give in.
I unpacked all the things he'd bought.
First of all, there was G.P.'s picture.
It is a drawing of a girl (young woman), a nude, not like anything else of his I have seen, and I think it must be something he did a long time ago.
It is his .
It has his simplicity of line, hatred of fussiness, of Topolski-itis.
She's half-turned away, hanging up or taking down a dress from a hook.
A pretty face?
It's difficult to say.
Rather a heavy Maillol body.
It's not worth dozens of things he's done since.
But real.
I kissed it when I unwrapped it.
I've been looking at some of the lines not as lines, but as things he has touched.
All morning.
Now.
Not love.
Humanity.
Caliban was surprised that I seemed so positively gay when he came in.
I thanked him for all he had bought.
I said, you can't be a proper prisoner if you don't try to escape and now don't let's talk about it — agreed?
He said that he'd telephoned every gallery I gave him the name of.
There was only the one thing.
Thank you very much, I said.
May I keep it down here?
And when I go, I'll give it to you.
(I shan't — he said he'd rather have a drawing of mine, in any case.)
I asked him if he had posted the letter.
He said he had, but I saw he was going red.
I told him I believed him and that it would be such a dirty trick not to post the letter that I was sure he must have posted it.
I feel almost certain he funked it, as he funked the cheque.
It would be just like him.
But nothing I say will make him post it.
So I've decided that I will suppose he has posted it.
Midnight.
I had to stop.
He came down.
We've been playing the records he bought.
Bartók's ‘Music for Percussion and Celeste’.
The loveliest.
It made me think of Collioure last summer.
The day we went, all four of us with the French students, up through the ilexes to the tower.
The ilexes.
An absolutely new colour, amazing chestnut, rufous, burning, bleeding, where they had cut away the cork.
The cicadas.
The wild azure sea through the stems and the heat and the smell of everything burnt in it.
Piers and I and everyone except Minny got a bit tipsy.
Sleeping in the shade, waking up staring through the leaves at the cobalt blue sky, thinking how impossible things were to paint, how can some blue pigment ever mean the living blue light of the sky?
I suddenly felt I didn't want to paint, painting was just showing off, the thing was to experience and experience for ever more.
The beautiful clean sun on the blood-red stems.
And coming back I had a long talk with the nice shy boy, Jean-Louis.
His bad English and my bad French, yet we understood each other.
Terribly timid he was.
Frightened of Piers.
Jealous of him.
Jealous of his throwing an arm round me, the silly lout Piers is.
And when I discovered he was going to be a priest.
Piers was so crude afterwards.
That stupid clumsy frightened-of-being-soft English male cruelty to the truth.
He couldn't see that of course poor Jean-Louis liked me, of course he was sexually attracted, but there was this other thing, it wasn't really shyness, it was a determination to try to be a priest and to live in the world.
A simply colossal effort of coming to terms with oneself.
Like destroying all the paintings one's ever done and making a new start.
Only he had to do it every day.
Every time he saw a girl he liked.
And all Piers could say was: I bet he's having dirty dreams about you.
So ghastly, that arrogance, that insensitivity of boys who've been to public schools.
Piers is always going on about how he  hated Stowe.
as if that solves everything, as if to hate something means it can't have affected you.
I always know when he doesn't understand something.
He gets cynical, he says something shocking.
When I told G.P. about it much later, he just said, poor frog, he was probably on his knees praying to forget you.
Watching Piers throw stones out to sea — where was it? somewhere near Valencia.
So beautiful, like a young god, all golden-brown, with his dark hair.
His swimming-slip.
And Minny said (she was lying beside me, oh, it's so clear) she said, wouldn't it be wonderful if Piers was dumb.
And then she said, could you go to bed with him?
I said, no.
Then, I don't know.
Piers came up just then and wanted to know what she was smiling about.
Nanda's just told me a secret, she said.
About you.
Piers made some feeble joke and went off to get the lunch from the car with Peter.
What's the secret, I wanted to know.
Bodies beat minds, she said.
Clever Carmen Grey always knows what to say.
I knew you'd say that, she said.
She was doodling in the sand and I was on my tummy watching her.
She said, what I mean is he's so terribly good-looking, one could forget he's so stupid.
You might think, I could marry him and teach him.
Couldn't you?
And you know you couldn't.
Or you could go to bed with him just for fun and one day you'd suddenly find you were in love with his body and you couldn't live without it and you'd be stuck with his rotten mind for ever and ever.
Then she said, doesn't it terrify you?
Not more than so many other things.
I'm serious.
If you married him I'd never speak to you again.
And she was serious.
That very quick grey shy look she puts on, like a little lance.
I got up and kissed her on the way up  and went to meet the boys.
And she sat there, still looking down at the sand.
We're both terrible lookers-through.
We can't help it.
But she's always said, I believe this, I shall act like this.
It's got to be someone you at least feel is your equal, who can look through as well as you.
And the body thing's always got to be second.
And I've always secretly thought, Carmen will be another spinster.
It's too complicated for set ideas.
But now I think of G.P. and I compare him to Piers.
And Piers has got nothing on his side.
Just a golden body throwing stones aimlessly into the sea.
November 5th
I gave him hell tonight.
I started throwing things around upstairs.
First cushions and then plates.
I've been longing to break them.
But I was beastly, really.
Spoilt.
He suffered it all.
He's so weak.
He ought to have slapped me across the face.
He did catch hold of me, to stop me breaking another of his wretched plates.
We so rarely touch.
I hated it.
It was like icy water.
I lectured him.
I told him all about himself and what he ought to do in life.
But he doesn't listen.
He likes me to talk about him.
It doesn't matter what I say.
I won't write any more.
I'm reading Sense and Sensibility and I must find out what happens to Marianne.
Marianne is me; Eleanor is me as I ought to be.
What happens if he has a crash?
A stroke.
Anything.
I die.
I couldn't get out.
All I did the day before yesterday was to prove it.
November 6th
It's afternoon.
No lunch.
Another escape.
So nearly, it seemed at one point.
But it never was.
He's a devil.
I tried the appendicitis trick.
I thought of it weeks ago.
I've always thought of it as a sort of last resort.
Something I must not bungle through unpreparedness.
I didn't write about it here, in case he found this.
I rubbed talc into my face.
Then when he knocked on the door this morning I swallowed a whole lot of saved-up salt and water and pressed my tongue and the timing was perfect, he came in and saw me being sick.
I put on a tremendous act.
Lying on the bed with my hair in a mess and holding my tummy.
Still in my pyjamas and dressing-gown.
Groaning a little, as if I was being terribly brave.
All the time he stood and said, what's wrong, what's wrong?
And we had a sort of desperate broken conversation, Caliban trying to get out of taking me to hospital, I insisting that he must.
And then suddenly he seemed to give way.
He muttered something about it being ‘the end’ and rushed out.
I heard the iron door go (I was still staring at the wall) but no bolts.
Then the outer door.
And there was silence.
It was weird.
So sudden, so complete.
It had worked.
I pulled on some socks and shoes and ran to the iron door.
It had sprung back an inch or two — was open.
I thought it might be all a trap.
So I kept up the act, I opened the door and said his name in a quiet voice and hobbled weakly across the cellar and up the steps.
I could see the light, he hadn't locked the outer door, either.
It flashed across my mind that it was just what he would do, he wouldn't go to the doctor.
He'd run away.
Crack up completely.
But he'd take the van.
So I would hear the engine.
But I couldn't.
I must have waited several minutes, I should have known but I couldn't bear the suspense.
I pulled the door  open and rushed out.
And he was there.
At once.
In all the daylight.
Waiting.
I couldn't pretend I was ill.
I'd put shoes on.
He had something (a hammer?) in his hand, peculiar wide eyes, I'm sure he was going to attack me.
We sort of stood poised for a moment, neither of us knowing what to do.
Then I turned and ran back.
I don't know why, I didn't stop to think.
He came after me, but he stopped when he saw me go inside (as I instinctively knew he would — the only safe place from him was down here).
I heard him come and the bolts were shot to.
I know it was the right thing to do.
It saved my life.
If I had screamed or tried to escape he would have battered me to death.
There are moments when he is possessed, quite out of his own control.
His trick.
(Midnight.)
He brought me supper down here.
He didn't say a word.
I'd spent the afternoon doing a strip cartoon of him.
The Awful Tale of a Harmless Boy.
Absurd.
But I have to keep the reality and the horror at bay.
He starts by being a nice little clerk and ends up as a drooling horror-film monster.
When he was going I showed it to him.
He didn't laugh, he simply looked at it carefully.
It's only natural, he said.
He meant, that I should make such fun of him.
I am one in a row of specimens.
It's when I try to flutter out of line that he hates me.
I'm meant to be dead, pinned.
always the same, always beautiful.
He knows that part of my beauty is being alive, but it's the dead me he wants.
He wants me living-but-dead.
I felt it terribly strongly today.
That my being alive and changing and having a separate mind and having moods and all that was becoming a nuisance.
He is solid; immovable, iron-willed.
He showed me one day what he called his killing-bottle.
I'm imprisoned in it.
Fluttering against the glass.
Because I can see through it I still think I can escape.
I have hope.
But it's all an illusion.
A thick round wall of glass.
November 7th
How the days drag.
Today.
Intolerably long.
My one consolation is G.P.'s drawing.
It grows on me.
On one.
It's the only living, unique, created thing here.
It's the first thing I look at when I wake up, the last thing at night.
I stand in front of it and stare at it.
I know every line.
He made a fudge of one of her feet.
There's something slightly unbalanced about the whole composition, as if there's a tiny bit missing somewhere.
But it lives.
After supper (we're back to normal) Caliban handed me The Catcher in the Rye and said, I've read it.
I knew at once by his tone that he meant —‘and I don't think much of it’.
I feel awake, I'll do a dialogue.
M. Well?
C. I don't see much point in it.
M. You realize this is one of the most brilliant studies of adolescence ever written?
C. He sounds a mess to me.
M. Of course he's a mess.
But he realizes he's a mess, he tries to express what he feels, he's a human being for all his faults.
Don't you even feel sorry for him?
C. I don't like the way he talks.
M. I don't like the way you talk.
But I don't treat you as below any serious notice or sympathy.
C. I suppose it's very clever.
To write like that and all.
M. I gave you that book to read because I thought you would feel identified with him.
You're a Holden Caulfield.
He doesn't fit anywhere and you don't.
C. I don't wonder, the way he goes on.
He doesn't try to fit.
M. He tries to construct some sort of reality in his life, some sort of decency.
C. It's not realistic.
Going to a posh school and his parents  having money.
He wouldn't behave like that.
In my opinion.
M. I know what you are.
You're the Old Man of the Sea.
C. Who's he?
M. The horrid old man Sinbad had to carry on his back.
That's what you are.
You get on the back of everything vital, everything trying to be honest and free, and you bear it down.
I won't go on.
We argued — no, we don't argue, I say things and he tries to wriggle out of them.
It's true.
He is the Old Man of the Sea.
I can't stand stupid people like Caliban, with their great deadweight of pettiness and selfishness and meanness of every kind.
And the few have to carry it all.
The doctors and the teachers and the artists — not that they haven't their traitors, but what hope there is, is with them — with us.
Because I'm one of them.
I'm one of them.
I feel it and I've tried to prove it.
I felt it during my last year at Ladymont.
There were the few of us who cared, and there were the silly ones, the snobbish ones, the would-be debutantes and the daddy's darlings and the horsophiles and the sex-cats.
I'll never go back to Ladymont.
Because I couldn't stand that suffocating atmosphere of the ‘done’ thing and the ‘right’people and the ‘nice’behaviour.
(Boadicea writing ‘in spite of her weird political views’ on my report — how dared she?)
I will not be an old girl of such a place.
Why should we tolerate their beastly Calibanity?
Why should every vital and creative and good person be martyred by the great universal stodge around?
In this situation I'm a representative.
A martyr.
Imprisoned, unable to grow.
At the mercy of this resentment, this hateful millstone envy of the Calibans of this world.
Because they all hate us, they hate us for being different, for not being them, for their own not being like us.
They  persecute us, they crowd us out, they send us to Coventry, they sneer at us, they yawn at us, they blindfold themselves and stuff up their ears.
They do anything to avoid having to take notice of us and respect us.
They go crawling after the great ones among us when they're dead.
They pay thousands and thousands for the Van Goghs and Modiglianis they'd have spat on at the time they were painted.
Guffawed at.
Made coarse jokes about.
I hate them.
I hate the uneducated and the ignorant.
I hate the pompous and the phoney.
I hate the jealous and the resentful.
I hate the crabbed and the mean and the petty.
I hate all ordinary dull little people who aren't ashamed of being dull and little.
I hate what G.P. calls the New People, the new class people with their cars and their money and their tellies and their stupid vulgarities and their stupid crawling imitation of the bourgeoisie.
I love honesty and freedom and giving.
I love making, I love doing, I love being to the full, I love everything which is not sitting and watching and copying and dead at heart.
G.P. was laughing at my being Labour one day (early on).
I remember he said, you are supporting the party which brought the New People into existence — do you realize that?
I said (I was shocked, because from what he had said about other things, I thought he must be Labour, I knew he had been a Communist once), I'd rather we had the New People than poor people.
He said, the New People are still the poor people.
Theirs is the new form of poverty.
The others hadn't any money and these haven't any soul.
He suddenly said, have you read Major Barbara ?
How it proved people had to be saved financially before you could save their souls.
They forgot one thing, he said.
They brought in the Welfare State, but they forgot Barbara herself.
Affluence, affluence, and not a soul to see.
I know he's wrong somewhere (he was exaggerating).
One  must be on the Left.
Every decent person I've ever met has been anti-Tory.
But I see what he feels, I mean I feel it myself more and more, this awful deadweight of the fat little New People on everything.
Corrupting everything.
Vulgarizing everything.
Raping the countryside, as D says in his squire moods.
Everything mass-produced.
Mass-everything.
I know we're supposed to face the herd, control the stampede — it's like a Wild West film.
Work for them and tolerate them.
I shall never go to the Ivory Tower, that's the most despicable thing, to choose to leave life because it doesn't suit you.
But sometimes it is frightening, thinking of the struggle life is if one takes it seriously.
All this is talk.
Probably I shall meet someone and fall in love with him and marry him and things will seem to change and I shan't care any more.
I shall become a Little Woman.
One of the enemy.
But this is what I feel these days.
That I belong to a sort of band of people who have to stand against all the rest.
I don't know who they are — famous men, dead and living, who've fought for the right things and created and painted in the right way, and unfamous people I know who don't lie about things, who try not to be lazy, who try to be human and intelligent.
Yes, people like G.P., for all his faults.
His Fault.
They're not even good people.
They have weak moments.
Sex moments and drink moments.
Coward and money moments.
They have holidays in the Ivory Tower.
But a part of them is one with the band.
The Few.
November 9th
I'm vain.
I'm not one of them.
I want to be one of them, and that's not the same thing.
Of course, Caliban is not typical of the New People.
He's hopelessly out of date(he will call the record-player, the ‘gramophone’).
And there's his lack of confidence.
They're not ashamed of themselves.
I remember D saying they think they're all equal to the best as soon as they have a telly and a car.
But deep down Caliban's one of them — there's this hatred of the unusual, this wanting everybody to be the same.
And the awful misuse of money.
Why should people have money if they don't know how to use it?
It sickens me every time I think of all the money Caliban has won; and of all the other people like him who win money.
So selfish, so evil.
G.P. said, that day, the honest poor are the moneyless vulgar rich.
Poverty forces them to have good qualities and pride in other things besides money.
Then when they have money they don't know what to do with it.
They forget all the old virtues, which weren't real virtues anyway.
They think the only virtue is to make more money and to spend.
They can't imagine that there are people to whom money is nothing.
That the most beautiful things are quite independent of money.
I'm not being frank.
I still want money.
But I know that it's wrong.
I believe G.P. — I don't have to believe him when he says it, I can see it's true — he hardly worries about money at all.
He has just enough to buy his materials, to live, to have a working holiday every year, to manage.
And there're a dozen others — Peter.
Bill McDonald.
Stefan.
They don't live in the world of money.
If they have it they spend it.
If they don't they go without.
Persons like Caliban have no head for money.
They've only got to have a little, like the New People, and they become beastly.
All the horrid people who wouldn't give me money when I  was collecting.
I could tell, I only had to look in their faces.
Bourgeois people give because they're embarrassed if you pester them.
Intelligent people give or at least they look honestly at you and say no.
They're not ashamed not to give.
But the New People are too mean to give and too small to admit it.
Like the horrid man in Hampstead (he was one of them) who said, I'll give you half a dollar if you can prove it doesn't go into someone's pocket.
He thought he was being funny.
I turned my back on him, which was wrong, because my pride was less important than the children.
So I put a half-crown in for him later.
But I still hate him.
With Caliban it's as if somebody made him drink a whole bottle of whisky.
He can't take it.
The only thing that kept him decent before was being poor.
Being stuck to one place and one job.
It's like putting a blind man in a fast car and telling him to drive where and how he likes.
A nice thing to end with.
The Bach record came today, I've played it twice already.
Caliban said it was nice, but he wasn't ‘musical’.
However, he sat with the right sort of expression on his face.
I'm going to play the parts I like again.
I'm going to lie in bed in the darkness and the music and think I'm with G.P. and he's lying over there with his eyes shut and his pitted cheek and his Jew's nose; as if he was on his own tomb.
Only there's nothing of death in him.
Even so.
This evening Caliban was late coming down.
Where've you been, I snapped at him.
He just looked surprised, said nothing.
I said, you seem so late.
Ridiculous.
I wanted him to come.
I often want him to come.
I'm as lonely as that.
November 10th
We had an argument this evening about his money.
I said he ought to give most of it away.
I tried to shame him into giving some away.
But he won't trust anything.
That's what's really wrong with him.
Like my man in Hampstead, he doesn't trust people to collect money and use it for the purpose they say they will.
He thinks everyone is corrupt, everyone tries to get money and keep it.
It's no good my saying I know it's used for the right purpose.
He says, how do you know?
And of course I can't tell him.
I can only say I feel sure — it must go where it's needed.
Then he smiles as if I'm too naive to have any right on my side.
I accused him (not very bitterly) of not having sent the CND cheque.
I challenged him to produce a receipt.
He said the gift was anonymous, he hadn't sent his address.
It was on the tip of my tongue to say, I shall go and find out when I'm free.
But I didn't.
Because it would be one more reason for him not to set me free.
He was red, I'm sure he was lying, as he lied about the letter to D and M.
It's not so much a lack of generosity — a real miserliness.
I mean (forgetting the absurdity of the situation), he is generous to me.
He spends hundreds of pounds on me.
He'd kill me with kindness.
With chocolates and cigarettes and food and flowers.
I said I'd like some French perfume the other evening — it was just a whim, really, but this room smells of disinfectant and Airwick.
I have enough baths, but I don't feel clean.
And I said I wished I could go and sniff the various scents to see which I liked best.
He came in this morning with fourteen different bottles.
He'd ransacked all the chemists' shops.
It's mad.
Forty pounds' worth.
It's like living in the Arabian Nights.
Being the favourite in the harem.
But the one perfume you really want is freedom.
If I could put a starving child before him and give it food and  let him watch it grow well, I know he'd give money.
But everything beyond what he pays for and sees himself get is suspicious to him.
He doesn't believe in any other world but the one he lives in and sees.
He's the one in prison; in his own hateful narrow present world.
November 12th
The last night but one.
I daren't think about it, about not escaping.
I've kept reminding him, recently.
But now I feel I should have sprung it on him more or less suddenly.
Today I decided that I would organize a little party tomorrow night.
I shall say I feel differently towards him, that I want to be his friend and lameduck him in London.
It won't be altogether a lie, I feel a responsibility towards him that I don't really understand.
I so often hate him, I think I ought to for ever hate him.
Yet I don't always.
My pity wins, and I do want to help him.
I think of people I could introduce him to.
He could go to Caroline's psychiatrist friend.
I'd be like Emma and arrange a marriage for him, and with happier results.
Some little Harriet Smith, with whom he could be mousy and sane and happy.
I know I have to steel myself against not being freed.
I tell myself it's a chance in a hundred that he'll keep his word.
But he must keep his word.
G.P.
I hadn't seen him for two months, more than two months.
Being in France and Spain and then at home.
(I did try to see him twice, but he was away all September.)
There was a postcard in answer to my letters.
That was all.
I telephoned him and asked him if I could go round, the first evening I was back with Caroline.
He said the next day, that were some people there that evening.
He seemed glad to see me.
I was trying to look as if I hadn't tried to look pretty.
I had.
And I told him all about France and Spain and the Goyas and Albi and everything else.
Piers.
And he listened, he wouldn't really say what he had been doing, but later he showed me some of the things he'd done in the Hebrides.
And I felt ashamed.
Because we'd none of us done much, we'd been too busy lying  in the sun (I mean too lazy) and looking at great pictures to do much drawing or anything.
I said (having gushed for at least an hour), I'm talking too much.
He said, I don't mind.
He was getting the rust off an old iron wheel with some acid.
He'd seen it in a junk-shop in Edinburgh and brought it all the way down.
It had strange obtuse teeth, he thought it was part of an old church clock.
Very elegant tapered spoke-arms.
It was beautiful.
We didn't say anything for a while, I was leaning beside him against his bench watching him clean off the rust.
Then he said.
I've missed you.
I said, you can't have.
He said, you've disturbed me.
I said (knight to cover his pawn), have you seen Antoinette?
He said, no.
I thought I told you I gave her the boot.
He looked sideways.
His lizard look.
Still shocked?
I shook my head.
Forgiven?
I said, there was nothing to forgive.
He said, I kept on thinking about you in the Hebrides.
I wanted to show you things.
I said, I wished you were with us in Spain.
He was busy emery-papering between the teeth.
He said, it's very old, look at this corrosion.
Then, in the same tone, in fact I decided that I want to marry you.
I didn't say anything and I wouldn't look at him.
He said, I asked you to come here when I was alone, because I've been thinking quite hard about this.
I'm twice your age, I ought to take things like this in my stride — Christ only knows it's not the first time.
No, let me finish now.
I've decided I've got to stop seeing you.
I was going to tell you that when you came in.
I can't go on being disturbed by you.
I shall be if you keep on coming here.
This isn't a roundabout way of asking  you to marry me.
I'm trying to make it quite impossible.
You know what I am, you know I'm old enough to be your father, I'm not reliable at all.
Anyhow, you don't love me.
I said, I can't explain it.
There isn't a word for it.
Precisely, he answered.
He was cleaning his hands with petrol.
Very clinical and matter-of-fact.
So I have to ask you to leave me to find my peace again.
I stared at his hands.
I was shocked.
He said, in some ways you're older than I am.
You've never been deeply in love.
Perhaps you never will be.
He said, love goes on happening to you.
To men.
You become twenty again, you suffer as twenty suffers.
All the dotty irrationalities of twenty.
I may seem very reasonable at the moment, but I don't feel it.
When you telephoned I nearly peed in my pants with excitement.
I'm an old man in love.
Stock comedy figure.
Very stale.
Not even funny.
Why do you think I'll never be deeply in love, I said.
He took a terribly long time to clean his hands.
He said, I said perhaps.
I'm only just twenty.
He said, an ash tree a foot high is still an ash tree.
But I did say perhaps.
And you're not old.
It's nothing to do with our ages.
He gave me a faintly hurt look then, smiled and said, you must leave me some loophole.
We went to make coffee, the wretched little kitchen, and I thought, anyhow I couldn't face up to living here with him just the domestic effort.
A vile irrelevant wave of bourgeois cowardice.
He said, with his back to me, until you went away I thought it was just the usual thing.
At least I tried to think it was.
That's why I misbehaved myself with your Swedish friend.
To exorcize you.
But you came back.
In my mind.
Again and again, up north.
I used to go out of the farmhouse at night, into the garden.
Look south.
You do understand?
Yes, I said.
It was you, you see.
Not just the other thing.
Then he said, it's a sudden look you have.
When you're not a kid any more.
What sort of look?
The woman you will be, he said.
A nice woman?
A much more than nice woman.
There's no word to say how he said it.
Sadly, almost unwillingly.
Tenderly, but a shade bitterly.
And honestly.
Not teasing, not being dry.
But right out of his real self.
I'd been looking down all the time we were talking, but he made me look up then, and our eyes met and I know something passed between us.
I could feel it.
Almost a physical touch Changing us.
His saying something he totally meant, and my feeling it.
He remained staring at me, so that I was embarrassed.
And still he stared.
I said, please don't stare at me like that.
He came and put his arm round my shoulders then and led me gently towards the door.
He said, you are very pretty, at times you're beautiful.
You are sensitive, you are eager, you try to be honest, you manage to be both your age and natural and a little priggish and old-fashioned at the same time.
You even play chess quite well.
You're just the daughter I'd like to have.
That's probably why I've wanted you so much these last few months.
He pushed me through the door, face forward, so I couldn't see him.
I can't say such things to you without turning your head.
And you mustn't turn your head, in any sense.
Now, go.
I felt him press my shoulders an instant.
And he kissed the back of my head.
Pushed me away.
And I went two or three steps down the stairs before I stopped and looked back.
He was smiling, but it was a sad smile.
I said, please don't let it be too long.
He just shook his head.
I don't know if he meant ‘no, not  too long’ or ‘it's no good hoping it will be anything else but very long’.
Perhaps he didn't know himself.
But he looked sad.
He looked sad all through.
Of course I looked sad.
But I didn't really feel sad.
Or it wasn't a sadness that hurt, not an all-through one.
I rather enjoyed it.
Beastly, but I did.
I sang on the way home.
The romance, the mystery of it.
Living.
I thought I knew I didn't love him.
I'd won that game.
And what has happened since?
That first day or two, I kept on thinking he would telephone, that it was all a sort of whim.
Then I would think, I shan't see him again for months, perhaps years, and it seemed ridiculous.
Unnecessary.
Stupid beyond belief.
I hated what seemed his weakness.
I thought, if he's like this, to hell with him.
That didn't last very long.
I decided to decide that it was for the best.
He was right.
It was best to make a clean break.
I would concentrate on work.
Be practical and efficient and everything that I'm not really by nature.
All that time I kept thinking, do I love him?
Then, obviously, there was so much doubt, I couldn't.
And now I have to write down what I feel now.
Because I have changed again.
I know it.
I feel it.
Looks; I know it is idiotically wrong to have preconceived notions about looks.
Getting excited when Piers kisses me.
Having to stare at him sometimes (not when he would notice, because of his vanity) but feeling his looks intensely.
Like a beautiful drawing of something ugly.
You forget about the ugliness.
I know Piers is morally and psychologically ugly — just plain and dull, phoney.
But even there I've changed.
I think about G.P. holding me and caressing me.
There's a sort of nasty perverted curiosity in me — I mean, all the women he's had and all the things he must know about being in bed.
I can imagine his making love to me and it doesn't disgust me.
Very expert and gentle.
Fun.
All sorts of things, but not the thing.
If it's to be for life.
Then there's his weakness.
The feeling that he would probably betray me.
And I've always thought of marriage as a sort of young adventure, two people of the same age setting out together, discovering together, growing together.
But I would have nothing to tell him, nothing to show him.
All the helping would be on his side.
I've seen so little of the world.
I know that G.P. in many ways represents a sort of ideal now.
His sense of what counts, his independence, his refusal to do what the others do.
His standing apart.
It has to be someone with those qualities.
And no one else I've met has them as he has.
People at the Slade seem to have them — but they're so young.
It's easy to be frank and to hell with convention when you're our age.
Once or twice I've wondered whether it wasn't all a trap.
Like a sacrifice in chess.
Supposing I had said on the stairs, do what you like with me, but don't send me away?
No, I won't believe that of him.
Time-lag.
Two years ago I couldn't have dreamed of falling in love with an older man.
I was always the one who argued for equal ages at Ladymont.
I remember being one of the most disgusted when Susan Grillet married a Beastly Baronet nearly three times her age.
Minny and I used to talk about guarding against being ‘father’ types (because of M) and marrying father-husbands.
I don't feel that any more.
I think I need a man older than myself because I always seem to see through the boys I meet.
And I don't feel G.P. is a father-husband.
It's no good.
I could go on writing arguments for and against all night.
Emma .
The business of being between inexperienced girl and experienced woman and the awful problem of the man.
Caliban is Mr Elton.
Piers is Frank Churchill.
But is G.P. Mr Knightley?
Of course G.P. has lived a life and has views that would make Mr Knightley turn in his grave.
But Mr Knightley could never have been a phoney.
Because he was a hater of pretence, selfishness, snobbism.
And they both have the one man's name I really can't stand.
George.
Perhaps there's a moral in that.
November 18th
I have eaten nothing for five days.
I've drunk some water.
He brings me food, but I have touched not one crumb .
Tomorrow I am going to start eating again.
About half an hour ago, I stood up and felt faint.
Had to sit down again.
I haven't felt ill so far.
Just tummy pains and a bit weak.
But this was something different.
A warning.
I'm not going to die for him.
I haven't needed food.
I have been so full of hatred for him and his beastliness.
His vile cowardice.
His selfishness.
His Calibanity.
November 19th
For all that time, I didn't want to write.
Sometimes I wanted to.
Then it seemed weak.
Like accepting things.
I knew as soon as I wrote it down I'd go off the boil.
But now I think it needs writing down.
Recording.
He did this to me.
Outrage.
What little friendship, humanity, good nature there was between us has gone.
From now on we are enemies.
Both ways.
He said things that showed he hates me as well.
He resents my existence.
That's exactly it.
He doesn't realize it fully yet, because he's trying to be nice to me at the moment.
But he's much nearer than he was.
One day soon he's going to wake up and say to himself-I hate her.
Something nasty.
When I came round from the chloroform I was in bed.
I had my last underclothes on, but he must have taken everything else off.
I was furious, that first night.
Mad with disgust.
His beastly gloating hands touching me.
Peeling my stockings off.
Loathsome.
Then I thought of what he might have done.
And hadn't.
I decided not to fly at him.
But silence.
To shout at someone suggests that there's still contact.
Since then I've thought two things.
First: he's weird enough to have undressed me without thinking, according to some mad notion of the ‘proper’ thing to do.
Perhaps he thought I couldn't lie in bed with my clothes on.
And then that perhaps it was a sort of reminder.
Of all the things he might have done, but hadn't.
His chivalry.
And I accept that.
I have been lucky.
But I even find it frightening that he didn't do anything.
What is he?
There is a great rift between us now.
It can never be bridged.
He says now he will release me in another four weeks.
Just talk.
I don't believe him.
So I've warned him I'm going to try to kill him.
I would now.
I wouldn't think twice about it.
I've seen how wrong I was before.
How blind.
I prostituted myself to Caliban.
I mean, I let him spend all that money on me, and although I told myself it was fair, it wasn't.
Because I felt vaguely grateful, I've been nice to him.
Even my teasing was nice, even my sneering and spitting at him.
Even my breaking things.
Because it takes notice of him.
And my attitude should have been what it will be from now on— ice.
Freeze him to death.
He is absolutely inferior to me in all ways.
His one superiority is his ability to keep me here.
That's the only power he has.
He can't behave or think or speak or do anything else better than I can — nearly as well as I can — so he's going to be the Old Man of the Sea until I shake him off somehow.
It will have to be by force.
I've been sitting here and thinking about God.
I don't think I believe in God any more.
It is not only me, I think of all the millions who must have lived like this in the war.
The Anne Franks.
And back through history.
What I feel I know now is that God doesn't intervene.
He lets us suffer.
If you pray for liberty then you may get relief just because you pray, or because things happen anyhow which bring you liberty.
But God can't hear.
There's nothing human like hearing or seeing or pitying or helping about him.
I mean perhaps God has created the world and the fundamental laws of matter and evolution.
But he can't care about the individuals.
He's planned it so some individuals are happy, some sad, some lucky, some not.
Who is sad, who  is not, he doesn't know, and he doesn't care.
So he doesn't exist, really.
These last few days I've felt Godless.
I've felt cleaner, less muddled, less blind.
I still believe in a God.
But he's so remote, so cold, so mathematical.
I see that we have to live as if there is no God.
Prayer and worship and singing hymns — all silly and useless.
I'm trying to explain why I'm breaking with my principles (about never committing violence).
It is still my principle, but I see you have to break principles sometimes to survive.
It's no good trusting vaguely in your luck, in Providence or God's being kind to you.
You have to act and fight for yourself.
The sky is absolutely empty.
Beautifully pure and empty.
as if the architects and builders would live in all the houses they built!
Or could live in them all.
It's obvious, it stares you in the face.
There must be a God and he can't know anything about us.
(Same evening.)
I've been very mean with him all day.
Several times he's tried to speak, but I've shut him up.
Did I want him to bring me anything?
I said, I want nothing.
I am your prisoner.
If you give me food I shall eat it to keep alive.
Our relations from now on are strictly those of a prisoner and a warder.
Now please leave me alone.
Luckily I've plenty to read.
He'll go on bringing me cigarettes (if he doesn't I shan't ask him for them) and food.
That's all I want of him.
He's not human; he's an empty space disguised as a human.
November 20th
I'm making him wish he never set eyes on me.
He brought in some baked beans for lunch.
I was reading on the bed.
He stood for a moment and then started to go out.
I jumped to the table, picked up the plate and hurled it at him.
I don't like baked beans, he knows it, I suppose he'd been lazy.
I wasn't in a temper, I just pretended.
He stood there with the filthy little bits of orange sauce on his so-clean clothes and looking sheepish I don't want any lunch, I snapped at him.
And turned my back.
I ate chocolates all the afternoon.
He didn't reappear until supper-time.
There was caviare and smoked salmon and cold chicken (he buys them ready-cooked somewhere)— all things he knows I like — and a dozen other things he knows I like, the cunning brute.
It's not the buying them that's cunning, it's just that I can't help being grateful (I didn't actually say I was grateful, but I wasn't sharp), it's that he presents them so humbly, with such an air of please-don't-thank-me and I-deserve-it-all.
When he was arranging my supper-things on the table, I had an irresistible desire to giggle.
Awful.
I wanted to collapse on the bed and scream.
He was so perfectly himself.
And I am so cooped up.
Down here my moods change so rapidly.
All determination to do one thing one hour; all for another the next.
It's no use.
I'm not a hater by nature.
It's as if somewhere in me a certain amount of good-will and kindness is manufactured every day; and it must come out.
If I bottle it up, then it bursts out.
I wasn't nice to him, I don't want to be nice to him, I shan't be nice to him.
But it was a struggle not to be ordinary to him.
(I mean little things like ‘that was a nice meal’.)
As it was I said nothing.
When he said, ‘Will that be all’(like a butler), I said, ‘Yes, you can go now’, and turned my back.
He would have got a shock if he could have seen my face.
It was smiling, and when he shut the door, I was laughing.
I couldn't help it again.
Hysteria.
Something I have been doing a lot these last days.
Staring at myself in the mirror.
Sometimes I don't seem real to myself, it suddenly seems that it isn't my reflection only a foot or two away.
I have to look aside.
I look all over my face, at my eyes, I try to see what my eyes say.
What I am.
Why I'm here.
It's because I'm so lonely.
I have to look at an intelligent face.
Anyone who has been locked away like this would understand.
You become very real to yourself in a strange way.
As you never were before.
So much of you is given to ordinary people, suppressed, in ordinary life.
I watch my face and I watch it move as if it is someone else's.
I stare myself out.
I sit with myself.
Sometimes it's like a sort of spell, and I have to put my tongue out and wrinkle my nose to break it.
I sit down here in the absolute silence with my reflection, in a sort of state of mystery.
In a trance.
November 21st
It's the middle of the night.
I can't sleep.
I hate myself.
I nearly became a murderess tonight.
I shall never be the same again.
It is difficult to write.
My hands are bound.
I've got the gag off.
It all began at lunch.
I realized that I was having to struggle not to be nice to him.
Because I felt I must talk to someone.
Even him.
At least he is a human being.
When he went away after lunch, I wanted to call him back to talk.
What I felt was quite different from what I decided I should feel two days ago.
So I made a new decision.
I could never hit him with anything down here.
I've watched him so much with that in mind.
And he never turns his back to me.
Besides, there's no weapon.
So I thought, I've got to get upstairs and find something, some means.
I had several ideas.
Otherwise I was afraid I would fall into the old trap of pitying him.
So I was a bit nicer at supper-time and said I needed a bath (which I did).
He went away, came back, we went up.
And there, it seemed a sign, specially left for me, was a small axe.
It was on the kitchen window-sill, which is next to the door.
He must have been chopping wood outside and forgotten to hide it.
My always being down here.
We passed indoors too quickly for me to do anything then.
But I lay in the bath and thought.
I decided it must be done.
I had to catch up the axe and hit him with the blunt end, knock him out.
I hadn't the least idea where on the head was the best place to hit or how hard it had to be.
Then I asked to go straight back.
As we went out through the kitchen door, I dropped my talcum powder and things and stood to one side, towards the window-sill, as if I was looking to see where they'd gone.
He did just what I wanted and bent  forward to pick them up.
I wasn't nervous, I picked the axe up very neatly, I didn't scrape the blade and it was the blunt end.
But then…it was like waking up out of a bad dream.
I had to hit him and I couldn't but I had to.
Then he began to straighten up (all this happened in a flash, really) and I did hit him.
But he was turning and I didn't hit straight.
Or hard enough.
I mean, I lashed out in a panic at the last moment.
He fell sideways, but I knew he wasn't knocked out, he still kept hold of me, I suddenly felt I had to kill him or he would kill me.
I hit him again, but he had his arm up, at the same time he kicked out and knocked me off my feet.
It was too horrible.
Panting, straining, like animals.
Then suddenly I knew it — I don't know, undignified.
It sounds absurd, but that was it.
Like a statue lying on its side.
Like a fat woman trying to get up off the grass.
We got up, he pushed me roughly towards the door, keeping a tight hold of me.
But that was all.
I had a funny feeling it was the same for him — disgusting.
I thought someone may have heard, even though I couldn't call out.
But it was windy.
Wet and cold.
No one would have been out.
I've been lying on the bed.
I soon stopped crying.
I've been lying for hours in the dark and thinking.
November 22nd
I am ashamed.
I let myself down vilely.
I've come to a series of decisions.
Thoughts.
Violence and force are wrong.
If I use violence I descend to his level.
It means that I have no real belief in the power of reason, and sympathy and humanity.
That I lameduck people only because it flatters me, not because I believe they need my sympathy.
I've been thinking back to Ladymont, to people I lameducked there.
Sally Margison.
I lameducked her just to show the Vestal Virgins that I was cleverer than they.
That I could get her to do things for me that she wouldn't do for them.
Donald and Piers (because I've lameducked him in a sense, too) but they're both attractive young men.
There were probably hundreds of other people who needed lameducking, my sympathy, far more than those two.
And anyway, most girls would have jumped at the chance of lameducking them.
I've given up too soon with Caliban.
I've got to take up a new attitude with him.
The prisoner-warder idea was silly.
I won't spit at him any more.
I'll be silent when he irritates me.
I'll treat him as someone who needs all my sympathy and understanding.
I'll go on trying to teach him things about art.
Other things.
There's only one way to do things.
The right way.
Not what they meant by ‘the Right Way’ at Ladymont.
But the way you feel is right.
My own right way.
I am a moral person.
I am not ashamed of being moral.
I will not let Caliban make me immoral; even though he deserves all my hatred and bitterness and an axe in his head.
(Later.)
I've been nice to him.
That is, not the cat I've been lately.
As soon as he came in I made him let me look at his head, and I dabbed some Dettol on it.
He was nervous.
I make him jumpy.
He doesn't trust me.
That is precisely the state I shouldn't have got him into.
It's difficult, though.
When I'm being beastly to him, he has such a way of looking sorry for himself that I begin to hate myself.
But as soon as I begin to be nice to him, a sort of self-satisfaction seems to creep into his voice and his manner (very discreet, he's been humility itself all day, no reproach about last night, of course) and I begin to want to goad and slap him again.
A tightrope.
But it's cleared the air.
(Night.)
I tried to teach him what to look for in abstract art after supper.
It's hopeless.
He has it fixed in his poor dim noddle that art is fiddling away (he can't understand why I don't ‘rub out’) until you get an exact photographic likeness and that making lovely cool designs (Ben Nicholson) is vaguely immoral.
I can see it makes a nice pattern, he said.
But he won't concede that ‘making a nice pattern’ is art.
With him, it's that certain words have terribly strong undertones.
Everything to do with art embarrasses him (and I suppose fascinates him).
It's all vaguely immoral.
He knows great art is great, but ‘great’ means locked away in museums and spoken about when you want to show off.
Living art, modern art shocks him.
You can't talk about it with him because the word ‘art’ starts off a whole series of shocked, guilty ideas in him.
I wish I knew if there were many people like him.
Of course I know the vast majority — especially the New People — don't care a damn about any of the arts.
But is it because they are like him?
Or because they just couldn't care less?
I mean, does it really bore them (so that they don't need it at all in their lives) or does it secretly shock and dismay them, so that they have to pretend to be bored?
November 23rd
I've just finished Saturday Night and Sunday Morning .
It's shocked me.
It's shocked me in itself and it's shocked me because of where I am.
It shocked me in the same way as Room at the Top shocked me when I read it last year.
I know they're very clever, it must be wonderful to be able to write like Alan Sillitoe.
Real, unphoney.
Saying what you mean.
If he was a painter it would be wonderful (he'd be like John Bratby, much better), he'd be able to set Nottingham down and it would be wonderful in paint.
Because he painted so well, put down what he saw, people would admire him.
But it isn't enough to write well (I mean choose the right words and so on) to be a good writer.
Because I think Saturday Night and Sunday Morning is disgusting.
I think Arthur Seaton is disgusting.
And I think the most disgusting thing of all is that Alan Sillitoe doesn't show that he's disgusted by his young man.
I think they think young men like that are really rather fine.
I hated the way Arthur Seaton just doesn't care about anything outside his own little life.
He's mean, narrow, selfish, brutal.
Because he's cheeky and hates his work and is successful with women, he's supposed to be vital.
The only thing I like about him is the feeling that there is something there that could be used for good if it could be got at.
It's the inwardness of such people.
Their not caring what happens anywhere else in the world.
In life.
Their being-in-a-box.
Perhaps Alan Sillitoe wanted to attack the society that produces such people.
But he doesn't make it clear.
I know what he's done, he's fallen in love with what he's painting.
He started out to paint it as ugly as it is, but then its ugliness conquered him, and he started trying to cheat.
To prettify.
It shocked me too because of Caliban.
I see there's something of Arthur Seaton in him, only in him it's turned upside down.
I mean, he has that hate of other things and other people outside  his own type.
He has that selfishness — it's not even an honest selfishness, because he puts the blame on life and then enjoys being selfish with a free conscience.
He's obstinate, too.
This has shocked me because I think everyone now except us (and we're contaminated) has this selfishness and this brutality, whether it's hidden, mousy, and perverse, or obvious and crude.
Religion's as good as dead, there's nothing to hold back the New People, they'll grow stronger and stronger and swamp us.
No, they won't.
Because of David.
Because of people like Alan Sillitoe (it says on the back he was the son of a labourer).
I mean the intelligent New People will always revolt and come across to our side.
The New People destroy themselves because they're so stupid.
They can never keep the intelligent ones with them.
Especially the young ones.
We want something better than just money and keeping up with the Joneses.
But it's a battle.
It's like being in a city and being besieged.
They're all around.
And we've got to hold out.
It's a battle between Caliban and myself.
He is the New People and I am the Few.
I must fight with my weapons.
Not his.
Not selfishness and brutality and shame and resentment.
He's worse than the Arthur Seaton kind.
If Arthur Seaton saw a modern statue he didn't like, he'd smash it.
But Caliban would drape a tarpaulin round it.
I don't know which is worse.
But I think Caliban's way is.
November 24th
I'm getting desperate to escape.
I can't get any relief from drawing or playing records or reading.
The burning burning need I have (all prisoners must have) is for other people.
Caliban is only half a person at the best of times.
I want to see dozens and dozens of strange faces.
Like being terribly thirsty and gulping down glass after glass of water.
Exactly like that.
I read once that nobody can stand more than ten years in prison, or more than one year of solitary confinement.
One just can't imagine what prison is like from outside.
You think, well there'd be lots of time to think and read, it wouldn't be too bad.
But it is too bad.
It's the slowness of time.
I'll swear all the clocks in the world have gone centuries slower since I came here.
I shouldn't complain.
This is a luxury prison.
And there's his diabolical cunning about the newspapers and radio and so on.
I never read the papers very much, or listened to the news.
But to be totally cut off.
It's so strange.
I feel I've lost all my bearings.
I spend hours lying on the bed thinking about how to escape.
Endless.
November 25th
(Afternoon.)
This morning I had a talk with him.
I got him to sit as a model.
Then I asked him what he really wanted me to do.
Should I become his mistress?
But that shocked him.
He went red and said he could buy that in London.
I told him he was a Chinese box.
And he is.
The innermost box is that I should love him; in all ways.
With my body, with my mind.
Respect him and cherish him.
It's so utterly impossible — even if I could overcome the physical thing, how could I ever look in any way but down on him?
Battering his head on a stone wall.
I don't want to die.
I feel full of endurance.
I shall always want to survive.
I will survive.
November 26th
The only unusual thing about him — how he loves me.
Ordinary New People couldn't love anything as he loves me.
That is blindly.
Absolutely.
Like Dante and Beatrice.
He enjoys being hopelessly in love with me.
I expect Dante was the same.
Mooning around knowing it was all quite hopeless and getting lots of good creative material from the experience.
Though of course Caliban can't get anything but his own miserable pleasure.
People who don't make anything.
I hate them.
How frightened of dying I was in those first days.
I don't want to die because I keep on thinking of the future.
I'm desperately curious to know what life will bring to me.
What will happen to me, how I'll develop, what I'll be in five years' time, in ten, in thirty.
The man I will marry and the places I will live in and get to know.
Children.
It isn't just a selfish curiosity.
This is the worst possible time in history to die.
Space-travel, science, the whole world waking up and stretching itself A new age is beginning.
I know it's dangerous.
But it's wonderful to be alive in it.
I love, I adore my age.
I keep on having thoughts today.
One was: uncreative men plus opportunity-to-create equals evil men.
Another one was: killing him was breaking my word to what I believe.
Some people would say — you're only a drop, your word-breaking is only a drop, it wouldn't matter.
But all the evil in the world's made up of little drops.
It's silly talking about the unimportance of the little drops.
The little drops and the ocean are the same thing.
I've been daydreaming (not for the first time) about living with G.P.
He deceives me, he leaves me, he is brutal and cynical  with me, I am in despair.
In these daydreams there isn't much sex, it's just our living together.
In rather romantic surroundings.
Sea-and-island northern landscapes.
White cottages.
Sometimes in the Mediterranean.
We are together, very close in spirit.
All silly magazine stuff, really, in the details.
But there is the closeness of spirit.
That is something real.
And the situations I imagine (where he forsakes me) are real.
I mean, it kills me to think of them.
Sometimes I'm not very far from utter despair.
No one knows I am alive any more.
I'm given up for dead by now, I'm accepted for dead.
There's that — the real situation.
And there are the future situations I sit on the bed here and think about: my utter love for some man; I know I can't do things like love by halves, I know I have love pent up in me, I shall throw myself away, lose my heart and my body and my mind and soul to some cad like G.P. Who'll betray me.
I feel it.
Everything is tender and rational at first in my daydreams of living with him, but I know it wouldn't be in fact.
It would be all passion and violence.
Jealousy.
Despair.
Sour.
Something would be killed in me.
He would be hurt, too.
If he really loved me he couldn't have sent me away.
If he really loved me he would have sent me away.
November 27th
Midnight.
I'll never escape.
It drives me mad.
I must must must do something.
I feel as if I'm at the earth's heart.
I've got the whole weight of the whole earth pressing in on this little box.
It grows smaller smaller smaller.
I can feel it contracting.
I want to scream sometimes.
Till my voice is raw.
To death.
I can't write it.
There aren't the words.
Utter despair.
I've been like that all day.
A kind of endless panic in slow-motion.
What can he have thought when he first got me here?
Something's gone wrong in his plans.
I'm not acting like the girl of his dreams I was.
I'm his pig in a poke.
Is that why he keeps me?
Hoping the dream Miranda will appear?
Perhaps I should be his dream-girl.
Put my arms round him and kiss him.
Praise him, pat him, stroke him.
Kiss him.
I didn't mean that.
But it's made me think.
Perhaps I really should kiss him.
More than kiss him.
Love him.
Make Prince Charming step out.
I'm thinking hours between each sentence I write.
I've got to make him feel that finally I've been touched by his chivalry and so on and so on…
This is extraordinary.
He would have to act.
I am sure I can do it.
At least he's scrupulously clean.
He never smells of anything but soap.
I'm going to sleep on it.
November 28th
I've come to a tremendous decision today.
I've imagined being in bed with him.
It's useless just kissing him.
I've got to give him such a tremendous shock that he'll have to release me.
Because you can't very well imprison someone who's given herself to you.
I shall be in his power.
I couldn't ever go to the police.
I should only want to hush it up.
It's so obvious.
It stares one in the face.
Like a really good sacrifice at chess.
It's like drawing.
You can't rubble at a line.
The boldness is the line.
I thought out all the sex facts.
I wish I knew a little more about men, I wish I was absolutely sure, that I didn't have to go on things heard, read, half understood, but I'm going to let him do what Piers wanted to do in Spain — what they call Scotch love.
Get me into bed if he wants.
Play with me if he wants.
But not the final thing.
I'm going to tell him it's my time of the month, if he tries to go too far.
But I think he'll be so shocked that I shall be able to make him do what I want.
I mean, I'm going to do all the seducing.
I know it would be a terrible risk with ninety-nine men out of a hundred, but I think he's the hundredth.
He'll stop when I tell him.
Even if it came to the point.
He didn't stop.
I'd take the risk.
There are two things.
One's the need to make him let me go.
The other's me.
Something I wrote on Nov. 7th —‘I love being to the full, I love everything which is not sitting and watching.’
But I'm not being to the full at all.
I'm just sitting and watching.
Not only here.
With G.P.
All this Vestal Virgin talk about ‘saving yourself up’ for the right man.
I've always despised it.
Yet I've always held back.
I'm mean with my body.
I've got to get this meanness out of the way.
I've got sunk in a sort of despair.
Something will happen, I say.
But nothing will, unless I make it.
I must act.
Another thing I wrote (one writes things and the implications shriek — it's like suddenly realizing one's deaf), ‘I must fight with my weapons.
Not his.
Not selfishness and brutality and shame and resentment.’
Therefore with generosity (I give myself) and gentleness (I kiss the beast) and no-shame (I do what I do of my own free will) and forgiveness (he can't help himself).
Even a baby.
His baby.
Anything.
For freedom.
The more I think about it the more I feel sure that this is the way.
He has some secret.
He must want me physically.
Perhaps he's ‘no good’.
Whatever it is, it will come out.
We'll know where we are.
I haven't written much about G.P. these last days.
But I think about him a great deal.
The first and last thing I look at every day is his picture.
I begin to hate that unknown girl who was his model.
He must have gone to bed with her.
Perhaps she was his first wife.
I shall ask him when I get out.
Because the first thing I shall do — the first real positive thing.
after I've seen the family, will be to go to see him.
To tell him that he has been always in my thoughts.
That he is the most important person I have ever met.
The most real.
That I am jealous of every woman who has ever slept with him.
I still can't say that I love him.
But now I begin to see that it's because I don't know what love is.
I'm Emma with her silly little clever-clever theories of love and marriage, and love is something that comes in different clothes, with a different way and different face, and perhaps it takes a long time for you to accept it, to be able to call it love.
Perhaps he would be dry and cold when it came to it.
Say  I'm too young, he wasn't ever really serious, and — a thousand things.
But I'm not afraid.
I would risk it.
Perhaps he's in mid- affaire with somebody else.
I'd say, I've come back because I'm not sure any more that I'm not in love with you.
I'd say, I've been naked with a man I loathed.
I've been at bottom.
I'd let him have me.
But I still couldn't bear to see him sneaking off with someone else.
Reducing it all to sex.
I should wither up and die inside if he did.
I know it's not very emancipated of me.
This is what I feel.
Sex doesn't matter.
Love does.
This afternoon I wanted to ask Caliban to post a letter to G.P. from me.
Quite mad.
Of course he wouldn't.
He'd be jealous.
But I so need to be walking up the stairs and pushing open the studio door, and seeing him at his bench, looking over his shoulder at me, as if he's not in the least interested to see who it is.
Standing there, with his faint, faint smile and eyes that understand things so quickly.
This is useless.
I'm thinking of the price before the painting.
Tomorrow.
I must act now .
I started today really.
I've called him Ferdinand (not Caliban) three times, and complimented him on a horrid new tie.
I've smiled at him, I've dutifully tried to look as if I like everything about him.
He certainly hasn't given any sign of having noticed it.
But he won't know what's hit him tomorrow.
I can't sleep.
I've got up again and put on G.P.'s clavichord record.
Perhaps he's been listening to it, too, and thinking of me.
The Invention I like best is the one after the one he loves best — he loves the fifth, and I the sixth.
So we lie side by side in Bach.
I always used to think Bach was a bore.
Now he overwhelms me, he is so human, so full of moods and gentleness and wonderful  tunes and things so simple-deep I play them over and over again as once I used to copy drawings I liked.
I think, perhaps I'll just try putting my arms round him and kissing him.
No more.
But he'd grow to like that.
It would drag on.
It's got to be a shock.
All this business, it's bound up with my bossy attitude to life.
I've always known where I'm going, how I want things to happen.
And they have happened as I have wanted, and I have taken it for granted that they have because I know where I'm going.
But I have been lucky in all sorts of things.
I've always tried to happen to life; but it's time I let life happen to me.
November 30th
Oh, God.
I've done something terrible.
I've got to put it down.
Look at it.
It is so amazing.
That I did it.
That what happened happened.
That he is what he is.
That I am what I am.
Things left like this.
Worse than ever before.
I decided to do it this morning.
I knew I had to do something extraordinary.
To give myself a shock as well as him.
I arranged to have a bath.
I was nice to him all day.
I dolled myself up after the bath.
Oceans of Mitsouko.
I stood in front of the fire, showing my bare feet for his benefit.
I was nervous.
I didn't know if I could go through with it.
And having my hands bound.
But I had three glasses of sherry quickly.
I shut my eyes then and went to work.
I made him sit down and then I sat down on his lap.
He was so stiff, so shocked, that I had to go on.
If he'd clutched at me, perhaps I'd have stopped.
I let the housecoat fall open, but he just sat there with me on his lap.
as if we had never met before and this was some silly party game.
Two strangers at a party, who didn't much like each other.
In a nasty perverted way it was exciting.
A woman-in-me reaching to a man-in-him.
I can't explain, it was also the feeling that he didn't know what to do.
That he was sheer virgin.
There was an old lady of Cork who took a young priest for a walk.
I must have been drunk.
I had to force him to kiss me.
He made a sort of feeble pretence of being afraid that he might lose his head.
I don't care if you do, I said.
And I kissed him again.
He did kiss me back then, as if he wanted to press his wretched thin inhibited mouth right through my head.
His mouth was sweet.
He smelt clean and I shut my eyes.
It wasn't so bad.
But then he suddenly went away by the window and he wouldn't come back.
He wanted to run away, but he couldn't, so he stood by his desk, half turned, while I knelt half-naked by the fire and let my hair down, just to make it quite obvious.
In the end I had to go up to him and bring him back to the fire.
I made him undo my hands, he was like someone in a trance, and then I undressed him and I undressed myself.
I said, don't be nervous, I want to do this.
Just be natural.
But he wouldn't, he wouldn't.
I did everything I could.
But nothing happened.
He wouldn't thaw out.
He did hold me tight once.
But it wasn't natural.
Just a desperate imitation of what he must think the real thing's like.
Pathetically unconvincing.
He can't do it.
There's no man in him.
I got up, we were lying on the sofa, and knelt by him and told him not to worry.
Mothered him.
We put our clothes back on.
And gradually it all came out.
The truth about him.
And later, his real self.
A psychiatrist has told him he won't ever be able to do it.
He said he used to imagine us lying in bed together.
Just lying.
Nothing else.
I offered to do that.
But he didn't want to.
Deep down in him, side by side with the beastliness, the sourness, there is a tremendous innocence.
It rules him.
He must protect it.
He said he loved me, even so.
I said, what you love is your own love.
It's not love, it's selfishness.
It's not me you think of, but what you feel about me.
I don't know what it is, he said.
And then I made a mistake, I felt it had all been a sacrifice in vain, I felt I had to make him appreciate what I'd done, that he ought to let me go — so I tried to tell him.
And his true self came out.
He got beastly.
Wouldn't answer me.
We were further apart than ever.
I said I pitied him and he flew at me.
It was terrible.
It made me cry.
The terrible coldness, the inhumanity of it.
Being his prisoner.
Having to stay.
Still.
And realizing at last that this is what he is.
Impossible to understand.
What is he?
What does he want?
Why am I here if he can't do it?
as if I'd lit a fire in the darkness to try and warm us.
And all I'd done was to see his real face by it.
The last thing I said was — We can't be further apart.
We've been naked in front of each other.
But we are.
I feel better now.
I'm glad nothing worse happened.
I was mad to take the risk.
It's enough to have survived.
December 1st
He's been down, I've been out in the cellar, and it is absolutely plain.
He's angry with me.
He's never been angry like this before.
This isn't a pet.
It's a deep suppressed anger.
It makes me furious.
Nobody could ever understand how much I put into yesterday.
The effort of giving, of risking, of understanding.
Of pushing back every natural instinct.
It's him.
And it's this weird male thing.
Now I'm no longer nice.
They sulk if you don't give, and hate you when you do.
Intelligent men must despise themselves for being like that.
Their illogicality.
Sour men and wounded women
Of course, I've discovered his secret.
He hates that.
I've thought and thought about it.
He must always have known he couldn't do anything with me.
Yet all his talk about loving me.
That must mean something.
This is what I think it is.
He can't have any normal pleasure from me.
His pleasure is keeping me prisoner.
Thinking of all the other men who would envy him if they knew.
Having me.
So my being nice to him is ridiculous.
I want to be so unpleasant that he gets no pleasure from having me.
I'm going to fast again.
Have absolutely nothing to do with him.
Strange ideas.
That I've done for the first time in my life something original.
Something hardly anyone else can have done.
I steeled myself when we were naked.
I learnt what ‘to steel oneself’ meant.
The last of the Ladymont me.
It's dead.
I remember driving Piers's car somewhere near Carcassonne.
They all wanted me to stop.
But I wanted to do eighty.
And I kept my foot down until I did.
The others were frightened.
So was I. 
But it proved I could do it.
(Late afternoon.)
Reading The Tempest again all the afternoon.
Not the same at all now what's happened has happened.
The pity Shakespeare feels for his Caliban, I feel (beneath the hate and disgust) for my Caliban.
Half-creatures.
‘Not honour'd with a human shape.’
‘Caliban my slave, who never yields us kind answer.’
‘Whom stripes may move, not kindness.’
PROS.
…and lodged thee
In mine own cell, till thou didst seek to violate
The honour of my child.
CAL.
O ho, O ho!— Would't had been done!
Thou didst prevent me; I had peopled else
This isle with Calibans…
Prospero's contempt for him.
His knowing that being kind is useless.
Stephano and Trinculo are the football pools.
Their wine, the money he won.
Act III, scene 2.
‘I cried to dream again.’
Poor Caliban.
But only because he never won the pools.
‘I'll be wise hereafter.’
‘O brave new world.’
O sick new world.
He's just gone.
I said I would fast unless he let me come upstairs.
Fresh air and daylight every day.
He hedged.
He was beastly.
Sarcastic.
He actually said I was ‘forgetting who was boss.’
He's changed.
He frightens me now.
I've given him until tomorrow morning to make up his mind.
December 2nd
I'm to go upstairs.
He's going to convert a room.
He said it would take a week.
I said, all right, but if it's another put-off…
We'll see.
I lay in bed last night and thought of G.P.
I thought of being in bed with him.
I wanted to be in bed with him.
I wanted the marvellous, the fantastic ordinariness of him.
His promiscuity is creative.
Vital.
Even though it hurts.
He creates love and life and excitement around him; he lives, the people he loves remember him.
I've always felt like it sometimes.
Promiscuous.
Anyone I see, even just some boy in the Tube, some man, I think what would he be like in bed.
I look at their mouths and their hands, put on a prim expression and think about them having me in bed.
Even Toinette, getting into bed with anyone.
I used to think it was messy.
But love is beautiful, any love.
Even just sex.
The only thing that is ugly is this frozen lifeless utter lack-love between Caliban and me.
This morning I was imagining I'd escaped and that Caliban was in court.
I was speaking for him.
I said his case was tragic, he needed sympathy and psychiatry.
Forgiveness.
I wasn't being noble.
I despise him too much to hate him.
It's funny.
I probably should speak for him.
I know we shouldn't be able to meet again.
I could never cure him.
Because I'm his disease.
December 3rd
I shall go and have an affaire with G.P.
I'll marry him if he wants.
I want the adventure, the risk of marrying him.
I'm sick of being young.
Inexperienced.
Clever at knowing but not at living.
I want his children in me.
My body doesn't count any more.
If he just wants that he can have it.
I couldn't ever be a Toinette.
A collector of men.
Being cleverer (as I thought) than most men, and cleverer than all the girls I knew.
I always thought I knew more, felt more, understood more.
But I don't even know enough to handle Caliban.
All sorts of bits left over from Ladymont days.
From the days when I was a nice little middle-class doctor's daughter.
They've gone now.
When I was at Ladymont I thought I could manipulate a pencil very nicely.
And then when I went to London, I began to find I couldn't.
I was surrounded by people who were just as skilled as I was.
More so.
I haven't begun to know how to handle my life — or anyone else's.
I'm the one who needs lameducking.
It's like the day you realize dolls are dolls.
I pick up my old self and I see it's silly.
A toy I've played with too often.
It's a little sad, like an old golliwog at the bottom of the cupboard.
Innocent and used-up and proud and silly.
G.P.
I shall be hurt, lost, battered and buffeted.
But it will be like being in a gale of light, after this black hole.
It's simply that.
He has the secret of life in him.
Something spring-like.
Not immoral.
It's as if I'd only seen him at twilight; and now suddenly I see him at dawn.
He is the same, but everything is different.
I looked in the mirror today and I could see it in my eyes.
They look much older and younger.
It sounds impossible in words.
But that's exactly it.
I am older and younger.
I am older because I have learnt, I am younger because a lot of me consisted of things older people had taught me.
All the mud of their stale ideas on the shoe of me.
The new shoe of me.
The power of women!
I've never felt so full of mysterious power.
Men are a joke.
We're so weak physically, so helpless with things.
Still, even today.
But we're stronger than they are.
We can stand their cruelty.
They can't stand ours.
I think — I will give myself to G.P.
He can have me.
And whatever he does to me I shall still have my woman-me he can never touch.
All this is wild talk.
But I feel full of urges.
New independence.
I don't think about now.
Today.
I know I'm going to escape.
I feel it.
I can't explain.
Caliban can never win against me.
I think of paintings I shall do.
Last night I thought of one, it was a sort of butter-yellow (farm-butter-yellow) held rising to a white luminous sky and the sun just rising.
A strange rose-pink, I knew it exactly, full of hushed stillness, the beginning of things, lark-song without larks.
Two strange contradictory dreams.
The first one was very simple.
I was walking in the fields, I don't know who I was with, but it was someone I liked very much, a man.
G.P. perhaps.
The sun shining on young corn.
And suddenly we saw swallows flying low over the corn.
I could see their backs gleaming, like dark blue silk.
They were very low, twittering all round us, all flying in the same  direction, low and happy.
And I felt full of happiness.
I said, how extraordinary, look at the swallows.
It was very simple, the unexpected swallows and the sun and the green corn.
I was filled with happiness.
The purest spring feeling.
Then I woke up.
Later I had another dream.
I was at the window on the first floor of a large house (Ladymont?) and there was a black horse below.
It was angry, but I felt safe because it was below and outside.
But suddenly it turned and galloped at the house and to my horror it leapt gigantically up and straight at me with bared teeth.
It came crashing through the window.
Even then I thought, it will kill itself, I am safe.
But it sprawled and flailed round in the small room and I suddenly realized it was going to attack me.
There was nowhere to escape.
I woke again, I had to put on the light.
It was violence.
It was all I hate and all I fear.
December 4th
I shan't go on keeping a diary when I leave here.
It's not healthy.
It keeps me sane down here, gives me somebody to talk to.
But it's vain You write what you want to hear.
It's funny.
You don't do that when you draw yourself.
No temptation to cheat.
It's sick, sick, all this thinking about me.
Morbid.
I long to paint and paint other things.
Fields, southern houses, landscapes, vast wide-open things in vast wide-open light.
It's what I've been doing today.
Moods of light recalled from Spain.
Ochre walls burnt white in the sunlight.
The walls of Avila.
Cordoba courtyards.
I don't try to reproduce the place, but the light of the place.
Fiat lux.
I've been playing the Modern Jazz Quartet's records over and over again.
There's no night in their music, no smoky dives.
Bursts and sparkles and little fizzes of light, starlight, and sometimes high noon, tremendous everywhere light, like chandeliers of diamonds floating in the sky.
December 5th
G.P.
The Rape of Intelligence.
By the moneyed masses, the New People.
Things he says.
They shock you, but you remember them.
They stick.
Hard, meant to last.
I've been doing skyscapes all day.
I just draw a line an inch from the bottom.
That's the earth.
Then I think of nothing but the sky.
June sky, December, August, spring-rain, thunder, dawn, dusk.
I've done dozens of skies.
Pure sky, nothing else.
Just the simple line and the skies above.
A strange thought: I would not want this not to have happened.
Because if I escape I shall be a completely different and I think better person.
Because if I don't escape, if something dreadful happened, I shall still know that the person I was and would have stayed if this hadn't happened was not the person I now want to be.
It's like firing a pot.
You have to risk the cracking and the warping.
Caliban's very quiet.
A sort of truce.
I'm going to ask to go up tomorrow.
I want to see if he's actually doing anything.
Today I asked him to bind me and gag me and let me sit at the foot of the cellar steps with the door out open.
In the end he agreed.
So I could look up and see the sky.
A pale grey sky.
I saw birds fly across, pigeons, I think.
I heard outside sounds.
This is the first proper daylight I've seen for two months.
It lived.
It made me cry.
December 6th
I've been up for a bath and we've been looking at the room I shall occupy.
He has done some things.
He's going to see if he can't find an antique windsor chair.
I drew it for him.
It's made me feel happy.
I'm restless.
I can't write here.
I feel half-escaped already.
The thing that made me feel he was more normal was this little bit of dialogue.
M (we were standing in the room ).
Why don't you just let me come and live up here as your guest?
If I gave you my word of honour?
C. If fifty people came to me, real honest respectable people, and swore blind you wouldn't escape, I wouldn't trust them.
I wouldn't trust the whole world.
M. You can't go all through life trusting no one.
C. You don't know what being alone is.
M. What do you think I've been these last two months?
C. I bet a lot of people think about you.
Miss you.
I might be dead for all anyone I knew ever cared.
M. Your aunt.
C. Her.
(There was a silence .)
C (he suddenly burst out with it ).
You don't know what you are.
You're everything.
I got nothing if you go.
(And there was a great silence .)
December 7th
He's bought the chair.
He brought it down.
It's nice.
I wouldn't have it down here.
I don't want anything from down here.
A complete change.
Tomorrow I'm going upstairs for good.
I asked him afterwards, last night.
And he agreed.
I haven't got to wait the whole week.
He's gone into Lewes to buy more things for the room.
We're going to have a celebration supper.
He's been much nicer, these last two days.
I'm not going to lose my head and try and rush out at the first chance.
He'll watch me, I know.
I can't imagine what he'll do.
The window will be boarded and he'll lock the door.
But there'll be ways of seeing daylight.
Sooner or later there'll be a chance (if he doesn't let me go of his own accord) to run for it.
But I know it will be only one chance.
If he caught me escaping he'd put me straight back down here.
So it must be a really good chance.
A sure one.
I tell myself I must prepare for the worst.
But something about him makes me feel that this time he will do what he has said.
I've caught his cold.
It doesn't matter.
Oh my God my God I could kill myself.
He's going to kill me with despair.
I'm still down here.
He never meant it.
He wants to take photographs.
That's his secret.
He wants to take my clothes off and…oh God I never knew till now what loathing was.
He said unspeakable things to me.
I was a street-woman, I asked for what he suggested.
I went mad with rage.
I threw a bottle of ink at him.
He said that if I didn't do it he'd stop me having baths or going out in the cellar.
I'll be here all the time.
The hate between us.
It came seething out.
I've caught his wretched cold.
I can't think straight.
I couldn't kill myself, I'm too angry with him.
He's always abused me.
From the very beginning.
That story about the dog.
He uses my heart.
Then turns and tramples on it.
He hates me, he wants to defile me and break me and destroy me.
He wants me to hate myself so much that I destroy myself.
The final meanness.
He's not bringing me any supper.
I'm to fast, on top of everything else.
Perhaps he's going to leave me to starve.
He's capable of it.
I've got over the shock.
He won't beat me.
I won't give in.
I won't be broken by him.
I've got a temperature, I feel sick.
Everything's against me, but I won't give in.
I've been lying on the bed with G.P.'s picture beside me.
Holding the frame in one hand.
Like a crucifix.
I will survive.
I will escape.
I will not give in.
I will not give in.
I hate God.
I hate whatever made this world, I hate whatever made the human race, made men like Caliban possible and situations like this possible.
If there is a God he's a great loathsome spider in the darkness.
He cannot be good .
This pain, this terrible seeing-through that is in me now.
It wasn't necessary.
It is all pain, and it buys nothing.
Gives birth to nothing.
All in vain.
All wasted.
The older the world becomes, the more obvious it is.
The bomb and the tortures in Algeria and the starving babies in the Congo.
It gets bigger and darker.
More and more suffering for more and more.
And more and more in vain.
It's as if the lights have fused.
I'm here in the black truth.
God is impotent.
He can't love us.
He hates us because he can't love us.
All the meanness and the selfishness and the lies.
People won't admit it, they're too busy grabbing to see that the lights have fused.
They can't see the darkness and the spiderface beyond and the great web of it all.
That there's always this if you scratch at the surface of happiness and goodness.
The black and the black and the black.
I've not only never felt like this before, I never imagined it possible.
More than hatred, more than despair.
You can't hate what you cannot touch, I can't even feel what most people think of as despair.
It's beyond despair.
It's as if I can't feel any more.
I see, but I can't feel.
Oh God if there is a God.
I hate beyond hate.
He came down just now.
I was asleep on top of the bed.
Fever.
The air so stuffy.
It must be flu.
I felt so rotten I said nothing.
No energy to say my hate.
The bed's damp.
My chest hurts.
I didn't say a word to him.
It's gone beyond words.
I wish I was a Goya.
Could draw the absolute hate I have in me for him.
I'm so frightened.
I don't know what will happen if I'm really ill.
I can't understand why my chest hurts.
as if I've had bronchitis for days.
But he'd have to get a doctor.
He might kill me, but he couldn't just let me die.
Oh, God, this is horrible.
(Evening.)
He brought a thermometer.
It was 100 at lunch, and now it's 101.
I feel terrible .
I've been in bed all day.
He's not human.
Oh God I'm so lonely so utterly alone.
I can't write.
(Morning.)
A really bad bronchial cold.
Shivering.
I haven't slept properly.
Horrid dreams.
Weird, very vivid dream.
G.P. was in one.
It made me cry.
I feel so frightened.
I can't eat.
There's a pain in my lung when I breathe, and I keep on thinking of pneumonia.
But it can't be.
I won't die.
I won't die.
Not for Caliban.
Dream.
Extraordinary.
Walking in the Ash Grove at L. I look up through the trees.
I see an aeroplane in the blue sky.
I know it will crash.
Later I see where it has crashed.
I am frightened to go on.
A girl walks towards me.
Minny?
I can't see.
She is in peculiar Greek clothes drapery.
White.
In sunshine through the still trees.
Seems to know me but I do not know her (not Minny).
Never close.
I want to be close.
With her.
I wake up.
If I die, no one will ever know.
It puts me in a fever.
I can't write.
(Night.)
No pity.
No God.
I shouted at him and he went mad.
I was too weak to stop him.
Bound and gagged me and took his beastly photographs.
I don't mind the pain.
The humiliation.
I did what he wanted.
To get it over.
I don't mind for myself any more.
But oh God the beastliness of it all.
I'm crying I'm crying I can't write.
I will not give in.
I will not give in.
December
I can't sleep.
I'm going mad.
Have to have the light on.
Wild dreams.
I think people are here.
D. Minny.
It's pneumonia.
He must get a doctor.
It is murder.
I can't write it down.
Words are useless.
(He's come.)
He won't listen.
I've begged him.
I've said it's murder.
So weak.
Temperature 102.
I've been sick.
Nothing about last night, him or me.
Did it happen?
Fever.
I get delirious.
If only I knew what I have done.
Useless useless.
I won't die I won't die.
Dear dear G.P., this 
Oh God oh God do not let me die.
God do not let me die.
Do not let me die.
