The Forces of Change
Key geographical trends
Geographers have always been interested in the relations between people and the environment.
A particular interest for Britain lies in assessing which environments are most threatened by ongoing movements of population and employment, with their attendant roads, shopping centres and housing.
In turn, however, the question of where population is growing — or declining — is fundamentally related to human welfare.
It leads on to one of the basic processes of geographical inquiry, to study the impact of processes occurring over time on different areas.
The temporal processes that we shall examine, such as the changing structure of employment, may result more from international forces than from influences in the local environment, but they may change the map of the UK at regional, sub-regional or local scale.
Uneven regional development
One of the most important features of the British outlook of the last hundred years has been its revelry in nostalgia and dislike of change.
This is reflected in the highest places, such as parliament, and does not fit easily with the hectic pace of recent change in the economy.
In this volume we shall concentrate on changes since 1960, and particularly since 1980.
It is tempting to underestimate the scale and radical nature of changes occurring around us, socially or geographically.
One salutary reminder is that many writers see ‘uneven regional development’ as the norm in western industrialized society (Smith, 1984; Storper and Walker, 1989).
The flow of people, profits and investment between regions produces differences in living standards between them.
It is currently widely accepted that regional divergence in living standards within countries is the norm (Bennett, 1980, 67).
For example, there remain clear differences in unemployment levels between northern and southern Italy, or different parts of France.
One can go further, however, and assert that the 1980s were a period of more rapid change in UK economic geography than any previous decade of this century.
Smith (1984, ix), for example, argues ‘one can hardly look at the world today without perceiving that, at the hands  of capital, the last two decades have witnessed an emergent restructuring of geographical space more dramatic than any before’, instancing de-industrialization and regional decline, changes in the distribution of population in metropolitan areas, and the nascent industrialization of the Third World.
Historical precedents of major change can well be illustrated from Britain itself, where the whole geographical pattern of the Industrial Revolution provides ample evidence of radical geographical evolution.
Even in the mid eighteenth century, Britain ‘exhibited a complex and shifting pattern of industrial concentration’, and some areas ‘became de-industrialized, like parts of East Anglia’(Pollard, 1981).
‘Above all, the British industrial revolution was a regional phenomenon’(Pollard, 1981); but often pioneering regions, four declined soon after they had made their vital contribution (Cornwall, Shropshire, North Wales and the Derbyshire uplands), while two more (Tyneside and Clydeside) had to get something like a second wind to survive as centres of expanding metal industries and shipbuilding.
50-year ‘long cycles’ and British regions
These impulses of expansion and decline may be related to the ‘upswings’ and ‘downswings’of the suggested international ‘Kondratieff cycle’.
Experience of recession in the 1980s has redirected our attention to a longer-term temporal pattern in economic events, which was first applied to nineteenth century international change.
A Russian scholar, Kondratieff published in 1926 evidence for the view that familiar economic cycles of 3.5 to 11 years' length were superimposed on deeper ‘long waves’ of 47 to 60 years.
He identified these in England, France, the United States and Germany from the movement of prices, interest rates, wages, foreign trade and metal production.
For instance, he observed expansions of English foreign trade on about a 50-year cycle from the 1790s to 1810, from 1842 to 1873, and from 1893 to 1914, each separated by periods of consolidation.
This pattern sheds light on the evolution of many local economies, for instance the industrialization of Shropshire (in the Coalbrookdale Coal field).
Industrial development in this case was prepared in the ‘downswing’ before the 1790s, largely took place in the ‘upswing’from the 1790s to 1810, was overtaken by the rest of the West Midlands from 1842 to 1873, and was largely extinguished in the downswing from the 1920s to 1932.
Likewise, one may say that much of the Lancashire and Yorkshire textiles industries developed from the 1790s to 1810, and from 1842 to 1873, and declined in subsequent downswings.
The heavy industry of Scotland and north-east England largely developed from 1842 to 1873.
The pattern is in fact more complex than can be schematized in any one model of development (Marshall, 1987); some regions like the Midlands repeatedly found replacement industries at least until the 1966–81 downswing.
More general was the reversal in the relative fortunes of the northern and southern parts of Britain in about 1921, when many of the older industrial regions fell into relative decline in economic and population trends.
Table 1.1 shows that the South East, East Anglia and the South West (as mapped at Figure 1.1) together had 46 per cent of the population of Great Britain in 1701; this share fell to its lowest level, of 38 per cent, in 1921, before recovering to 42 per cent in recent census years.
The adjustment of population through migration was prompted by the existence of higher unemployment levels in northern Britain throughout the period since 1921; these peaked in the year 1932, when over 2,750,000 people were unemployed.
After this, employment levels improved in all regions, but despite the beginnings of ‘regional policy’ from 1934 (McCrone, 1969), employment change was more favourable to the ‘South’than the ‘North’in all years before 1973 except 1937 and 1939 (Crouch, 1989; excluding the war years 1940–45).
Population distribution, by regional grouping, 1701–1981 (per cent)
A fundamental map (Figure 1.1) shows the value of production per head (gdp per capita) in the standard regions.
The high levels of wealth in the South East and East Anglia are the central feature of UK geography today.
The depth of the North-South divide, its precise definition, and directions of change are key issues for this volume.
Along with this run many other questions.
For instance, are regions like East Anglia ‘re-industrializing’?
If so, why?
Major reversals occurred in the relative trends of different regions in the past; are they occurring now?
Concentration and dispersal across a finer-grained map
In practice this book requires a finer-grained view than that of Figure 1.1.
Political discussion of the North-South divide in the late 1980s demonstrated examples of relative poverty in the South, notably the inner residential areas of London, and of relative affluence in the North, such as the Aberdeen area and North Yorkshire.
As in the USA and, more recently, several countries of Europe, it is seen that international and national processes have impacted differentially on different kinds of subregions .
The spatial expression of these differences appears at three levels of concentration and dispersal.
Figure 1.1 Regional variations in gross domestic product, 1987 (UK= 100).
Data exclude production of North Sea oil etc. from Continental Shelf.
Source: Regional Trends 1989, 135.
Core-periphery relationships
Much of the distinction between North and South since 1920 is best expressed in terms of the performance of individual sub-regions.
For , ‘new industrial regions’(Greater London, Warwickshire, Staffordshire and Worcester shire) expanded their share of net output from 28.7 per cent to 37.1 per cent over the period 1924 to 1935 (Pollard, 1983).
The attraction of the London market, and the adoption of West Midlands skills by the motor and engineering industries, led to a consolidation of the economy on these core regions.
This structural advantage was offset by the transfer of nearly half a million industrial jobs under government regional policy, 1945–65, to assisted areas of the ‘periphery’; these areas were again defined essentially as sub-regions, namely, much of the Clyde Valley, the north-east coast of England, South Wales and Cornwall, together with Merseyside.
Urban-rural relationships
Geographers have discovered a recent tendency for rural areas to see something of a recovery in population and employment levels, no matter where they are; conversely, conurbation (metropolitan) areas have suffered a loss of population and employment, whether in London, the West Midlands or the North; while intervening areas lie along a statistical continuum.
Fothergill and Gudgin (1979) demonstrated this pattern from data for the period 1959 to 1975.
As there was much greater divergence in growth levels between conurbations and rural sub-regions than between the 11 constituent regions of the UK, the statistical performance of the regions is better understood and predicted by reference to their respective mixtures of conurbation and rural sub-regions than to their industrial structure.
City-suburban relationships
It is in the ‘inner cities’ that conurbation employment has fallen most steeply, and that greater social sorting produces concentrations of poorer people, with distinctive ethnic and family structures, as in social geography texts.
Both population and employment were already falling in the former London County Council area between 1951 and 1961, and the process intensified in all cities after 1966.
In contrast, suburban areas increased in relative wealth, developed more local jobs, and intensified many of the socio-economic characteristics of the ‘safe’ Conservative constituency.
The challenge of different kinds of places
All the evidence has led us to organize this book with reference to different kinds of places.
The resolution of the different forces is studied not in terms of the 11 standard regions shown in Figure 1.1, as commonly used in statistical volumes and geographical texts on Great Britain, but in terms of types of sub-regions — the large cities, the prosperous sub-regions, the declining industrial areas, and the outer (more remote) rural areas.
This is not to say that there are not important distinctions between, say, the large cities, or between declining industrial areas; individual localities may all show different social relationships (Cooke, 1989); it may be that similarities of trends in the 1960s and 1970s were in part coincidental, and that there will be salient differences in the 1990s.
However, the trends of the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s have already created different planning problems.
The large cities
The modern western city remains the centre of many activities of society, but was seen as representing a large planning problem from the early 1960s.
Many initial questions concerned excessive transport congestion for the users of cities, and the renewed need for planned decentralization of people and growth.
By the 1980s, however, massive decline of jobs and population had led to the concentration of national socio-economic problems in inner cities, and to a very varied set of government programmes to improve the situation (Chapter 8).
The problems of coping with growth in attractive, prosperous sub-regions
The dispersal of housing and employment growth from the cities to surrounding counties occurred in many different phases, but has increasingly raised major questions in land-use planning.
The rival claims of economic growth and of countryside conservation are in conflict in rural areas of the South, and some other regions (Chapter 9).
Thus a political dilemma has re-emerged.
Economic trends and population projections may be evaluated to assess the future position of Green Belts, and whether any of the growth of modern light industry and offices may again be diverted to areas of types we now mention.
The challenge of redundant places and ‘grey areas'
The 1930s showed how individual towns (such as Jarrow) could lose the bulk of their economic livelihood, and ‘de-industrialization’ of the 1980s has done the same.
The emphasis now has switched more to whole manufacturing and mining sub-regions (such as South Yorkshire or Merseyside), which, together with older parts of major cities, can suffer unemployment rates in excess of ten per cent with little prospect of redress.
If it is difficult to restore economic vitality to the worst-hit redundant areas, it has nonetheless been argued, since the Hunt Report (Department of Economic Affairs, 1969) on ‘Intermediate Areas’, that the growth needs and potential of ‘grey areas’ were bypassed by policy.
Are there any possibilities or precedents for developing the image and infrastructure of areas such as West Yorkshire, as a means of introducing some modern economic activity at least to parts of the ‘urban North’?
(Chapter 10)
The emerging issue of outer rural areas
Some of the most surprising issues of contemporary Britain arise in areas like Cornwall or mid Wales, which had previously been suffering from the decline of population and employment.
Their more rural environments have not only attracted people there for holidays and retirement, but also induced elements of industrial growth.
Some of these new elements are in conflict with the needs of local people and the preservation of the environment (Chapter 11).
The threats of increasing polarization in UK society
If these types of challenges are not resolved, then explicit political conflict and urban violence will accelerate.
Like most western European nations the UK divides between ‘left’ and ‘right’: between the Labour party's view of the world, in which an emphasis on public spending on welfare and infrastructure was closely associated with post-war urban and regional planning, and a Conservative party view which in the 1980s emphasized that free-market economic growth must come before state spending.
The gap between these  views widened enough in the early 1980s for (what is now) the Liberal Democrat party to capture a fairly even share of the voting allegiances of different socio-economic groups and regions.
This accentuated the contrast between Labour and Conservative voters, with manual socio-economic groups, public service workers, and council house tenants most likely to vote Labour, and a strong association between white-collar owner occupation and Conservative allegiance (Johnston et al., 1988).
The spatial outcome of increasing socio-political polarization was an increase in the contrasts of wealth and of constituency voting between North and South, and between urban and rural areas.
In 1983, the Conservatives lost their last remaining seats in Glasgow and Liverpool, and Labour's loss of all but three seats in the South (other than in London) left it in control of large contiguous areas only at the core of individual conurbations, and in the former coal field areas of Strathclyde, the north east of England, South Yorkshire and South Wales.
In 1987, the small 2.5 per cent national swing from Conservative to Labour was differentiated between North and South.
The number of Conservative MPs in Scotland was reduced from 21 to 10, and the Conservatives lost their last seats in Newcastle upon Tyne, Bradford, Manchester and Leicester.
However, a swing towards the Conservatives in London reduced Labour's representation there from 26 to 24 seats.
A strong correlation exists between party control and constituency unemployment levels, because parliamentary seats are small enough to represent distinct residential districts in larger urban areas, and because voting behaviour and unemployment are two variables which are both strongly related, in turn, to social class characteristics.
The comparison can be made visually in Figure 1.2, which allocates equal space on the page to each constituency, Figure 1.2A for unemployment, and in Figure 1.2B for the 1987 election result at the same time.
Although there is still some variation in the size of constituency electorates and their populations (after the redrawing of their boundaries in 1983), the simple comparison of numbers unemployed (claimants) at the 1987 election is useful.
Of the worst fifth of constituencies for unemployment (127 shaded black), only 18 returned Conservative MPs, and three Alliance.
Of the best fifth (127, unshaded), only 10 returned MPs other than Conservative, of which only one (Yeovil) was in England.
(Indeed of the next best fifth, all but 17 returned Conservatives.)
Table 1.2 shows the size of Conservative majorities in the best ten constituencies (in Surrey, Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire and London), and the size of Labour majorities in the worst ten (located in inner cities and the North).
Voting in national elections is only the tip of the iceberg, however, in expressing the troubles of ‘northern council estate’ Britain.
Social contrasts can take different forms in different areas, witness the tensions between the (generally poorer) Catholics and the (relatively richer) Protestants in Northern Ireland.
Different political coalitions occupy power in county and district authorities in different parts of the UK, and a key question emerges from local government: if national government policy provides no remedy for the problems of economic development of so many towns and cities, is there any scope for local authorities to generate greater employment and investment themselves?
These are questions which we take up later in the volume.
Many of the similarities and divisions between different areas of Britain need      deeper understanding, which can be provided by a fuller review of the country's international and historical position.
Figure 1.2 Parliamentary constituencies, Great Britain:(A) Unemployment, June 1987, and (B) General Election results, 1987.
Table 1.2 Constituency unemployment and General Election results, June 1987, extreme values
Further Reading:
Kondratieff's basic statement is available in translation in Kondratieff (1978) and an extensive statement of relevant European research is to be found in Pollard (1981).
An interpretation of British experience is in Marshall (1987).
A refreshing view of past industrial specialisation among British coal fields is provided by Rawstron (1964) and of long-term population movements by Osborne (1964).
A summary of attention to the ‘North South’ problem can be found in Lewis and Townsend (1989).
A radical survey of industrial and regional change in Britain is provided by Dunford and Perrons (1983).
For a recent collection of regional and policy reports (including the former ‘grey areas’ of the North West and Yorkshire and Humberside), see Damesick and Wood (1987).
The ‘core-periphery’ question was developed by Keeble (1976) and the basic statement of the ‘urban-rural shift’is in Fothergill and Gudgin (1982).
A useful reader on critical urban problems is provided by Anderson et al .
(1983) and one of the few volumes in its field is Herington (1984).
Analyses of the 1983 and 1987 general elections are provided by Johnston et al .
(1988).
Britain's position in the wider world
‘Few human geographers seem willing to come out of their national shells and take the wider view which would enable them to understand what is going on within their own countries’(Thrift, 1986, 62).
This chapter concentrates on the international context, past and present, of change in the UK.
We hope to say enough about the UK's international position to show that international competition, and the changing commodity composition of world trade, are the keys to understanding the changing composition and size of the UK economy.
Those, in turn, are vital to understanding the growth of employment and population in different areas of the country at different dates: for instance, the earlier growth of the Atlantic ports of Glasgow, Liverpool and Bristol, or the relative prosperity of London or Aberdeen vis-a-vis most manufacturing areas in the 1980s.
It is sometimes argued that international competitive pressures are the origins, directly or indirectly, of all the UK's economic and employment problems.
We do not fully agree with this, but the issue must await Chapter 5.
The economic base of growth and decline
The ‘Thatcher governments’ of 1979 onwards argued that ‘the world does not owe us a living’.
Translated into disciplinary terms, the study of international economic geography should precede social geography and town planning.
Most people live where they do because it contains factories, farms and offices, or perhaps transport facilities, educational institutions or research laboratories, which draw income into the area.
Much of this income is from the surrounding region or other parts of the same country.
Yet some of the income from the goods and services supplied comes directly or indirectly from other countries.
Indeed, income from other countries, and imports from other countries, may be the critical factors in the modern competitive success of local factories, farms and offices.
International competition is now intense in many industries and is frequently the main factor in the rise and fall of different industries, and therefore of different areas.
Much of the distribution of population was built up in a period when British industry enjoyed competitive supremacy in international trade.
Now, when the USA, Japan and western Europe wrestle with each other for the domination of world markets, including those of Britain, many production areas of this country are already redundant or facing extinction.
Areas of growth occur in an  uneven manner as they are critically dependent on the expansion of new business in the supply of specialist goods and services, often to the international market.
Long-term perspectives
On the periphery of Europe again
It is salutary to recall that, as Europe's main offshore islands, the British Isles were historically often the last to benefit from the diffusion of innovative ideas in Europe.
Estimates of past populations have tended to be revised upwards, but in the Roman period, Britain sustained a population much lower than did Italy.
Most of our population stock arrived later, from northern Germany and Denmark, as shown in the place names of most of England and southern Scotland, and in the Middle Ages the Kingdom of Scotland was one of the poorest areas of Europe.
Trading wealth was largely confined to southern centres of wool exports; when England joined other Atlantic states, Spain, Portugal, France and the Netherlands, in expansion to other continents, much of the resulting capital remained in the south.
Scotland eventually benefited greatly from Union with England in 1707, but in the heyday of nineteenth-century expansion large parts of the western and northern periphery of Britain remained bitterly poor: the clearance of people to make way for sheep caused large-scale migration from the highlands and islands of Scotland, and a large part of the population of Ireland was forced to emigrate through the scarcity of food.
Today there is little doubt that northern and western Britain, now including industrial areas, form part of the relatively deprived ‘periphery’ of western Europe — with southern Spain and southern Italy.
These physical extremities are important for NATO bases, and can for various reasons prove attractive for tourists.
However, national averages leave Britain as a whole in a substantially inferior position to western Germany and France.
Even Italy, which suffered recurrent economic stagnation from the seventeenth century to the 1950s, claims to have overtaken the UK in the value of production per head (with a population of virtually the same size).
The UK's former advantages of an Atlantic position, a plentiful supply of coal (in which Italy's supplies were nugatory), and its building of an Empire (in which Italy's success was very limited by comparison) have come to nought.
It remains essential to remind ourselves of the UK's imperial and industrial past, in understanding its ports, industrial concentrations and London.
Imperial power and ‘workshop’ of the world
The UK provides the oldest industrial landscapes of the world, a point of considerable significance in Chapters 5, 8 and 10.
If we find that industries are now disappearing fairly rapidly, it is also worth realizing that they arrived on the landscape quite suddenly.
There is, of course, debate as to the accuracy of the term ‘Industrial Revolution’ to describe the arrival of the factory system in Britain, where production often grew slowly in small workshops.
Modern research shows that industry had its roots in the  previous rural life of home weavers and part-time farmers, that technological innovations (such as Abraham Darby's use of coal in smelting iron, 1709) took many decades to supplant existing methods of production and provide for successful exports, and that early reliance on water power and canal transport placed limits on expansion.
The nineteenth-century emergence of coal-based technology, including the modern railway, was as much a result of ‘Revolution’ as a cause.
There was nothing pre-ordained in Britain's supremacy, or in the industrial specialising eventually adopted by different coal fields (and sung by a hundred previous textbooks).
However, the fact and success of world-scale specialism are undoubted; for instance, towards the end of the nineteenth century the Lancashire cotton industry exported nine-tenths of its output.
Economic influence in the world was closely interrelated with political power.
‘Exports, backed by the systematic and aggressive help of government, provided the spark, and — with cotton textiles — the ‘leading sector’ of industry’(Hobsbawm, 1969).
Behind this trade lay two centuries of growth in Europe's Atlantic trade by the leading colonial and slave-trading ports, Bristol, Glasgow and Liverpool.
Britain acquired large parts of North America (until the independence of the USA in 1776), the West Indies, the West African coast, and the Indian sub-continent and this was partly a cause, partly a reinforcement of industrial growth: ‘We were, or we increasingly became, the agency of economic interchange between the advanced and the backward, the industrial and the primary-producing, the metropolitan and the colonial or quasi-colonial regions of the world’(Hobsbawm, 1969, 14).
This role required closer political control from the 1880s, when the competitive growth of Imperialism among European powers led to the scramble for Africa, and to British dominance of the Latin American market.
Iron and steel works came to rely, like cotton mills, on the Empire and a few other developing countries.
Middlesbrough steel, for instance, can still be identified in the railway stations of India and Argentina: on the eve of the First World War, those countries alone bought more British iron and steel exports than the whole of Europe.
By that date the Empire received nearly half the total of British foreign investment, and Latin America a further fifth.
Britain did ‘rule the waves’ on the shores of most continents, and settlement continued in Canada, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand.
British imperial and industrial success appeared unlimited, but in fact was already being compromised by long-term processes of economic and political change, which we shall outline in the next two sections.
Only retrospectively have we learnt that Imperial investment was not particularly profitable overall.
However, it did benefit certain social classes in certain areas.
For instance, Davis and Huttenback (1987) argue that British political and social elites, along with merchants, particularly those based in London, received the largest share of the benefits available from the Empire, while successfully avoiding a full share of the associated tax costs.
Long-term processes of economic change and restructuring
The competitive advance of other countries and relative decline of British production areas can largely be charted in relation to Kondratieff's ‘long waves’.
Kondratieff presented few data for growth from 1789 to 1814 from countries other than Britain because they had little growth to analyse.
Parts of Belgium, Germany and France were economically active, but real growth came with the mid-century period of railway building.
‘It seems possible to place France in the company of those countries — Germany and the US included — which at mid century experienced a ‘railway Kondratieff’ with emphatic growth-industry capabilities’(Trebilcock, 1981).
Having achieved modern technological growth in the period 1849 to 1873, several of these countries then consolidated their competitive position during the ‘Victorian depression’ of the 1880s.
In the period of expansion from 1893 to 1914, Germany developed an extremely powerful position in the new technologies of chemicals, dye stuffs and electrical engineering.
Britain's share of world trade in manufactured goods fell to one third by 1900 and was further reduced in each of the next four decades.
Germany and the USA had overtaken Britain's total levels of production by 1900 and equalled her world share of manufactured exports in the depressed conditions, or ‘downswing’, of the 1930s.
It is commonplace now to seek the beginnings of Britain's relative world decline early in the 1880s to 1930s cycle, and to blame them on Britain's lack of adaptation to changing competitive conditions in industry.
Behind this, it is claimed, lay ‘complacency by the descendants of industrial pioneers’, a ‘disdain for trade’ and ‘anti-manufacturing snobbery’, the ‘neglect of technical education’and ‘failure of the universities to supply industrial leaders’(Allen, 1979).
It is held by others, however, that a large part of the relative decline was the inevitable sequel of having been a pioneer in industrialization.
Either way, the outcome is a marked legacy in the economic landscape, representing today the ‘continuing influence of Britain's historical international position’(Massey, 1986): by the time of the 1930s depression, some of the greatest industrial regions of Britain, the specialist production regions of textiles, steel, ships and coal exports, with their ports, had already entered a long period of continuous decline.
Adjustment to relative decline
Political realignment from Commonwealth to Europe
Success in some new industries and London's continuing world importance in finance during the ‘upswing’ from 1933 to 1966, together with the deep interruption of the Second World War, largely disguised the gradually declining value of the UK's old international and political role.
The independence of India and Pakistan in 1947, Ghana and Malaysia in 1957, and most other African dependencies in the 1960s, were only milestones in the long, gradual process of the relative weakening of Commonwealth links, which for instance withdrew the tariff advantages of the British cotton industry in many tropical markets.
But ‘Commonwealth preference’ was  still important in the 1960s because it was granted on half the UK's imports from Commonwealth countries.
‘Whether under the Labour or the Conservative Government, links with the Commonwealth were regarded as precluding too close links with the countries of Europe’(Kitzinger, 1961,).
Repeatedly the UK passed over opportunities to join or even lead the emerging European Common Market, now the European Community (EC).
This was partly because of perceptions of the political complexion and potential instability of such a body, but mainly because Common Market membership would be incompatible with the spirit of the Commonwealth.
Economic arguments appeared conclusive: Britain had a special position as banker to the sterling area, and would have great difficulty in adjusting its food production and Commonwealth food imports to Common Market structures.
Like many observers, UK leaders failed to appreciate that the greatest potential for post-war expansion lay in the trade of industrial goods between industrialized countries.
At the foundation of the Common Market in 1958, its area received an apparently modest share of the UK's total exports, a mere 13.7 per cent: the sterling area and Canada together received nearly half.
Yet the Common Market total was expanding rapidly, and the Commonwealth total was stable.
The UK's exports went mostly to the low tariff countries of the market, which would raise tariffs on British goods and abolish tariffs on all goods from their partners.
The Treaty of Rome, which established the Common Market, accelerated the already rapid growth of some members, so that the 1960s saw the emergence of a dynamic economy far stronger than the British, offering economies of scale in a consumer market of more than 200 million people.
The UK finally overcame its internal doubts and external diplomatic problems and joined the Common Market (the EC) in 1973, along with Ireland and Denmark.
The precise impact on the UK is still debated, but internal political opposition largely evaporated between the 1983 and 1987 General Elections.
Changing patterns of external trade and migration
Social and trading links have been slow to change.
Throughout the twentieth century the Commonwealth countries remained the main origins and destinations of international migration.
A net outflow from the UK until the 1931 Census was followed by a period of net inward migration which culminated in the early 1960s in the peak arrivals of migrants from the ‘new Commonwealth’, chiefly the Caribbean and the Indian sub-continent, reflecting a UK shortage of labour in the long ‘post-war boom’.
The subsequent period of net outward migration was dominated by the Commonwealth, but by 1985 a small growth in migration to and from the EC contributed to a net inward balance.
Though less visible, it was export competition in goods and services which had a more fundamental effect on UK towns and cities.
The internal economic geography of the UK has been reworked over a century by fundamental change in the nature and orientation of exports, which has reflected the success of individual industries and their factories.
demonstrates the principal changes so far this century in the composition of export goods.
In 1900, the country was still largely dependent on exports of textiles, metals and coal, whereas by 1987 nearly half the country's exports were accounted for by ‘machinery and transport equipment’ and chemicals.
The impact of North Sea oil on the structure of the balance of payments may actually have reduced the absolute volume of manufacturing exports.
This is because it raised the real sterling exchange rate, rendering ‘marginal’ manufacturing exports uncompetitive.
We shall return to this issue at several points later in this volume.
The geographical destinations of exports have shown a swing towards the EC.
As recently as 1970 the Commonwealth accounted for 20 per cent of the value of the UK's trade in manufactured goods, but by 1982 that share had decreased to 11 per cent.
Table 2.2 demonstrates changes over the seventeen years to 1987: western Europe took over half our exports for the first time in recent history; by 1987, the EC alone took virtually half, and most other destinations, except for North America, had declined in relative importance.
The tragedy is that visible trade with industrialized countries was not favourable.
In 1973 the UK had the smallest dependence on EC markets of any of the nine EC members, and this was still the case ten years later.
‘The central problem still seems to be that the UK is generally less adept than other developed economies at moving out of slow growth industries into  faster growing ones, such as scientific instruments and electronics’(Atkinson, 1983).
Foreign imports into Britain continued to grow rapidly in the 1970s and 1980s while UK exports of manufactures levelled off from the late 1970s, making the UK a net importer of manufactured goods for the first time in the long history we have described (Figure 2.1).
The UK's growth of total exports showed the slowest growth of any of 19 Industrial Market Economies for much of the last 25 years (World Bank, 1989); however, through the mid 1980s the decline of the UK's share of world trade was arrested at the level of about 8 per cent.
Figure 2.1 External balances on foreign trade, United Kingdom, 1951–1987.
Source: Annual Abstract of Statistics, HMSO.
Economic level on the international ladder
The result of all these changes is two-fold, that the UK has been getting richer, but not as fast as the rest of the industrialized world.
It is difficult for many to appreciate that it is now just an average ‘industrialized country’.
For the decade 1975–84, the OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development) reported for the UK a decrease in total manufacturing output of 4.3 per cent, while virtually all the other major industrial nations increased their output (though at a lower rate than before 1975)— Japan by 61.4 per cent , the USA by 41.6 per cent , Italy by 22.1 per cent , and West Germany by 16.0 per cent .
However, from 1985 to mid 1989, UK manufacturing output increased by 19 per cent; the value of output from production industries, including North Sea oil, increased by 8 per cent , compared with 14 in OECD countries.
On the occasion of the Prime Minister's visit to the USSR in March 1987, the Soviet authorities put out a statement that the UK lay seventeenth in the world economic league.
Using the measure of gross national product per capita in 1987, the World Bank (1989) also put the UK seventeenth on the  world ladder, after 14 of the 19 Industrial Market Economies and two ‘high income oil exporters’, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait.
The UK's GNP of $10,420 per capita contrasted with an average for 42 ‘lowest income economies’ of $290.
However, such comparison of gross product per head of different countries at contemporary exchange rates with the dollar gives misleading results.
It is possible to calculate hypothetical exchange rates to allow for the fact that specific commodities (say, bread, video cassettes etc.) are cheaper in country A than country B. Such comparisons of production on the basis of ‘real income per head’, or ‘purchasing power parity’ showed the UK in 1985 to have 64.8 per cent of the income of the USA, or 85.6 per cent of the average of six countries shown at Figure 2.2.
On this basis the UK had held its own relative to the USA over 25 years but had fallen below the average of the six, certainly below Japan, West Germany and France; indeed Japan overtook the UK in 1972, West Germany in the early 1960s, and France in the late 1960s, but on this calculation the UK still lay ahead of Italy.
In EC data for ten constituent countries, the UK ranked seventh for gdp per capita in both adjusted and unadjusted data.
The effects of oil appeared to halt the decline in the 1980s, and it is a principal question for this book whether recovery is being, or can be, generated by the growth of services (such as financial services) provided to other countries (see below).
Figure 2.2 Relative gross domestic product at ‘purchasing power Parities’, 1960–85 (average of six countries = 100).
Source: EC Annual Economic Report, 1986.
International comparisons of employment
Demand in the US economy generated the net addition of 23 million new jobs in the period 1974 to 1986, fuelled partly by population growth, illegal immigration and lower increases in productivity than before.
Figure 2.3 looks at a similar period for Europe.
The strongest growth of total employment was reported by the USSR, in Scandinavia (which has the highest proportion of its population at work), and in a number of countries in central and eastern Europe such as Austria, Yugoslavia and Romania (a broadly similar pattern is evident for manufacturing employment).
It is chiefly the  EC which failed to show any net increase of jobs in this period.
The map shows falling employment in five countries: Poland, Spain, West Germany, Hungary and Belgium.
The overall pattern has been attributed to a well established preference on the part of western European firms (unlike those in the USA) to continue investing in labour-saving equipment.
This may be the cause of semi-permanent structural unemployment, aggravated perhaps by excessively cautious government policies.
In the mid 1980s, unemployment in most western market countries reached its highest level since World War II.
Part of this represented a disquieting pattern which had set in since the 1960s (see Table 2.3).
But the immediate cause of the growth of unemployment in western Europe to a peak of 19 million in 1986 was a sharp deterioration since 1979 (Table 2.4) in Europe, but not in the USA.
When, as here, figures are standardized between different countries, the UK exhibited the worst overall unemployment rates in 1982, but France and Italy were latterly suffering worse unemployment.
The European Commission can standardize unemployment data as between constituent regions of their territory.
Figure 2.4, for 1986, provides an intricate pattern of data but its outstanding characteristic is a distinction between ‘core’ and ‘periphery’in the EC area.
The ‘core’ of this unit has sometimes been seen as a ‘golden triangle’based on Paris, London and Hamburg, whose prosperity was a function of accessibility to the rest of Europe.
Keeble et al .
(1982) show that the maximum value of accessibility to the European market lay in the area of the Ruhr/Benelux, and that poor access was one common causative factor in the higher unemployment rates of the peripheral regions of the Community.
However, Figure 2.4 provides us with a different ‘core area’, suggesting perhaps there is something in Hall's (1987) identification of a larger triangle lying between Toulouse, Copenhagen and Florence.
Some elements of a regular transition toward higher unemployment in the periphery appear on Figure 2.4, from eastern to western France, from south and east England to Ireland and Scotland, from northern to southern Italy, although the highest regional rates in the Community were encountered in southern Spain.
If we were to present separate maps for unemployment by sex, the map for females would show southern Italy in a worse light, but female unemployment data are particularly prone to non-comparability because of wider differences between countries in the definitions used.
It would be valuable to study other variables across the map of the EC.
Cheshire et al .
(1986) have undertaken a multi-variate study of 103 urban regions of the EC.
Through combining in ‘discriminant analysis’ measures of  urban income, unemployment, migration and the demand for visitors' travel to the different centres, they rank the 103 ‘Functional Urban Regions’according to an index of their problems.
The general pattern of results tends to confirm the impression that the UK is relatively poorly placed in the EC (in these data before the accession of Spain and Portugal).
The UK had only four representatives in the first, prosperous, half of the list: Norwich (23), Brighton (28), London (34) and Leicester (35).
Table 2.5 shows the UK's strong representation in the bottom ten places.
The areas were also ranked according to the deterioration of their position in three constituent parts of the period 1971–84; Liverpool, Sunderland, Belfast and Glasgow appear in the bottom ten in all sub-periods.
This is further evidence of a somewhat depressing saga, even for readers from the south of England.
From leader to follower?
The relative decline of the UK economy has been accompanied by the loss of world leadership both in successive individual industries and in fields of social and welfare reform.
This is only the logical concomitant of the view reported earlier, that there was a certain inevitability about the relative deterioration of the world's first industrial power.
Again, we have mentioned that from the 1880s, certain advanced industries developed primarily in other countries (notably Germany and the USA) before the UK.
Equally, the UK was bound to lose its leadership in relatively simple labour-intensive industries like textiles; this is the most widely spread industry in the world (Dicken, 1986), and a vital element of Third World employment.
The longer-term benefit for the UK of the development of textiles in Lancashire and Yorkshire was to introduce, through the production of textile machinery, the skills of modern mechanical engineering.
But even in metal-using industries leadership has been lost not only by the UK but also by Europe.
Whereas as recently as 1950 half the world's ships were built in the UK (notably in Liverpool, Sunderland, Belfast and Glasgow), this role was taken by Japan (45.9 per cent in 1985), followed by western Europe (21. 8 per cent), South Korea (11.5 per cent ) and the Soviet Bloc (10.0 per cent ).
In the 1950s the UK was still second to the USA for its share of world manufacturing exports and produced half the world's export of motor cars.
However, the industry was partly under US control, and in the late 1980s the only remaining motor-car manufacturer in UK hands, Rover, had only 15 per cent even of the UK market.
There are, of course, many links and parallels between economic history and the development of the government and social institutions.
Town planning is of great interest in the map of contemporary Britain.
It can be argued that town planning has its origins in the early cities of, say, Egypt or Mexico, or in the architecture of Renaissance Europe.
‘But social ideas do not grow independently of their context.
The idea of town planning was something that presented itself as an answer to a problem or group of problems which had arisen in contemporary urban life’(Ashworth, 1954).
Early industrialization created Victorian cities, and town planning was one of the measures adopted to correct the unhealthy and congested nature of the industrial city.
Some of the first newly-planned settlements were established by Victorian industrialists themselves, but a long process of government legislation culminated in the passing, between 1945 and 1950, of comprehensive Town and Country Planning legislation, including provision for New Towns and National Parks but also a characteristically negative policy toward the expansion of cities themselves.
The UK's New Towns have attracted international fame and study, and our approach to town planning became a model for the Commonwealth, Scandinavia, the Netherlands and Israel.
However, this record has been marred by the UK's relative lack of money to invest in new housing and public works and to maintain the existing stock.
Successful post-war reconstruction was overtaken in the first half of the 1980s by economic depression and the European unemployment crisis.
Thus, even if we look strictly inside the built-up urban area, conventional  town planning has become much less relevant in the 1980s than the growth of crime and the condition of existing property for increasingly large sections of the community.
Meanwhile, the rest of Europe has moved ahead of the UK in other innovations in the urban environment.
In many countries ‘comparison shopping’ has been largely decentralized from city centres to regional shopping centres.
In the UK, such a centre was proposed in the early 1960s at Haydock Park, near the intersection of the M62 with the M6 between Liverpool and Manchester.
Others were proposed on the outskirts of Leicester, Birmingham and Bristol.
As retail centres they would probably have been a success, but they threatened existing centres and the needs of non-car owners: ‘these and other proposals were greeted with hostility by planners and rejected largely on impact grounds’(Schiller, 1986, 13).
The first free-standing regional centres in the UK are at Brent Cross, north London, and the Metro Centre, Gateshead, followed by the Meadow hall development, by the M1 near Sheffield.
In transport, too, the UK lost its early lead in rail and road development.
The first European motorways were built in Germany and Italy in the 1920s and 1930s; the UK had active plans to follow them, but these were shelved on the outbreak of war, and the first British motorway was not built until 1958 (the Preston bypass).
The length of motorway reached 1,000 kilometres only in 1970, but had grown to 3,110 kilometres by 1988.
Italy and Switzerland electrified their main-line railways early in this century, but the UK had to wait till the 1960s for electrification from London to north-west England, and the late 1980s to Yorkshire.
In 1984, 56.9 per cent of British Rail train kilometres were under electric haulage compared with 75.1 per cent in the EC as a whole.
Furthermore, the leading European countries are now engaged in building new strategic lengths of fast track, which will hopefully link with the Channel Tunnel and with improvements in Belgium and the Netherlands to provide high-speed links between London, Paris, Brussels, Amsterdam and Cologne (Figure 2.5).
In contrast with the UK's decline towards the European material average, it is frequently asserted that the UK has maintained its lead in intellectual and research activity.
This ‘hypothesis of superior inventiveness’ has some early support from the UK's discovery of penicillin, radar and the jet engine.
Budworth (1986) has shown, however, that reports that 55 per cent of all ‘significant’ world inventions since the Second World War are of UK origin are a garbled version of a 1976 report for the United States' National Science Foundation.
The total innovations counted for each country were 257 in the USA, 45 in the UK, 23 in West Germany and 17 in France.
Even in the sub-class of ‘radical breakthroughs’, the USA outran the UK by 65 to 25 innovations.
Thus, the UK was still a European leader in innovation in the 1950s and 1960s, but perhaps had a bias towards pure science rather than towards the commercial development of technological ideas that will form the next generation of industries.
Statistical data indicate that the UK has a low proportion of its 16, 17 and 18 year olds undergoing education compared with most western industrialized countries other than Spain and Portugal; however, a thorough review of eight measures of participation and spending on higher education showed  varying results on different measures (Department of Education and Science, 1987).
At the same time, UK industry has been constrained by skill shortages at most times since the Second World War.
It appears to be that the generally unskilled nature of the labour force helps to determine that the processes of UK industry are, by present international standards, relatively simple and low productivity ones; the country is locked into comparatively simple technology because it does not have the technical expertise to use technology to the fullest effect.
Figure 2.5 Projected high-speed European rail network, with estimated journey times from London.
Source: The Economist, 11 March 1989, 81.
The ‘New International Division of Labour'
The Transnational Corporation
The people who are in the best position to compare the costs, uses and potential of different national labour markets are often the decision-makers  of Transnational Corporations (TNCs).
These are companies which run or control economic activity in more than one country and can therefore, in locating new investment or abandoning old plants, take advantage of geographical differences between countries in the costs of production.
(As in the usage of Dicken, 1986, the term Transnational Corporation is preferred here to the term Multinational Corporation, because there are few corporations with an equal footing in two or more leading countries, even in the EC.)
The power of TNCs is very great because of the number of factories, warehouses, offices and research laboratories which they control in different countries.
Of course, the UK has long been the home of large companies exploiting ‘primary products’(plantation crops, furs, timber and minerals) in different parts of the Commonwealth and the world.
But the ‘multi-plant’ manufacturing enterprise is fairly new.
In 1963 the hundred largest UK enterprises controlled on average only 40 plants each within the UK: by 1972 this had increased to 72, and it is clear that this period of domestic expansion and takeovers was also the main period of international expansion by TNCs.
They began to use their holdings in different regions and countries for different but complementary roles within their respective international patterns of plants, and thus had systematic effects on the evolution of employment patterns in different kinds of country.
In the UK the leading effect of international investment is the presence here of foreign TNCs' factories, of which the most prominent and well established remain those of US origin.
American factories increased in number particularly between the wars, but the increase continued in the post-war period so that by 1977 they employed a total of 711,800 workers in the UK, or 70.2 per cent of all the employees of foreign-owned manufacturing firms.
These foreign-owned firms were responsible for about 20 per cent of UK manufacturing output — a slightly lower proportion than in France, West Germany or Italy, but becoming more diverse as investment from the EC, Japan and other industrialized countries increased while that of the USA declined.
The net effect of foreign TNCs on UK unemployment is a hotly debated topic which we shall hope to resolve in later chapters.
One basic reason for concern in industrialized countries is that the ‘New International Division of Labour’(Froebel et al .,
1980) is alleged to involve a transfer of TNC manufacturing production from industrialized countries like the UK to new ‘export processing zones’ etc., in Third World countries such as Malaysia, and to production within the domestic markets of countries such as Brazil.
On the one hand, it is argued that labour costs in advanced countries have become too high to be competitive for many industrial tasks.
On the other hand, through the development of container transport, telecommunications and the division of production into simpler, semi-skilled tasks, technology has made it possible to transfer these tasks to new factories in Third World markets.
However, there are in reality few prominent cases of the direct transfer of production from the UK to the Third World.
The UK evidence (Labour Research Department, 1987) confirms the view that outward investment by home-based manufacturing concerns has concentrated not in the Third World but in North America and western Europe (rather than the  Commonwealth); it is the wish to have a stake in economies that are growing more rapidly than the UK which is the key factor in company decision-making.
In the individual years 1980 to 1984, the proportion of investment going to Third World countries, as derived from a survey of the leading 40 UK manufacturing corporations, varied between 10 and 26 per cent.
The Labour Research Department (1987) argued that ‘more and more, for large UK-based companies the UK has ceased to be the primary area of operations.’
In the leading 40 corporations, overseas employment increased from 34 per cent in 1979 to 44 per cent in 1986.
The overall flow of investment from UK TNCs involved the absolute and relative exporting of jobs to other countries.
The 40 corporations increased their employment overseas by 125,000 between 1979 and 1986, while reducing jobs in the UK by 425,000.
The UK not only remained the second largest source, after the USA, for foreign direct investment, but increased in importance after 1979 when the first Thatcher government abandoned most controls on the foreign exchange of sterling currency.
Increasingly, therefore, TNCs take up international investment opportunities through international capital markets, and domestic companies have to compete for capital from the USA, Japan and other countries.
Thus stock markets are no longer simply domestic institutions, one of the points we explore in the following section.
London's world status
The world's first industrial country has clearly fallen into relative decline on many measures of industrial competitiveness.
How has it balanced its books with the rest of the world?
The answer is that three other sectors have provided relief — the revenues of North Sea oil extraction from 1980 (an activity of limited life), the profits from selling services to other countries, and the profits on investment in other countries.
A number of sub-regions of the UK, as we shall see, earn their living through providing tourist facilities or business services to other areas.
The concept, however, is nowhere more relevant than for the London area itself, which has recently been reaffirmed as a home of the rapidly expanding international office sector.
The financial activities of the City of London both pre-date British industrialism and have survived its relative world decline.
McRae and Cairncross (1984,2) argue that the growth of the City originated in the large volume of government borrowing in the eighteenth century to pay for Britain's foreign wars; the Industrial Revolution took place almost independently of the City, which thereby showed that it perhaps could survive on its financial wits as a major service centre.
For the last twenty years of progressive manufacturing decline in Britain, the one optimistic assertion had been that while industry's contraction might be irreversible, at least the City of London remained the financial centre of Europe and second only perhaps to New York in the world.
London's insurance and commodity markets, the inheritance of a century of British imperial and trade dominance before the First World War, remained the most truly international of their kind.
British invisible foreign earnings from financial services were the largest in the world and for long had made up any deficit on visible trade.
(Hamilton, 1986, 130–1)
Success was not automatic, since the country lacked the economic base and domestic resources of France and West Germany, let alone the USA or Japan.
However, the ending of UK exchange controls in 1979, and government stimulation of a relaxation in trading regulations (‘Big Bang' of 1986) helped to secure London's recognized position, with Tokyo and New York, among the world's three leading financial centres, which together, with their respective working days, provide for 24-hour activity in world financial markets.
The volume of the UK's resulting ‘invisible earnings’ is shown for 1987 in Table 2.6.
On the net basis shown in the third column of this table, the UK has frequently stood second only to the USA, lying ahead of France and Germany.
When we come to examine the employment trends of Greater London, we shall find that some of the most buoyant growth lies in ‘business services’, that is in firms providing specialist management advice, computer software, accountancy and advertising to banks, insurance firms, stock exchange partnerships and TNCs themselves.
As Noyelle and Stanback (1984) have stressed, the growth of services for other firms, ‘producer services’, is critical in both USA and world geography; in the international division of labour, it is creating specialized centres of skilled workers in a small number of international centres of white-collar work.
The UK is fortunate to have one of these ‘world cities’.
Leading flows of UK invisible trade, 1987
Conclusion
What emerges from this broad review of international and historical trends is that international issues are all-important for Britain's internal geography.
The country was a leader in the expansion of Europe, but holds only an average position in the European Community area as it becomes a more unified, single competitive market from 1992.
In many ways, the modernization of industry and training remain critical for Britain's future in that market.
The details of the harmonization of the financial system of Europe may threaten the City of London's position compared with European cities.
The principal legacy of Britain's past world role lies in the important growth of the City in the 1980s, which of course benefits the provinces of Britain only indirectly.
Further reading
A recent study of European industrial development is provided by Trebilcock (1981), and data for individual countries can be updated from OECD (annual) and World Bank (annual).
The relationships between industrialism and the British Empire are reviewed in Hobsbawm (1969).
The causes of Britain's relative decline are addressed in Allen (1979), and the thesis that British society, fatally, failed to embrace industrialism is developed in Weiner (1981).
Geographers' exploration of UK post-war foreign trade problems is exemplified in Hudson and Williams (1986), and critical reviews by economists of the foreign trading position are available from Kaldor (1966), and Singh (1977).
An example of an industrial study is Dunnett (1980).
A translation from the original German provides a key text, Froebel et al.
(1980).
A reader on many current world issues is provided by Johnston and Taylor (1986).
Dicken (1986) provides an extensive study of world industrial geography.
The international role of UK financial services is explained in McRae and Cairncross (1984), and the changing US role of service employment is analysed in Noyelle and Stanback (1984).
3 Transformation towards a post-industrial society
A fundamental process of change is occurring within society both in the UK and certain other richer nations: this has been termed the emergence of ‘post-industrial society’(Bell, 1973).
For a century, the typical UK employee was male, engaged in manual factory work, and lived in a large industrial city or town — with many implications for leisure and health patterns.
Yet we have already found in Chapter 2 that the UK has, relatively speaking, been suffering from declining international competitiveness as a place in which goods are actually made, though it has been holding its own in providing financial services on a world scale, and is prosperous enough, for example, to have a demand for hypermarkets on the international model.
A pronounced shift towards decentralized smaller plants, and towards non manufacturing activities in the economy, has already occurred.
The transformation to a ‘post-industrial’ society has further to go in some parts of the UK than others.
Some areas, we shall find, are better characterized by the loss of manufacturing work and are ‘de-industrialized’, as opposed to‘post-industrial’.
The latter denotes the arrival of new sources of employment and is clearly a better term for wide areas of the South East.
How far will the transition spread, and how far will it solve the UK's socio-economic problems?
These are central issues in this volume.
Before assessing the impact of the process of change on different areas of the UK (in Parts II and III), it is essential to assess the character and pace of socioeconomic change for the nation as a whole.
This involves reference not only to average wealth and the structure of employment, but also to the social distribution of wealth and its spending.
This must include spending by private individuals and by the state, the latter providing for ‘collective consumption’ of health and welfare services.
An outline of socio-economic change
Health and wealth in the UK today and yesterday
The greatest reform in access to health care was the setting up of the National Health Service in 1948.
Even this has proved disappointing for its slow development of preventative medicine, but it contributed further to many changes.
For instance, infant mortality, which had stood at 147 per thousand (births) at the turn of the century, was reduced to 20 per thousand in 1965 and nine per thousand in 1987.
It is difficult to make broader international  comparisons in social policy, but Kaim-Caudle (1973) placed the UK top among ten countries for its health service provision, though in his survey of wider social security policies the top place went more often to other countries, the Netherlands, West Germany and Denmark.
The fall in death rates was the most fundamental feature of change in the longer term.
Expressed as crude annual rates per thousand, they fell from 23 in 1861–65 to 12 in 1931–35, but have since shown no further improvement due to the ageing of the population, and still stood at 11.4 in 1988.
Birth rates fell somewhat later, from their peak of 35.5 per thousand in 1871–75 to 16.3 in 1931, before showing remarkable fluctuations after the war — with a peak of 18.8 per thousand in 1964, a trough of 11.9 in 1977, and a recent figure of 13.8 (1988).
The delay between the long decline of death rates and that of birth rates yielded considerable ‘natural increase’ over much of the century.
The legacy of all these changes (Table 3.1) comprised only a very small UK rate of increase of total population in the 1970s and 1980s, but an increase in the size of school-leaving and working age groups (15–64) for much of this period, as well as a marked rise in the proportion of the population over 65, particularly of the very elderly.
The latter, however, was less critical in the UK than the increase expected in other west European countries, notably West Germany.
Table 3.1 and subsequent tables provide a comparison between the UK and developed countries as a whole, in the shape of averages for the EC (the present 12 countries of the European Community) and for the OECD (the EC plus 12 further countries: the USA, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland and Turkey).
Table 3.1 Principal features of population change, 1961 -87, UK, EC and OECD
A number of European countries, like the UK, fed a large volume of school-leavers onto the labour market in a period, the 1980s, of economic difficulty.
Here the demographic fact of 1960s fertility ran directly counter to later economic events, whereas the 1990s already show a different combination of circumstances.
What other relationships might exist between demographic and economic trends?
There were some suggestions that a lower rate of population increase, from the decline in the UK birth rate after 1964, was a cause of economic decline, as it reduced demand for the purchase of consumer durables.
An analysis by Reddaway (1977) of the period 1961–71 showed that this view  was wide of the mark; only 3 per cent of the purchase of motor cars and television sets in this period was attributable to population increase.
The rest chiefly reflected greatly increased levels of per capita demand, in the consumer revolution of Galbraith's Affluent Society (1958).
Four-fifths of households already had a television set by 1962 and the figure had grown to 98 per cent in 1988 (with 53 per cent having added a video recorder).
With more spectacular growth in purchases of refrigerators, freezers and washing machines, the home provided physically less onerous domestic drudgery for housewives, and was more of a centre of leisure-time entertainment.
Mobility increased too, as ownership of cars increased from one per ten people in 1960 to one per 3.2 at the end of 1987, or 0.85 per household.
Average personal income rose in real terms by as much as 5 per cent per annum in the early 1960s, and continued to grow by an average of more than 1 per cent per year in the 1970s, resuming a level of 2–3 per cent per year in 1983–88.
The rise of unemployment up to 1986 raises many questions about the distribution of income in society, which we shall consider in the final part of this chapter.
We can, however, be clear that the average household was spending its increased income in a very different way in 1985 compared with five decades earlier.
In 1937/8 the average UK (industrial working-class) household had to spend 40.1 per cent of its income on food, compared with 30.4 per cent for all households in 1961, and only 19.0 per cent in 1987.
The 1987 household had more spare income, within its weekly total of £188.62, for a wide range of other needs.
Following the figure of 19.0 per cent are 16.1 per cent of income spent on housing and 14.3 per cent on transport (Employment Gazette , April 1989).
Both these two figures have profound implications for migration, daily travel and tourism in UK sub-regions as they will be visualized in Part III, and for the growing purchase of services outside the home.
Consumer expenditure does not vary greatly between regions, but the main North-South differences are outlined in Lewis and Townsend (1989).
The changing structure of work
Home and work are linked in many ways, notably because the location of work and of home are mutually related.
However, different kinds of work may have different patterns of location (between countries, cities and regions), and a change in the structure of employment may thus be important for the relative economic prosperity of different countries, cities and regions.
Many writers take the view that it is the changing structure of spending, described immediately above, which accounts for the changing structure of employment in modern western society.
On the one hand, industry is achieving much greater productivity per worker than in previous decades, and so employing fewer production workers, yet paying much higher salaries and wages to the individual worker.
On the other hand, he or she disposes this increased income over a wider range of services, many of which (it is asserted) are less capable of automation (increased productivity) than is the case in production of industrial goods.
In restaurants, the Health Service or teaching, machines can be of assistance (for instance, in washing  up, diagnosis or use of videos respectively) but have not yet replaced the work of chefs, nurses or teachers.
This has led to a changing ratio between service sector and industrial workers, in the same way that the number of industrial workers earlier overtook the number of workers on the land (Figure 3.1).
Under the ‘Fisher-Clark’ hypothesis, industrialized countries have seen a progression from Primary employment (agriculture, forestry, fishing and mining) to Secondary employment (industrial activity in manufacturing and construction) and in turn to Tertiary employment (services including distribution, transport, finance and public services).
In geographical terms, there has been a progression from work on the land to factory work, and in turn to jobs in shops, offices and hospitals.
Figure 3.1 Sectoral changes in employment, Great Britain, 1850–1988.
Source: Tiny and Scott.
1978: Employment Gazette (various).
There are several criticisms of this simple hypothesis.
The most fundamental criticism challenges the contention that productivity in the service sector must necessarily remain low, because human tasks such as cooking, nursing or teaching cannot readily be replaced by machines.
However, problems of measurement have led to underestimation of improvements in service-sector productivity expressed most recently in the drive towards self-service restaurants and petrol stations, and automated cash dispensers at banks.
Secondly, as Gershuny and Miles (1983) stress, the nature of trading relationships between sectors is complex.
On the one hand, manufactured goods like washing machines and power tools encourage consumers to provide their own services in the home (DIY —‘do it yourself’) while on the other, some of the large increases in service employment result from the provision of work by service enterprises for other firms.
Thirdly, there are many historical and current variations in different developed countries' shares of employment in Primary, Secondary and Tertiary sectors (Urry, 1987b).
We may at this stage, however, rest the case on the changing structure of employment (Figure 3.1): this is basic to our study because, as we have said, Primary, Secondary and Tertiary sectors of the economy tend to have different locational patterns, and a shift from one sector to another may thus have fundamental effects on the geography of employment — and therefore of population.
This process has been at work since the Industrial Revolution.
Historical estimates of Table 3.2 indicate most firmly the decline in the relative importance of the Primary sector, which provided nearly a quarter of all jobs in 1841 but only 4 per cent by 1961.
The Tertiary sector was already larger than the Primary in 1841 and provided virtually half of all jobs by 1961: it advanced most markedly between 1911 and 1931.
The Secondary sector provided more than half of all employment between 1851 and 1921, but ended the period, as it began, with 48 per cent.
Table 3.2 Composition of the occupied population, by sector, 1841–1961 Great Britain (percent)
A pronounced swing from Secondary to Tertiary employment was renewed around 1961.
International comparison for the subsequent period (Table 3.3) indicates, whatever the starting point in different countries, a steady rate of change in the structure of employment in one direction, towards a greater share of employment in the Tertiary sector.
In the OECD area as a whole, which includes the USA, service employment increased from 44 to 62 per cent of total employment, a swing of 18 ‘percentage points’, while the EC and UK swing was of 20 points.
(Despite changes of definition from Table 3.2 to 3.3, values for the UK in 1961 are closely comparable in both tables.)
These are very substantial changes which are widely expected to continue in the 1990s.
Table 3.3 Composition of total employment, by sector, 1961 -87, UK, EC and OECD (per cent)
Remarkably, the UK proportion of employment in industry fell below 30 per cent by 1987.
It is when we look at data on the role of industry internationally that the emergence of a ‘post-industrial society’ is less clear.
In the OECD area as a whole, industry's share of total employment passed its peak only in 1969, and its subsequent reduction in importance was more modest than in the UK, which, almost uniquely, has not only lost much factory employment but also suffered a net loss of factory output from 1974 to 1988.
Even here, manufacturing's share of production , of ‘gross domestic product’, fell only from 30 per cent in the period 1961 to 1976 to 25 per cent in 1984 (Harris, 1987).
We may conclude then that ‘de-industrialization’ is meaningful as a simple description of a relentless process in which the manufacturing sector suffers declining shares of total employment , inevitably leading to the service sector capturing a greater share, but that the process takes on a different pace and complexion in different countries and places.
Even within industry, however, pronounced shifts are in progress between different types of work.
White-collar workers increased their share of manufacturing employment from 27.6 to 31.7 per cent between the 1971 and 1981 Censuses; that is to say that services provided in offices and laboratories within manufacturing concerns increased in relative importance and largely escaped the process of job reduction which took place on the shop floor.
We may refer to the functions of manager, sales representative, typist, or industrial scientist, or for that matter fitter, as ‘occupations’.
Geographers have gradually realized that it may be more relevant to classify workers by their occupations than by their industries, firstly because large corporations may employ a different mix of occupations at establishments in different parts of the country (Massey, 1984), and secondly because of the different trends, incomes and social attributes attaching to manual and non-manual workers, and to different varieties of each.
We can extend this interpretation to the service (Tertiary) sector, for here white-collar occupations are both dominant and increasing further in relative  importance.
Thus, in the Health Service, nurses, doctors and technicians are tending to increase in number at the expense of more strictly manual jobs in hospital cleaning, cooking and domestic work.
Again this contributes to a continuing shift from manual to non-manual occupations which is affecting most parts of the economy.
This change can clearly be related to the country's net increase of average real income and the emergence of a clear majority of households which owned a car and owned their house (Table 3.4).
The ownership of housing was encouraged by the Conservative governments of the 1980s, who obviously place great sociological significance on it themselves.
Table 3.4 Socio-economic characteristics of households, 1971 -88, Great Britain (per cent)
Occupation is, in turn, the principal determinant of the ‘social class’ or ‘socio-economic’characteristics of different areas.
On this basis, Table 3.4 shows that the share of economically active and retired persons in the ‘higher-status groups’ increased between 1971 and 1981 from 22 per cent to 27 per cent of the population.
The majority of readers probably regard these features as self-evident, but they may not be aware of the speed with which UK society has changed in the last three decades, or, as we shall see, of the effects on areas which have not shared in the process.
It is therefore critical to assess whether the shift towards service industries and service occupations will redress the problems of the rest of the community, accompanied by all their political and social ramifications.
New forms of employment
Gender
Many of the changes we have already discussed reflect a changed role for women, which is important for everyone's experience of contemporary Britain.
In steadily increasing numbers (Figure 3.1) women have found time for paid work, itself closely involved with smaller families and, allegedly, with more labour-saving devices among consumption goods in the modern home.
In many households the modern standard of living depends on married women finding jobs, often in service occupations, on a scale much greater than in the previous generation.
A change of attitudes to the role of the sexes in paid work represents a revolution in the interpretation of  gender, though female work remains different from male work in a variety of ways.
Recent research, however, suggests that, roughly speaking, ‘we have been here before’.
In the eighteenth century when the first Industrial Revolution was born, the home was a place of work for both sexes, in farmwork, handicrafts and textiles.
The later growth of textile mills in the North West, Yorkshire and the East Midlands produced high rates of female participation in factory work in these areas, a relative regional difference which persisted until the 1960s (Women and Geography Study Group, 1984, 72).
However, female participation rates there and in most regions fell from 1871 to 1921 (Marshall, 1986, 128).
The proportion of women working in other people's homes, i.e. in domestic service, was a component of this and fell continuously throughout the century beginning in 1850.
Some writers suggest that reduced participation in work was encouraged by Victorian moralists through an idealization of the role of the home, while others saw that in the early twentieth century ‘the development of separate suburban environments in the maturing industrial/commercial city was itself of crucial importance in the establishment of the home as a separate sphere and in the enforcement of the social definition of a woman's place as being in the home’(Mackenzie and Rose, 1983, 169).
Table 3.5 Economic activity rates, by sex and marital status, 1921 -88, Great Britain (per cent)
The great increase during this century has been in the paid work of married women.
While the proportion of other women at work has remained between 40 and 60 per cent, the early decades (Table 3.5) showed 10 per cent or less of married females at work, compared with a recent (1988) figure of 55.7 per cent who were economically active.
The source of the net increase of jobs has been the service sector; as shown in Figure 3.1, the number of females in manufacturing increased only marginally from 1850 to 1960, and then declined.
Increased participation rates have occurred chiefly among mothers with children at school, and the immediate cause is that women are spending fewer years than before exclusively in child rearing.
The fundamental reason for increased participation is sought in social  change, and in the availability of improved washing machines, shopping facilities etc.
Gershuny (1982) reported that these have saved time for working-class households and challenged the widespread contrary belief, instanced by Bowlby (1984), that technology has not in fact cut domestic labour.
However, it is suggested here that the prime factor attracting women to work in the 1980s lay rather in demand for labour from the service sector, albeit at comparatively low rates of pay (Townsend, 1986a).
Socially, we have seen a change of almost revolutionary proportions; in terms of economics and economic geography, however, the pattern is less clear.
Women's gross hourly earnings as a proportion of men's increased, under the influence of equal pay legislation, from 63.1 per cent in 1970 to 75.5 per cent in 1977.
This peak was not reached again for a long period, but by 1989 it had reached 76.4 per cent(Employment Gazette , November 1989).
Added to this differential in hourly pay was the effect of ‘full-time’ females working shorter hours, reducing their gross weekly earnings to 67.6 per cent of those of men.
When we add to this in turn the effect of nearly half of all women working ‘part-time’, then the average income of all households where the married woman was working was only about 40 per cent higher than where the married woman was not working.
Women's employment is thus commonly regarded as profitable only to a couple with a working husband.
Where the husband is unemployed, the UK's national insurance laws make it of little financial advantage for a woman to take low-paid work.
It is thus having one worker in the family that enables the other members to take low-paid work.
Furthermore, Pahl (1984, 336) concluded that the contrast between households with jobs and those without extended to unpaid work around the home: ‘The contrast between households with money being productive and busy and the households without money being unproductive and idle is the overwhelming conclusion…
’ Halsey arrives at a similar finding, after rejecting the view that women's work may have moderated the ‘class-ridden’nature of British society:
Sexual inequality is a dimension of social stratification in its own right.
But its impact on class inequality…is to sharpen class division.
Socially assortative mating increases the spread of income and wealth between families ‘headed’ by individuals (usually males) of different occupational class.
Significantly also there is a high correlation between husband's and wife's unemployment.
(Halsey, 1986, 36)
Changing terms of employment
In general, the rise of female employment can be seen as part of a transcending trend which divides the workforce between two broad groups.
On the one hand are employers' most important workers, possessing most of the central skills on which the organization depends; on the other are auxiliary workers with fewer specific skills and less security of tenure in their jobs, the latter including most of the women workers.
Most organizations, very remarkably, are heading in the direction of a stronger division between the two types:
The emerging model is one of horizontal segmentation into a core workforce, which will conduct the organizations' key, firm-specific activities, surrounded  by a cluster of peripheral groups.
Their twin purpose is to protect the core group from numerical employment fluctuations while conducting the host of non-specific and subsidiary activities which all organizations require and generate.
The core group is required to be functionally flexible; the numerical flexibility secured from the use of peripheral groups provides the core group with employment security as the basis of their functional flexibility in the face of change.
Peripheral groups may be made up of employees or of workers bought in on a sub-contract basis.
The exploitation of a range of alternative contractual and working time arrangements permits firms to secure precisely the number and types of such secondary workers that they might require at any time.
(Atkinson, 1985,3)
This division between ‘core’ and ‘peripheral’workers was hastened by the concentration of redundancies, from 1979 to 1981, among male manual workers.
This contributed to a fall of 423,000, from 1971 to 1981, in the number of males at work.
On the other hand there was an increase in overall activity rates between 1971 and 1981 (Table 3.6), which was due to the increase (of 692,000) in working females.
Yet, in that period the number of females working part-time increased by a larger amount, 974,000, so there was a decrease in female full-time work.
The UK's overall 1987 activity rate of 49.6 per cent was exceeded by only one EC country, Denmark.
However, the UK economically active included still large proportions who were unemployed and receiving unemployment benefit, and a proportion of females working part-time, 43.9 per cent, which was exceptionally high.
It is possible to adjust the data for the high proportion of part-time workers, by assuming that two of them are equivalent to one full-time worker.
When this adjustment is made, the UK's distinction disappears; it is merely an average EC country for its level of human activity in the economy, expressed in terms of‘full-time equivalents’ per head of population (for details by GB region, see Table 6.11 below).
Table 3.6 Economically active as percentage of total population, 1961–87 UK, EC and OECD
The emergence of a distinction between the full-time workforce and a large part-time group is a comparatively recent phenomenon.
If we take the engineering industry, we find that ‘normal’ weekly hours were reduced from 58.5 in 1851 and 47 between the two world wars to a ‘40-hour week’in 1968.
However, the regular use of overtime meant that adult male manual workers were still undertaking an average week of 44.2 hours in 1988.
But holidays with pay of more than two weeks had become increasingly common from 1965 onwards.
Security, high income and ‘fringe benefits’ such as paid holidays are seen to characterize the ‘core’workforce, while the  peripheral workforce has a lower income, a minimum of ‘fringe benefits’and generally shorter, though variable, hours.
Pahl (1984) asserts that it is the last hundred years that have been the aberration compared with the greater flexibility of both earlier periods and the present time.
Many writers have asserted that the USA's high level of growth in employment since the 1970s has been achieved only by incorporating many people in the low-paid ‘peripheral’ workforce.
It is argued that the UK in the 1980s showed a similar transformation.
The predominance of secure full-time jobs gave way under pressure of high unemployment, weakened trade unions, rising female employment, and the removal of labour market restrictions, to a more flexible workforce, which we can categorize as comprising part-time workers (conventionally defined as undertaking less than 30 hours per week),home workers or home-based workers ,temporary staff , and the self-employed (frequently undertaking work sub-contracted from normal employers); some of these people may be undertaking a ‘second job’ in addition to their main one.
For the sake of the country's geography, it may be that the growth of ‘core’ workers is concentrated more in some regions and types of area than in others.
We shall consider these changes in more detail in Chapter 6, and relate them to spatial data by reference principally to female and part-time employees.
Their implications are important, particularly for the standards of living of ‘peripheral workers’.
These contribute to many distributional questions concerning the share of the UK's current wealth enjoyed by different social groups.
The politics of the post-industrial transformation
The distribution of income
It is important to study the changing distribution of income between social groups in the present context, because it may carry with it changes in the distribution of income between different types of place.
For instance, there had been a trend, in the early 1970s, towards a more equal distribution of income between regions of the UK, but this was reversed under the Conservative government after 1979, when the share of national income received by south-east England increased in connection with the location of wealthier groups.
A key point is the question whether individual socio-economic groups enjoy a better life through being concentrated together; does the overall social composition of an area enhance or reduce the prospects of individuals in a given socio-economic group?
In a detailed examination of the issue, Donnison and Soto (1980) argue that, on the whole it does not, i.e. that location is more important than the social composition of an area for the individual.
Detailed trends in the distribution of income at any one time are the net result of many forces, several of which we have mentioned already.
Among positive features were the growth of service-sector employment, including notably public services in the 1960s and early 1970s and financial and business services in the 1980s; the increase of North Sea oil production from 1979 to 1985; and the recovery of overall output, reflected in the real growth  of disposable income from 1982 to 1989.
Negative features relate principally to manual workers and the manufacturing workforce.
The latter fell from 7.7 million in 1973 to 5.1 million in 1990 because of the effects of recession conditions in 1979–82, the accelerated growth in productivity after 1980 and the application of new technology.
We shall see later in Part II that this decline of manufacturing employment was closely identified with the heavy growth of unemployment in the 1980s, and with its concentration in most industrial towns and cities outside the South East, places which typically had rates of unemployment of 14 to 20 per cent.
This loss of income became generalized, through the play of the labour market, to less skilled families, to school-leavers, to ethnic minorities, and to the sick and disabled to create what has been described as a ‘deprived underclass’.
There is mounting evidence that unemployment accentuated the contrasts in health among different social classes in the UK.
Features of deprivation were closely correlated with each other, socially and spatially, and caused widespread comment on the emergence of ‘two nations’(Martin, 1987, 1989a).
The influence of government and politics
Viewed on the longer scale, this century saw slow progress toward a more equal distribution of income until the mid 1970s, when the process was reversed (Halsey, 1986, 39).
Why was this allowed to happen; or to put it another way, why were issues of distribution within society put into second place?
Under the ‘post-war consensus’ the long boom in the economy allowed Conservative governments (1951–64, 1970–74) as well as Labour (1945–51, 1964–70, 1974–79) to engage in the redistribution of resources to poorer groups and areas through ‘progressive taxation’(taxing income at higher rates in higher-income groups) and through expenditure on social security programmes, supplementary benefit, education, health, etc.
In addition to being the party representing the interests of wealthier people, Mrs Thatcher's Conservative governments of the 1980s argued that the UK's competitive position was so difficult that the interests of production had to come firmly before redistribution.
The effect of the changes in the patterns of taxation and public spending was to accentuate an underlying inequality in income distribution.
The bottom 40 per cent of households saw their share of national income fall from 8.7 per cent in 1981 to 6.0 per cent in 1986.
The top fifth increased their share from 46.4 to 50.7 per cent(Table 3.7).
By the mid 1980s, therefore the poor were significantly worse off, relative to the rest of the population, than ten years earlier, although in absolute terms their purchasing power improved.
In association with this trend, there was renewed attention to longstanding evidence on the effects of poverty on health, in association with government restrictions on the growth of Health Service spending.
The effect of economic difficulties on health and health spending is debatable, but one conclusion was given as follows:
There is no question that inequalities in health between rich and poor do exist and that poverty causes ill-health.
But it is highly questionable whether the health gap is getting wider.
The rise in long-term unemployment and the  increase in child poverty since the mid 1970s is likely to mean that the health of the lower social classes is improving more slowly than it should and would have done, rather than that it is getting worse.
(Le Grand, 1987, 22)
Table 3.7 Distribution of income, by households, 1976–86, UK (per cent)
Le Grand's calculations stressed that upward social mobility meant there are now fewer people in manual and unskilled social classes than 20 or 30 years ago.
This major social trend has widespread implications in different kinds of geography, not least in connection with elections.
There is considerable debate over the long-term significance of this trend in politics; does it have a clear effect, in turn, on the influence of the Labour party?
Halsey (1986) suggested that the steady fall in Labour's percentage share of the vote from 1964 to 1983 was attributable not primarily to people of a given social class voting differently over time, but to a straightforward decline in the working-class population, which affected many parliamentary constituencies: ‘The dominant class had grown from 18 per cent of the electorate in 1964 to 29 per cent in 1983 while the working-class proportion had dropped from 47 to 31 per cent’(Halsey, 1986, 88).
Accompanying this possible result of ‘de-industrialization’ was the growth of alternative, mainly middle-class parties including the Liberal Democrat party, SDP, Scottish and Welsh Nationalists and the Green party.
The Green party reflected more widespread concern for the environment, especially in the European elections of 1989.
A Gallup Survey (Heald and Wybrow, 1986, 151) had earlier reported that a majority (57 per cent) preferred protection of the environment even at the expense of holding back economic growth.
On the other hand, 32 per cent felt that economic growth should be given priority even if the environment suffered to some extent.
There was, however, a generation gap: young adults, aged from 18 to 34, put the environment first by a margin of 63 per cent to 28 per cent, but senior citizens were almost evenly divided.
Clearly, the post-industrial world is changing attitudes as well as places.
There are thus significant differences between places in voting patterns generally, and in attitudes to the debate about growth and the environment, because social and demographic groups are not evenly distributed across the country.
Conclusion
In this chapter we have considered the rapidly changing size and composition of the ‘national cake’.
This evolution may itself have the potential to alter Britain's geography, through providing built-in advantages for some occupations and places and relative disadvantages for others.
Much of the governmental life of a western nation also concerns the politics of distribution, above all the distribution of wealth between social classes.
As, however, social classes are unevenly distributed over the map of Britain, then the politics of distribution also quickly becomes a geographical matter implicitly, if not explicitly through spatial policies.
Some social geographers might consider it sufficient to emphasize the national issue of distribution, leaving the spatial outcome as a secondary by-product.
We, however, consider it necessary now to disaggregate the main national trends into their principal spatial components in Part II, before considering the different circumstances and politics of four broad geographical types of area of Britain in Part III.
Further reading
A prime example of geographers interpreting international socio-economic change is Dicken and Lloyd (1981).
Social and economic polarization in this country are considered by geographers in Hudson and Williams (1989) and in McDowell et al .
(1989).
There are many histories of UK change by sociologists, but a good example is Halsey (1986).
The individual reader can most conveniently update statistical trends for topics in this chapter by reference to Social Trends and Regional Trends (HMSO, annual) and OECD (annual).
Demographic trends are analysed by Compton (1982), and by Lawton (1982).
Another useful study, which looks at the implications of demographic trends for a range of different activities at the national level, is Ermisch (1983).
On health and social services, valuable perspectives are provided by two volumes: from that of British social administration by Titmuss (1976), and in terms of international comparison by geographers Joseph and Phillips (1984).
The relationship with social inequality is considered in Whitehead (1987).
The best introductions by a geographer to international trends in the service industries and their various interpretations are by Daniels (1982, 1985).
A refreshing view of the changing nature of work, especially in the home, is provided by Pahl (1984).
New forms of employment are explored by Redclift and Mingione (1985).
The first major introduction to feminist geography, including women's employment, is by the Women and Geography Study Group of the IBG (1984).
Changes in women's roles are studied by Mackenzie and Rose in Anderson et al .
(1983), and by Beechey (1986).
Inequality and the response to it are themes of many geographical and political studies.
The example of a geographer's approach is provided by Knox (1982).
An example from political science is Leys (1983).
The Geographical Impact
4 Population change
At a superficial level the recent history of population in Britain conveys an almost static picture.
Yet under this placid surface there are strong forces of demographic restructuring at work.
Chapter 3 has referred to the very low overall rate of national population growth in recent years.
However, the collapse in the birth rate from its peak in the mid 1960s, which was primarily responsible for this, was itself a major event with long-term implications.
Mention has already been made of the inexorable movement of the 1960s ‘baby boom’ through schooling age during the 1970s to entry into higher education and the labour force in the 1980s.
These are not the only changes.
The legacy of Britain's largest ever baby boom, dating from the early years of this century, manifested itself in the growth of the numbers of people of pensionable age in the 1960s and 1970s and the dramatic increase in the numbers of the very elderly in the 1980s.
For various reasons including the growth of the elderly population, the fall in the birth rate, the increase in the number of young adults and the rising divorce rate, the long-term trend towards smaller average household size has continued and even accelerated over the past two decades.
At the same time, Britain has been developing into an increasingly plural society, with a major increase in the size of the non-white ethnic groups alongside a decline in the size of the white population.
It is inconceivable that these dramatic changes in demographic structure could have taken place without a major effect on the geographical distribution of population in Britain and on its composition in different localities.
In fact, they have been accompanied by a massive redistribution of population away from the largest cities to smaller settlements and more rural areas and by an acceleration of the drift from North to South.
Across much of the advanced western world the 1970s are now synonymous with the phenomenon of ‘counterurbanization’.
This term was coined by Berry (1976) to denote a turnaround in net migration flows, away from greater concentration of population in a small number of major agglomerations, and towards a revival of population growth in more rural areas and peripheral regions.
In the UK, as in many other countries, however, this trend of deconcentration  slowed down in the later 1970s.
By contrast, the early 1980s were dominated by the re-emergence of the drift to the South East which had been such a focus of attention in the 1950s and early 1960s.
As a result, the ‘inner city problem’ has changed somewhat in character since it was first recognized as a major political issue in the mid 1970s.
That is because the resurgence of development pressures in the more central parts of the larger cities, particularly London, has proved a very mixed blessing to the low-income residents which these areas have inherited.
These shifts in population distribution result partly from the changes in demographic structure just described, but the links are not always clear.
It is migration patterns that are primarily responsible for these shifts, and they are also related to changes in residential preferences and to trends in the location of employment and housing opportunities.
What is certain, however, is that these structural and geographical changes in the population have, in combination, produced a profound transformation in the population size and composition of most places in Britain over the past two decades.
It is a major finding that the socio-demographic profiles of individual localities have become increasingly distinctive.
It is also the case that demographic forces are looming ever larger in determining the way in which the geography of Britain is evolving.
Already it is possible to identify significant differences between changes in the distribution of population and employment, but the developments of recent years have sown the seeds for potentially much greater dislocation in the future.
It is this increasingly autonomous nature of population change that prompts us to tackle this subject first in our review of the broad geographical patterns underlying the changes affecting individual places.
This is also the reason why, having examined the main dimensions of employment change in the next two chapters, we return to the topic of population in Chapter 7.
This investigates more fully the nature and scale of the dislocation between trends in the distribution of people and jobs, and examines the barriers which appear to restrict the efficiency of the ‘matching processes’ in the labour and housing markets.
The purpose of the remainder of this chapter is to analyse the changing structure and composition of the national population, assess the principal dimensions of population redistribution, and examine the impact which both these sources of change are having on the geography of Britain.
Key demographic trends
Overall numbers of people
The principal dimensions of overall population change in the UK are shown in Figure 4.1 Somewhat paradoxically, the total population has changed relatively little in size since the early 1970s, but this in itself represents a significant change from previous experience.
Official estimates put the UK's mid-1988 population at some 57,065,000 — the highest level yet, but only 1.1 million or 2.0 per cent larger than in 1971.
This compares with an average annual increase of 0.5–0.6 per cent in the 1950s and 1960s.
Particularly dramatic was the reduction in growth rate which took place between the mid 1960s, when the annual increase reached almost 400,000, and the five years  Figure 4.1 Population change and its components, UK, 1960–87.
Total change is calculated as the sum of natural change and net international migration and excludes other changes such as movements of Armed Forces, the effects of changes in the definition of population, and other statistical adjustments.
Source:Annual Abstract of Statistics , various years.
1973–78 when the national population was virtually static in size.
Since the early 1980s something of an upturn has occurred, with annual increases in excess of 100,000 being recorded in the mid 1980s (Figure 4.1).
Components of national population change
The direct causes of these trends can be expressed in terms of the contribution made by births, deaths and international migration.
All three components had a hand in producing the marked reduction in annual growth rate between the first half of the 1960s and the first half of the 1970s, but the dominant feature was the fall in the number of births.
While the average number of deaths climbed by 37,000 a year between these two periods and the rate of net emigration from the UK is estimated to have increased by 47,000 a year, the annual average number of births fell by 222,000.
The annual statistics plotted in Figure 4.1 reveal that the number of births declined by one third from a peak of over one million in 1964 to less than 660,000 in 1977.
Since then the birth rate has recovered somewhat, leading to modest rates of natural increase.
The mid 1980s were also associated with a  switch in the direction of the international migration balance.
The fairly consistent pattern of net losses recorded since the mid 1960s was replaced in 1983–88 by substantial net gains (Figure 4.1).
This was brought about principally by a sharp fall in emigration by British citizens, but was reinforced by some increase in immigration by both British passport-holders and others.
Ethnic composition
The relatively small amount of movement in the national population total since the early 1970s, however, masks the considerable changes that have taken place in the composition and structure of the population.
Amongst the most remarkable is the growth in Britain's ethnic minorities.
Their combined size was estimated at only around 200,000 people in 1951, but was six times larger by 1971 and put at over 2.4 million by the mid 1980s (Shaw, 1988).
Indeed, for some years now, Britain's non-white population has totally dominated the nation's population growth.
In the fifteen years 1971–86 its increase by over 1.2 million people compared with an increase of only 672,000 in the total population of Great Britain, indicating that Britain's white population fell by some 560,000 over this period.
This replacement of whites by non-whites derives partly from the general pattern of international population exchanges reigning since the late 1940s, with net outflows of British citizens and net inflows of residents from the former colonial territories.
It has, however, been made more visible in recent years by the lower national birth rate and by the strong natural increase of immigrant groups, resulting from their youthful age structure and relatively high fertility.
By the mid 1980s over two-thirds of Britain's non-white population was made up by just three broad cultural groups — Indians (760,000), West Indians (534,000) and Pakistanis (397,000).
Age distribution
Age patterns have also been undergoing major changes in recent years.
Britain's passage through the ‘demographic transition’ in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, associated with rising life expectancy and falling fertility (Chapter 3), long ago began to change the nation's age ‘pyramid’into a rectangular shape.
Even so, the number of people moving through particular age groups has varied substantially over the past two or three decades.
International migration has played a part since young adults and families are more than proportionately represented in these flows, but the prime factor is the variation in the size of age groups resulting from previous fluctuations in births.
As a result, the size of almost all age groups has changed substantially over the past two decades, in marked contrast to the small increase registered by the overall population.
As shown in Table 4.1, the numbers of pre-school and school-age children were both about one-fifth lower in 1988 than in 1971, together contracting by some 2.7 million.
Meanwhile, the number of 25–44 years olds grew by a similar amount, with both the constituent age groups expanding by 20 per cent.
The largest percentage  increase, however, was recorded by the very elderly — the survivors of the large birth cohorts dating from the early years of this century — with the number of people aged 75 and over up by 46 per cent on their 1971 level.
Table 4.1 Age structure, UK, 1971–88
These changes have had massive implications for the provision of age-specific services such as maternity facilities, school places, youth training, elderly health care and sheltered housing.
Particular problems arose as the baby boom of the late 1950s and early 1960s ‘came of age’, with pressures on higher education, the job market and the housing stock.
For instance, the number of working-age people (16-pensionable age) grew by 1.2 million between 1971 and 1981 and by a further 1.3 million in the seven years up to 1988, while the age groups spanning the period of most intense new household formation (15–44 years old) contained 3.6 million more people in 1988 than at the beginning of the 1970s.
Household size and structure
Alongside these changes in age structure, and partly related to them, have been some substantial changes in the way in which people group themselves into households.
These trends are potentially very important because the number of people in a household and the composition of the households — in terms of such characteristics as sex, age and relationships to each other— both have a strong influence on the preferred type and location of housing accommodation.
Any change in the size and structure of households in a particular place or for the nation as a whole will have substantial implications for housing requirements and land-use planning.
Over the last two decades, households have been shrinking in size, increasing in number and becoming more varied in their type.
The reduction in fertility from the mid 1960s peak has led to a decrease in the average size of family households, with a very marked drop in the number of very large households.
The increase in the number of elderly people, together with a rise in the  proportion living alone, has boosted the number of small households, as too has the higher divorce rate.
It has also been spurred on by the growing tendency for young adults to seek accommodation away from their parents' home and, particularly in the 1980s, by the increase in the numbers of young adults resulting from the baby boom.
The overall effect on household size and composition can be gauged from the following statistics.
According to the General Household Survey, the proportion of one-person households went up from 17 per cent in 1971 to 26 per cent in 1988, while that of households with six or more people fell from 6 to 2 per cent.
Average household size fell from 2.91 in 1971 to 2.70 in 1981 and was down to 2.48 by 1988, a fall of 15 per cent from 1971.
Not surprisingly, the increase in the number of households in Great Britain was running far ahead of the rate of population growth over this period, totalling some 20 per cent for 1971–88.
In absolute terms, there were three extra households for every extra member of the population over this period, generating a very much higher level of new housing need than reflected in the overall population figures.
Recent years have also seen a swing away from the traditional ‘family’ household.
By 1988, married couples with children made up no more than 26 per cent of all households in Britain.
Married couples without children, including ‘empty nesters’(older families whose children have left home) as well as newly-married partners, form the largest single group of households at 36 per cent of the total, while the proportion of households comprising lone parents with children stood at 8 per cent in 1988.
Geographical implications
These key demographic developments of the past 20–30 years have had a major impact on regional and local populations in the UK.
This has occurred in two ways.
One is that, because in general these trends are not only national but also nationwide, the structure and composition of the population in each place in Britain has to some extent tended to change along similar lines, albeit not at precisely the same rates.
Thus most places are now characterized by longer life expectancy, lower fertility, higher average age, smaller household size and more lone-parent families than they were in the early 1960s.
The other notable consequence is that these changes can lead to alterations in the distribution of population between places.
For instance, with lower household size, a fully built-up town must decline in population, given its essentially fixed stock of dwellings.
This is particularly likely to occur for larger cities with very limited amounts of vacant land and in rural areas where environmental and other considerations have led to the imposition of strict controls on new building.
These demographic forces can also operate in more subtle ways.
For instance, the ‘coming of age’ of a baby boom can be expected to lead to higher levels of migration towards the ‘bright city lights’, while the subsequent increase in the numbers of young couples is likely to lead to greater demand for family-size housing and suburban residential locations.
In such ways can basic demographic developments, which are normally monitored at national level, promote changes in population distribution through their  influence on migration.
These work alongside other factors such as trends in the distribution of employment opportunities at both regional and more local scales and changes in the preferences of individuals about the types of places that they would like to live in.
Migration and changes in population distribution
Just as with population structure and composition, so also the patterning of people across national space is highly dynamic despite the low level of national population growth in recent years.
Three principal dimensions have dominated geographical patterns of population change in the second half of the twentieth century.
Though often difficult to distinguish in practice, in the simplest terms they relate to the three main spatial scales of economic and social organization.
They involve, firstly, the change in the balance between Britain's two broad geographical ‘nations’ from North to South; secondly, the ‘urban-rural shift’from larger metropolitan centres to smaller cities and towns, including those situated in the more remote and rural regions; and thirdly, suburbanization and local metropolitan decentralization within the commuting hinterlands of individual urban centres.
They differ in their date of onset and in their scale and relative importance over time.
The most dramatic development of the last quarter of a century has been the emergence of the urban-rural shift as a major factor in population redistribution, but in the late 1970s and early 1980s its strength waned somewhat, as too did the pace of local decentralization, whereas the North-South divide reasserted itself at this time after a period of lower significance.
Migration holds the key to understanding these shifts in population distribution.
Because as recognized a century ago by Ravenstein (1885, 1889) most movement takes place over shorter distances, migration's role in population change becomes more important as the spatial scale of analysis descends.
Moreover, its significance has increased in recent years relative to the role of natural increase.
This is partly because the once marked regional and local differences in rates of natural increase — characterized notably by high fertility in rural areas and high mortality in towns — have diminished (Armitage, 1987).
At the same time, levels of residential mobility have tended to increase in gross terms, giving the potential for more rapid and substantial net changes in population distribution.
In the last twenty years the importance of migration has been reinforced by the decline in rates of natural increase; now that births and deaths are almost in balance, migration is the crucial determinant of whether population grows or contracts even at the national level.
Finally, because it tends to be selective in terms of the types of people involved, migration also has the power to produce substantial and rapid changes in the population composition of individual places.
The North-South drift
For at least half a century, as outlined in Chapter 1, the dominant movement of population and employment at this ‘two Britains’ scale has been from  North to South.
This represents a reversal of the prevailing trends of the nineteenth century and is re-establishing the broad distribution found before 1750, dominated by the national capital and the rich agricultural lowlands (Osborne, 1964; Department of the Environment, 1971).
The shift of people into the Midlands and south of England slowed substantially during the later 1960s and early 1970s, but its subsequent re-emergence formed one of the key features of the 1980s, along with the ‘transfer’ of large parts of the Midlands into the North (Green, 1988; Lewis and Townsend, 1989; Martin, 1989a).
According to the annual data on migration and population change provided by the National Health Service Central Register and mid-year population estimates, the re-opening of the North-South divide appears to date from the first half of the 1970s.
If the South is redefined to include only the four regions of the South East, South West, East Anglia and the East Midlands, then the net movement of people from North to South can be seen to have risen from a low point of only around 10,000–20,000 a year in the early 1970s to a peak of nearly 70,000 by 1985–86 (Figure 4.2).
In terms of overall rate of population growth, the gap between the four regions of the South and those comprising the rest of Great Britain — which had narrowed to only 1.6 points (per thousand people a year) in 1974–77 — widened progressively through the remainder of the 1970s and into the 1980s (Table 4.2).
Particularly impressive has been the major revival of the South East since the mid 1970s, but there has also been a return to strong growth in the other three regions of the South in the mid 1980s.
By contrast, all northern regions suffered badly in the early 1980s and only Wales exceeded the national rate of recovery in 1984–87 (Table 4.2).
Employment conditions were clearly involved (Chapter 5).
Figure 4.2 Net migration to the South from the rest of Great Britain, 1971–86.
South refers to the South East, South West, East Anglia and East Midlands.
Source: data for 1971–78 comprise two-year running averages estimated from Ogilvy, 1982; 1978/79 onwards from OPCS Monitors, Ref.
MN.
Moreover, it is not only the quantity but also the composition (or ‘quality’) of the North-South drift that appears to be affecting the balance between the two parts of the country.
Since the 1920s concern has been expressed over the fact that it tends to be the younger and better qualified people who are  51 leaving the less dynamic North, thus undermining the ability of the latter to rejuvenate itself.
This selectivity in the migration process appears to have intensified in the 1980s.
For instance, the Census shows a switch from a net outflow of young adults from Greater London to the rest of Great Britain in 1970–71 to a net inflow to London in 1980–81 (Champion and Congdon, 1988a).
According to analyses based on the 1983 Labour Force Survey, migration's role in swelling the South's labour force was then restricted to non-manual workers; though unemployment rates for manual workers were markedly higher in the North than the South, there was no net migration of manual workers to the South (Hughes and McCormick, 1987a).
The background and implications of this are discussed more fully in Chapter 7.
Table 4.2 Population change, 1971–87, by standard region (annual rate per 1 000 people)
Urban-rural shift
Studies of population and employment change in the 1970s, particularly those based on the results of the 1981 Census, are dominated by the urban-rural shift.
This is true not just for the UK, but applies widely across the more developed western world (Champion, 1989d).
The long-established tendency for national populations to become more concentrated in large metropolitan centres and their surrounding hinterlands was found to be interrupted, if not broken: major cities were losing population not just from their older inner areas but from their whole city regions, while more remote rural areas with a history of depopulation began to record population growth for the first time for decades (Morrison and Wheeler, 1976; Vining and Strauss, 1977; Vining and Kontuly, 1978; Brown and Wardwell, 1980; Fielding, 1982).
Some evidence of the importance of the urban-rural shift in Britain is provided by Figure 4.3.
Here, aggregation of 1971–81 population change data for five groups of the CURDS Local Labour Market Areas (LLMAs, see Champion et al .,
1987) shows the strong negative relationship between growth rate and size of place that Fielding (1982) expects if ‘counter-urbanization’ forces are at work.
Liverpool, Glasgow and Manchester dominate the list of fastest declining LLMAs for 1971–81, not just in absolute but also in percentage terms, despite their large size, with London not far behind.
By contrast, the fastest growing places were smaller cities and towns at some distance from the major metropolitan centres, most of them involving overspill arrangements under the New or Expanded Towns schemes such as Milton Keynes (Bucks.),
Redditch (Hereford and Worcs.),
Tamworth (Staffs.) and Peterborough (Cambs.
); see Champion et al .
(1987, 21) for further details.
Figure 4.3 Population change 1971–81, Great Britain, by Local Labour Market Area size.
LLMAs are grouped by size and urban status.
Conurbation Dominants comprise Birmingham, Manchester, Glasgow, Liverpool and Newcastle upon Tyne.
Provincial Dominants comprise Leeds, Bristol, Edinburgh, Nottingham and Sheffield.
Source: Champion et a/., 1987, Table 2.3.
One of the most impressive features of 1971–81 population changes is the marked upturn in rate of population growth which was recorded by many of the more remote rural places in Britain, compared with the 1960s.
Table 4.3 gives details of population change over the two decades for the twenty counties and Scottish regions which in 1981 had the lowest population densities (i.e. were the most rural).
It can be seen that, whereas in the 1960s half these areas had growth rates below the national average, in the 1970s only one area — Tayside — was in this situation.
Moreover, only Wiltshire experienced a cutback in growth rate between the decades that was greater  than the national figure, while 15 of the 20 areas saw a positive movement in growth rate against the national trend.
Additional evidence of the significance of rural growth is provided by population data for a classification of districts in England and Wales.
The most rural category labelled ‘remoter, mainly rural districts’ was the only one to record an upturn in population growth rate between the 1960s and 1970s and in the latter period recorded an overall growth rate second only to districts containing New Towns (OPCS, 1981).
Table 4.3 Population change, 1961–81, in Britain's areas of lowest population density
Annual population estimates give a rather different impression of the phasing of the pace of the urban-rural shift over time (Champion, 1981, 1987b).
They indicate that it was already accelerating in the mid and late 1960s and actually reached a peak in the first three or four years of the following decade, after which it fell back substantially.
This is reflected at both ends of the settlement hierarchy in Table 4.4, not only in the reduction in the growth rate of the remoter, mainly rural districts but also in the marked fall in the rate of population loss estimated for Greater London and the principal cities of the Metropolitan Counties.
On the other hand, it would be a mistake to conclude that the urban-rural shift is a spent force.
In the first place, even in the early 1980s, the more rural areas were still gaining population far more rapidly than the nation as a whole, and the more general process of deconcentration from the metropolitan counties and from the largest settlements in non-metropolitan counties was still continuing apace.
Secondly, the latest available information  at the time of writing (November 1989) suggests that a further surge of non-metropolitan growth was underway by the mid 1980s, with the remoter, mainly rural areas and resort, port and retirement areas — along with Inner London — being the main beneficiaries of the acceleration in the national growth rate at this time (Table 4.4).
Table4.4 Population change, 1961–87, by type of district, England and Wales only (annual average rate per 1000 people)
The continuing strength of the urban-rural shift is evident from Figure 4.4, albeit overlain by the drift from North to South.
Population growth in the 1980s was dominated by shire counties in the southern half of England, the ‘rural South’, particularly those forming an arc in and around the western and northern parts of the South East region.
In both 1981–84 and 1984–87 Berkshire, Buckinghamshire, Cambridgeshire, Dorset and Oxfordshire were amongst the fast-growing counties, along with Cornwall and the Isle of Wight.
The biggest increases in growth rate between the two periods, however, occurred largely in counties situated at a greater distance from London, namely (in rank order) Northamptonshire, Isle of Wight, Lincolnshire, Dyfed, Gloucestershire, Devon, Dorset and Hereford &Worcester.
Migration (Figure 4.5B) has played the key role in these growth patterns — indeed, to a greater extent than might be expected from the overall rates of population change, because it is also compensating for substantial natural decrease in some of the fastest growing counties, principally those noted as retirement areas like East and West Sussex, the Isle of Wight, Dorset and Devon (Figure 4.5A).
The urban-rural shift is also identifiable further north, but in the context of lower regional growth and with less marked differences between county growth rates; for instance, in northern England, with Cleveland and Tyne &Wear in population decline and with Northumberland and Cumbria failing to reach the national average rate of growth in the mid 1980s.
A wide range of factors has been put forward to account for the urban-rural shift and its phasing over time (Champion, 1987b).
Retirement migration is an important component, but except for a few areas its contribution to population growth has been smaller than that of other age groups, not just pre-retirement moves but also those of younger working age and their families (Warnes and Law, 1984).
For these, the main factors would seem to be a change in residential preferences and the greater availability of jobs in more rural areas.
As described in more detail in Chapters 5 and 6, the latter results from the growth in employment in public-sector services in the late 1960s and early 1970s and the search by companies for less cramped factory sites and for cheaper and less unionized labour such as married women (Fothergill and Gudgin, 1982; Massey, 1984).
The programme of motorway building played an important facilitating role, while direct government involvement made a substantial contribution in the form of the Location of Offices Bureau, large-scale slum clearance and the official overspill programme, the latter being expanded in the light of the mid 1960s projections of strong national population growth (Hamnett and Randolph, 1983a; Robert and Randolph, 1983).
The demographic trends outlined earlier in this chapter also played a part, as the rearing of the 1960s baby-boom children increased the demand for houses with gardens and as falling average household size reduced the population capacity of cities that had only limited sites available for new housing construction.
Population change, by county and Scottish region (a) 1981–84 (B) 1984–87
Components of population change 1981–87, by county and Scottish region:(A) Natural change (B) Net migration and other changes.
The decrease in the pace of urban-rural movement in the late 1970s can partly be ascribed to some of the same factors working in reverse.
These include the ageing of the baby boom, the run-down of the New and Expanded Towns programme, the switch from slum clearance to housing rehabilitation and the reorientation of government policy to deal with the problems of the inner city areas.
This slow-down can also be related to the economic hiccoughs of the later 1970s and particularly the period of deep recession in 1979–82 (Townsend, 1983).
This led to a reduction in the amount of capital available for new investment in manufacturing and to a fall in the ability of private individuals to change jobs and move houses.
Both these increased again with the economic recovery of the mid 1980s, though more noticeably in the South than in the North.
As with the North-South drift, the urban-rural shift has involved certain types of people more than others, a feature which intensified as migration became more difficult after the early 1970s peak.
As can be seen from the composition of net migration flows from London to the rest of Great Britain (Table 4.5), this was particularly true for income groups (as represented by socio-economic groups and housing tenure).
Even in 1970–71 London's net loss of population was skewed towards non-manual workers and owner-occupiers, but the subsequent reduction in the scale of movement had its greatest effect on the proportion of public-sector tenants and of lower-income sections of the labour force, both manual and non-manual.
This can be attributed in large measure to the lower demand of low-paid labour in non-metropolitan manufacturing during the recession years and to a contraction in housing opportunities for low-income groups.
The latter have always found it more difficult to move out of cities than owner occupiers, because of the limited availability of private-rented accommodation outside the large cities and because of the barriers limiting transfers between council  housing areas.
However, in the later 1970s these problems were exacerbated by the rundown of the New and Expanded Towns programme and the lower level of public-sector house-building.
These problems have been compounded in the 1980s by the government's encouragement of the sale of council houses and by the rise in house prices in the owner-occupied sector, so that the acceleration in the urban-rural shift in the mid 1980s is not likely to have been caused by the lower paid.
This has important implications for the social composition of both origin and destination areas as will be seen later in the chapter.
Table 4.5 Migration between London and the rest of Great Britain, 1970–71 and 1980–81, by socio-economic grouping and housing tenure (thousands)
Suburbanization and local decentralization
The flight from the older inner areas to the suburbs is a long-established feature of population redistribution.
It dates from the latter half of the nineteenth century when improvements in local passenger transport allowed people to reside at greater distances from their workplaces.
The rate and physical extent of suburban and ‘exurban’ growth accelerated rapidly in the inter-war period, with the sharp increase in car ownership, but it has taken on even greater numerical and spatial dimensions since the early 1950s.
It is normally defined as the intra-urban movement of population from the inner to the outer parts of the same urban region, but in more recent years it has become inextricably bound up with the patterns of inter-urban redistribution associated with the urban-rural shift.
Indeed, while the latter has fuelled the rate of suburban growth for smaller cities and towns, the larger cities have experienced a reduction in their rate of suburban growth.
These trends and interrelationships can be illustrated most effectively by reference to the zone level of the Functional Regions framework, particularly the contrast between the Cores and Rings which make up the Daily Urban Systems of the 228 Functional Regions in Britain.
The Cores are defined in  such a way as to embrace the entire built-up area of the main settlement and therefore include the contiguous suburbs as they existed in 1971 as well as the inner city areas (see Champion et al .,
1987, for further details).
Nevertheless, the predominance of centrifugal movement is clear and is found to have intensified markedly between the 1950s and the 1970s.
As shown in Table 4.6, the growth rate for the 228 Cores, in aggregate, declined from 4.0 per cent in 1951–61 to 0.7 per cent in the following decade and slumped further to -4.2 per cent in the 1970s.
Table 4.6 Population change, Great Britain, 1951–87, by Functional Region zone
These patterns can be related to the same type of factors as described above for the urban-rural shift.
This is particularly the case for the ‘push element’ operating in the inner city areas.
These comprise several features: employment has fallen in most branches of manufacturing and in some parts of the service sector; land has been diverted from residential use by office expansion, road construction and slum clearance; more mobile people have been leaving to escape the poor physical environment and the social problems; new private house-building has been discouraged by high costs, land hoarding by local authorities and uncertainties about sales potential; and falling household size has reduced the capacity of the overall housing stock (Cameron, 1980; Evans and Eversley, 1980; Kennett and Hall, 1981; Lawless, 1981).
The effect of these push factors on the individual city regions has, however, been reinforced by limitations imposed on new population growth in their outer areas.
Again falling household size has played an important role here in reducing the capacity of these areas, but equally significant have been the tight planning controls on urban development, particularly the wide Green Belts round most of the larger cities.
As pointed out by Hall et al .
(1973) and Hamnett and Randolph (1983a), much of the urban-rural shift in the more heavily populated parts of the country would seem to comprise essentially suburban movements which have been forced to become ‘exurban’ and inter-urban because of pressure on space.
Initially, a majority of these reluctant long-distance movers commute back to their  metropolitan jobs, but in the longer term many take up more local jobs — a feature that has grown as employment too has decentralized (Herington, 1984; Congdon and Champion, 1989).
The local centrifugal movements have been just as selective in their social composition as the longer-distance transfers involved in the urban-rural shift and North-South drift, indeed probably even more so.
Archetypal suburbia from the 1920s contains virtually no housing for private renting.
Moreover, a substantial proportion of the council housing built on low-density suburban estates in the inter-war period has now been incorporated into the owner-occupied sector and no longer provides a route for lower-income households wanting to move into the suburbs.
As Hall et al .
(1973) discovered, for most of the post-war period the political interests of both the Labour-held city authorities and the surrounding Tory-controlled shire counties were best served by restricting the outward movement of the lower-paid — considerations which, along with other factors, led to the encouragement of high-rise apartment blocks on redeveloped sites in inner urban areas.
The only significant opportunities for low-income people to decentralize locally (as opposed to the longer-distance moves facilitated by the New and Expanded Towns programmes) have derived from the re-cycling of older and poorer quality housing in the inner suburbs and from the development of spare peripheral sites by city councils-the ‘outer council estates’ which now suffer from major social and physical problems because of inaccessibility, limited facilities, faulty design and inadequate maintenance.
In the 1980s local decentralization has been occurring at a slower pace than in the previous decade and in some cases appears to have gone into reverse.
This is seen in the narrowing of the difference in growth rate between the Cores and Rings of the Functional Regions framework (Table 4.6).
It is also reflected in the reduction in the population losses for the larger metropolitan centres, most notably London (Table 4.4).
In fact, during the first half of the 1980s, there was virtually no distinction in growth rates between Inner and Outer London Boroughs (Champion and Congdon, 1988b).
In the London case at least, this recovery can no doubt be attributed in part to the strength of its economy, the support given by central government to the Docklands redevelopment and other schemes, and the associated attraction of young professionals back to the more central parts of the city.
Here and elsewhere, however, the barriers to the outward movement of the lower paid and ethnic minorities have also played a significant role, leading to further social polarization not just between inner city and suburb but also between different parts of inner city areas.
Impact on socio-demographic patterns and local population profiles
The three basic dimensions of migration, together with the major changes in national population structure and composition outlined in the earlier section of this chapter, have produced some distinctive patterns in Britain's population geography.
In recent years, relatively few places have recorded growth rates around the national average.
Most have either grown much more  rapidly, or they have declined significantly.
In terms of their population characteristics, few places can be regarded as microcosms of the nation as a whole.
Because of the selective nature of migration, areas that have been growing rapidly tend to have very different population profiles from those that have been declining, the latter generally having below-average representations of young families, owner-occupiers and high-income professionals.
The larger cities, as well as bearing the hallmarks of population decline, also contain above-average shares of young single adults, one parent families and ethnic minorities.
The destinations of the net migration flows, particularly at the intermediate scale of the urban-rural shift, comprise a number of relatively distinctive categories according to the nature of their growth.
These include retirement areas, over spill towns, industrial centres, commuting dormitories and traditional market centres.
This section highlights some of the principal types of variation between places that impinge on their economic performance and social problems.
Social polarization
Recent trends have tended to produce greater social divisions between places.
The socially selective nature of migration, which the previous section identified at all three scales, has worked alongside differences in the indigenous rates of upward social mobility to produce impressive contrasts in social status and other indicators of material well-being between North and South, between rural and urban sub-regions, and between suburbs and inner cities.
At the level of the 280 Local Labour Market Areas, the proportion of economically active or retired people in the higher socioeconomic groups — the most sophisticated measure of social status available from the 1981 Census — displays an immense range between 43.1 per cent for St Albans and 12.5 per cent for West Bromwich (Table 4.7A).
Similarly, the proportion of households with two or more cars in High Wycombe in 1981 was five times as large as for Mexborough in South Yorkshire (Table 4.7B).
The county-level map of social class composition (Figure 4.6A) reveals the expected patterns of greatest prosperity in the shire counties of southeastern England and greatest relative deprivation in the more industrial areas of the rest of the country.
Educational achievement and health record
These social patterns are quite closely correlated with spatial variations in education and health.
The South East is the leading region in terms of the educational qualifications of its work force and the level of school attainment.
At the 1981 Census 16.3 per cent of its employed men had successfully completed higher education, with the next highest region — the South West managing only 13.3 per cent and the Northern Region lowest at 11.5 per cent.
Similarly, the proportion of school-leavers in 1985–86 who had obtained at least one ‘A’ Level stood at 23.5 per cent for the South East compared with barely 16 per cent for the Northern Region.
In recent years considerable attention has been given to the ‘health divide’ in Britain (Black Report, 1980; White head, 1987).
Again this has a clear  geographical expression at the broad regional level.
The Northern Region, Scotland and Northern Ireland recorded the highest age-adjusted mortality rates in 1986, at over 13.0 per thousand, while the lowest at under 11.0 were found in East Anglia, the South West and the South East.
The spatial differentials are, however, most marked at the local scales which pick out residential clusters with distinctive social mixes.
For instance, major variations in health were found within the Northern Region by Townsend et al.
(1988), who identified close links between health standards and levels of material prosperity.
In a detailed study of premature mortality in North Tyne side, Phillimore (1989) has shown that people aged under 65 in the two worst-off wards are subject to mortality rates around 50 per cent higher than the national average, while in the two wards at the other extreme the rates are 30 per cent below average.
These variations in health and educational attainment are of long standing and appear to have defied attempts made under the Welfare State to obtain greater equality in access to services.
They were certainly very clear twenty years ago according to the regional and county data analysed by Coates and Rawstron (1971).
Moreover, they cannot be accounted for merely by reference to spatial differences in social composition.
For instance, Fox and Goldblatt (1982) have noted that a clear North-South contrast in mortality rates remained even after standardizing for the socio-economic character of areas.
Similarly, as observed by Bradford and Burdett (1989), larger numbers of children in southern England go through the private education system    than would be expected from the social class patterns there.
With the widening of the income range between social groups since the late 1970s and the government's emphasis on restricting public spending and encouraging privatization, there are signs that these geographical differences have widened over the past decade (see Bradford and Burdett (1989) and Curtis and Mohan (1989) for reviews).
Table 4.7 Highest and lowest Local Labour Market Areas for two social indicators, 1981
Non-white population
As mentioned earlier in the chapter, the rapid growth of the ethnic minority populations is one of the major features of Britain's demographic development over the past three decades.
It is also an extremely distinctive feature in terms of its high level of geographical polarization.
It is not easy to measure at local scale because the 1981 Census did not contain an ethnicity question, but an impression can be gained from birth-place data in the Census.
In 1981, six of the 280 LLMAs accounted for over half of the people in Britain that had been born in the New Commonwealth or Pakistan (NCWP).
London and Leicester had almost three times the national average share, while Bradford, Slough, Birmingham and Smethwick had over twice the average (Champion et al .,
1987).
Using the broader measure of the proportion of the population living in a household headed by a NCWP-born person, the South East headed the regional averages in 1981, closely followed by the West Midlands region, but again the main contrasts are more local in nature.
The proportion averaged one in five for Inner London as a whole, but at borough level ranged from almost 30 per cent in Haringey to under 10 per cent for Kensington and Chelsea and was in fact highest for an outer borough — Brent — at 33.5 per cent.
Outside London there was only a handful of districts with over 10 per cent of their population living in households with a NCWP-born head Luton and Slough in the South East, Birmingham, Sand well and Wolverhampton in the West Midlands, Blackburn in Lancashire, and the City of Leicester, being the highest at 21.7 per cent in 1981.
These stand out as islands within a sea of districts where the proportion is generally below 3 per cent(OPCS, 1984a).
This high degree of concentration also manifests itself at the most localized scales.
This is shown, for instance, by a survey of Leicester, where each individual ethnic and cultural group tends to possess its own distinctive residential territory (Leicester CC, 1983).
These patterns represent the outcome of the recent history of NCWP immigration, the lowly status of those involved and the direct or indirect effects of racial discrimination.
Most of the original immigrants were recruited during the period of labour shortages in the 1950s and 1960s for particular types of jobs including the textile industry and more menial tasks in the service sector.
Their local distribution was largely determined by the availability of low-cost housing.
The original patterns have been reinforced by the subsequent arrival of relations and others from the same parts of the world, as well as by their high birth rate-the result of relatively high fertility and young average age.
The degree of dispersion away from these concentrations has been limited by the same forces that have prevented low-income people in general from moving into suburban environments, combined with  a desire for being amongst their own people in an essentially alien culture.
As such, the ethnic minorities represent a major demographic strength for parts of urban Britain, though at the same time their presence may have hastened the exodus of better-off whites and certainly gives rise to a very difficult set of policy issues (Chapter 8).
Age structure
Migration processes have also given rise to distinctive age patterns around Britain, though the absolute scale of differences between places is relatively small.
The principal contrast across the country is between the younger populations of the urban heartland areas and the older populations of the coastal and rural rims (Figure 4.6B).
This pattern reflects both the tendency for school-leavers to leave the more rural and remote parts of the country and the fact that many people at or near retirement age see advantages in moving away from the more expensive and congested metropolitan regions.
The counties with the highest proportions of 25–44 year olds form a compact block around the northern and western edges of the South East region.
This results chiefly from age-selective migration from London, but also bears witness to the North-South movement of labour.
It contrasts with the above-average representation of older-working-age people in much of northern England.
At the level of individual LLMAs there are some very marked differences in age structure.
For instance, in 1981 almost 36 per cent of Clacton's population were of pensionable age, over twice the national average of 17.5 per cent , and people of older working age — either those taking early retirement or moving in anticipation of retirement after their children had grown up — are also strongly represented here and in similar resorts like Eastbourne, Worthing, Hastings, Llandudno and Torquay.
At the other extreme, the proportion of elderly was smallest in LLMAs which have New or Expanded Towns at their core, such as Tamworth, Harlow, Basil don, Red ditch and Milton Keynes, all with less than 12.0 per cent in pensionable age groups in 1981 (Champion et al .,
1987).
These local imbalances in age composition raise important policy issues.
Mention has already been made of the significance of national trends in age structure, but it can be seen that these effects can be substantially reinforced at the regional and local level through migration.
Moreover, once imbalances have been created, they tend to work their way through the higher age groups in situ .
Thus the traditional retirement resorts have already experienced a large increase in the number of very elderly people who place extra demands on health and residential care facilities, to the extent that in places like Worthing, Hastings, Eastbourne and Clacton around one in eight people were aged 75 or over in 1981.
The earlier New Towns are particularly prone to this ageing process, given that many of them were built up extremely quickly with young married couples in rented accommodation (Champion et al .,
1977).
Places like Welwyn Garden City and Crawley have been experiencing the relentless movement of these original cohorts of migrants up the ‘age pyramid’.
In 1981 Welwyn possessed the largest proportion of older working people out of all the LLMAs in Britain, while  Stevenage, Thetford and Bracknell headed the list of LLMAs with the greatest percentage increases in elderly numbers over the previous decade (Champion et al .,
1987).
Change in labour supply
One of the most remarkable aspects of population change in recent years has been the growth and redistribution of the labour force.
This has resulted partly from the increased participation of married women and the ‘coming of age’ of the main post-war baby boom, but has of course been influenced greatly at more local level by migration.
Not surprisingly, the most rapid increase in economically active persons between 1971 and 1981 was registered by the New and Expanded Towns, with Milton Keynes LLMA experiencing a massive 64 per cent growth in labour supply over the decade.
By contrast, West Bromwich, Manchester, London and Liverpool all sustained losses amounting to over 10 per cent of their work force.
Labour supply patterns have, however, become more complicated in the 1980s and are inevitably emerging as a key issue of the 1990s.
On the one hand, the economic recession of the early 1980s coincided with the peaking of school-leaving rates resulting from the baby boom.
This led not only to the aggravation of unemployment problems but also to the lowering of labour force participation rates through earlier retirement and fewer married women returning to work after child-rearing — a phenomenon which, not surprisingly, was particularly marked in northern cities and industrial towns.
On the other, the national ‘demographic time bomb’ of much smaller numbers of school-leavers in the 1990s is likely to have its most severe impact on those places which experience rapid-migration of younger families during the 1950s and 1960s, namely the older New Towns and the more traditional commuting zones and most notably those in the Home Counties/ Outer Metropolitan Area of South East England.
We give more detailed treatment to these developments in Chapter 7.
Conclusion
The 1970s and 1980s have constituted a period of major transformation in Britain's demographic patterns, notwithstanding the almost stationary size of the national population itself.
Its overall composition has been changing substantially towards older average age, smaller household size, greater labour force participation, and generally greater prosperity.
Two of the most distinctive features of post-1950 Britain — the baby boom and New Commonwealth immigration — have become deeply embedded in the national population profile and will produce further upheavals within the foreseeable future.
In combination, these changes have considerably altered the character of most places in Britain.
Even more important in the context of this book, however, have been the changes wrought by migration.
Population redistribution over the past quarter of a century has been characterized by unprecedentedly large inter-urban flows in contrast to the dominance of relatively local rural-urban and suburban moves in previous decades.
Against the background of  almost zero national population growth in the 1970s and 1980s, this has produced a mosaic of both absolute growth and absolute decline across Britain with relatively few places maintaining a static population size.
A large number of places, particularly the smaller cities and towns of southern England, have been on the receiving end of all three major migration streams, while at the other extreme the large cities, particularly those in northern England and Scotland (the ‘urban north’), have acted as the main reservoir from which these flows have been drawn.
As a result of different levels of personal mobility, the former types of place have tended to attract people who are younger, better qualified, more enterprising and more wealthy and have thus gained at the expense of the larger cities and less dynamic industrial areas, causing the latter a double blow in terms of both quantity and quality.
The resulting degree of demographic and socio-economic polarization at regional, sub-regional and local scales is the central feature of the many changes which have affected the geography of the UK in the second half of the twentieth century.
The remaining chapters in this part of the book examine the economic forces which have contributed to these trends and the impact which population change has in its turn had on the spatial organization of economic activity.
The ‘explosion’ of place differentiation in Britain also provides the rationale for the more locally focused treatments in Part III, which are arranged in term of types of places rather than on the basis of the standard regional units used conventionally for more detailed accounts of the geography of Britain.
Further reading
The most useful and comprehensive account of the background to recent population developments is provided by Joshi (1989).
This contains chapters on fertility, the family, divorce, old age, education, housing, internal migration and ethnic minorities, as well as a chapter stressing the significance and implications of population change for planning and policy-making.
The latest statistics on population change and its components can be obtained from the journal Population Trends (OPCS); this also includes annual reviews of trends in migration, both international and internal.
A longer-term perspective on developments is available in the OPCS publications series DR, the latest available at the time of writing being Demographic Review 1984.
Background information on the spatial aspects of population change and related trends in demographic and social structure is provided by Compton (1982); Lawton (1982); and Champion (1983).
Population trends since 1971 for different types of places are outlined by Britton (1986), while an account of vital trends is provided by Armitage (1987).
The main features of recent migration at regional and metropolitan scales are described by Stillwell and Boden (1986).
Several studies focus primarily on the urban-rural shift in population distribution, including Hamnett and Randolph (1983a); Robert and Randolph (1983); and Champion (1987b).
The nature of counterurbanization is examined by Champion (1989c), while one example of the reduction in big-city population losses in the 1980s is provided by Champion and Congdon (1988).
The socially selective nature of population changes and the problems which this causes are explored by Champion (1989a).
Regional variations in health and education are detailed by Curtis and Mohan (1989) and Bradford and Burdett (1989).
The  policy implications of trends relating to health and education are explored in chapters by Whitelegg (1986) and Briault (1986).
Regional and local variations in socio-economic characteristics, labour supply, age structure and ethnic composition, particularly relating to 1981 and the changes over the previous decade, are described by Champion et al .
(1987).
Differentials in wealth and opportunity are examined by class, gender, race and geographical location by Hudson and Williams (1989).
Trends in age structure across Britain are described by Warnes and Law (1984).
An introduction to the geography of race is provided by Peach (1982).
A fascinating case study of ethnic patterns is available in a report by Leicester City Council (1983).
De-industrialization
The British map of industrial employment has changed more fundamentally and dramatically than that of population.
The result of this discordance is the map of continuing unemployment, only gradually moderated by net migration from industrial areas (Chapter 4).
More manufacturing jobs have been lost in the UK than in any other European country.
The net loss of 2.8 million from 1971 to 1989 occurred above all through the decline of the large factory.
This involves a very broad range of industries, including mass production factories, older, heavier industries and manufacture by the public sector, the private sector and foreign firms; it is accompanied by job losses in supporting service industries such as docks and railways, and, with renewed vigour in the period after 1985, by coal mining.
Chapter 3 (p. 29) used ‘de-industrialization’ as a simple description of manufacturing's declining share of total employment.
In this chapter, we consider the incidence of falling employment in all sectors, but manufacturing and mining are the worst affected.
In Chapter 6 we shall evaluate increase.
Which people, which industries and which places are the losers from industrial change?
Chapter 3 showed a general picture of a society moving away from the basis of male manual work.
A decline in the national importance of industry must also, however, induce relative decline in industrial regions.
Many British readers will not feel such change directly if they are students from a more prosperous area (as is likely since higher education places are filled largely from non-manual social groups).
However, the co-existence of unemployment and labour shortage in different places is a cost to the whole society.
The country needs professional workers who can work on both sides of the ‘North-South divide’.
In political life there is a fierce interest in the poverty, unemployment and poor housing that are a legacy of Britain's industrial past.
Why did the world's first industrial country (Chapter 2) fall prey to such rapid industrial and geographical change in the 1970s and 1980s?
In Chapter 2 we outlined the UK's fading international competitiveness.
The singular British anomaly of failure to expand employment over the longer term in the manufacture of new information technology products was, in the view of the geographers Hall and Preston (1988, 220–1), ‘a consequence of the deteriorating competitive position of British firms, associated with poor innovative performance’.
However, in a more general analysis, Row thorn (1986, 26) argued that Britain was ahead of other countries in the post-war era in maturing into a post-industrial economy, thus the decline of industrial  employment was earlier and deeper.
Secondly, he concluded, huge improvements in non-manufacturing trade meant that the country no longer needed a large surplus on manufactured goods.
‘Between them these two factors — maturity and trade specialization — account for virtually all the decline of manufacturing employment, 1955–81.
Poor industrial performance is of only minor importance in explaining this decline’(Row thorn, 1986, 26).
We must ask whether performance is less important than general structural change in individual areas as well.
The changes of the 1980s were more far-reaching than those of the 1930s.
In the earlier decade, heavy unemployment in the peripheral regions was also gradually overtaken by consistent national growth.
Employment expanded about 1 per cent per annum faster in the South than the North.
The extra growth was in new places and industries, yet much was still generated in manufacturing employment.
In the 1980s there were not only changes in product demand and in imports and exports, but large-scale changes in investment and in the occupational structure.
In the 1930s, the growth of manufacturing was dramatized by the mass production methods already pioneered by Henry Ford in his US car factories.
In the 1980s, British industry is seen to have evolved away from the self-contained mass production factory toward ‘flexible production’, making shorter runs for particular customers and supported by greater sub-contracting of supplies and services.
The era of ‘Fordism’ is allegedly being replaced by a ‘regime’of ‘flexible accumulation’(Murray, 1988; Scott, 1988).
This chapter certainly finds evidence for the first part of the process, a diminution in importance of the traditional large factory, not least in TNCs with many plants.
New and old questions follow.
What does this mean for the traditional large factory town ?
Why is there a migration of industry from urban areas towards relatively rural ones?
Does any of the ‘blame’ fall on the industrial areas and their people and institutions, or does it lie in historical factors and the national and international organization of industry?
Do firms close their branch plants before their headquarters?
Are foreign TNCs responsible for proportionately more redundancies and closures in Britain than are domestically-owned firms?
Did the Conservative government's policies of 1979–80 accelerate job losses, and were their reductions of public-sector employment a significant contribution to the job losses of the 1980s?
Does the pattern of job loss leave any support for a return to past ‘regional policies’, in which government steered new investment to areas experiencing higher unemployment?
Is there any policy scope for local economic initiatives or for devolution of power to Scotland, Wales and the English regions?
Whatever the level of national economic success, certain areas will remain disadvantaged.
What is at stake is whether conurbations like Merseyside and Tyne side face a future as grim as the present Belfast.
Elements of accelerated de-industrialization
The slowing down in the world industrial economy in the 1970s changed the whole environment in which many firms worked.
Reduced demand and increased competition forced down profit levels, acting as an extra spur to reduce costs through reorganizing factories and introducing new  technologies.
Large companies took over others and thus became more ‘transnational’ in operation.
This ‘centralization and internationalization of capital’ knew no political boundaries, and the UK in particular was prone to a loss of investment overseas and increased imports (Chapter 2).
Figure 5.1 Output of the UK economy, 1974–88, including separate index for manufacturing industries (1975 = 100).
Source: Employment Gazette (various), Table 1.8.
The outstanding feature of the UK economy in the 1970s and 1980s was the extraordinary setbacks met by the manufacturing sector.
The overall output of the economy, including services, grew at moderate rates in most years of the 1970s (not 1974 to 1975 or 1979 to 1980), before resuming accelerating rates of growth from 1981 until mid 1989 .
By contrast, the manufacturing sector suffered much deeper and more sustained losses of output (Figure 5.1).
Indeed the 1974 level of output stood as a record until 1988!
From 1974 to 1975 output fell by 12 per cent, followed by moderate recovery, but from 1979 to 1981 there was a reduction of no less than 17 per cent .
These were ‘asymmetrical cyclical troughs’ because recovery of output was spread over a much longer period than its initial loss, and because many factories closed for good in the second recession.
International increases in oil prices preceded both recessions, but in Britain the second was advanced and deepened by government policy.
There must be doubt as to whether the Government fully intended the severity of the monetary squeeze and the  massive rise in the real exchange rate that impinged on the economy in those years, but it is not possible to overstate the economic shock that hit industry in 1979–1981.
Some argued that the shock made industry return in the end to competitiveness, but other economists argued that subsequent growth owed more to spending North Sea oil profits on a consumer boom.
The late 1970s' level of manufacturing investment stood as a record until 1987.
The withdrawal of investment from UK manufacturing (Table 5.1) was especially marked by comparison with other sectors in the UK and with UK investment in manufacturing overseas.
Table 5.1 shows that the manufacturing sector led fixed investment in 1978, but that ‘financial and business services’ overtook it during the recession (and had doubled in amount by 1986).
By contrast a fall in investment in ‘oil and gas’, principally in the North Sea, was associated with depleting reserves.
Table 5.1 Key indicators of economic change in the UK economy, 1978–88
Table 5.2 Number of manufacturing establishments recorded in the United Kingdom, 1 97 1–88
This pattern included a reduction in the number of manufacturing establishments employing ten or more people; it is here that we can begin to visualize the effects of de-industrialization on the ground.
Table 5.2 shows  that over the period 1971 to 1988 the number employing 1,000 or more workers fell by more than half to leave less than 500 such factories in the whole country.
This strongly supports one of the concepts of ‘the end of Fordism’, the reduced importance of the mass-production factory.
What is more, the table is remarkable in revealing a progressively better record for successively smaller sizes of factory (although medium-sized factories ceased to fall in number in the mid 1980s, and all figures are influenced by contracting units moving from a larger to a smaller category).
Falling industrial employment could in the past be better characterized by reference to product sectors such as cotton, 1945–61, or coal mining, which lost 317,000 jobs from 1961 to 1971.
The greatest sources of all job losses from 1971 to 1978 lay in the manufacture of textiles, mechanical engineering and metals, but already manufacturing decline was generalized, common to many products and areas.
Thus the effect of different inherited structures, that is of ‘industrial structure’, in differentiating the employment trends of different areas became weakened (Fothergill and Gudgin, 1982, 56).
The period of most rapid decline, 1978–81, was notable for some disproportionate job losses, in metals, vehicles and textiles (Townsend, 1983), and in public administration.
However, if we take eleven years to the date of writing (1978–89 at Table 5.3), we find that, while job losses were concentrated in manufacturing, they were again widely spread within it.
Four metal-using and manufacturing industries are prominent at the head of the list, with losses of more than 200,000 jobs each.
In the public sector, the coal industry and the whole sphere of public administration and defence both appear.
We shall deal separately later with public service job losses, as a continuing feature of the 1980s, but the data justify us in paying prime attention to manufacturing.
Table 5.3 Leading ‘classes’ of economic activity with declining employment, Great Britain, 1978–89 (June)
The loss of 28.7 per cent(2.05 million) from Great Britain's factory jobs in 11 years, 1978–89, occurred through several processes.
Formal redundancy was concentrated in the manufacturing sector; there were no less than 2,071,600 cases of confirmed redundancies in manufacturing (Townsend, 1983), out of 2,974,700 in the whole economy, 1978–87.
However, some workers were made redundant several times over, even though redundancy is generally a last resort; indeed it is only one part of the complex process of job turnover .
Martin (1984) and Meager (1984) both pointed out that, when considered as a proportion of gross as opposed to net job loss, redundancy was not the dominant process.
Figure 5.2 enables us to separate recruitment and ‘discharges’ in manufacturing.
What we find over 15 years after the 1974–75 recession was much less turnover in the factory work force in the context of surrounding unemployment.
The main impact of the 1979–80 recession was felt in a sharp drop in recruitment, which then grew slowly to match discharges only in 1987–88.
Figure 5.2 The process of manufacturing employment change, Great Britain, 1973–88.
Source: Employment Gazette 97, December 1989, Table 1.6.
Why did it take so long for manufacturing employment to level out?
If redundancy was the leading form of change to 1981, it was gains in productivity that made the greatest inroads from then.
Many writers consider that the closure by 1981 of older large plants itself artificially improved the overall average of output per worker.
In studying the period 1968–77, Davies and Caves (1987) had argued that it was the conjunction of British managerial weakness and labour organization in large plants which led to the traditional national problem of low productivity.
Metcalf (1988) concludes that levels of unionization, which were higher in large plants, did affect productivity.
Unionized workplaces were in 1980–84 actually more likely to suffer job losses (after standardizing by product sector) than non-unionized plants, which were more likely to enjoy job gains.
These data are in line with the general concept of a trend to more ‘flexible production’; they link the reduction in large plants, presented earlier, with the increase achieved in manufacturing output per person employed of 50 per cent, 1981–89.
The factory labour force fell by 16.6 per cent in the same period after the main recession, because the growth of productivity outstripped that of output, which was only 29.5 per cent.
Taking the whole period 1978–89 (Table 5.3), manufacturing employment was responsible for the overall decline of male employment.
In the opposite direction, the total working population increased for demographic reasons (Chapter 4), and female employment and activity rates expanded, chiefly in part-time work in the service sector.
The net result was of course the high levels of unemployment of much of the 1980s.
Unemployment then was chiefly due to de-industrialization, and this was apparent in the precise timing and location of its rise in the early 1980s.
It carries many accompanying social and medical problems and many possible definitions (Farmer, 1985).
Nearly 40 per cent of the unemployed had been claiming benefit for at least 52 weeks in mid 1989, although ‘turnover’ among shorter duration claimants was by then fairly rapid.
It would be wrong to suggest that the long-term male unemployed of 1989 were the same people as those made redundant from factories in earlier years, but in geography the correlation is very close.
Geographical dimensions of de-industrialization
North-South drift
The ‘North-South divide’ in Britain's economic patterns was increasingly recognized in the 1980s (Lewis and Townsend, 1989).
We shall approach the far-reaching changes of the recent record at a number of levels, from a division of Britain into two units (‘North' and ‘South’) down to the examples of individual factories.
Theorists may argue that real factories represent a crucial level of explanation and that one cannot ‘read off’ local events from international and national trends.
Nonetheless, the changes in employment by product sectors which we have reported at Table 5.3, that is, changes in national ‘industrial structure’, will go a long way to explain the concentration of de-industrialization in regions of the ‘North’, with all its effects on population (Chapter 4).
The focus of the inter-war depression in Scotland, the Northern Region and Wales is universally attributed to specialization in a narrow band of declining industries, and these areas were identified as the principal target of regional policy for the subsequent decades.
The early 1970s were one period of ‘policy success’ in which the gap between ‘North’and ‘South’in employment change was almost closed (see measures for 1971–78 at Table 5.4).
Most of the difference between North and South in periods between 1971 and 1984 (Table 5.4) could still be predicted from the national industrial composition of changes in employment.
Data in brackets indicate the values of change that would be ‘expected’ if employment in all individual manufacturing industries were to undergo the same changes as in Great Britain as a whole.
Thus, referring back to the period 1971–78, that method predicted a    difference of only 2.2 percentage points in the rate of change of North and South, and the gap was in reality almost closed by a ‘differential shift’(the difference between recorded and expected)in favour of the North .
This was due to the coincidence of the growth of ‘regional policy factories’ in, for instance, the Northern Region and Wales with a heavy run-down in London factories (sometimes due to property development).
The gap was re-opened with a vengeance by events after 1978, when ‘the North-South divide’ entered a period of widening on most economic and political measures.
In 1979–83 manufacturing output declined in all regions, varying from -3.0 per cent in East Anglia to -19.3 per cent in the North West, -20.0 per cent in Wales and — 23.3 per cent in the West Midlands.
These three regions of the North were also the ones most hit by redundancies, but job loss in all regions of the North was close to its average of -20.0 per cent from 1978 to 1981, compared with -11.3 per cent in the South.
Industrial structure can account for two-thirds of this gap, 5.5 out of 8.7 per cent, because of the North's bias towards iron and steel, motor vehicles and textiles.
However, there were additional ‘differential shifts’, further differences in performance, which were most marked in Scotland and the North West, and which remain for discussion.
The aftermath of recession in 1981 to 1984 was felt most in the North, and differences in industrial structure left all its constituent regions likely to show heavier decline (in data in brackets) than any of those of the South.
In the event, all regions of the North also experienced negative ‘differential shifts’ except Wales and the West Midlands in 1981 to 1984, and all regions of the South enjoyed positive ‘differential shifts’except Greater London.
All these differences between North and South were in turn further amplified by the greater proportionate dependence of the overall employment structure of the North on manufacturing.
Not only did the North lose 1.3 million factory jobs in eleven years (31.6 per cent of employment in manufacturing and 63 per cent more than the number lost in the South) but, as a result, the growth of other sectors and female employment was slower than in the South.
In 1989, 3 per cent more of the working population of the North were unemployed than in 1978.
In the second half of the 1980s, however, the North recovered a small part of the share of manufacturing employment which it had previously lost to the South.
In direct contradiction of the predicted values of Table.
5.4 (in brackets) for the years 1984 to 1987, the North's factory jobs declined at a lesser rate than in the South.
This difference continued in 1987 to 1989 as one between an estimated modest increase in employment, of 1.4 per cent, in the North, and a small continuing decline in the South.
This favourable trend was to be attributed on the one hand to efforts at ‘re-industrialization’, for instance of steel closure areas in the Northern Region and Wales, and on the other to a partial reversion to the pattern of 1971–78, when labour shortage in Greater London created some of the worst trends in manufacturing employment.
Urban-rural shift
A fall in manufacturing employment in the most populated urban regions (as mentioned above) was a tell-tale sign of the more systematic ‘urban-rural shift’ of the 1960s and 1970s.
Fothergill and Gudgin (1979) pointed to the manufacturing employment growth of the ‘smallest’ regions, such as East Anglia, as evidence of the displacement of growth from urban to rural areas.
The earlier return of growth in these regions in the 1980s signalled a resumption of the urban-rural shift which we have already seen in population trends (Chapter 4).
It is not clear precisely what causes this preference for rural areas.
However, it is generally agreed that industrial structure plays no general part in the urban-rural shift.
Economists such as Cameron (1980b) suggest a continuing ‘fall in demand for urban agglomeration economies’.
Many writers suggest that cities have become high-cost locations for industry, but the evidence of an increasing number of studies is contradictory.
Fothergill et al .
(1986) sustained a more basic view, that physical space is a constraining factor in conurbations; if firms have limited land for horizontal extensions, then, as more machinery brings a steady expansion of space needed per employee, they must either employ fewer workers, or move out.
This ‘physical’ view is comparable to the effects of declining average household size on the total population of a built-up urban area with a fixed number of dwellings (Chapter 4).
At any rate, the effect of the urban-rural shift, 1960–78, was to produce a remarkable gradation in manufacturing employment change across the range of areas from London to the most rural locations.
This consistent urban-rural gradient was lost in the period 1978–81.
Rural areas did experience employment decline.
Nonetheless, provincial ‘conurbations’, all in the North, suffered appreciably more than other types of area in both absolute and proportionate terms; the effect was devastating in view of their inherited history of decline and levels of unemployment.
For example, the West Midlands metropolitan area lost 23.2 per cent (151,100) of its factory jobs in this period, primarily under the impact of international competition on its motor vehicle industry (Flynn and Taylor, 1986a, 1986b; Spencer et al., 1986).
The Rover Group alone (then British Leyland) announced 22,000 job losses, and many of the other large cases of redundancy (Townsend, 1983, 122) were among national and local suppliers of motor cylinders, castings, tyres and other components.
The Strathclyde area, with half of Scotland's economy, lost 26.6 per cent(88,100) of its manufacturing jobs in a wide range of metal industries (Townsend, 1983), comprising both the (then) nationalized steel and shipbuilding industries and a number of large foreign-owned plants making vehicles, computers and washing machines.
Losses of these types continued through most of the 1980s.
From 1978 to 1981 the heaviest rates of manufacturing job loss were found in two types of area in the North: metropolitan areas and steel-making counties (Figure 5.3A).
The worst rates of loss were in the Welsh steel making counties of West Glamorgan (-31.4 per cent) and Clwyd (-27.7 per cent ), followed by Strathclyde (26.6 per cent ), Merseyside (-24.2 per cent ) and Durham (-23.8 per cent ).
These losses all exceed what would be ‘expected’ from the areas' detailed industrial structure (which would have forecast the greatest rates of decline in Gwent, West Glamorgan and South Yorkshire), and the balances can be mapped as ‘differential shifts’(Figure 5.3B).
On this basis, the worst ‘performances’ relative to‘expected’values were those of Strathclyde, Merseyside and West Glamorgan: the best were those of more rural areas, Powys (Chapter 11), Cambridgeshire, and Dumfries and Galloway.
All counties of Great Britain (apart from Orkney) showed manufacturing decline in this period.
The best industrial record, in the shape of low rates of decline, was achieved in scattered rural areas which happened to escape closures and represented survivals from the earlier, more general drift to the countryside.
In 1981–87, there was a continuing process of national job loss (Figure 5.4A; this period of decline is little known because of delays in the availability of the data that are considered here).
Even after the main recession, heavy national declines occurred in mechanical engineering, motor vehicles and metals.
We may extend our analysis of urban-rural shift to these years, 1981–87, by reference to Table 5.5, which disaggregates the South and North of Great Britain further into types of districts, a breakdown that is more fully explained in Chapter 7 and utilized in Chapters 8 to 11.
Manufacturing employment decline reached the level of 29.7 per cent in Greater London, from 1981 to 1987, and was prevalent throughout the cities and other districts of metropolitan counties.
At the other extreme, the ‘remoter, mainly rural’ districts and the ‘mixed’urban-rural districts showed positive differential shifts in employment levels.
The strong urban-rural gradient in the performance of factory employment is also evident at Figure 5.4.
The worst and most significant job loss, in the overall period 1981 to 1987, was met in Cleveland (32.9 per cent; see Chapter 10), and this area demonstrates one of the severest proportionate ‘differential shifts’ among those mapped at Figure 5.4B, along with Greater London and Merseyside.
Reductions in manufacturing employment were even more dramatic at the LLMA level, 1971–87 (Table 5.6), and were compounded by the disproportionate dependence on manufacturing of many of Britain's provincial cities, especially Birmingham and Sheffield.
On the other hand, the many other activities of London tended to offset the impact of a manufacturing recession.
In general, the impact on overall unemployment tended to bear most heavily on the most peripheral conurbations (Merseyside, Tyne side and Clyde side).
The physical and social legacies of a heavy period of de-industrialization were massive, although they varied a little between areas (Chapter 11).
Yet there appears to be no eventual change in the relationship between ‘North South’ and ‘urban-rural’dimensions.
Both remained important, creating the worst conditions at their intersection, in the conurbations of the North.
Job loss in multi-plant firms
The geographical patterns of de-industrialization allow more understanding if we study the collective geographical behaviour of leading decision-takers.
To many geographers the general statistical tendencies revealed above do       not explain anything, and the use of industrial structure in this context is seen only as a first step in the analysis of spatial change.
A large proportion of closure and redundancy decisions are made by relatively few employers.
In the critical period, 1976–81, Table 5.7 shows that no less than 264,200 job losses were reported by only 20 transnational corporations (TNCs) and nationalized industries.
Of course, these occurred in all parts of the country and include some apparently random choice of plants for closure.
It might be possible, however, by sampling these and other ‘corporations’, to discover elements of spatial regularity, and a rationale, in the choice of locations for closures and reductions.
In particular, of course , we would be interested in explanation of the differential shifts of Figures 5.3 and 5.4 through closures, etc., working against the North and urban areas, particularly against problem conurbations of the urban North (e.g. Strathclyde, Merseyside, West Glamorgan).
Table 5.5 Manufacturing employment change, South and North, 1981–87, by district type (percentage change)
Table 5.6 Local Labour Market Areas with largest absolute decreases in manufacturing employment, 1971–81 and 1981–87
Table 5.7 The leading 20 job losers in the UK: losses reported at known locations, October 1976 — September 1981
Why should a multi-plant corporation close one plant rather than another?
The immediate answer might well be that one is making a financial profit and the other a loss.
There is a recognized question in the USA as to Why Corporations Close Profitable Plants?
(Bluestone and Harrison, 1980).
The answer is that greater corporate profits may be made by releasing assets by sale of machinery, land and buildings, and by investing them in another sector (e.g. offices), or by building or re-equipping another, substitute factory elsewhere.
The last strategy is known as ‘investment and technical change’ in Massey and Meegan's Anatomy of Job Loss (1982), in distinction from strategies of ‘intensification’(improvement of productivity) and ‘rationalization’(selective reductions) at existing sites.
Watts and Stafford (1986) refer to the overall motivation of seeking higher profits elsewhere as ‘opportunistic redeployment’, in contrast to ‘forced redeployment’ through overall financial losses.
The imperative of financial difficulty, forcing corporations to cut their losses through closing capacity, was the dominant mode of UK job losses in the early 1980s.
Even the strongest economic determinists, however, admit the existence of and varying scope for choice in many varied mixtures of strategies (this is the main content of Massey and Meegan, 1982).
The UK shows some examples of ‘investment and technical change’, notably Times Newspapers' construction of an advanced new plant at Wapping, East London, and abandonment of their Fleet Street premises.
However, ‘selective rationalization’ was sufficiently widespread for Townsend and Peck (1985c) and Watts and Stafford (1986, 216) to draw up typologies of plants' locational and other characteristics that might affect the probabilities of closure.
Direct commercial influences are clearly involved where the corporation closes excess capacity in a particular product, or withdraws from that market entirely.
Technological influences may be important where the plant or machinery is old, or where new technology is unsuccessful.
Labour relations also influence closures; some examples can be found in which corporations close plants where relations are poor, or, we may infer, where little opposition is expected.
Organizational factors derive from the historical and sociological ties between different sites of a corporation.
Geographically, this may bring in the concept of relative location , for instance, the distance in travel time between the corporate headquarters and a branch factory.
North-South drift; job loss in multi-plant firms
Research has shown that closures tended to occur in the North (as above).
Job losses additional to ‘structural shifts’ occurred because of the relative status, and often age of product, of branch factories within their respective multi-plant firms, and only rarely because of their absolute location in Britain.
By the 1970s the large part of industrial capacity of peripheral regions was ‘externally controlled’ from other regions (principally London), both through company acquisitions and through the effects of regional policy in concentrating new investment in large ‘Fordist’plants in ‘assisted areas’.
A detailed study of the 515,700 job losses attributed in 1,468 Financial Times reports, 1977–81, to named corporations (Townsend and Peck, 1985b, 201) showed no less than 322,800 in then ‘assisted areas’, including 138,000 in Special Development Areas (SDAs).
Covering most of Strathclyde, Tyne and Wear, Durham, Cleveland, Merseyside, West and Mid Glamorgan, these SDAs sustained twice their share of national redundancies in these data.
This suggests that individual multi-plant firms closed their branch plants in peripheral regions before their respective headquarters, usually in the South.
In support of this view, more detailed evidence (Townsend and Peck, 1985b, 205) showed that a majority (12) of the leading 20 job-losing corporations allocated a greater proportion of their respective decisions for job losses to ‘assisted areas’ in 1977–79 than in 1980–81.
This change was particularly marked in the electrical engineering industry, involving closure of large branch plants typically employing semi-skilled workers, as in Plessey (see below), GEC, Hoover and Thorn-EMI.
Likewise, most closures by multi-plant firms in ‘assisted areas’ after 1977 were the first closures by the respective firms in this country and in that product heading.
(The same data sets do not support any alternative view that ‘multi-plant firms close their conurbation plants first’.)
The main finding then is to support the oft-cited hypothesis that ‘multi-plant firms close their branch plants first’.
Previous findings over this hypothesis had been contradictory.
However, the result is matched by US research (Howland, 1988), which covered closures in three national industries from 1975 to 1982.
The study found, as we have implied for the UK, that local economic conditions were not to blame , as they had little impact on plant closures.
By contrast, ‘the only variables to consistently predict the probability a plant will close is the plant's status as a branch, subsidiary, headquarters, or independent, and for independents, the firm's age.
The likelihood of a branch plant or subsidiary closing is much higher than that of an independent or headquarters’(Howland, 1988, 193).
There had already been indications that the established branches in ‘assisted areas’ were becoming obsolescent or employing fewer workers in the 1970s, and that new branches were vulnerable.
It can be calculated that at least 47,000 jobs in ‘regional policy factories’ were lost in 1977–81.
The US and UK evidence naturally then brings into question the continued use of regional policies in Europe, which characteristically bring branch plants to assisted areas.
However, at least 80 per cent of such jobs were not lost but were retained at least for another day, many in viable foreign TNCs, and it would not be logical to criticize the whole policy because of setbacks.
The deepest investigation of UK branch closures was prepared by Fothergill and Guy (1990).
They interviewed ex-managers and others associated with 118 closures by externally controlled manufacturing plants in Northern Ireland, Tyne side, Leicestershire and South Hampshire, 1980–86.
The reason for reducing capacity was attributed to long-term shifts in demand rather than recession-related factors.
Most frequently the group had several alternative plants to consider for closure rather than an obvious choice.
In three quarters of the job losses it was the role of the factory which was important rather than its operation or location.
It was both the product and the size of plant that were critical.
The implication of the study was that assisted areas are not of themselves ‘uneconomic places’; the rate of closure in assisted areas was higher simply because they had attracted investment in expanding products in the 1960s which were at the stage of losing markets twenty years later.
The study of individual multi-plant firms
Individual multi-plant firms interact with each other in their decisions, chiefly through competition but also through collusion in agreeing, for instance, to close competing plants (Peck and Townsend, 1986).
It is, however, feasible for the reader to study the geographical pattern of individual multi-plant firms in public libraries by use of directories and the index maintained since 1981 by the Financial Times .
Company brochures on Courtaulds pie, the leading private corporation for job losses with 23,200 at Table 5.7 (above), showed that while it had 300 textile and other plants spread across the UK in 1976, by 1981 this stock fell by 20 per cent in ‘assisted areas’ but only 5 per cent in non-assisted areas.
Studies of five individual multi-plant firms by Peck and Townsend (1984, 1987) showed how their reductions in employment were fundamentally related to changes in fairly specific market niches, but how the effect of any one factor in the future of a factory was usually contingent upon others.
In turn, the way in which different product lines were structured within divisions provided a key to the complex origins of job losses.
The way in which the TNC frames its international marketing strategy could also determine the way in which labour shedding occurred.
Plessey plc was the eighth most important corporation in Table 5.7, and continued to consolidate its activities through mergers in the 1980s before themselves falling prey to takeover activity in 1989.
The company first emerged in the Second World War, supplying electrical components for the RAF, and much of its advanced scientific work for the Ministry of Defence in ‘Electronic Systems’ remained (like that of very many Defence suppliers) in the South, co-ordinated from national headquarters in Ilford (Greater London).
Expansion and contraction in northern ‘assisted areas’ were, for market and technological reasons, the main features of change in this corporation.
The Liverpool factory employed 12,000 workers in the 1960s and was supported by new ‘overspill’ branches in the 1960s and 1970s in north-west and north-east England.
By 1977, however, national orders for electromechanical telephone exchange equipment were halved, the Liverpool work force was reduced to 5,000 and branches were closed in Sunderland (2,100 redundancies) and the North West.
In addition, international competition forced the company to sell Garrard Engineering to a Third World (Brazilian) firm which eventually transferred all production to the assisted area of Manaus, on the Amazon, with 4,000 job losses in Swindon between 1975 and 1982.
Shares in electronics companies were among the few attractive ones in the early 1980s, but by 1988 the National Economic Development Council was reporting that rationalization to meet foreign competition in this sector was overdue.
After totally re-equipping their Liverpool factory to make exchange equipment to a new electronic specification (‘System X’), Plessey were forced in October 1987 to establish a joint company with GEC.
This resulted in the elimination of duplication through the concentration of System X manufacture at Liverpool and Coventry, and 1,800 redundancies at Nottingham, Liverpool and three ex-GEC sites in the North (the Guardian , 7 May 1988), followed by a closure in County Durham.
In turn, however, there followed a long-running battle to acquire Plessey by GEC and the German firm Siemens.
The European Commission finally gave approval for the £2 billion bid to go ahead in August 1989, having required that part of Plessey's activities should continue under their own name.
This short case-study shows the extent to which a multi-plant set of factories is vulnerable to continuing change.
The collective role of foreign transnational corporations
So far, we have tended to support one general notion, the vulnerability of branch plants.
What about the notorious role of ‘the multinationals’ in the closure of branch plants in the UK?
We have already considered UK-owned TNCs but can now consider foreign-owned manufacturing plants.
As they are a clearly established data subset in the Census of Production, their collective performance can therefore be compared directly with that of UK manufacturing companies in the UK.
In the years of heaviest recession (measured in this case as 1977–81), the rate of loss of jobs in foreign-owned establishments was on average lower than that of all UK privately-owned establishments.
This applied in all regions except two, but still reflected higher rates of loss in the North than the South.
All employment size bands showed a more favourable performance for the foreign plants than their UK equivalents (in both cases, the smaller the plant the better the performance), except that factories with 1,000 or more workers shed proportionately more labour (Townsend and Peck, 1986).
At the sub-regional level losses were determined by the location of inter-war and post-war investment.
Therefore they were not major features of metropolitan counties, although Strathclyde suffered disproportionate losses from the closure of the vehicle plants of Peugeot-Citroen and Massey-Ferguson.
However, the difference in performance between foreign- and UK-owned plants disappears if we take a longer time-span.
By 1985 the total employment of foreign-owned plants had fallen to 677,100, dominated by ownership in the USA (416,300) and the EC (95,100); by mechanical engineering and vehicles (205,600); and by the South East (240,200).
In 1985–86 a further reduction in employment, to 621,000, was more rapid than in UK-owned plants and showed a net reduction in jobs of a full third compared with 1978,slightly more than UK industry.
In aggregate then, the run-down of employment in foreign-owned plants was steadier than in domestic industry, reflecting more the international average of changes in the economy and productivity.
Figure 5.5 demonstrates the regional distribution of employment reductions from 1978 to 1986, led by the South East, the North West and Scotland.
Where foreign-owned corporations created serious unemployment, it arose from their characteristic concentration of investment in large sites.
One of the most spectacular of such closures was that of the American-owned Caterpillar tractor factory in Strathclyde in 1987, which was announced with great suddenness from the Detroit headquarters simply because of the corporation's international overcapacity.
It was asked, how do we respond when what appears to most commentators to be a  profitable plant is closed on the basis of criteria that have nothing to do with the plant itself?
Figure 5.5 Employment change in foreign-owned factories, 1978–86, by region.
Source: Censuses of Production.
Private investment trends and the regions
External control, whether from abroad or from the South, was widely seen again in the later 1980s as a threat to the North.
One concern is simply the common withdrawal of headquarters functions from the North when a firm is taken over from the South (Watts, 1989).
The issue should be considered more widely than that, though Ash croft and Love (1988) showed that acquisition of Scottish firms tended on average to increase sales and have no effect on overall employment.
However, they thought that these aspects were outweighed by the loss of headquarters functions and their multipliers from Scotland, and concluded that UK mergers policy was blind to some of these issues.
In the UK it was repeatedly suggested, during the mounting tide of national mergers of the mid 1980s, that any benefits to corporations and shareholders were being exaggerated through creative accounting.
On the other hand, the European Commission could see many essential benefits  accruing from the possible birth of European TNCs in the battle against the penetration of Japanese imports and factories.
As regards outward investment, it is difficult to assess the effect on individual regions of the outflow from the UK's own TNCs.
There are very few reported cases of new investment in Third World countries directly replacing UK closures (as with Garrard Engineering, above).
In fact, there is general agreement that the country's leading corporations were increasing overseas employment in other industrial countries (Chapter 2, 25–6) at the same time as reducing it in Britain.
It is in the West Midlands (Gaff akin and Nickson, 1984) and the North West (Lloyd and Shutt, 1985) that researchers have correlated massive domestic job losses in leading regional corporations with net increases in respective overseas employment.
The public sector and privatization (including public services)
Even in private industry, some of the largest job losses of the 1980s have resulted from government policies, whether through economies in defence spending (with effects on British Aerospace and West land Helicopters), changes in orders for power stations (with effects on Northern Engineering Industries), or job losses before and after privatization of nationalized industries (as with the ‘break up’ of the British Leyland and British Shipbuilders groups).
Public-sector spending and employment were themselves heavily and deliberately constrained by the Conservative policy of ‘rolling back the frontiers of the state’, which to many trade-unionists was part of the same process as de-industrialization.
In 1978, 69.5 per cent of the one million jobs of the nationalized manufacturing and mining concerns were in the North, many in large, male-employing urban establishments.
However, the immense job losses inflicted on the British Steel Corporation in 1980 were followed by shipbuilding redundancies in naval dockyards on the south coast as well as in northern yards.
Policies to contain employment levels affected railway employment in all areas and extended far into the public service sector; here the greatest loss of Health Service and local authority work to private contractors and hospitals was in the South.
Part of the problem may be that the Labour government of 1974–79 was unduly protecting jobs in northern nationalized industries, but Labour was then criticized for halting the growth of public-sector services.
The Conservative approach to the employment levels of the public sector, and ultimately to the ‘privatization’ of much of it, was rooted in ‘the assumption that the public sector is wasteful, inefficient and unproductive’(Le Grand and Robinson, 1984).
The growth of the Welfare State was seen to have developed diseconomies of scale and was seen to be securing staff interests rather than the public's.
In particular, free from the risk of takeover or bankruptcy, staff were able to pursue their own working practices; thus ‘for the government, the power given by unions to public ownership is part of the problem of nationalization’(Kay et al .,
1986, 299).
However, international comparative reviews do not credit all private-sector corporations with better efficiency than public, and ‘The real purpose of contracting  out, as with state industry privatization, is as much to weaken the unions’ monopoly as to save money' (The Economist , 17 September 1983, 53).
Public-sector employment ceased to become a growth sector across the map of Britain from 1977.
Total public-sector employment rose steadily from 5.9 million in 1961 to 7.4 million in 1977 before showing reductions each year at least until 1988.
In many fields, however, the use of cash limits, monitoring and sub-contracting served only to stabilize employment levels (Table 5.8) in the face of growing demand (for instance for health services, unemployment benefit or policing), and permanent reductions were shown principally for the civil service and nationalized industries.
Data for the latter are, of course, affected by privatization itself, but it appears from government figures (see Note) that sale of corporations accounted for over 400,000 of the 1.14 million jobs lost from nationalized industries between 1978 and 1988 (prior to the sale of water and electricity).
There were others in the period before each privatization when financial losses were being reduced or written off as part of a continuing process of rationalizing older, basic industries.
Table 5.8 Employment in the public and private sectors, 1978–88, UK
Coal and energy
The miners' strike of 1984–85 correctly anticipated an accelerated run-down of employment by British Coal.
This in turn was involved with government policies for promoting the nuclear generation of electricity, open cast mining and the privatization of electricity generation, with the threatened increased use of cheap imported coal.
It had been the growth of then cheap oil supplies in the 1960s which caused the main post-war reduction of coal-mining employment, from 700,000 in 1955 to 287,000 in 1971.
However, the increase in oil prices in the 1970s gave fresh support to the coal industry, major new pits were initiated in North Yorkshire and Leicestershire and job losses were still moderate when manufacturing fell under the impact of recession in 1980.
In the statistical period, 1978–81, losses continued to be greatest in  Scotland, the North and Wales; they were only 4 per cent in Yorkshire and 2 per cent in the East Midlands.
This explains the shock felt when from 1981 to 1984 losses increased to 17 per cent in Yorkshire and 14 per cent in the East Midlands, again reflecting a ‘southward movement’ of industrial problems.
The miners' strike drew attention to the social costs of pit closures in mining villages, but the government case gave barely any recognition to this and no connection was made with regional policy.
After the strike, British Coal was free to reduce its workforce from 221,000 to below 100,000 (June 1989), but was producing almost the same quantity of coal because of a 60 per cent increase in productivity (Figure 5.6A).
Job losses from 1984 to 1989 amounted to 41,000 in Yorkshire and Humberside and 25,000 in the East Midlands.
Figure 5.6 Production and employment trends in (A) coal, 1978–88, and (B) steel, 1979–88.
Source:The Economist , 16 January 1988;The Guardian , 7 July 1988.
The process made for a much slower reduction in unemployment than elsewhere in the Yorkshire, Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Coalfields, and there were fears of the industry being cut to 35,000–40,000 men, with the possible ending of mining in Scotland, Wales and the North East.
It was argued, for instance, that the privatization of the electricity industry, hitherto stable in employment, could lead to the loss of 30,000 jobs in coal and more in electricity.
However, the preceding privatization of gas had shown only moderate job losses, and the government lobby argued that  privatization of coal itself could make marginal collieries economically viable if they had a ‘leaner management’ and supervisory structure.
Nationalized manufacturing
The regional impact of policy for nationalized industries since the war has been considerable (Hudson, 1985).
Most localities with nationalized factories felt the impact of hardening government policies in the 1980s, but effects were selective in space and time as different public corporations received political attention at different dates.
In Conservative thinking, the production of internationally tradable goods is the least appropriate activity for public ownership, and the end of nationalized manufacture in the UK is in sight at the time of writing (late 1989).
The methodology of Massey and Meegan (1982) is relevant to the British Steel Corporation in that ‘investment and technical change’ in new works such as Redcar (Cleveland) were accompanied by closure of many older works such as Consett (Co.
Durham), Shotton (Clwyd) and Bilston (W. Midlands).
The closure of Shotton Works, with 8,200 jobs in 1981, was the largest factory closure in Europe, but Britain's programme of steel industry cuts, led by Ian MacGregor in the period 1979 to 1981, was also the largest in Europe.
Productivity improvements led to further losses of jobs, cut from 190,000 in 1979 to 51,600 in 1988 (Figure 5.6B), and to a return to profitability and private ownership, although the survival of the Ravenscraig Works (Strathclyde), threatened in 1990, was owed to political factors.
In the transport equipment industries, British Shipbuilders showed different levels of rationalization in different divisions (Peck and Townsend, 1984), and was eventually sold off or closed, yard by yard.
The Navy's own dockyard at Devonport, Plymouth, was handed over to private management in 1987, with 3,300 of the 11,500 jobs to go by 1990 (the Guardian, June 11 1988) and, again, little preparation of land for replacement industries.
Smaller cuts were made through the reduction, privatization or closure of most of British Rail's workshops.
Even in the aerospace industry, employment fell by a quarter in the period 1981 to 1988, following the privatization of British Aerospace in 1981; its acquisition of the Rover Group and the Royal Ordnance Factories also led to controversial closures, staff reductions and sales of land.
Public-sector services
It is possible to study the ‘anatomy of service job loss’(Buck, 1988).
However, the only sizeable national job losses in services in the 1980s were in the public sector, chiefly in the railways and ports, industries associated functionally and locationally with the decline of heavy industry itself.
However, the reduction in railway employment was offset by the growth of activity in the Post Office, and changes in bus service employment were less than feared at the time of ‘deregulation’(1987).
Likewise, it is a myth that the National Health Service suffered overall ‘cuts’ in overall employment levels in the 1980s.
It was job growth that was reduced after 1981 by the Conservative government's imposition of cash  limits on Health Authorities (Table 5.8).
This in itself was serious in the contexts of delivering the Service and of heavy unemployment.
In most Health Authority areas, increased employment of nurses was offset by reductions in the use of ancillary manual staff, even prior to the government's imposed requirement for Authorities to put this work out to tender.
In the event, catering and laundry work was not a field in which private sector contractors made many successful bids, and there was a tendency for bids to be less serious or successful in northern areas than in the South (Mohan, 1988a).
Combined, however, with the rationalization of facilities and the closure of older hospitals in areas of declining population, the policy became politically contentious and the source of local job losses in inner city areas.
This was accentuated in London itself by a progressive policy of resource allocation, in which investment was gradually transferred from relatively over-provided regions to under-provided regions (such as the Midlands and North)(Mohan, 1988a, 1988b).
(At the same time the number of nurses working in private hospitals, homes and clinics virtually doubled from 1982 to 1986, when 69 per cent worked in the South.)
The pattern of only selective reductions continues if we widen the field to comprise education, health and other services, which expanded employment in all regions from 1984 to 1989.
Local authority employment increased by 2.5 per cent over the same period, despite a reduction in refuse collection and disposal, the main field till then of tendering to private-sector firms; ‘although most of these firms claim to have a national presence, the great bulk of their work is in the South East and coverage of other areas is often patchy’(Le Grand and Robinson, 1984, 60).
Likewise the first major reductions in civil service employment had occurred in Greater London itself, which experienced a greater absolute and proportionate loss in 1978–81 (19,200 or 12.4 per cent) than all regions.
The pressure of higher salaries, labour shortages and office rents was by 1989 causing more government departments to think of moving sections of work to the North, as some had done in the 1960s and 1970s.
Overall geographical effects
The systematic questioning of the efficiency and importance of each kind of public-sector job had a searching effect on a previously fairly stable geographical pattern of employment.
From what has been said, we would expect the heaviest proportionate effects of the government's many methods of reducing employment to fall on the North.
It is possible to assemble total estimates of public-sector employment by region and county, but only up to 1987.
If we group together all the industries that were predominantly in public ownership on the departure of the Labour government, we find that their total employment was thrown into decline in the North from 1978 to 1981, but that it continued to grow in the South.
In Figure 5.7 we combine the employment of all industries that were mainly in public ownership in 1981.
Their total employment fell by 250,000 (4 per cent) from 1981 to 1987.
Due to losses in manufacturing, utilities, transport and communication, job reductions occurred in 38 of the 66 counties, with some  of the greatest percentage reductions in counties affected by changes in the coal, shipbuilding and steel industries.
Figure 5.7 Employment change, 1981–87, in public sector industries as in 1981.
Data relate to the best fit of SIC Groups to nationalized industries and public services of 1981.
Source: Census of Employment (NOMIS).
This imbalance raises many questions about the behaviour of a Conservative government towards different areas of the country.
To what extent was it a responsibility of government to anticipate the loss of large units of traditional male work, whether in Plymouth, Swindon, Sheffield or Glasgow?
In the event, organizations were established to try to bring new jobs to areas of coal and steel closures, but we shall see in Chapter 10 that these were mainly token operations in relation to the size of the problem.
Less obvious were the far-reaching effects of stopping the previous expansion of employment in health and education, which had been crucial to the growth of income and female activity rates especially in under-provided areas of the North.
Emerging trends in the pattern of de-industrialization
The containment of employment growth in public services exposed the more starkly the effects of the greatest phase of industrial retrenchment in  post-war British economic history.
This was no mere cyclical event: it effected a permanent reduction in the relative economic importance of manufacturing, the male worker and the North.
The searing impact of recession left behind the raw legacy of redundant sites and workers in all of the northern conurbations, above all because it was followed by a period of jobless growth in industry (1982–87).
Some products and places provide a few exceptions to this pattern, as we shall discover in the next chapter, and there were considerable, if patchy and delayed, efforts towards ‘re-industrialization’(Chapter 10), which created the estimated increase of manufacturing employment across all regions of the North from 1987 to 1989, averaging 1.4 per cent, probably arrested by 1990.
In assessing the possible impact of future recessions it is as well to ask ‘who is to blame?’ for the northern depression of the 1980s.
With the question put in that way, a group of students mentioned ‘the national government’, ‘local government’, ‘the EC’, ‘transnational corporations’, ‘capitalism’, ‘the unions’, ‘regional policy’, and ‘the people themselves’.
They actually failed to mention the main point of this chapter (Table 5.4), that the great bulk of factory job loss resulted from changes in production and employment in manufacturing as a whole , with only secondary variation resulting from the performance of its different parts.
True, each sub-period was historically specific: while the years 1978–81 showed equally bad rates of manufacturing job loss in all the major areas of the North of Britain (Table 5.4), the aftermath in 1981–84 revealed the worst continuing rates in northern England (the Northern Region, Yorkshire &Humberside and the North West).
Some of these lesser variations are due to the timing of government policy changes in the public sector.
However, negative differential shifts in the North have been associated with some of the reinforcing institutional factors mentioned by the students.
Industrial structures of the North are important because they are also associated with different occupational structures, including a relative lack of professional and managerial workers, research and development facilities, and experience in developing new technologies, business support services and small firms (Northern Region Strategy Team, 1977).
Branch plants in the North may continue therefore to be overlooked by both UK and TNC multi-plant corporations in the allocation of forward investment.
In the ‘spatial division of labour’, the labour-intensive mass-production branch has a weaker role than in the 1960s and is partly replaced by TNC investment in the Third World.
The number of factories employing over 1,000 in the North fell from 706 in 1971 to 282 in 1985.
Even where TNCs have been attracted by regional policy to locate new investments of the 1980s in assisted areas, the yield of additional jobs has been meagre.
The Ford Motor Company itself placed one of its largest world investments, a new European engine plant, alongside its existing plant at Bridgend (Mid Glamorgan).
This investment of £728 million was expected in 1988 to provide only 3,000 additional jobs, mainly in component firms.
The introduction of Japanese plants to South Wales, and later to north-east England (led by Nissan), was widely seen chiefly as a spur to UK firms to ‘improve’ their working practices and productivity, although Dunning (1986) estimated that Japanese employment in the UK could increase to  22,000 by the end of the 1980s and to a possible 250,000 by the year 2000.
The motor industry is seen as a prototype for the ‘post-Fordist regime of flexible accumulation’, involving both fewer workers at principal factories and a much more varied supply of components for different models and markets.
It is difficult as yet to relate these views to changes in the map of factory employment in Britain (critical as they are in political economy).
It is acknowledged that Britain and the USA have been slower in evolving decentralized, flexible manufacturing systems than have Japan or Italy.
It might be argued that the supply of components to factories on a ‘just-in-time’ basis might prompt adjacent location in a linked region of manufacturing, but, from reports to date, this does not have to follow.
Geographers have studied the recent adaptations of local industries, such as Manchester clothing (Gibbs, 1987), but these appear to be more concerned with the survival of firms, with the same or a smaller workforce, than to do with major ‘re-industrialization’.
Pinch et al .
(1989) reported that the scale of development of flexible employment strategies had ‘been exaggerated in the past by media hype and to some extent by the enthusiasm of academics’.
Gertler (1988) concluded that the motor industry model had over-influenced academic writing and that the ‘post-Fordist vision’ was not a new era of production but the ‘intensification and development of historical trends established long ago’(Gertler, 1988, 430).
These include the improvement of productivity in general, which gathered pace in Britain prior to 1989.
Internationally one must recognize that greater success has attended more decentralized firms making products for smaller market niches.
‘The most successful manufacturing regions have been ones which have linked flexible manufacturing systems with innovative organization and an emphasis on ‘customization’, design and quality’(Murray, 1988, 11).
The example of the less traditional manufacturing regions of Italy has been well used in the literature.
Ginzberg and Vojta (1986) maintained that TNCs are losing their competitive edge in trade and technology and must decentralize to overcome diseconomies of scale.
Robertson (1986) also argued that big companies and the public sector cannot afford to go on employing large numbers of people, as the cost of co-ordinating their activities rises and as pensions become more expensive.
His view was that the breaking down of large organizations was delayed only by the political power of European governments and workers' movements.
Perhaps then Britain is only losing from its delay in moving to ‘post-Fordism’, and creating the flexible small modern factory.
This chapter has brought together many of the negative features of economic change in 1980s Britain.
It is probably significant that manufacturing employment fell at a slower rate in the North than in the South from 1984 to 1987, and was estimated to have increased from 1987 to 1989.
This favourable turn was first evident in Wales, and then in the Northern Region, and was largely due to special measures for the worst-hit steel closure areas.
However, we have found few indications of any change in the relentless economic decline of areas such as Merseyside or Belfast.
Their future may be to show the worst urban decay and deviance in a depressed and divided society; at best, they will remain well behind the South and much of Europe in sharing the gains of an advanced material culture.
But perhaps we are  looking entirely in the wrong place for any significant employment gains in industry.
It may be, firstly, that the increased output of manufacturing is yielding marked increases in what industrial workers (though fewer in number) spend in the service sector, and so supporting more jobs there.
It may be, secondly, that the era of ‘flexible accumulation’ takes the form, not so much of sub-contracting between small firms within manufacturing, but rather of more work put out to service sector firms.
It may be, thirdly, that the gains from more flexible forms of employment contracts are also accruing in female part-time work in the service sector.
Certainly the private services sector is growing in output and employment and suffered little from recession.
The question for us now is whether these new forms of growth are occurring in the same geographical labour market areas as those of factory and public sector job losses.
It is this question that is crucial to Chapter 6.
Further reading
Many different aspects of this topic in Britain are covered in Martin and Rowthorn (1986), and several are further advanced in Massey and Allen (1988).
The nature of industrial change is dealt with through a variety of approaches in Massey (1984); in Amin and Goddard (1986); and by Keeble (1987).
The later debate over the nature of production is exemplified in Scott (1988).
Unemployment may be investigated through Farmer (1985) and Routh (1986).
A vivid social view is exemplified by Coffield et al .
(1986).
Many social and political implications are spelt out in Lewis and Townsend (1989).
The contrast between urban and rural trends is evident in Fothergill et al .
(1986), and the particular case of London manufacturing in Buck et al.
(1986).
A full survey of major redundancies is in Townsend (1983) and in Townsend and Peck (1985b).
Theoretical interpretation of factory employment reductions was provided by Massey and Meegan (1982) and by Watts and Stafford (1986).
However, many of the issues of UK branch closures in the early 1980s are resolved in Fothergill and Guy (1990).
Factors in the international control of industry are presented by Taylor and Thrift (1986), by Young et al .
(1987), and by Gordon (1987).
The regional role of nationalized industries is criticised by Hudson (1985).
An unusual overall view is provided by Humphrys (1987).
An example from a growing literature is Ascher (1987).
