7
We passed the lay-by near the Cowal Road junction doing about ninety.
I watched as we went by.
Nothing; it was just a damp, deserted parking place with a big new concrete litter bin (replaced with unusual alacrity, in less than six months).
We swept past, trailing light spray.
It was a dim, grey day; light drizzle from the overcast, mountains hidden past about a thousand feet.
We were on dipped-beam; the instruments glowed orange in front of the delicious, straight-armed, black-skirted, Doc-shoed, crop-blonde, purse-lipped Verity; my angelic bird of paradise, driving like a bat out of hell.
‘Yo; Prentice.
Get you out of bed?’
‘Oh, you guessed.’
‘It's a gift.
Pick you up at one?’
‘Umm…
Yeah.
Where are you, Lewis?’
‘At the Walkers’, in Edinburgh.’
‘Oh…
Is Verity there?’
‘Yeah; she's coming.’
‘Eh?’
‘She's coming; to Lochgair.
Charlotte and Steve are off to the States this morning, skiing, and Verity —’
‘Skiing, to the States?
Sheesh, that pack-ice gets —’
‘Shut up, Prentice.
The upshot is Verity's going to be Festival Perioding with the Urvills.
She's going to drive us there.’
And me insane, I thought.
‘Great,’ I said.
‘No Rodney?’
Lewis laughed.
‘No Rodney.
Verity is finally a Rod-free zone.’
‘Couldn't have happened to a nicer chap.’
‘Agree grade and comments.
See you thirteen hundred hours.’
‘Yeah; see you then.’
I put the phone down.
There was a dartboard above the phone with a picture of Thatcher taped over it.
I kissed it.
‘Yeeeeee-HA!’
I shouted, leaping back into the bedroom.
‘Shut up, Prentice,’ Gav moaned, muffled, from his bed.
He was invisible under a heap of duvet.
My bed was on the other side of the room, away from the window, and so not quite as cold as Gav's in the winter.
I fell into it, bounced.
(Technically I should have Norris's solo room because I've been in the flat longest, but that room's small and noisy; also, Gav doesn't snore and he's quite happy to retreat to the living room couch if I have female company…
That's another thing; there's only room for a single bed in Norris's room).
‘Put the heater on, ya bastard,’ Gav mumbled.
I leapt up, ninja'd over to Gav's bed and wheeched the duvet off.
‘Aw ya —!’
He grabbed the duvet back, cocooned himself again.
‘— bastard!’
‘Gavin,’ I told him.
‘You are a skid-mark on the lavatory bowl of life.
But I respect you for it.’
I turned, grabbed my dressing gown  and made for the door; with one mighty ninja kick, the side of my right foot connected with all three switches of the fan heater at the same time and it hummed into life.
‘I shall make some tea.’
‘Dunno about tea; fuckin good at makin a noise.’
‘Thank you for sharing that with us, Gav.
I shall return.’
‘What's the weather like?’
‘Hmm,’ I said, staring at the ceiling, one finger to my lips.
‘Good question,’ I said.
‘The weather's like, a manifestation of the energy-transfer effected between volumes of the planet's gaseous envelope due to differential warming of the atmosphere at various latitudes by solar radiation.
Surprised you didn't know that, actually, Gavin.’
Gavin stuck his head out from under the duvet, giving me cause once more to marvel at the impressive way the lad's shoulders merged into his head with no apparent narrowing in between(this appeared to be the principal physical benefit bestowed by the game of rugby; the acquisition of an extremely thick neck, just as the most important thing one could take to the sport was a thick skull, and from it an intact one still in satisfactory two-way communication with one's spinal cord).
Gav — who probably epitomised thick-skulledness, though admittedly would not be amongst one's first fifteen when it came to offering proof of heavy traffic within the central nervous system — opened one bleary eye and focused on me with the same accuracy one has grown to expect from security forces aiming baton rounds at protesters' legs.
‘What the fuck's made you so unbearable this morning?’
I clasped my hands, smiled broadly.
‘Gavin, I am in a transport of delight, or at least shall be shortly after one o'clock this afternoon.’
There was a pause while Gavin's duty-neuron struggled to assimilate this information.
The intense processing involved obviously exhausted too much of Gav's thinly-stretch grey matter to allow speech in the near  future, so he contented himself with a grunt and submerged again.
I boogied to the kitchen, singing, ‘Walking On Sunshine’.
I watched the orange-white needles swing across their calibrated arcs.
Ninety.
Jeez.
I was sitting behind Lewis, who was in the front passenger seat.
I kind of wished I'd sat behind Verity; I wouldn't have seen so much of her — not even a hint of that slim, smooth face, frowning in concentration as she barrelled the big black Beemer towards the next corner — but I wouldn't have been able to see the speedometer, either.
Lewis seemed unperturbed.
I shifted in my seat, a little uncomfortable.
I pulled the seat belt tight again.
I checked Verity wasn't watching and adjusted my jeans a little.
The folder containing Rory's work lay on the seat by my side; I lifted the file onto my lap, concealing a bulge.
There was a reason for this.
We'd been on the bit of fast dual carriageway between Dumbarton and Alexandria, not long after Verity and Lewis had picked me up.
Verity made a sort of wriggling motion a couple of times, straining back against her seat.
This force was applied by those long, black-nyloned legs, and though most of the pressure was provided by her left limb, some residual effort pushed her right foot down as well, and on each occasion we speeded up, just momentarily, as her amply-soled Doc Marten pressed against the accelerator.
‘You okay?’
Lewis had asked, sounding amused.
She'd made a funny face.
‘Yup,’ she'd said, shifting down to fourth as a car she'd been waiting to pass pulled back into the slow lane.
We were all pressed back into our seats.
‘Problem of wearing sussies, sometimes; they sort of pull a bit, you know?’
She flashed a smile at Lewis, then me, then looked forward again.
Lewis laughed, ‘Well, no, can't claim I do know, but I'll take your word for it.’
Verity nodded.
‘Just getting things sorted out here.’
She strained against the back-rest again, her bum lifting right off the seat.
The car, already doing eight-five, roared up to over a hundred.
The rear of a truck was approaching rapidly.
Verity wiggled her bottom, plonked it back down, calmly braked and shifted up to fifth, dawdling along behind the green Parceline truck while she waited for it to overtake an Esso tanker.
‘Parceline, parceline…’ she breathed, tapping her fingers on the thick steering wheel.
She made it sound French, pronouncing the word so that it rhymed with ‘Vaseline’.
‘That better?’
Lewis inquired.
‘Mm-hum,’ Verity nodded.
Meanwhile I was fainting in the back seat, just thinking of what that tight black mid-thigh skirt concealed.
It had taken until the long, open left-hander that leads down into Glen Kinglas before my erection had finally subsided, and that had been mostly naked fear; Verity had lost it just for a second, the rear of the car nudging out towards the wrong side of the road as we whanged round the bend.
Sitting in the rear, maybe it had felt worse, but I'd been petrified.
Thankfully, there'd been no traffic coming; the concept of striking up an intimate — indeed potentially penetrative — relationship with the rocks on the far side of the road had been bad enough; but even the prospect of a head-on with another lump of metal travelling at anything remotely like the sort of speed we were sustaining might have resulted in me making my mark in the most embarrassing fashion on the leather upholstery of the Bavarian macht-wagen .
Verity just went ‘Whoa-yeah!’ like she'd accomplished something, jiggled the steering wheel once and accelerated cleanly away.
Anyway, it's one of the minor unfortunate facts of life that a detumescing willy is prone to trap stray pube hairs under the foreskin as it scrolls forward again, and that was why I was adjusting my clothing as we braked for the bend above Cairndow.
I opened the Crow Road folder lying on my lap and leafed  through some of the papers.
I'd read the various bits and pieces a couple of times now, looking for something deep and mysterious in it all but not finding anything; I'd even done a little research of my own, and discovered through mum that dad had some more of Rory's papers in his study; she'd promised she'd try and look them out for me.
I took a sheet of paper out of the folder and held the page of scribbled, multi-coloured notes up, resting it on one raised knee, gazing at it with a critical look, wondering if Verity could see what I was doing.
I cleared my throat.
I'd rather been hoping Lewis or Verity might have asked me what the file contained by now, and what I was doing, but — annoyingly — neither of them had.
‘Sounds?’
Lewis asked.
‘Sounds.’
Verity nodded.
I sighed.
I put the sheet back in the folder and the folder back on the other rear seat.
We rounded the top of Upper Loch Fyne listening to an old Madonna tape, the Material Girl singing ‘Papa Don't Preach,’ which raised a smile from me, at least.
…
Back to Gallanach, for Christmas and Hogmanay.
I felt a strange mixture of hope and melancholy.
The lights of on-coming cars glared in the dull day.
I watched the lights and the drizzle and the grey, pervasive clouds, remembering another car journey, the year before.
‘Sounds daft to me, Prentice,’ Ashley said, lighting another cigarette.
‘It sounds daft to me,’ I agreed.
I watched the red tip of her cigarette glow; white headlights streamed by on the other side of the motorway, as we headed north in the darkness.
Darren had been dead a couple of months; I had fallen out with my father and I'd been in London for most of the summer, staying with Aunt Ilsa and her long-term companion, whose only name appeared to be Mr Gibbon, which I thought made him sound like a cat for some reason…
Anyway, I'd been staying with them in darkest Kensington, at Mr Gibbon's very grand, three-storeyed  town-house in Ascot Square, just off Addison Road, and working at a branch of Mondo-Food on Victoria Street (they were trying a new line in Haggisburgers at the time and the manager thought my accent would help shift them.
Only trouble was, when people said, ‘Gee, what's in these?’
I kept telling them.
I don't believe they're on the menu any more).
I'd saved some money, grown heartily sick of London, fast food and maybe people, too, and I was getting out.
Ash had been in London for a programming interview with some big insurance company and had offered me a lift back home, or to Gallanach anyway, as I'd exiled myself from Lochgair.
Her battered, motley-panelled 2CV had looked out of place in Ascot Square, where I think that anything less than a two-year old Golf GTi, Peugeot 209 or Renault 5 was considered to be only just above banger status, even as a third car, let alone a second.
‘Sorry I'm late, Prentice,’ she'd said, and kissed my cheek.
She and Lewis had been out for a meal the night before.
Big brother was staying in Islington, making a living from TV comedy shows by being one of the twenty or so names that zip up the screen under where it says Additional Material By:, and trying to be a stand-up comic.
I'd been invited to dinner too, but declined.
I'd hoped she'd just pick me up and we'd be on our way, but Ash hadn't seen Aunt Ilsa for a long time and insisted on exchanging more than just pleasantries with her and Mr G.
Aunt Ilsa was a large, loud woman of forbiddingly intense bonhomie ; I always thought of her as being the most remote outpost of the McHoan clan (unless you counted the still purportedly peripatetic Uncle Rory); a stout bulwark of a woman who for me at least— had always personified the dishevelled ramifications of our family.
A couple of years older than dad, she had lived in London for three decades, on and off.
Mostly, she was off; travelling the world with Mr Gibbon, her constant companion for  twenty-nine of those thirty years.
Mr Gibbon had been an industrialist whose firm had employed the ad agency which Aunt Ilsa had worked for when she'd first moved to London.
They met; he found her company agreeable, she found him a new slogan.
Within a year they were living together and he had sold his factory to devote more time to the rather more demanding business of keeping Aunt Ilsa company on her peregrinations; they had been on the move more or less ever since.
Mr Gibbon was a grey-haired pixie of a man, ten years older than Aunt Ilsa, and as tiny and delicate as she was tall and big-boned.
Apparently he was quite charming, but as the basis of his charm seemed to rest upon the un-startling stratagem of addressing every female he encountered by the fullest possible version of her name (so that every Julie became a Juliana, every Dot extended to a Dorothea, all Marys became Mariana, Sues Susanna, etc.
Sorry; etcetera) as well as the slightly perverse habit of calling all young girls ‘madam’ and all old women ‘girls,’it was a charm to which I at least was quite prophylactically immune.
‘And you are…?’ he asked Ashley as he welcomed her in the hallway.
‘Ash,’ she said.
‘Pleased to meet you.’
I grinned, thinking Mr Gibbon would have a hard job finding a convincing embellishment for Ash's uncommon monicker.
‘Ashkenazia!
Come in!
Come in!’
He led the way to the library.
Ash turned back to me as we followed, and muttered, ‘He's a pianist, isn't he?’
Totally misunderstanding what she meant, I sneered slightly at Mr Gibbon's back, and nodded.
‘Yeah; isn't he just.’
Aunt Ilsa was in the library; she had a heavy cold at the time and I am tempted to say we discovered her poring over a map, but the inelegant truth is that she was searching the shelves for a misplaced book when we entered.
She spent most of the next half hour or so talking about the extended holiday to Patagonia she was planning, in an extremely  loud voice and with an enthusiasm that would probably have embarrassed the Argentinian Tourist Board.
I sat fretting, wanting to be away.
By some miracle, the 2CV hadn't been towed away when I'd finally dragged Ash out; we'd made it to the M1, picked up a hitcher and — rather beyond the call of duty, I'd have said — dropped him where he was going, in Coventry.
We got lost in Nuneaton trying to get back on the M6, and were now heading through Lancashire at dusk, still an hour or more from the border.
‘Prentice, there are a lot of better reasons for not talkin to your dad, believe me.’
‘I believe you,’ I said.
‘What about your mother?’
‘No, she's still talking to him.’
She tutted.
‘You know what I mean.
You're still seeing her, I hope.’
‘Yeah; she came to Uncle Hamish's a couple of times, and she drove me back to Glasgow once.’
‘I mean, what's the big argument?
Can't you just agree to disagree?’
‘No; we disagree about that.’
I shook my head.
‘Seriously; it doesn't work that way; neither of us can leave it alone.
There's almost nothing either of us can say that can't be taken the wrong way, with a bit of imagination.
It's like being married.’
Ash laughed.
‘What would you know?
I thought your mum and dad were pretty happy.’
‘Yeah, I suppose.
But you know what I mean; when a marriage or relationship is going wrong and it's like everything that one person says or doesn't say, or does or doesn't do, seems to rub the other one up the wrong way.
Like that.’
‘Hmm,’ Ash said.
I watched the red tail lights.
I felt very tired.
‘I think he's angry that having given me the freedom to think for myself, I've not followed him all down the line.’
‘But, Prentice, it's not as though you even believe in Christianity or anything like that.
Shit, I can't work out what it is you do believe in…
God?’
I shifted uncomfortably in the thin seat.
‘I don't know; not God, not as such, not as a man, something in human form, or even in an actual thing, just…just a field…a force —’
Follow the Force, Luke,’ eh?’
Ash grinned.
‘I remember you and your Star Wars.
Didn't you write to Steven Spielberg?’
She laughed.
‘George Lucas.’
I nodded miserably.
‘But I don't even mean anything like that; that was just background for the film.
I mean a sort of interconnectedness; a field effect.
I keep getting this feeling it's already there, like in quantum physics, where matter is mostly space, and space, even the vacuum, seethes with creation and annihilation all the time, and nothing is absolute, and two particles at opposite ends of the universe react together as soon as one's interfered with; all that stuff.
It's like it's there and it's staring us in the face but I just can't…can't access it.’
‘Maybe it isn't accessible,’ Ash said, fag in mouth, holding the steering wheel with her knees and making a stretching, circling motion with her shoulders (we were on a quiet stretch of motorway, thankfully).
She took her cigarette from her mouth again, put her hands back on the wheel.
I hoped she wasn't getting sleepy; the drone of the wee Citroen's engine was cataleptically monotonous.
‘How not?’
I said.
‘Why shouldn't it be accessible?’
‘Maybe it's like your particle; inevitably uncertain.
Soon as you understand one part of what it means, you lose any chance of understanding the rest.’
She looked over at me, brows furrowed.
‘What was that routine Lewis used to do?
About Heisenberg?’
‘Oh,’ I said, annoyed now.
‘I can't remember.’
‘Something about being at school and bursting into this office  and saying, look, are you Principal here or not, Heisenberg?
And him going, weellll…’
She gave a small laugh.
‘Mind, it was funnier the way Lewis told it.’
‘A little,’ I conceded.
‘But —’
‘Lewis seems to be making it in the old alternative comedy scene, doesn't he?’
Ash said.
‘So we're told,’ I said, looking away.
‘I don't imagine Ben Elton or Robin Williams have considered early retiral quite yet, though.’
‘Aye, but good for him, though, eh?’
I looked at Ash.
She was watching the road as we roared down a slight incline at all of seventy.
Her face was expressionless; that long, Modigliani nose like a knife against the darkness.
‘Yeah,’ I said, and felt small and mean-spirited.
‘Aye, good for him.’
‘It true you've not seen much of him in London?’
‘Well, he has his own friends, and I was usually too tired after work.’
(A lie; I wandered art galleries and went to films, mostly.)
‘And I couldn't have paid my way, either.’
‘Ach, Prentice,’ Ashley said, chiding.
She shook her head (the long mane of fair hair was tied up, so it did not swish and fall over her shoulders).
‘He'd have liked to have seen you more often.
He's missed you.’
‘Oh, well,’ I said.
I watched the lights again for a while.
Ashley drove and smoked.
I felt myself nodding off, and shook myself awake.
‘Ah, dear…’
I rubbed my face with both hands, asked, ‘How do you keep awake?’
‘I play games,’ she told me.
‘Oh yeah?’
‘Yeah,’ she nodded, licking her lips.
‘Like Name That Tail-Light.’
‘What?’
I laughed.
‘True,’ she said.
‘See that car up ahead?’
I looked at the two red lights.
‘Yeah.’
‘See how high up the lights are, not too far apart?’
‘Yo.’
‘Renault 5.’
‘No kidding!’
‘Mm-hmm.
One it's over-taking?’
‘Yeah?’
‘Horizontally divided lights; that's an old Cortina; mark 3.’
‘Good grief.’
‘Here's a Beemer.
New five series, I think…about to pass us; should have lights that slant in slightly at the bottom.’
The BMW passed us; its rear lights were slanted in slightly, at the bottom.
We overtook the old Ford and the 5 a little later.
‘Course,’ Ash said.
‘It's more fun in a fast car when you're doing all the overtaking, but even just sitting at seventy you'd be surprised how much you pass, sometimes.
Now.’
She held up one finger.
‘Listen and feel as we pull back into the slow lane.’
Ash swung the ancient 2CV to the left, then straightened.
‘What?’
I said.
‘Nothing.’
She grinned.
‘Missed all the cats’ eyes.
Bump-free lane-changing.
A great skill, you know.’
She glanced at me, mock-serious.
‘Not so easy in a Ferrari, or whatever; the tyres are too wide.
But skinny wee tyres like this thing's got are just about ideal.’
‘Allow me to sit back in amazement, young Ashley,’ I said, crossing my arms and twisting in my seat to face her.
‘I had no idea it was possible to extract such multifarious enjoyment from a simple night-time car journey.’
Ashley laughed.
‘Cobbled streets are even more fun, if you're a girly.’
‘Huh.
Trust you to lower the tone of the whole conversation and introduce a note of clitoris envy at the same time.’
Ash laughed louder, ground the cigarette butt out in the ashtray, flipped it closed.
‘Och, it's a gift; I'd be ashamed of myself if I wasn't just so fucking nice with it.’
She put her head back and roared with laughter at this, before shaking her head and restoring her attention to the road.
I laughed a little too, then stared out of the side window, wondering suddenly if Ash had slept with Lewis last night.
She clicked the indicator on.
‘Ye Olde Motorway Services.
Come on; yer Aunty Ashley'll buy you a coffee and a sticky bun.’
‘Gee, you sure know how to show a boy a good time.’
Ash just smirked.
When I woke, about mid-day in the flat on Crow Road, Janice Rae had gone.
To work, I assume.
There was a note, on a small blue sheet of writing paper: ‘You're the better stand-up.
Call me, sometime, if you want.
J.’
I looked at that qualified second sentence with an odd feeling of sadness and relief.
Drying off after a shower, I stood looking at two framed movie posters on the bathroom wall.
Paris, Texas and Dangerous Liaisons .
I had a coffee and some toast, washed up and let myself out.
I'd put the Crow Road folder in a Tesco bag, and walked back to our flat under grey skies and through a mild and swirling wind, swinging the carrier to and fro, and whistling.
Our flat was in Grant Street, near St George's Cross (and just off Ashley Street, funnily enough).
My flat-mates were out when I got back, which was fine by me; I did not relish the prospect of facing the single-entendres that were Gav's best approximation of wit, and which inevitably followed any sexual adventure of mine or Norris's — real or imagined — Gav ever found out about.
If I was lucky, Gav would be so shocked at the very idea I had had carnal knowledge of an aunt — even one of the not-really-an-aunt variety — that he would just pretend it hadn't happened.
Hell, if I was really lucky he might stop talking to me altogether, I thought…but that didn't seem likely.
Or preferable, to be honest; part of me rather looked forward to such taunting.
I'd caught a glimpse of my  face in the hall mirror once, when Gav was berating me for such rakish tendencies, and I'd been smiling.
I made myself another coffee, extended myself on the sofa — my legs quivery with fatigue — opened the folder, pulled out the sheets of paper and started to read.
Crow Road seemed to be the title of Uncle Rory's Big Idea.
From the notes, he seemed unsure whether its final form would be a novel, a film, or an epic poem.
There were even some pages discussing the possibility of it being a concept album.
I lay there on the couch and shuddered at the very thought.
So seventies .
The material in the folder seemed to fall into three basic categories: notes, bits of descriptive prose, and poems.
A few of the notes were dated, all between the early and late seventies.
The notes were on a mixture of papers, mostly loose-leaf; ruled, plain, squared, graph.
Some were on cartridge paper, some on pages torn from what looked like school exercise books, and some on folded, green-lined computer print-out.
Napkins and old cigarette packets did not, sadly, put in an appearance.
The notes were scribbled in a no-less motley variety of different-coloured pens (ball, felt and micro-liner) and used a lot of abbreviations and compressions:H crshd twn carige &tr?
Erlier proph. by Sr: ‘kld by t. livng &t. ded ((?))
H Chrst-lk figr (chng nm to start with T!!???); fml Chrst fr new times?
Scot mrtyr?
Or Birnam wd idea — disgsd army???(2 silly?)…and that was one of the more comprehensible bits.
2 silly, indeed.
The prose was mostly about places Rory had been; they read like out-takes from his travel pieces.
San José, Ca: Suddenly, the Winchester House itself seemed like a emblem for the restless American soul …. about some weird house Rory wanted to use in his story, judging by some cryptic notes at the end of the passage.
Then there was the poetry:
…
We know this life
is merely a succession
of endless brutal images,
punctuated,
for effect,
by relative troughs
whose gutsy heaves
at first disguised
but power us to the next disgrace.
‘Not applying for a job with Hallmark cards, then,’ I muttered to myself, sipping at my coffee.
But I kept on reading.
My head wasn't really in the right state for assimilating all this stuff, but as far as I could gather, Uncle Rory had been trying for years to come up with something Creative (his capital, his italics).
Something that would establish him as a Writer: script-writer, poet, lyricist for a rock band, novelist, playwright…it didn't matter.
Being recognised for having kept a glorified diary while wandering through India when he was young and naïve wasn't enough for him.
It wasn't serious .
This work,Crow Road , would be Serious.
It would be about Life and Death and Treachery and Betrayal and Love and Death and Imperialism and Colonialism and Capitalism.
It would be about Scotland,(or India, or an ‘Erewhon???’) and the Working Class and Exploitation and Action, and there would be characters in the work who would represent all of these things, and the working out of the story would itself prove the Subjectivity of Truth .
…
There were pages of that sort of stuff.
There were also pages of poems forced into some sort of rhyming structure so that they might conceivably have worked as songs, several paragraphs of references to critical works (Barthes, especially;Death of the Author ! shouted what looked like a headline over one entire page of notes devoted to ideas about a looseleaf novel/poem ??
There were location notes for a film and sheets about the physical appearance of the characters and the sort of  actors who might play them, these surrounded by doodles, mazes and uninspired drawings of faces.
There was a list of bands that might be interested in doing an album (a musical tone-scale running all the way from Yes to Genesis), and a sheaf of sketches for the sets in a stage presentation.
What there wasn't was any indication whatsoever that Rory had actually written any part of this great work.
The only things that might have been classed as narrative were the poems, and they didn't seem to have anything to do with each other, apart from the fact a lot of them seemed to be vaguely about Death, or Love.
Tenuous, was the word that came to mind.
I looked in the folder again to see if I'd missed anything.
I had.
There was another small sheet of blue writing paper, in Janice Rae's hand.
‘Prentice — had a look at this —’(then the word ‘while’, crossed out heavily, followed by the word ‘before’, also nearly obliterated)‘— Can't find any more; R had another folder.
(?) If you find it and work out what it's all about, let me know; he said there was something secret buried in it.
(Gallanach)?’
I bobbled my head from side to side.
‘Gallanach?’
I said, in a silly high-pitched voice, as though quoting.
I stretched, grunting with pain as my leg muscles extracted their revenge for having been ignored twelve hours earlier.
I reached for my coffee, but it was cold.
‘Dear God, we beseech ye, visit the reactive wrath of their own foulness upon those nasty wee buggers in the Khmer Rouge in general, and upon their torturers, and their leader Pol Pot, in particular ; may each iota of pain they have inflicted on the people of their country — heathen or not — rebound upon their central nervous system with all the agony they originally inflicted upon their victims.
Also, Lord God, we ask that you remember the dark deeds of any communistic so-called-interrogators, in this time of  great upheaval in eastern Europe; we know that you will not forget their crimes when their day of reckoning comes, and their guttural, Slavic voices cry out to ye for mercy, and ye reward them with all the compassion they ever showed to those unfortunate souls delivered unto them.
Prentice?’
I jumped.
I'd almost fallen asleep while Uncle Hamish had been droning on.
I opened my eyes.
The Tree was looking expectantly at me.
‘Oh,’ I said.
‘Umm…
I'd just like to put in a word for Salman Rushdie.
Or at least take one out for old Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini…’
I looked at Uncle Hamish, who was making quiet signals that I should clasp my hands and close my eyes.
We were in the front lounge of Uncle Hamish and Aunt Tone's Victorian villa in the attractive Gallanach suburbette of Ballymeanoch, facing each other over a card table.
I closed my eyes.
‘Ah,’ I said.
‘Dear God, we pray that as well as suffering whatever part of the general physical unpleasantness involved in the Iran-Iraq war you may judge to be rightly his, you can find a spare area in his suffering, er, anti-create, for Mr R. Khomeini, late of Tehran and Qom, to experience at least some of the, umm, despair and continual worry currently being undergone by the novelist Mr S Rushdie, of Bombay and London, heathen and smart-alec though he may well be.
Amen.’
‘Amen,’ echoed Uncle H. I opened my eyes.
Uncle Hamish was already rising from his seat, looking positively twinkly with health and good cheer.
He rubbed his hands.
‘Very good,’ he said, moving in that oddly stiff and creaky way of his for the door.
‘Let us repair for some repast,’ he chuckled as he held the door open for me.
‘I believe Antonia has prepared something called Cod Creole.’
He sniffed the fishy air in the hall; we crossed to the dining room.
‘Not Lobster Creole?
Or Kid?’
I inquired.
But I don't think Uncle Hamish heard me.
He was humming something sombre and looking pleased with himself.
Uncle H has developed a fascinating heresy based on the idea  that exactly what you did to other people while you were alive gets done right back to you once you're dead.
Torturers die — in agony — hundreds, maybe thousands of times, before their ravaged souls are finally dropped from the jaws of a fearsome and vengeful God.
Those who authorise the dreadful deeds carried out by the torturers (or whoever) also share whatever proportion of this retrospective agony the deity — or his angelic cost-benefit-calculating representatives — deem they deserve.
Having quizzed The Tree on the details of this scheme, it would appear that said burden of transferred pain is debited from the account of the guy at — or rather wielding — the sharp end of the original action, which seems only fair, I suppose.
Apparently Uncle Hamish is awaiting divine inspiration on the knotty problem of whether the good things one has accomplished in one's life are also re-lived from the other side (as it were), or simply subtracted from the nasty stuff.
At the moment he seems to be veering towards the idea that if you did more good than bad during your life you go straight to Heaven, an arrangement which at least processes the merit of simplicity; the rest sounds like something dreamt up by a vindictive bureaucrat on acid while closely inspecting something Hieronymus Bosch painted on one of his bleak but imaginative days.
Still, it has its attractions.
Aunt Tone and the family's two children, Josh and Becky, and Becky's infant daughter, Iona, were already in the dining room, filling it with bustle and chat.
‘Said your prayers?’
Aunt Tone said brightly, depositing a steaming dish of potatoes on the table.
‘Thank you, yes,’ Hamish replied.
My uncle worships alone these days, and has done ever since his son left home to become a devout Capitalist (neither his wife nor his daughter had ever bothered with my Uncle's unique brand of condemnationist Christianity; as a rule, the McHoan women, whether so by blood or marriage, have displayed a marked reluctance to take their men-folk's  passions seriously, at least outside the bedroom).
I think that was why Uncle Hamish had been so delighted when I'd come to stay with the family, and also — perhaps — why he was in no hurry to help effect a reconciliation between me and my father.
We dined on spicy fish which repeated on me for most of the evening in the Jac, meeting pals, until I drowned it in an ocean of beer.
‘Happy New Year!’
Ashley yelled, flourishing a bottle of generic whisky with more enthusiasm than care; she cracked the bottle off the oak-panelled wall of the castle's crowded entrance hall, but without, apparently, causing damage to either.
Clad in a sparkly jacket and a long black skirt, wreathed in silly string and clumps and strands of paper streamers from party poppers, her long hair bunned, she enveloped me in a very friendly kiss, breathing whisky and wine fumes.
I kissed right back and she pushed away, laughing.
‘Wo, Prentice!’ she shouted over the noise.
The hall was packed with people; music spilled out from the main hall beyond; pipes and fiddles, tabors and accordions, guitars and a piano, several of them playing the same tune.
‘I thought you gave up,’ I said, pointing at the cigarette she had stuck behind one ear.
Josh and Becky were still at the doors, greeting people they knew.
‘I did,’ she said, taking the fag from behind her ear and putting it in her mouth.
She left it there for a few seconds, then restored it to its previous position.
‘See?
Still given up; no temptation at all.’
Ash and I levered our way through the press of people while I undid my jacket and struggled to extricate my half-bottle of whisky from a side pocket.
We made it into the hall, which was actually less crowded, though still full.
A huge fire roared in the grate; people balanced on the fire-seat which ran around the hearth, and on every other available perch, including the stairs and the piano.
A few enthusiasts within the midst of the crowd were trying to dance the Eightsome Reel, which in the circumstances was a little like trying to stage a boxing match in a telephone box; not totally impossible, just pointless.
Ash and I found a space over near the piano.
She reached over the piano to a pile of little plastic cups, grabbed one and shoved it into my hand.
‘Here; have a drink.’
She sloshed some whisky into the cup.
‘How've you been?’
‘Fine,’ I said.
‘Broke, and I can see that 2.1 disappearing over the event horizon, but fuck it; I've still got my integrity and my Möbius scarf, and a boy can go a long way with those things.
You got a job yet?’
‘What?’
‘Let's stand away from this fucking piano.’
‘What?’
‘Have you got a job yet?
‘Na.
Hey.’
She put one hand on my shoulder.
‘Heard what David Bowie's latest film's called?’
‘This sounds Lewisian,’ I shouted.
‘No,’ she shook her head.
Merry Christmas, Mister Ceausescu’!’
Ashley laughed like a drain; a teetotaller might have said her breath smelled like one.
‘Very funny,’ I yelled into her ear.
‘Haven't laughed so much since General Zia got blown up.
Where is Lewis, anyway?
We were waiting for them to turn up at Hamish and Tone's but they never showed.
He and James here?’
Ash looked concerned for a second, then her smile returned.
She put her arm round my shoulders.
‘Saw James over by the accordion earlier.
Hey; you want to take a stroll round the battlements?’
She pulled a spliff half out of her breast pocket, let it fall back.
‘Got a number here, but Mrs McSpadden keeps wandering through, and I seem to remember she took inordinate and extremely loud interest in one of these last year when wee Jimmy Calder stoked up.
You comin?’
‘Not right now,’ I said, looking around the crowd, acknowledging a few waves and some distant mouthings that were probably shouts.
I stood on tip-toes to look round the hall; a paper-plane battle seemed to be taking place at one end.
‘You seen Verity?’
‘Not for a bit,’ Ash said, pouring herself more whisky.
I refused.
‘Hey.’
Ash nudged me.
‘There's dancing upstairs.’
‘Verity there?’
‘Maybe,’ Ash said, raising her eyebrows.
‘Let's check it out.’
‘Way to go, Prent.’
…
No Verity in the Solar, loud with sounds and dark with light, and less crowded still.
Ash and I danced, then cousin Josh asked her, and I sat watching the people dance for a while — the best way to extract any real enjoyment from dancing, I've always thought, but I seem to be unusual in not gaining any real pleasure from performing the movements — and then saw Helen Urvill, entering the hall holding a lager can.
I went over to her, through the dancers.
‘Happy New Year!’
‘Hey, Prentice.
Same to you…’
I kissed her, then lifted her up and spun her round; she whooped.
‘How are you?’
I yelled.
Helen Urvill, elegantly tall and judiciously lean, straight thick hair obsidian black, dress combat-casual, back on holiday from Switzerland and looking as thoroughly kempt as ever, passed the lager can to me.
‘I'm fine,’ she said.
I looked at the tin she'd handed me.
‘Carling Black Label ?’
I said, incredulous.
Somehow this did not quite seem Helen's style.
She smirked.
‘Try some.’
I tried some; the stuff foamed, went up my nose.
I spluttered, stepping back, dripping, while Helen took the can back and stood grinning.
‘Champagne?’
I said wiping my chin.
‘Lanson.’
‘What else?
Oh you're so stylish , Helen,’ I said.
‘Wanna dance?’
We danced, and shared the can of champagne.
‘How's Diana?’
I shouted above the music.
‘Couldn't get back,’ Helen yelled.
‘Still out in Hawaii.’
‘Poor thing.’
‘Yeah.’
Helen continued to circulate; I decided it was time for a pee and then maybe some food, which took me via the garden (there was a queue for the downstairs loo, and the upper part of the castle was locked) to the kitchen.
Mrs McSpadden was in command, over-seeing a production line of sandwiches, sausage rolls, bowls of soup and chilli, slices of black bun and Christmas cake and accompanying slices of cheese.
‘Prentice!’
Mrs McSpadden said.
‘Mthth MnThpndn!’
I replied, mouth full of cake.
She shoved a set of keys into my hand.
‘Will ye pop down to the cellar, for us?’
Mrs S shouted.
‘Get another litre of whisky; it's the second archway on the left.
Dinnae let anybody down with you, mind; keep that door locked.’
The microwave chimed and she hauled a still half-frozen block of chilli out on a big plate; she started breaking it up with a large wooden spoon.
I swallowed.
‘Okay,’ I said.
I went through to the utility room, cool and dark after the noise and chaos of the kitchen.
I turned the light on, sorted through the keys for one that looked like it might match the door to the cellar.
A movement outside caught my eye and I peered through the window; looked like I'd put on an outside light, too.
Verity Walker, clad in a short black dress, was dancing sinuously on the roof of Uncle Fergus's Range Rover.
Lewis sat cross-legged on the bonnet of the car, watching her.
He glanced over, shading his eyes, and seemed to see me, looking through the window from the utility room.
Verity pirouetted.
Holding her shoes in one hand, she ran the other down over her body to one thigh, then back to her head and through her cropped blonde hair.
The floodlight outside — harsh and white — lit her like she was on stage.
Her hair glowed like pale flame.
Lewis jumped off the Range Rover (Verity wobbled a little as the car bounced on its springs, but recovered); he stood at the side of the car, between me and it, and held one hand up to Verity.
She danced on, oblivious, then he must have said something, and she danced seductively, fluidly, to the edge of the roof, hips moving slow, a big smile on her face as she looked down at Lewis, then she threw herself off the roof.
Lewis caught her, staggered back a couple of steps, then forward, as Verity wrapped her arms round his neck and her legs round his waist; white glances of thigh against the black.
Lewis put his arms round her as he pitched forward.
They thumped together into the Range Rover.
I thought the impact must have hurt her back, but it didn't look like it had.
Her arms and legs stayed where they were, and Lewis's head bent down to hers.
Her hands started to stroke and caress the nape of his neck and the back and sides of his head.
After a while, one of Lewis's arms disengaged, waving behind him.
One finger pointed up to the bright flood-light that was showing me all this.
His hand made a cutting, chopping motion.
When he did it a second time, I put the light out.
I let myself into the cellar, locked the door behind me.
The cellar was cold.
I found the whisky, let myself out of the cellar and locked it, turned all the lights out, gave Mrs McSpadden the bottle, accepted a belated new-year kiss from her, then made my way out through the kitchen and the corridor and the crowded hall where the music sounded loud and people were laughing, and out through the now almost empty entrance hall and down the steps of the castle and down the driveway and down to Gallanach, where I walked along the esplanade — occasionally having to wave or say ‘Happy New Year’ to various people I didn't know — until I got to the old railway pier and then the harbour, where I sat on the quayside, legs dangling, drinking my whisky and watching a couple of  swans glide on black, still water, to the distant sound of highland jigs coming from the Steam Packet Hotel, and singing and happy-new-year shouts echoing in the streets of the town, and the occasional sniff as my nose watered in sympathy with my eyes.
8
Rory stood on the dunes, facing the sea.
Lewis stomped away along the tide-line, kicking at the odd piece of driftwood and the occasional plastic bottle.
His hands were stuffed into the pockets of his camouflage jacket; his head — short-haired, these days — was down.
South Uist.
Lewis seemed to be taking it as a personal insult that the family had come to the Hebrides for their summer holiday.
People kept asking him what he was doing on Uist; Lewis was further north, ha ha.
‘He's awful moody, isn't he, Uncle Rory?’
Rory watched Lewis walk away along the beach.
‘Yeah.’
He shrugged.
‘Why do you think he doesn't want to walk with us?’
Prentice's thin face looked genuinely puzzled.
Rory smiled, looked once more at Lewis's retreating back, then started down the far side of the dune heading for the narrow road.
Prentice followed.
‘I think,’ Rory said, ‘it's called being at an awkward age.’
Kenneth, Mary and the boys had come holidaying to the Hebrides, as they did most years.
Rory had been invited along too, as he usually was, and for a change had accepted.
So far, they'd been lucky; the Atlantic weather systems had been kind, the days bright and warm, the nights calm and never completely dark.
The big rollers boomed in, the wide beaches lay mostly empty, and the machair — between dunes and cultivation — was a waving ocean of bright flowers thrown across the rich green waves of grass.
Rory loved it, somewhat to his surprise; a holiday from holidays.
A place to stay where he didn't have to take notes about flights and ferries and hotels and restaurants and sights.
No travel book to think about, no articles, no pressure.
He could laze.
He volunteered to take the boys on a walk after breakfast that Sunday.
James had stayed behind and Lewis had been sullen for the half-hour or so they'd been walking before suddenly announcing he wanted to be alone.
Rory and Prentice walked on together, their short shadows preceding them.
The road would be turning east soon, and taking them back to the main road so that they could turn south and walk back to the house.
Lewis knew his way about the area, so Rory was happy to let him wander off alone.
A car passed them on the single track road, heading north; they stood aside to let it pass, waving at the single occupant when he waved at them.
The surf was a distant wash of noise, rolling over the sparkling machair in invisible waves.
Larks warbled, points of sound in the sweep of blue sky and small puffy clouds.
‘Is it all right to walk on a Sunday, Uncle Rory?’
‘All right?’
Rory said, glancing at the boy.
In shorts and a short-sleeved shirt, he looked almost painfully thin.
Rory wore an old cheesecloth shirt and cut-off jeans.
‘Aye; dad was saying you're not even allowed to walk in some islands on a Sunday!’
Prentice rolled his eyes and puffed his cheeks out.
‘Well, yeah,’ Rory said.
‘I think they're like that in Lewis and  Harris.
But that's the hard-line prods up there.
Down here they're Catholics; bit more relaxed about that sort of thing.’
‘But not being able to walk !’
Prentice protested, shaking his head at his shadow on the grey-black tarmac.
‘I think you're allowed to walk to church and back.’
‘Ho!
Big deal!’
Prentice didn't sound impressed.
He was silent for a while.
‘Mind you,’ he said, sounding sly.
‘I suppose you could always take a very long way round.’
Rory laughed, just as his attention was caught by a little white blossom lying on the road surface in front of them.
Prentice looked up, at first surprised, then smiling, when Rory laughed.
Prentice stood on the flower, then jumped, shrieking with pain.
‘Ah; my foot!
My foot!
Oh!
Oh!’
Rory stood, open mouthed for a second, watching Prentice hop around on the tarmac, clutching at one ankle, his face contorted.
Rory thought for a second Prentice was pretending, but the boy's expression convinced him he was in real pain.
Prentice hopped onto the grass and fell over, still clutching at his foot; Rory could see something white stuck to the sole of the boy's sandshoe.
‘What is it?’ he said, crouching down by Prentice's side.
The boy was shaking, and when he looked up at Rory there were tears in his eyes.
‘I don't know,’ he sobbed.
‘Stepped on something.’
‘Let me see.’
Rory sat on the grass in front of Prentice and held his foot.
The little white blossom he'd seen on the road's surface was stuck to the boy's sandshoe; it wasn't a flower, it was a little paper charity flag for the Royal National Lifeboat Institution, the sort you secured to your lapel with a pin.
The flag was still attached to its pin, which was buried in the sole of Prentice's shoe.
Rory sucked his breath in when he saw it; most of the pin must be inside the boy's foot, near the middle of the broadest part of the sole.
Prentice's foot and leg shuddered as he rolled on the grass.
‘It's awful sore, Uncle Rory,’ he said, voice trembling.
‘It's just a wee pin,’ Rory said, trying to sound encouraging.
‘I'll have it out in a second.’
He licked his lips, rubbed his right index finger and thumb together for a couple of seconds and held Prentice's foot steady with his left hand.
He used the nails of his finger and thumb to find the head of the pin, itself almost buried in the tan rubber sole of the sandshoe.
He grasped it.
Prentice whimpered, foot trembling in Rory's grip.
Rory gritted his teeth, pulled.
The pin slid out; an inch of it, shining in the sunlight.
Prentice cried out, then relaxed.
Rory put the boy's foot down gently.
Prentice sat up, face quivering.
‘That's better,’ he said.
He used one shirt sleeve to wipe at his face.
‘What was it?’
‘This.’
Rory showed him the pin.
Prentice grimaced.
‘Ouch.’
‘You're probably going to need a tetanus injection,’ Rory told him.
‘Aw no!
More needles!’
They took his shoe and sock off.
Rory sucked at the tiny wound and spat, trying to remove any dirt.
Prentice, eyes still watering, laughed nervously.
‘Is that not a horrible smell, no, Uncle Rory?’
Rory threw the boy's white sock at him, grinning.
‘I've been to India, kid; that ain't nuthin.’
Prentice put his shoe and sock back on and got to his feet, obviously in some pain when he stood.
‘Here; I'll give you a carry-coal-bag,’ Rory said, turning his back to the boy and putting his arms out from his sides as he crouched.
‘Really, Uncle Rory?
You sure?
Will I not be awful heavy?’
‘Hop on; you're a bean-pole, laddie.
I'll probably go faster with you on my back; you walk too slow.
Come on.’
Prentice put his arms round Rory's neck and got up onto his back; Rory set off at a run.
Prentice whooped.
‘See?’
Rory said, slowing to a fast walk.
‘I'm not too heavy, honest, Uncle Rory?’
‘What?
A skelf like you?
Never.’
‘Do you think this is a punishment from God for talking about walking on a Sunday, Uncle Rory?’
Rory laughed.
‘Certainly not.’
‘Do you not believe in God either, Uncle Rory?’
‘No.
Well; not in the Christian God.
Maybe something else.’
He shrugged his shoulders and shifted Prentice into a more comfortable position on his back.
‘When I was in India, I thought then I knew what it was I might believe in.
But when I came back it all seemed to go away again.
I think it was something to do with the place.’
He looked to one side, at the dazzling expanse of machair; endless emerald green scattered thick with flowers so bright they seemed lit from inside.
‘Places have an effect on people.
They alter your thoughts.
India does, anyway.’
‘What about when you went to America?
Did that affect what you thought?’
Rory laughed gently.
‘Yeah; it did that all right.
Kind of in the opposite way, though.’
‘Are you going to go away again?’
‘I expect so.’
Prentice clasped his hands in front of Rory's chin.
Rory glanced at his wrists; thin and fragile looking.
Prentice was still holding the little Lifeboat flag, twirling the pin between his fingers.
‘When did you stop believing in God?’
Prentice asked.
Rory shrugged.
‘Hard to say; I think I started to think for myself when I was about your age, maybe a bit younger.’
‘Oh.’
‘I tried to imagine how the world had been created, and I imagined Sooty — you know; the glove puppet —’
‘I know; they still have him.
Sooty and Sweep.’
Prentice giggled.
‘Well, I imagined him standing on a wee planet about the size of a football —’
‘But he hasn't got any legs!’
‘Ah, but he did in the annuals I got for Christmas.
Anyway, I imagined him waving a wand, and the world came into existence.
Like, I'd been to church, been to Sunday School, so I knew all the stuff in the Bible, but I guess I needed to envisage it…see it, in my own terms.’
‘Uh-huh.’
‘But then I thought; wait a minute; where does the planet Sooty's standing on come from?
I thought Sooty could have waved his wand and made that appear too, but where would he stand while he was doing it?
I mean, I didn't think, Well, he could float in space, and it never occurred to me to ask where Sooty himself had come from, or the wand, but I was already heading towards not believing, I suppose.
It was like the dragons.’
‘Dragons?’
Prentice said, sounding excited and wary at once.
Rory felt the boy tremble.
‘Yeah,’ Rory said.
‘I used to hide under the covers of my bed at night, imagining there were dragons out there; in the room when the light was out, when there was nobody else there.
I'd hunch down under the covers with just an air-hole to breath through, and shelter there.
The dragons couldn't get you through the air-hole; they could only get you if you put out a foot or a hand, or worst of all your head; that was when they struck; bit it off, or pulled you right out and ate all of you.’
‘Waa!
Alien!’
Prentice said.
His arms squeezed Rory's neck.
‘Yeah,’ Rory said.
‘Well, I guess a lot of horror films come from that sort of background.
Anyway; I used to be petrified of these dragons, even though I knew they probably didn't exist; I mean I knew there was no Santa Claus, and no fairies and elves, but still thought ghosts and dragons were a possibility, and it only took one to kill you…
I mean how did I really know I could trust adults?
Even mum and dad?
There were so many things I didn't really understand about people, about life.
Most of the time you could just ignore a lot of the stuff you didn't know; it'd come in time, you'd be told when you needed to know…
But how did you know that there wasn't some big secret, some big, evil deal going down that involves you but had been kept secret from you?
‘Like, maybe your parents were just fattening you up until you would make a decent meal for these dragons, or it was an intelligence test; the kids smart enough to have sussed out the fact there were dragons around were the ones that would survive, and the ones that just lay there, trusting, each night, deserved to die, and their parents couldn't tell them or the dragons would eat them , and stories about dragons were the only clues you were ever given; that was all the adults could do to warn you…
I was pretty paranoid about it.
I used to be frightened to fall asleep at night sometimes, afraid I'd stick my head out from under the clothes while I was asleep and wake up to find my head in a dragon's mouth, before I died.’
‘Wow!’
Rory grunted, shifting Prentice's weight again.
Kid wasn't so feather-light after all.
‘But then one night, under the covers — I was just getting older, I guess, but anyway — I was sort of reviewing the day, and I was thinking about school, and what we'd learned, and we'd been doing the Second World War, and I hadn't liked the sound of this Hitler guy at all; and I'd asked dad, just to double-check, and —’
‘So he was still alive?
When you were ten?’
‘Oh yeah; didn't die until I was twelve.
Anyway; he brought down this book; history of the War in pictures, and it had like all these photos of the death camps, where the Nazis murdered millions of Jews, and communists, and homosexuals, and gypsies and anybody else they didn't like…but mostly Jews, and there were like just piles of bodies; incredibly thin bodies, like bones; skeletons wrapped with tissue paper, and piled higher than a house…and pits; long pits full of bodies, and the metal stretchers they were put onto to be shoved into the ovens, and the piles of wedding rings and spectacles; glasses, and even artificial legs and weird stuff like that…
‘Anyway, that night they put a night-light in my room, in case I had nightmares, but the shadows were even worse than the  darkness, and so I just lay there, under the covers, quivering with fear thanks to these damn dragons, and I wished Ken was back from University because sometimes I was allowed to sleep in his room, and I wished I was allowed a torch in my room, but I wasn't, and I was wondering about crying really loudly, because that would bring mum and dad in to see me, but then what did I say was wrong?
And then I suddenly thought…
‘The dragons might be there; they might be real and they might be every bit as vicious as I'd imagined, but I'm a human being ; so was Adolf Hitler and he killed millions of people!
‘And I threw back the bedclothes before I had any more time to think about it and burst out of the bed; threw myself into the middle of the bedroom, screaming and roaring and thrashing about.’
‘Ha!’
Prentice said, squirming.
‘That brought mum and dad through; thought I was having a fit or something.
But I just looked up from the carpet with this great big reassuring smile and said there was nothing to worry about.’
Rory smiled at the memory, bringing his head up to look around.
A break in the dunes let the sound of surf grow louder.
There was a car in the distance coming towards them.
‘Brilliant!’
Prentice said.
Rory grunted, shifting Prentice's weight once more.
‘Never had any trouble with dragons after that.’
‘I'll bet you didn't!’
The car hummed nearer as the view to one side slowly opened up through the dunes to reveal the shining beach and blue-green ocean.
‘Let's see if we can get a lift off this car, eh?’
Rory said.
‘You okay to get down?
‘Yeah!’
Prentice slid off onto the grass and stood there, favouring his good leg, while Rory stretched and rubbed at his lower back.
He stuck one thumb out when the car was still a few hundred yards away.
Prentice reached up and put something on the  thin collar of Rory's shirt.
It was the little paper Lifeboat flag.
Rory held his collar out so that he could look at it.
He looked down at the boy's grinning face.
‘Thanks,’ he said.
‘That's your medal, Uncle Rory,’ Prentice told him.
‘For being a brilliant uncle.’
Rory ruffled the boy's hair.
‘Thanks, Prentice.’
He looked back at the car.
Was it slowing?
‘I used to worry about Darth Vader,’ Prentice confessed, putting his arm round Rory's waist and lifting his foot to massage it with one hand.
‘I'd lie under the covers and make the noise he makes when he's breathing, and then I'd stop, but sometimes it would go on after I'd stopped!’
Prentice shook his head, and slapped one hand off his forehead.
‘Crazy, eh?’
Rory laughed, as the approaching car started to slow down.
‘Yeah, well, that's what stories do to you, sometimes.
Your dad's always tried never to tell you lies, or stories that would scare you or make you superstitious, but —’
‘Ha!’
Prentice said, as the battered Cortina 11 drew to a stop just past them.
‘I remember he tried to tell us clouds came from the Steam Packet Hotel, in the town.
That's what they were: packets of steam from the Steam Packet Hotel.
Ha!’
Rory smiled as they walked towards the car, him supporting the limping boy.
Rory looked away for a second, towards the beach, where the long Atlantic rollers crashed against the broad expanse of gold.
He sniffed the glass; the whisky was amber, and there wasn't much of it.
The smell stung.
He put it to his lips, hesitated, then knocked it back in one go.
The drink made his lips and tongue tingle; his throat felt sore and the fumes went up his nose and down into his lungs.
He tried very hard not to cough like he'd seen people cough in westerns when they tried whisky for the first time, and got away  with just clearing his throat rather loudly (he looked round at the curtains, afraid somebody might have heard).
His eyes and nose were watering, so he pulled his hanky from his trousers, blew his nose.
The whisky tasted horrible.
And people drank this stuff for pleasure ?
He had hoped that by trying some whisky he'd understand adults a bit better; instead they made even less sense.
He was standing between the curtains and the windows of the ballroom of the Steam Packet Hotel, on the railway pier at Gallanach.
Outside, the afternoon was wet and miserable-looking, and what little light there had been — watery and grey — was going now.
Sheets of rain hauled in off the bay, blew around the steamers and ferries moored round the windswept quay, then collapsed upon the dark grey buildings of the town.
The street lamps were already lit, and a few cars crawled through the rough-mirror streets with their lights on and their wipers flapping to and fro.
Music played behind Rory.
He balanced the empty whisky glass on the window-sill and gave his nose a last wipe, pocketing his hanky.
He supposed he'd better go back into the ballroom.
Ballroom; he hated the word.
He hated the music they were playing Highland stuff, mostly — he hated being here in this dull, wet town, with these dull people listening to their dull music at their dull wedding.
They should be playing the Beatles or the Rolling Stones, and they shouldn't be getting married in the first place — modern people didn't.
‘Heeee-yooch!’ a voice shouted, startlingly nearby, making Rory jump.
The curtains bowed in a few yards away, almost touching the window-sill, the movement like a wave.
Rory could hear the stamping, slapping feet move in time to the fiddles and accordions as they played a jig.
People were clapping, shouting out.
God, it was all so provincial.
Rory straightened his tie, and with his whisky still burning in his throat, and now his stomach too, he moved along to the gap in the curtains and slid through, back into the ballroom, where people sat  drinking at long wooden tables and groups of dancers went whirling round in complicated, ever-changing patterns, all flowing dresses and clasping hands and big red sweaty faces and white shirts and ties and narrow trousers or — even worse — kilts.
Rory moved near the stage, behind the tables where Kenneth and Mary sat, talking to mum.
Boring Hamish and the horse-resembling Antonia were on the floor, him in a kilt, her still in her white bridal gown, both dancing badly and out of time, but seemingly thoroughly enjoying themselves.
‘Well,’ he heard his mum saying, ‘you two had better get a move on, or Hamish and Antonia will beat you to it.’
She laughed and drank from her glass.
She wore a hat.
Rory hated his mother in a hat.
He thought she sounded drunk.
Kenneth and Mary smiled uncertainly at each other.
‘Well, mum,’ Kenneth said, sitting back, filling his pipe.
‘We have been practising.’
‘Kenneth!’ his wife said quietly.
Mum shook her head.
‘Ah, don't mind me; plenty of time yet, I dare say.’
She looked into her empty glass.
‘I wouldn't be missing grandchildren so much, but…’
She shrugged.
There was an awkward silence between the three people then, while the music played and the dancers whooped and shouted and clapped and stamped.
Rory saw his mother's shoulders move once, and she put her head down for a second, sniffed.
She reached down for her handbag on the floor.
Kenneth handed her his hanky.
He put his arm round his mum's shoulders.
Mary moved her seat closer, reached out and took one of the older woman's hands in hers.
‘God, I miss that old devil,’ mum said, and blew her nose.
Eyes bright with tears, she looked at Mary, and then saw Rory standing behind and to one side of them.
‘Rory,’ she said, trying to sound all right.
‘We wondered where you were.
Are you enjoying yourself, darling?’
‘Yes,’ he lied.
He hated her calling him ‘darling’.
He stayed  where he was because he didn't want to get close enough for them to smell his breath.
His mother smiled.
‘Good lad.
See if you can find your cousin Sheila; you said you'd ask her to dance, remember?’
‘Yeah, all right,’ he said, turning away.
He didn't like boring cousin Sheila, either.
She was about the only girl here who was his own age.
It was horrible being this age when nobody else was; they were all either adults or children.
He blamed his parents.
Mostly he blamed his dad.
If he'd looked after himself, not had a heart attack, he'd still be around.
That was how thoughtless he'd been.
Rory supposed it was the same thoughtlessness that had made dad and mum have him so much later than the rest of their children.
People just didn't think, that was the trouble.
He didn't go looking for Sheila.
He decided to go wandering.
He would slip away.
He had always liked slipping away from things.
At parties he would just quietly leave when nobody was watching him, so that only much later would anybody wonder where he was.
When he was out with a group of other kids, playing kick-the-can or soldiers, he would often sneak away, so that they would never find him, or think he had fallen down a hole or into a burn or a loch.
It was a wonderful feeling, to disappear like that; it made him feel different and special.
He gloried in the cunningness of it, the feeling of having outwitted the others, of knowing what they did not; that he was out and away and they were back there where he'd left them, ignorantly worrying where he was, searching; wondering.
He slunk out through the doors while they were clapping the band after finishing one of their noisy, interminable Highland dances.
It was cooler in the lobby.
He drew himself upright and walked confidently through the bit of the lobby that gave onto the Cocktail Lounge, where ruddy-faced men stood panting and laughing, sleeves rolled up, ties loose, queuing for drinks or holding trays of them, laughing loudly in deep voices.
He went through another set of doors, down some steps, round a corner, and found the hotel's single small lift.
He pulled both sets of gates open with an effort, entered, then closed them again.
The lift was a little bigger than a phone box.
He pressed the brass button for the top floor.
The lift jerked into motion and set off, humming.
The white-washed walls of the lift shaft moved smoothly downwards as the lift ascended.
Stencilled letters painted inside the shaft said 1st Floor…2nd Floor…
God, he thought, Americans must think they're in the Stone Age when they come to stay in a place like this.
He felt ashamed.
The top floor was boring.
He went from one end to the other of the U-shaped hotel, up and down steps that marked the boundaries of the three separate buildings that made up the Steam Packet Hotel.
There were no windows; only skylights, each spattered with rain drops and lined with little rivulets of running water.
He'd been hoping for windows, and a view over the bay or the town.
He trod the corridors again, looking for an unlocked door.
Maybe the maids would have left some of the rooms open, if there was nobody staying in them just now.
He tried a few handles.
The only open door led to a broom cupboard.
Then at the next door he heard giggling.
He looked at the number.
It was room 48. 48 was a good number; not as good as 32 or 64, but better than, say, 49, and much better than 47 (though that was interesting too because it was a prime).
The very best numbers were numbers like 20, 23, 30, 40, 57, 75, 105 and 155.
Calibre numbers; gun numbers.
Those were luckiest.
But 48 was all right.
More giggling.
He looked back down the corridor, then crouched and looked through the key-hole.
It was a bit clichéd, but what did people expect in a boring hotel like this in a boring town like this in a boring country like this?
It was all you could do.
There was no key in the lock, so he could see in through the big old-fashioned key-hole.
He saw a large dressing table sitting in a  broad bay window.
The dressing-table held a big, tippable mirror, and most of the rest of the room was visible in it.
In the mirror Rory saw his sister Fiona, and then Fergus Urvill.
They were making the big double bed.
Fiona still wore her peach-coloured bridesmaid's dress, very long and smooth-looking.
There were flowers in her hair, which made her look quite good.
Rory suspected she looked so good because she didn't live here any more; she lived in London, and Aunt Ilsa had got her a job working for a television company.
Fiona sold time to people.
That was how she put it.
She sold advertising space.
She sold time.
Rory thought that sounded pretty interesting.
Fergus Urvill was on the other side of the bed, dressed in a kilt, shirt and waistcoat.
Rory knew Fergus was aged with Kenneth, but somehow he always seemed older.
Maybe it was because he had gone to a private high school.
Rory didn't really know Fergus Urvill very well; although he did sometimes visit Lochgair, he spoke differently — posher — and seemed to spend a lot of his time shooting at birds and animals with other rich people.
Rory had always found Fergus Urvill to be a little frightening.
Kenneth had told him the story, years ago, about when Fergus put Lachy Watt's eye out; he'd stuck a fossil bone in it, or something.
Rory thought now that his brother must have exaggerated the story, made it more horrific than it really had been, and he certainly didn't believe that Lachy had run away to sea just so that he could wear an eye-patch and pretend he was a pirate.
He had joined the merchant navy — Rory had asked dad about that — but he had an artificial eye, not a patch.
Rory knew because he'd been with mum once when they'd met Lachy and a woman in the street in Lochgilphead.
Rory had looked very hard but hadn't been able to decide which was the false eye.
His own eye smarted, exposed to the draft coming through the key-hole.
He blinked, then used his other eye.
Fiona and Fergus were making the bed, but doing it in a funny  sort of way; the bottom sheet had been doubled up half-way down the bed.
They were both chuckling to themselves, and talking in quiet, urgent whispers.
Fiona glanced off to one side a couple of times.
Rory worked out she was looking at the door he was crouched behind.
They made the bed up, so that it looked ordinary.
Rory got ready to run away down the corridor.
But they didn't leave the room; instead, Fiona and Fergus, still breathless with giggles, still chattering excitedly away, started to turn the furniture in the room upside down.
They left the bed, of course, but they turned a table, a chest of drawers, two bedside cabinets, two chairs and an easy chair upside down .
They carefully replaced lights and vases and other bits and pieces as they went along.
They stood before the dressing table for a while, looking at it and discussing it, apparently, but eventually just turned it round so that it faced the wrong way, rather than turn it upside down.
Fiona leant back against the rear of the dressing table, breathing hard, and waved one hand, wafting air over her face.
Her cheeks were pink, and a couple of coils of copper hair had fallen from her hairdo, one on each side of her head.
She pulled at her bodice, blew down, went ‘Whoo!’
Rory couldn't see Fergus Urvill.
Then he reappeared, stood by Fiona.
He was holding a key and a couple of toilet rolls; he said something Rory didn't catch.
‘Oh no,’ Fiona said, touching Fergus's arm.
Her face looked amused but concerned.
‘No, that's naughty…’
Fergus stood there for a moment.
Rory couldn't see his face, but Fiona's looked glowing and bright.
‘I like being naughty,’ he heard Fergus say, and then he stepped forward and took Fiona in his arms, still holding the key and the toilet rolls.
What ? thought Rory.
This really was something.
Sister Fiona and big Fergus Urvill?
Stupid girl; probably only after her body.
‘Ferg!’
Fiona said, breaking away.
Her face looked surprised, cheeks even redder.
She smiled broadly, held Fergus's elbows.
‘Well, this is…unexpected.’
‘I've always…’
Fergus lowered his voice as he bent to kiss her again, face in her hair and then his mouth on hers.
Rory missed the exact words.
Go on, thought Rory.
Go on.
Do it.
Let me see!
Fergus's hands dropped the key and the toilet rolls, grabbed Fiona's bum.
She pushed away from him.
‘Ferg…’ she said, breathless, lip-stick smeared.
‘Fiona,’ Fergus moaned, clutching her.
‘I want you!
I need you!’
‘Well,’ Fiona said, gulping.
‘That's very, ah…but not here, eh?’
Fergus pulled her close again.
‘Let me drive you home tonight.’
‘Umm, well, I think we were getting a taxi.’
‘Please; let me.
Please.
Fiona.
You don't know…’
Fergus stuck his nose into her hair again, made a sort of moaning noise.
‘Feel me.’
And he guided one of Fiona's hands to the front of his kilt.
Good God, thought Rory.
He took another quick glance down the hall, then looked back through the key-hole.
Fiona took her hand away.
‘Hmm.
Yes; actually I already could, Fergus.’
‘I need you!’
He pulled her close again.
‘Not here , Fergus.’
‘Fiona; please…’
‘All right; all right , Fergus.
I'll try.
We'll see, okay?’
‘Yes; yes, thank you!’
Fergus gathered Fiona's hands in his.
‘Right,’ she laughed.
‘Well, come on; let's get out of here before the happy couple arrive.
Put those back in the loo.’
She pointed at the toilet rolls.
Fergus retrieved them.
She busied herself with her hair, restoring it.
Fergus turned and disappeared from Rory's view.
‘And put some cold water on that ,’ Fiona said, grinning.
‘Looks like your sporran's trying to levitate.’
She came towards the door.
Rory leapt back, staggered on legs that had gone half to sleep, and only just scrambled into the broom cupboard and got the door shut before the bedroom door opened.
The broom cupboard key-hole didn't let him see anything.
He heard muffled conversation but no footsteps.
He waited, breathless, heart hammering in the darkness, one hand in his trouser pocket, stroking himself.
‘Do you know where the twins were conceived?’
‘No idea,’ he said, and belched.
‘Fucking McCaig's Folly, that's where.’
‘What, Oban?’
‘The very place.’
‘Good grief.’
‘You don't mind me saying this, I mean talking about Fiona like this, do you?’
‘No, no.’
He waved one hand.
‘Your wife; you talk about her.
No, no, that's bad, that sounds bad.
I'm all for women's lib.’
‘Might have bloody known.
Might have bloody known you would be.
Bloody typical, if you ask me.
You're a Bolshie bastard, McHoan.’
‘And you are the unacceptable face of Capitalism, Ferg.’
‘Don't quote that fairy at me, you Bolshie bastard.
And don't call me Ferg.’
‘Beg your pardon.
Some more whisky?’
‘Don't mind if I do.’
Rory got up out of the creaking wooden seat and walked unsteadily over to where Fergus lay on the bare wooden floorboards, head against the ancient, burst couch.
The fire crackled in the grate, its light competing with that of the little gas lamp.
Rory unscrewed the top from the bottle of Bells carefully and topped up Fergus's little silver cup.
Fergus had brought a leather case with him; it held three of the silver cups and a big hip flask.
Rory had brought the bottle in his rucksack.
‘There you go.’
‘Ta much.
You're a decent fellow for a Bolshie bastard.’
‘One tries, old bean,’ Rory said.
He walked carefully to his seat, picked his little cup up from the floor and went to the room's single window.
It was black outside.
There had been a moon when they'd first arrived, but the clouds had come while they were chopping wood, and the rain while they'd cooked dinner on the two little primus stoves.
He turned from the darkness.
Fergus looked like he was almost asleep.
He was dressed in plus fours, tweed waistcoat (the jacket, and his waxed Barbour were hanging behind the door of the bothy), thick socks, brogues, and a fawn country shirt with a button-down collar.
God, he even had his tie on still.
Rory wore cords, mountain-hiking boots and a plain Mshirt.
His nylon waterproofs were draped over a chair.
What an odd pair we make, he thought.
He had been back from his travels for a while, staying first in London then at Lochgair, while he tried to work out what to do with his life.
He had the impression things were sliding past him somehow.
He'd made a good start but now he was faltering, and the focus of attention was drifting slowly away from him.
He had returned to discover that — like his brother before him Ken had given up being a teacher.
Hamish had taken up the managerial place at the factory that everyone had expected would be Kenneth's, when Kenneth had decided to teach.
Now Ken too was quitting the profession to try something else: writing children's stories.
Rory had always thought of Hamish as a sort of ponderously eccentric fool, and Ken a kind of failure because he had so much wanted to travel, and instead had settled down with Mary, stayed in the same wee corner of the world as he'd been born and raised in, and not only raised his own children, but chosen to teach others', too.
Rory had felt slightly sorry for his elder brother, then.
Now he felt envious.
Ken seemed happy; happy with his wife, with his children, and now with his work; not rich, but doing what he wanted to do.
And why hadn't Ken told him he was writing too?
He might have been able to help him, but even if Ken had wanted to do it all  without any assistance from his younger brother, he might at least have told him what he was doing.
Instead Rory had found out only when Ken had had his first story published, and now it was as though they were passing each other travelling in opposite directions; Ken slowly but surely building up a reputation as a children's story-teller while his own supposed career as a professional recounter of traveller's tales sank gradually in the west.
Books people forgot about and articles in Sunday supplements that were only one notch above the sort of shit tourist boards put out.
And so he'd left London, to come here, hoping to lick the closing wise wound of whatever talent it was he had.
He'd spent a lot of time just wandering in the hills.
Sometimes Ken came too, or one of the boys if they were in the mood, but mostly he went by himself, trying to sort himself out.
What it boiled down to was: there was here, where he had friends and family, or there was London where he had a few friends and a lot of contacts, and it felt like things were happening, and where you could fill time with something no matter how mixed up and fraudulent you felt…or there was abroad, of course; the rest of the world; India (to take the most extreme example he'd found so far), where you felt like an alien, lumbering and self-conscious, materially far more rich and spiritually far more poor than the people who thronged the place, where just by that intensity of touching, that very sweating crowdedness, you felt more apart, more consigned to a different, echoing place inside yourself.
One day, on a long walk, he'd almost literally bumped into Fergus Urvill, crouching in a hide up amongst the folds in the hills, waiting with telescope and .303 for a wounded Sika deer.
Fergus had motioned him to sit down with him behind the hide, and to keep quiet.
Rory had waited with the older man — silent for quarter of an hour apart from a whispered hello and a quick explanation of what was going on — until the herd of deer appeared, brown shapes on the brown hill.
One animal was holding the rest back; limping heavily.
Fergus waited until the herd was as close as it looked like it was  going to come, then sighted on the limping beast, still two hundred yards away.
The sound of the shot left Rory's ears ringing.
The Sika's head jerked; it dropped to its knees and keeled over.
The rest raced off, bouncing across the heather.
He helped Fergus drag the small corpse down the slope to the track, where the Land Rover was parked, and accepted a lift back to the road.
‘Hardly recognised you, Roderick,’ Fergus said, as he drove.
‘Not seen you since Fi and I got shackled.
Must be at least that long.’
‘I've been away.’
‘Of course; your travels.
I've got that India book of yours, you know.’
‘Ah.’
Rory watched the trees slide past the Land Rover's windows.
‘Done any others?’
‘There was one about the States and Mexico.
Last year.’
‘Really?’
Fergus looked over at him briefly.
‘I didn't hear about that ,’
Rory smiled thinly.
‘No,’ he said.
Fergus made a grunting noise, changed gear as they bumped down the track towards the main road.
‘Ken said something about you living in a squat in London…or something ridiculous like that.
That right?’
‘Housing cooperative.’
‘Ah-ha.’
Fergus drove on for a while.
‘Always wanted to take a look at India myself, you know,’ he said suddenly.
‘Keep meaning to go; never quite get around to it, know what I mean?’
‘Well, it isn't the sort of place you can just take a look at.’
‘No?’
‘Not really.’
The Land Rover came down to the main road between Lochgilphead and Lochgair.
‘Look, we've got a do on this evening, in the town —’ Fergus glanced at his watch.
‘— bit late already, to tell the  truth.
But how about coming round tomorrow for…
In fact, d'you fish?’
‘Fish?
Yeah, I used to.’
‘Not against your vegetarian principles, is it?’
‘No.
India didn't change me that much.’
‘Well, then; come fishing with me tomorrow.
Pool on the Add with a monster trout in it; been after the swine for months.
Plenty of smaller stuff too, though.
Fancy it?
Course, I'll never talk to you again if you catch the big feller, but might make a fun afternoon.
What do you say?’
‘Okay,’ he said.
So they became friends, after a fashion.
Most of Rory's pals in London were in the International Marxist Croup, but here he was; wandering the hills with an upper class dingbat who just happened to be married to his sister and who lived for huntin', shootin' and fishin' (and seemed to spend the absolute minimum amount of time in his castle with his wife), and who had just last year rationalised half the work force in the glass factory out of a job.
Still, they got on together, somehow, and Fergus was an undemanding companion; company of a sort, but not taxing; none of Ken's garrulousness, Lewis's moodiness or Prentice or James's ceaseless questioning.
It was almost like walking the hills on your own.
And a couple of days ago Fergus had suggested they go for a longer hike, up into the trackless hills where the Landy couldn't reach.
They would take collapsible rods, a couple of guns, and have to fish and shoot to eat.
They could stay in the old lodge; it would save taking a tent.
So here they were, on the first floor of the old lodge, which was now used just as a bothy.
The room they were in contained a single big dormer window, a fireplace, a couch, a table and two seats, and two bunkbeds.
There were other rooms with more beds, but keeping to one room meant only lighting one fire; the autumn weather had turned chilly early.
‘No,’ Fergus said, looking up from where he lay, slumped against  the couch.
‘But you don't mind me talking about Fiona like this, do you?
I mean, your sister.
My wife.
You sure you don't mind, do you?’
‘Positive.’
‘Good man.’
‘McCaig's Folly, eh?’
‘Hmm?
Oh; well yes…at least I think so.
Cot the idea from Charlotte, actually.’
‘What, your sister?’
‘Mmm.
The one that married that chap Walker, from Edinburgh.’
‘Oh yeah; I remember.’
Rory went over to the seat that held his jacket.
‘Funny girl, Charlie; had this thing about…antiquity.
Got Walker to deflower her under this ancient fucking yew tree in Perthshire.
So she told me, anyway.’
‘Uh-huh.’
Rory rummaged in his jacket pockets.
‘Fiona and I thought we'd try something like that, one time we were in Oban, for some do.
You know; put a bit of sparkle back in…
You sure you don't mind me talking about your sister like this?’
‘Yeah.’
Rory took his tobacco tin from the jacket.
He held the tin up.
‘As long as you don't mind me having a little smoke?’
‘Not at all, not at all .
Bloody cold it was, in that damn folly.
Had to sit on a — Oh,’ Fergus said, suddenly realising ‘You mean the old wacky baccy.’
Rory smiled, sat down.
‘That's the stuff.’
‘Not at all,’ Fergus said, waving one hand.
‘Co ahead.’
He watched carefully as Rory set out the papers.
‘Mmm, go ahead.’
Rory looked up, saw Fergus's fascinated expression.
‘Do you want any of this, Fergus?’
‘Umm,’ Fergus said, sitting back, blinking.
‘Could do, I suppose.
Never really tried it, to be honest.
Couple of chaps at the school got booted out for that stuff and I never did get round to it.’
‘Well, I'm not forcing you.’
‘Not at all.
Not at all.’
They smoked the joint.
Fergus, used to the occasional cigar with his brandy now that he'd given up his pipe, pronounced the smoke quite cool, and objected more to the sweet taste of the Old Holborn than to the scent of resin.
‘This any good for hanky-panky?’ he said, passing the roach back to Rory, who took a last hot toke then flicked the remains into the heart of the fire.
‘Can be,’ he said.
‘Might try it some time.
God knows we could do with something to — Look, you absolutely sure you don't mind me talking about your sister this way?’
‘Positive.’
‘Good man — hey!
Did you hear that?’
Rory looked up at the ceiling.
Fergus was staring at the plasterboard expanse above them.
Rory listened.
Then, above the crackling of the fire, he did hear something; a quiet, scrabbling noise in the roof-space above them.
‘Rats, I'll bet!’
Fergus said, and rolled over to his pack.
Rory thought about it.
They were here in a deserted old house in the middle of nowhere on a black and starless night in one of the more mysterious bits of Scotland, and there was a scrabbling, clawy sort of noise coming from the ceiling above him and this other drunk, stoned man.
He shrugged.
Yeah; probably rats.
Or mice.
Or birds.
Fergus pulled his pack gently to him, scraping over the floorboards.
He lifted the rucksack up.
The .303 and the shotgun were in a waterproof bag strapped to the side of the pack.
Fergus undid the straps.
‘Ssh,’ he said to Rory.
Rory had started building another joint.
He waved.
He drank some more whisky.
He was just inserting the roach when Fergus rolled over to him and held the shotgun out to him.
‘Here!’ he whispered urgently.
‘Hmm,’ Rory said, nodding thanks.
He heard some clicks.
Fergus held the ancient Lee Enfield at his side.
He knelt close by Rory.
‘Think the little bastard's over there.’
He pointed.
He reached  up, touched the gun Rory held.
It was hard doing the roach one handed.
‘Put that down, man!’
Fergus hissed.
He took the tin from Rory's lap and put all the makings down on the floor.
Rory felt peeved.
‘There,’ Fergus said.
‘Safety's off.
When I fire, aim where I do, all right?’
‘Yup,’ Rory said, forgetting about the J. He took the shotgun.
Fergus walked on his heels, still hunkered down, across the room, eyes and gun pointed towards the plasterboard ceiling.
He stopped.
There was a noise like a spider running across a very sensitive microphone.
Bang! went the rifle.
Rory almost dropped the shotgun.
‘There!’ yelled Fergus.
Plaster was falling from a small hole in the ceiling; there was smoke in the air.
Rory aimed at the small hole, pulled the trigger.
The gun struck back against his shoulder, sending him falling back off his seat.
He clattered to the floor.
‘Well, pump it, man, pump it!’ he heard Fergus shouting from somewhere.
Awful lot of smoke around.
Ears seemed to be ringing.
He pumped the gun.
(Funny; he'd have thought Fergus would have been a side-by-side man.)
There was another sharp crack of sound from the .303.
He saw the hole appear in the plaster almost right above him.
Great; he could get the little bastard without having to get up from the floor.
The floorboards ought to provide extra firing stability, too.
He pulled the trigger again.
The gun went Blam! with a little less sonic enthusiasm than before, though it hurt his shoulder a little more.
A white waterfall of plaster burst down from the ceiling and slapped and pattered all over him.
Rory spat bits out of his mouth, blinked the white dust out of his eyes.
He heard Fergus colliding with something in the room.
He pumped the gun, looked round.
Fergus was lying on the couch, aiming at the centre of the ceiling.
He fired the Lee Enfield again; Rory was getting the hang of this now, and aimed the shotgun at the same place and fired it, almost before  the noise of Fergus's shot had stopped echoing.
The room was getting a bit hazy, and there was probably blood coming from his ears, but what the fuck.
Rory readied the gun again.
He tried to follow where Fergus was pointing his rifle.
As he did so, still lying there with his legs up on the chair he'd fallen over, he started to over-balance to one side, towards Fergus.
‘Aah!’
Rory said.
He tried to put one hand out to stop himself, but the gun was still in his grip.
The long, blue-black barrel arced towards Fergus.
Fergus looked, as Rory fell helplessly over, the gun barrel falling like some felled tree, wide muzzle pointed straight towards him.
Rory could tell exactly what was going to happen, and couldn't stop it.
Fergus's eyes widened.
He jumped; fell over the back of the couch.
Rory fell onto his side; the shotgun roared and the rear of the couch blew open in a dusty horsehair explosion.
Rory let the gun down to the floor.
The noise still rang in his ears.
The room stank of smoke and the fire had gone strangely quiet.
‘Ferg?’ he said, tentatively.
Couldn't hear himself speak.
‘Ferg !’ he shouted.
He sat upright, leaving the gun on the floorboards.
Plaster tumbled off his body in clouds of dust.
‘Hello?’
Fergus said, appearing over the top of the couch, gunless.
Rory looked at him.
They both blinked, eyes watering.
‘Did we get it?’
Rory asked.
‘Don't know,’ Fergus said.
He staggered round the rear of the couch, feet crunching in plaster, and sat down.
He looked at the still slightly smoking hole in the couch, just beside where he'd sat, then up at the holes in the ceiling.
He stayed looking at the holes in the ceiling for a while.
Then he started crying.
Rory watched for a while, befuddled.
‘What's the matter, man?’ he said.
Fergus took no notice; he kept on crying, still staring up at the holes in the ceiling.
He took big lungfuls of air and then let them out in great racking sobs that shook his whole body.
After a while he put his head in his hands and sat there, rocking back and forward, clutching his hair just above his ears.
The tears flowed, trickling off his nose and spotting the white plaster dust on the floorboards at his feet.
‘Ferg,’ Rory said, going over to him.
He hesitated, then put his arm on the man's shoulders.
‘Fergus; for God's sake man, what's wrong?’
Fergus looked up and suddenly Rory felt older than him.
Fergus's heavy, ruddy face was puffed and bloated, and tears had streaked through the dust on his cheeks, disappearing in the bristles on his jaw-line and chin.
When he spoke it was in the voice of a small, hurt boy.
‘Oh God, Rory, I've got to tell somebody, but you must promise; you must give me your word you won't breathe a word to anybody else.
On your life.’
‘Hey, you haven't killed anybody or anything, have you?’
‘No,’ Fergus shook his head, screwed his eyes up.
‘No!
Nothing like that!
It's not something I did.’
‘Okay; my word.
All that stuff.’
Fergus looked at him and Rory shivered.
‘You swear?’
Fergus said, voice hollow.
Rory nodded.
‘I swear.’
He felt dizzy.
The smoke-filled room seemed to tip and waver.
He wondered if they put something trippy in shotgun or rifle cartridges.
And why did I mention killing somebody?
That wasn't too sensible, way out here on this moonless night, etc., with a couple of lethal fire-arms lying around.
‘All right,’ Fergus said, sitting back, breathing deeply.
He looked almost soberly at Rory.
‘You sure you don't mind me talking about your sister?’ he said slowly, with what might have been some sort of smile on his face.
Oh god, thought Rory, and felt sick.
But it was too late to go back now.
The way he told it, it took maybe five minutes.
Fergus Urvill was crying like a baby again at the end of it.
Rory cuddled him.
And after as many tender words as he could think of, to try and lighten the load, to try and make it seem less of a confession, even to try and compensate for the shared and shaming confidence, he told Fergus that he had been responsible for the fire that had burned down the barn near Port Ann, fifteen years earlier.
They ended up laughing about that, but it was the uneasy laughter of desperation and displacement, and all they could do after that was finish the whisky and have the joint Rory had been working on, and it was almost a relief when Fergus was sick as a dog out of the window, hanging out barfing onto the slates and into the guttering while Rory tried to clean the plaster off the top bunk and stowed the guns out of harm's way.
They woke with raging hangovers to a wrecked room and the smell of black powder and vomit.
There was a dead rat, blown almost in two, resting on the hearth of the fire.
They left the place as it was, picked up their gear and walked away.
Neither of them mentioned anything that had been said during the night; they just agreed to head back to civilisation and not to mix whisky and cannabis like that again.
There were no more huntin' shootin' and fishin' trips.
Rory went back to live in London that winter, and ended up — funnily enough — living in a squat.
He wrote poems.
9
The train sat, wrapped in rain and rocked by gusts, waiting to join the main line.
Sidelined again, I watched the cold wind flatten the grubby-looking grass of a weedy field outside Springburn.
A man walked across the field, some mongrel dog padding ahead of him.
Two paths crossed the rectangular field, forming a neat St Andrew's Cross of down-trodden grass.
The dog stopped to sniff at something in the grass, then squatted, urinating.
The man following behind was dressed in cheap looking jeans and a donkey jacket, there was a bonnet perched on his head, and his hands were stuffed in his pockets.
He walked up behind the dog and kicked its arse.
The animal loped away, putting more distance between them, then resumed its casual, padding walk along the path.
It was getting dark.
Street lights were starting to come on in the distance, crimson slivers slowly brightening to orange.
I looked at my watch.
We'd been stuck here, waiting to join the main line into Queen Street, for about ten minutes.
You often had  to wait here while the Edinburgh trains came and went, but the delay didn't usually last this long.
The station was only five minutes away; more importantly,food was only five minutes away.
I'd forgone breakfast because I hadn't got to bed till four in the morning, lunch because I had a hangover and anyway I was late for the train, and due to the fact that it was — according to British Rail at any rate — still part of the extended Festive Period, there had been no buffet trolley on the train.
I was starving.
I was so hungry I'd have eaten pork scratchings.
Queen Street station, a scant mile and a half away, had burgers, sandwiches, shell pies, french fries and french sticks, bridies and pasties and patties.
My God, if all they had were Haggisburgers, I'd eat those.
‘Ladies and gentulmun…’ crackled a gruff Glaswegian voice from the carriage loudspeakers.
My heart sank.
The perfect end to a perfect holiday.
‘Due to a signalling failure…’
I looked out of the wind-shaken carriage, where people were moaning and cursing and making vows to start going by bus, or take the car next time, or buy a car, or learn to drive…looked out through the rain-spattered sheets of glass, watching the cold January day leach out of the grey skies above the drenched city, and witnessed the rain fall upon the tramped-on, pissed-on, shat-on grass of the narrow path in the scrubby field with a feeling of wry but nevertheless wretched empathy.
God, what did any of it matter, in the end?
You lived; you died.
You were as indistinguishable from a distance as one of these blades of grass, and who was to say more important?
Growing, surrounded by your kin, you out-living some, some out-living you.
You didn't have to adjust the scale much, either, to reduce us to the sort of distant irrelevance of this bedraggled field.
The grass was lucky if it grew, was shone upon and rained upon, and was not burned, and was not pulled up by the roots, or poisoned, or buried when the ground was turned over, and some bits just happened to be on a line that humans wanted to walk on, and so got trampled, broken, pressed flat, with no malice; just effect.
And intelligence?
Control?
There were things that we had no more control over yet than the grass did over the developer who chose to plough it all under and build a factory on top.
Perhaps some asteroid, nudged out of its place in the great gravitational gavotte, would fall to Earth; a bullet into a face, obliterating.
Unwitnessed, for what would be visible, from even a nearby star?
A blink of flame, like a match struck beside a search-light…
And then nothing.
But didn't there have to be something out there, just to witness, just to know ?
Hell, it didn't even have to do anything; it didn't have to act on prayers or have us singled out as a special species, or play any part in our history and development; it didn't even necessarily have to have created us, or created anything, all it had to do was exist and have existed and go on existing, to record, to encompass .
I watched as the rain battered the grass and the wind pummelled it, quick gusts flattening patches of the field like sudden bruises beneath the dull sky.
I could just imagine my father jumping up and down on this argument, this need for meaning, for faith.
The train jerked.
I started, too, shaken from my reverie.
Then the train went into reverse, motors growling, occupants groaning, and trundled slowly back through the squalls of rain, passing Maryhill and looping down through Anniesland and over Great Western Road.
We paralleled Crow Road for a bit, and stopped, waiting for signals, outside Jordanhill station; I looked up at the rear of the flats which fronted Crow Road, trying to work out which was Janice Rae's.
I thought of Uncle Rory, then remembered that I had some more of his papers with me, and a load of his poems.
Mum had found them for me in the house at Lochgair.
I got my bag down from the rack.
Uncle Rory could not be more depressing than reality was, just now.
Any hope I might have entertained that Lewis and Verity's little Hogmanay hug had been an aberration, something they would fail to follow through, or feel for some reason embarrassed about, was comprehensively quashed the next evening when they turned up together at Uncle Hamish and Aunt Tone's, bearing all the signs of new lovers (literally so in the case of Lewis's neck, which displayed a line of passion purpurae worthy of an industrial vacuum cleaner, and which were ill-concealed by Lewis's longish dark curls and a white shirt fastened with a bootlace tie).
Lewis and Verity kept exchanging looks, laughing at anything even remotely amusing each other said, sitting close together, finding a hundred small excuses to touch each other…
I wanted to throw up.
We had all gathered for Hamish and Tone's traditional Ne'erday partyette; a necessarily quietish affair during which people exchanged tales of drunkenness, broken resolutions and recipes for hangover cures, as well as taking advantage of the opportunity to compare notes regarding blank spots in the memories of any of the assembled penitents.
I was helping Aunt Tone prepare stuff in the kitchen but had to give up when Lewis and Verity volunteered to assist as well, and then spent most of the time feeding one another little bits of food, goosing each other and going into sardinely-intimate huddles punctuated by low whispers, bursts of baboon-like giggles and convincingly porcine snorts.
I went through to the dining-room and helped myself to a pint of the neuron-friendly punch Uncle Hamish always made for the event.
Mum and dad turned up later.
There were about twenty of us, all told; mostly McHoans but with a smattering of civilians.
We sipped — or in my case gulped — the weak but tasty punch, nibbled on Aunt Tone's buffet-bits, and played Alternative Charades; an invention of my father's in which one first has to guess the category of the thing one is being asked to decipher.
When it was my turn to mime, I tended to concentrate on Popular Communicable Diseases, Well-Known Poisons, Famous Mass Murderers and Great Natural Disasters.
My last memory is of trying to mime Rare Gynaecological Disorders, preparatory to attempting Toxic Shock Syndrome.
But apparently people insisted that one stand up to do one's piece, and I — successfully acclimatised to the horizontal by this time — refused to pander to this sort of nit-picking, and so passed my turn on to Cousin Josh with as much good grace as I could muster.
‘The congenitally odd-jeaned person to my left will take my place,’ I mumbled, waving one hand in his direction before letting my head resume its communion with Hamish and Tone's lounge carpet.
The bit about odd jeans was totally accurate, by the way; Cousin Josh made his fortune firstly by dealing in cars, then by risking all on a jeans company which at the time was tottering on the very hem of bankruptcy; under Josh's regime, their jeans weren't any better or any cheaper than anybody else's, but he had the garments made in odd sizes; waists of 29, 31, 33 inches, and so on, as opposed to the products from all other companies, domestic and foreign, which tended to favour the even numbers.
It was one of those brilliantly simple ideas people always wish they had had themselves, and believe that somehow they could have had; no need to incur any extra expense or make any more sizes than anybody else, or necessarily to distinguish one's product in other way, yet just by the idea one has a potential market of half the jeans-buying public, or at least that proportion of it which has always felt that they are somehow perpetually between the usual sizes.
I vaguely remember dreaming about Verity's jeans that night; how graphically, geographically tight they were and how wonderful it must be to take them off her.
Then I imagined Lewis, boots tied round his neck, for some reason suddenly resembling Shane MacGowan, skinning her jeans off, not me, and he turned into Rodney Ritchie, at home with his parents, unpicking the individual stitches of her jeans with a tiny knife, and the Ritchies all wore badly-fitting jeans and had denim curtains and denim  carpets and denim light shades and denim wallpaper with the little rivets left on like poppers so you could just press paintings and photos onto the wall…except that Mr Ritchie looked like Claude Levi-Strauss, which is when I think I started to get confused.
Either I had been put to bed, I thought, as I woke up next morning, in the wee cold room at the top of the house, or my standard drunk-person's on-board auto-pilot facility was improving with experience.
I bathed, dressed, and broke my fast with some left-overs from the fridge, a pint of water and a couple of brace of Paracetamol, all without encountering anybody else in the house.
It was only eight o'clock; obviously I'd conked out some time before everybody else, and they were still asleep (I had heard appropriate log-sawing-like noises coming from Hamish and Tone's room on my way back from the bathroom).
The day looked bright but cold; I laced up the Docs and went for a walk in the hills behind Gallanach.
I felt like shit and I was trying so hard not to think of Lewis and Verity that I couldn't think about anything else, but the day was fabulous; clear and cold, the sky crystal blue and reflecting in the waters of hill-cupped lochans and the glinting length of Loch Add.
On such days the hills hold a mixture of azure and gold never seen at any other time of year; the cobalt sky is more intense than it ever is in summer, and the straw-coloured hills shine strong in the light from the low winter sun.
Against the shifting mirror that is the surface of a loch, the colours shimmer and dance; they take your breath away, and — for a brief, relieving while — they can even take your thoughts away.
Up in the hills, at the place of marching water, I found Ashley Watt and one of her more exotic cousins.
The concrete spillway below the Loch Add reservoir comes down to a stepped slope above the confluence of several small burns draining nearby slopes.
A short bridge carries the track over  the spillway, and that was where Ashley and Aline were sitting, legs dangling over the stream in the concrete gully, arms resting on the lower bar of the bridge rails.
They were sitting side by side, watching the marching water.
What happened was that the water first backed up behind the lipped edge of the top step, then over-flowed, and spilled with increasing force, in a sort of hydro-chain-reaction, down each subsequent step to the bottom of the channel.
There followed a period of comparative quiet, while the water built up again behind the top step and those beneath.
You might guess it was my dad who first pointed out this odd (and classically Chaotic) phenomenon and brought it to the attention of us kids.
None of us had ever been able to discover whether it was a deliberate effect, or the result of pure chance.
Whatever, it was wonderfully restful, unpredictable and therapeutic.
‘Hey, Prentice,’ Ash said.
She looked a little worn and bleary-eyed, though her long, lion-coloured hair shone like health itself in the brassy sunlight of mid-day.
‘Hi.’
I nodded to her and to Aline, who was Franco-Vietnamese and engaged to Hugh Watt, one of Ashley's multitudinous cousins from the branch of the family that seemed to favour consorts of an exotic provenance (Hugh's brother Craig was going out with a stunning, lanky Nigerian called Noor).
Aline looked even smaller and blacker-haired than usual, beside Ashley.
‘Aline; ça va?’
‘Magic, Prentice,’ Aline replied in fluent Glaswegian.
‘Have some skoosh,’ Ash said as I sat down next to her.
She reached between her and Aline and handed me a half-finished bottle of Irn-Bru.
I had, over the course of the morning, already gulped down about a gallon of teeth-achingly cold stream-water at various points up in the hills, but the traditional Scottish hangover treatment was probably just what I needed.
I took a couple of mouthfuls, handed the bottle back, wiping my lips.
‘You look terrible,’ Ash said.
‘Feel worse,’ I said glumly, watching the water cascade down  the concrete stair-case of the spillway.
‘Lost track of you at the Urvills’ party, Prentice,’Ashley said.
‘You just slope off, or did you get a lumber?’
‘Oh God,’ I moaned, and lowered my head to the cool steel pipe of the bridge rail.
‘Hey…’
Ash said gently, putting her hand on my head and patting me.
‘There there, Prentice ma man.
What's the matter?’
‘Oh, nothing much,’ I sighed, slowly raising my head again and gazing at the water.
‘I saw the woman I love wrap herself round my older, smarter and wittier brother like clingfilm round a sandwich, and it looks like they're enjoying each other the way…
Oh, God, I'm so pissed off I can't even think of a decent comparison.
Or even an indecent one, which would probably — certainly — be more to the point.’
‘Part from that; everything okay, aye?’
Ash said, putting her arm round my shoulders.
‘Help me, Ashley,’ I said, closing my eyes and putting my head on her shoulder.
‘What am I to do?’
‘You must think of her on the toilet,’ Aline said, and giggled.
‘Off-white woman speak truth,’ Ash said, lowering her head to rest it on mine.
‘The hots rarely survive an intense course of imagining the beloved on the cludgie.’
‘No,’ I sighed, opening my eyes as a series of splashes announced another chaotic event on the spillway.
‘I'd probably only develop a fetish for coprophagy.’
‘Pardon?’
‘That as unpleasant as it sounds?’
‘Unpleasanter.’
‘Merde!’
‘Yup.’
‘You're a hopeless case, Prentice, so you are.
Have you contemplated suicide?’
‘Yeah; soon as it's finished, I'm going to throw myself off the Channel Tunnel.’
Ashley's shoulders moved once under my head.
‘Plenty of time to set your affairs in order, then.’
‘It's not my affairs I'm concerned with.’
‘Ach, she wasn't your sort, anyway, Prentice.’
‘What; you mean not good enough for me?’
‘No, Prentice; I mean too much taste.
You never stood a chance with a woman that choosy.’
I pulled away and looked dubiously at Ashley, who smiled sweetly.
‘What is this?’
I said.
‘You auditioning for the Exit chapter of the Samaritans, or what?’
Ashley took my hands in hers.
‘Ah, Prentice.
Dinnae worry; maybe it's just an infatuation; hers, or Lewis's…or yours.
Whatever.
Maybe she'll come to her senses.
Maybe she wants to work her way through all the McHoan brothers in order of age —’
‘Or weight.’
‘— or weight.
Maybe she'll get married to Lewis but have a lifelong affair with you.’
‘Oh, great.’
‘See?
You don't know what might happen,’ Ashley said happily, spreading her hands.
‘Anyway, Prentice,’ Aline said in her sing-song voice.
‘There are plenty more fishes in the sea, yes?’
I looked over at Aline.
‘Hey, can I quote you on that?’
Aline winked at me, tapped the side of her nose.
‘The toilet,’ she said conspiratorially.
I started to get up.
‘It's no good,’ I sighed.
‘You two are cheering me up too much and I can't stand the excitement.’
I got wearily to my feet, muscles aching from the effects of drink and walk.
‘See you down the Jac tonight?’
Ash said.
‘Maybe,’ I said.
‘I keep trying to drown my sorrows but they appear to be marginally more buoyant than expanded polystyrene.’
The water cascaded down the face of the spillway again, the noise like a million stamping feet heard from a long way off.
I shrugged.
‘Fuck it, though; worth another try.
Gotta start working some time.’
‘That's my boy.’
‘See you, gals.’
‘Bye-bye, Prentice.’
‘Try not to fall in love with anybody else before tonight.’
‘Yo.’
An hour or so later I saw my mother's green Metro, just about to turn out of the drive-way of Hamish and Tone's house.
She stopped when she saw me, wound the window down.
‘Here you are,’ she said.
‘Here I am,’ I agreed.
‘I was waiting for ages there.’
She glanced at her watch.
‘Oh well.
Getting in?’
I got into the car; we started to reverse the fifty yards back up the drive.
Actually, my legs were so tired I was quite grateful for the lift.
‘I brought what I could find of Rory's stuff.’
Mum nodded.
‘Your dad thinks there's more, but it's buried in the filing.’
I looked at the back seat, where a folder lay.
‘Not that you deserve it,’ she added.
‘Oh, thanks,’ I said.
I picked the folder up;CRII said the lettering on the spine.
It looked similar to the folder I already had, but perhaps a little thicker.
I vaguely remembered reminding mum last night that I was looking for the rest of Uncle Rory's papers.
‘Well?’ she said.
I looked over, yawning.
‘Well?’
I repeated.
We drew to a stop outside the door of the house.
‘You don't remember last night, do you?’ mum said, turning the ignition off.
She was dressed in angora and chunky cords; new perfume.
She looked slightly unamused and not a little worried.
‘Not…in its entirety, no,’ I confessed.
She shook her head.
‘God, you were drunk, Prentice.’
‘Umm,’ I said, weighing the folder in my hands.
‘…Yes.’
I  smiled my best ‘but I'm still your wee laddy’ smile.
She raised those delicate brown brows.
‘My God, you don't remember embarrassing Lewis and Verity last night, do you?’
I looked at her.
‘I mean, apart from embarrassing your father and me,’ she added.
I felt the blood draining from my face like somebody had opened a valve in my ankle.
Oh-oh.
I swallowed.
‘I wasn't doing my impression of the Bradford City supporter, the King's Cross Disaster victim and the guy from Piper Alpha meeting up in Hell, was I?’
(Requires three cigarettes; offends everybody.)
‘It's not funny, Prentice; poor Verity was nearly in tears.
You're lucky Lewis didn't throttle you.’
‘Oh my God,’ I said, feeling cold.
‘What did I say ?’
(Duck, and cover.)
‘Told her — told everybody — you were madly in love with her!’ she said, eyes flashing.
‘Then, having declared undying worship of the poor girl, you proceeded to slag her off for taking up with Lewis.’
Mum shook her head angrily, tears in her eyes.
‘Prentice!
What were you thinking of?’
‘Oh my God,’ I moaned.
KYAG.
I put the folder down in my lap and put my forehead on the folder.
‘Then you followed that up with some fairly off-colour remarks about Lapland, and what you referred to, I believe, as ‘the old earth-moving equipment’.’
‘Oh my God.’
‘And I think we all successfully worked out what ‘doing the Delta Foxtrot’ was, as well, before you became totally incoherent.’
‘Oh my God!’
‘I don't think saying ‘Oh my God’ will make it any better, Prentice.
I think you should apologise to Verity and Lewis as soon as you can.
They're up at the castle.’
My mother brought her voice under control with an effort.
‘Though you might also think about  saying sorry to Hamish and Antonia, too, as you were their guest and it was their party you brought grinding to an embarrassing halt.
Just as well you agreed to go quietly when Kenneth suggested it was time you went to bed; though apparently he and Hamish practically had to carry you upstairs, and the whole way up you were muttering something vile about Lewis being thrown naked into a tub of starving Elephant Leeches.’
And dad put me to bed!
Oh no!
Dad and the Tree!
The shame of it!
‘Mum, I want to die,’ I mumbled into the folder.
‘Just at the moment, Prentice, I don't think there'd be any shortage of volunteers to help you on your way, if you were serious.’
‘I am.’
‘Stop being melodramatic, Prentice; it doesn't suit you.
Sarcasm's more your forte.’
‘Oh my God.’
‘Prentice,’ mum said, putting her hand on my head and running her fingers through my hair.
‘Prentice…’
I looked up, straightened.
Mum's eyes looked red.
She shook her head.
‘Prentice, why are you so stupid with your cleverness sometimes?’
I took a deep breath.
‘Wish I knew, mum,’ I said, and sniffed, eyes smarting.
Best not to say anything about it running in the family.
She took me in her arms, hugged me.
I was surprised, as I always was at such moments, how slim and small she felt.
After a bit we let go of each other.
She glanced in the mirror and declared I had wrecked her eyes for the rest of the day.
Then we went in to Hamish and Tone's for tea and apologies, and later drove to the castle for what would have been the most excruciating interval of my life if Verity and Lewis had still been there, but they weren't; they had taken off in the car to visit some friends of Verity's who lived in Ardnamurchan, and wouldn't be back until late tomorrow at the earliest.
Mum took me back chez Hamish and Tone; she agreed to pass on my expressions of contrition to my father.
She'd wanted me to come to Lochgair and say sorry to him there, but I had begged for mercy, and — rather to my surprise — been granted it.
I had already decided that tomorrow I would take the train back to what was now your official European City of Culture for the following twelve months.
In theory, Verity and Lewis were meant to be giving me a lift in four days time, but that was obviously out, now.
I had to promise mum I'd write to each of them, and apologise in person at the first possible opportunity, and also that I'd stop off at Lochgair before I returned to Glasgow, to see dad.
Ashley met me in the Jac that night, listened to my woes, bought me drink when I ran out of money (I'm sure I was short-changed at the bar) even though she probably had less dosh than I did, and listened to my woes all over again when we went back to her mum's and sat up till God knows when, talking low so we wouldn't wake Dean in the next room.
She made me coffee, gave me hugs, and at one point I fell asleep, and was at peace for a while, and woke up sprawled on the floor, my head on her lap, one gentle hand stroking my head.
‘Ash,’ I croaked, ‘you're a saint.’
She just smiled.
A last cup of coffee and I left; back to H and T's in time for a few hours' fitful sleep; then up and away, run to the station by Aunt Antonia.
I only just caught the train, and when, a quarter of an hour later, we pulled in to Lochgair, and I should have got my bag and quit the Sprinter and walked to the house and finally have talked — sober, and not in the context of a game of Alternative Charades — to my father, and apologised, and spent the three hours until the next Glasgow train with my mother and father in some longed-for spirit of reconciliation, I did nothing of the sort.
Instead I put my head to one side so that it rested against the cold glass of the window, closed my eyes and let my mouth hang open a little.
I stayed like that for the minute or so we waited at the Lochgair station platform, and didn't stir again — yawning convincingly for any other passengers who might be watching — until we were crossing the viaduct at Succothmore.
Still stuck on the track within sight of Janice Rae's flat, I got up out of my seat, took down my bag and fished out the file mum had brought from the house.
I found some much-Tippexed poems typed on foolscap, plus about twenty or so printed A4 pages which looked like they were part of a play or film script.
I selected a page at random and started reading.
Lord :…
And I see them as they will be, dead and torn; shocked, mutilated and alone, on battlefields or by long roads, in ditches or against high walls, in echoing white corridors and misty woods, in fields, by rivers; dumped in holes, thrown in piles; neglected and absolved.
Or, if living on, filled with petty, bitter memories, and a longing for the war they fought to end.
Oh captain, I see in this my ending, what I think you didn't start to glimpse with your most cunning intuition; the soldiers are always the real refugees.
Their first victim is themselves, their life taken from them well before — as though seeking a replacement from another freed —
But I couldn't take any more.
I put the papers in the folder and the folder in my bag, then stuffed that under my seat.
I looked out at the rain instead; it was cheerier.
I'd avoided stopping off to see mum and dad.
It made my eyes close, every time I thought about it.
What was wrong with me?
Well, I thought; they made me.
They produced me; their genes.
And they brought me up.
School and university still hadn't changed me as much as they had; maybe even the rest of my life could never compensate for their formative effect.
If I was too embarrassed, too full of shame to go and see them, it wasn't just my fault; it was theirs too, because of the way they'd brought me up (God, I thought I'd stopped using that excuse when I left Lochgair Primary School).
But there was a grain of truth in there.
Wasn't there?
And hell, I thought; I had been tired; I was tired still, and I would phone that evening — definitely — and say I'd fallen asleep, and nobody would be too bothered, and after all a chap could only cope with so much sorrow-saying in one day…of course I'd phone.
A bit of soft soap, a bit of flannel, like dad would say.
No sweat; I could charm them.
I'd make everything all right.
Still, it was the hangover of that piece of moral cowardice at Lochgair station, along with everything else, that led to me feeling so profoundly awful with myself that evening (after the train finally did get into Queen Street and I walked back, soaked and somehow no longer hungry, in the rain to the empty flat in Grant Street), that mum had to call me there, because I hadn't been able to bring myself to phone her and dad…and I still managed to feign sleep and a little shame and a smattering of sorrow and reassure her as best I could that really I was all right, yes of course , not to worry, I was fine, thanks for calling…and so of course after that felt even worse.
I made a cup of coffee.
I was feeling so bad that I treated it as a kind of moral victory that I was able to empty most of the water out of the obviously Gav-filled kettle and leave the level at the minimum mark.
I stood in the kitchen waiting for the water to heat up with a distinct feeling of eco-smugness.
It was just as I was sitting down in the living room with my cup  of coffee that I realised I'd left my bag on the train.
I couldn't believe it.
I remembered getting out of my seat, putting on my jacket, wondering about trying to get something to eat, deciding I didn't feel hungry, glancing at the empty luggage rack, and then heading through the station and up the road.
With no bag.
How could I ?
I put the coffee down, leapt out of my chair and over the couch, ran to the phone, and got through, ten minutes later, to the station.
Lost Property was closed; call tomorrow.
I lay in bed that night, trying to remember what had been in the bag.
Clothes, toiletries, one or two books, a couple of presents…and the folder with Uncle Rory's papers in it; both folders, including the one I hadn't read yet.
No, I told myself, as panic tried to set in.
It was inconceivable that I'd lost the bag forever.
It would turn up.
I had always been lucky that way.
People were generally good.
Even if somebody had picked it up, maybe they had done so by mistake.
But probably a guard had spotted it and it was right now sitting in some staff-room in Queen Street station, or Gallanach.
Or maybe — in a siding only a mile or two from where I lay — a cleaner's brush was at this moment encountering the bag, wedged back under the seat…
But I'd get it back.
It couldn't just disappear; it had to find its way back to me.
It had to.
I got to sleep eventually.
I dreamt of Uncle Rory coming home, driving the old Rover Verity had been born in, the window open, his arm sticking out, him smiling and holding the missing folder in his hand; waving it.
In the dream, he had a funny looking white towel wrapped round his neck, and that was when I woke up and remembered.
My white silk scarf; the irreplaceable Mobius scarf, the gift of Darren Watt, had been in the missing bag as well.
‘Noooo!’
I wailed into the pillow.
Waking up was a process of gradually remembering all the things I had to feel bad about.
I rang Lost Property first thing.
No bag.
I got them to give me the number for the cleaners' mess-room and asked there.
No bag.
I tried Gallanach, in case the train had got back there before the bag had been discovered under the seat by some honest person.
No bag.
I tried both stations again in the afternoon; guess what?
: I did the only thing I could think of, and retired to bed; if I was to be a blade of grass doomed to be trampled flat, then I might as well accept it and lie down.
I stayed in bed for the next twenty-four hours, sleeping, drinking a little water, not eating at all, and only rousing myself when Gav arrived back (from his parents', I wrongly assumed), loudly declaring himself to be of unsound liver but totally in love.
Oh, lucky ewe, I said, does she come from a respectable flock?
Ha ha, it's your au — fr…parents' friend, Janice, Gav beamed, radiating unrepentant guilt; came round here the other day looking for you we got talking went for a curry had a few drinks ended up back here one thing led to another know how it is always liked older women they're more experienced know what I mean arf arf anyway spent an extremely enjoyable New Year at her place apart from the usual visit to my folk's of course oh by the way she's coming round here tonight I'm cooking lasagne can you swap rooms seeing Norris won't be back until tomorrow it's just I didn't expect you back until then either, that okay?
I stared at Gav from my bed, blinking and trying to take in this torrent of exponentially catastrophic information.
I attempted desperately to convince myself that what I was experiencing was just a particularly cruel and hateful dream concocted by some part of my mind determined to exact due penalty from my conscience for my having behaved with such despicable lack of grace during the holidays…but failed utterly; my sub-conscious' stock of nightmare-paradigms includes nothing so banally twisted as Gav.
Finally, scraping together the last microscopic filaments of my  tattered pride to produce a quorum fit for emergency egoresuscitation if not actual wit, I managed: ‘Gav, I'm shocked.’
(Gav looked defensive for all of a micro-second, a concession my lacerated self-respect fell upon with all the pathetic desperation of a humiliatingly defeated politician pointing out that well, things can only get better.)
‘You never told me you could cook lasagne.’
10
Once upon a time, long ago, there was a rich merchant who thought that the city where he lived was full of bad people, and especially bad children.’
— 'Were; they Slow Children?’
‘Some of them were, as a matter of fact, but at the time they didn't have the signs to tell them so.’
‘Are the Slow Children only in Lochgair, dad?’
‘No; there are Slow Children in various places; watch out for the road-signs.
Now; back to the story.
The rich merchant thought the children should always salute him and call him ‘sir’ when they passed him in the street.
He hated beggars and old people who couldn't work any more.
He hated untidiness and waste; he thought that babies who threw things from their cradles should be punished, and children who wouldn't eat their food should be starved until they ate what they had been given in the first place.’
‘Dad, what if it had gone rotten?’
‘Even if it had gone rotten.’
‘Aw, dad!
Even if it had maggots and things in it and it was all horrible?’
‘Yes; that would teach them, he thought.’
‘Awwrr!
Yuk!’
‘Well, the rich merchant was very powerful, and he came to control things in the city, and he made everybody do as he thought they ought to do; snowball-throwing was made illegal, and children had to eat up all their food.
Leaves were forbidden to fall from the trees because they made a mess, and when the trees took no notice of this they had their leaves glued onto their branches…but that didn't work, so they were fined; every time they dropped leaves, they had twigs and then branches sawn off.
And so eventually, of course, they had no twigs left, then no branches left, and in the end the trees were cut right down.
The same happened with flowers and bushes too.
‘Some people kept little trees in secret courtyards, and flowers in their houses, but they weren't supposed to, and if their neighbours reported them to the police the people would have their trees chopped down and the flowers taken away and they would be fined or put in prison, where they had to work very hard, rubbing out writing on bits of paper so they could be used again.’
‘Is this story pretend, dad?’
‘Yes.
It's not real; I made it up.’
‘Who makes up real things, dad?’
‘Nobody and everybody; they make themselves up.
The thing is that because the real stories just happen, they don't always tell you very much.
Sometimes they do, but usually they're too…messy.’
‘So the rich merchant wouldn't like them?’
‘That's right.
In the city, nobody was allowed to tell stories.
Nobody was allowed to hum, or whistle or listen to music, either, because the merchant thought that people should save their breath the way they saved their money.
‘But people didn't like living the way the merchant wanted them to; most mums and dads wouldn't serve their children rotten food, and hated having to pretend that they did.
People missed the trees and flowers…and having to walk around with one eye covered by an eye-patch.’
‘Why was that, dad?
Why did they have —’
‘Because the merchant thought it was a waste of light to have both eyes open; why not save the light the way you save money?’
‘Were they like Mr Lachy, dad?’
‘Well, not exactly, no; Lachlan Watt only has one eye; the other one looks like a real one but it's glass.
The people in the city could change from one eye to the other on different days, but Lachlan —’
‘Aye, dad, but they're like him sort of, aren't they?’
‘Well, sort of.’
‘Why has Mr Lachy only got one eye, dad?’
‘Uncle Fergus punched him!
Eh, dad?’
‘No, Prentice.
Uncle Fergus didn't punch him.
It was an accident.
Fergus and Lachy were fighting and Fergus meant to hit Lachy but he didn't mean to put his eye out.
Now; do you two want to hear this story or not?’
‘Aye, dad.’
‘Aye, dad.’
‘Right.
Well, the city wasn't a nice place to live because of all the silly laws the merchant had passed, and people started to leave it and go to other towns and other countries, and the merchant was spending so much time passing new laws and trying to make people obey the ones he'd already passed that his own business started to fail, and eventually the city was almost deserted, and the merchant found that he owed people much more money than he had in the bank, and even though he sold his house and everything he owned he was still broke; he was thrown out of his house and out of the city too, because he had become a beggar, and beggars weren't allowed in the city.
‘So he wandered the countryside for a long time, starving and having to beg for food, and sleeping in barns and under trees, and eventually he found a little town where all the beggars and old  people he'd had thrown out of the city had gone; they were very poor, of course, but by all helping each other they had more than the merchant had.
He asked if he could stay with them, and eventually they agreed that he could, but only if he worked.
So they gave him a special job.’
‘What, dad?’
‘What was the job, dad?’
‘He had to make brooms.’
‘Brooms?’
‘Old fashioned brushes made from bundles of twigs tied to a wooden handle.
You know up in the forest you sometimes see those things for beating out fires?’
‘The big flappy things?’
‘Yes; they're big bits of rubber — old tyres — attached to wooden handles, for beating out fires on the ground.
Well, in the old days, those used to be made from twigs, and even longer ago people used to use brooms like that to sweep the streets and even to sweep their houses.
Not all that long ago, either; I can remember seeing a man sweeping the paths in the park in Gallanach with a broom like that, when I was older than either of you are now.’
‘Ah, but dad, you're ancient!’
‘Ha ha ha ha!’
‘That's enough.
Now listen; about these brooms, right?’
‘What?’
‘What, dad?’
‘The man who had been a rich merchant, and who was now a beggar, had to make brooms for the town.
He had a little hut with a stone floor, and a supply of handles and twigs.
But to teach the man a lesson they had given him a supply of twigs that were old and weak; poor twigs for making brooms with.
‘So, by the time he had made one broom the floor of the hut was covered in bits of twigs, and he had to use the broom he'd just made to sweep the floor of his hut clean before he could start making the next broom.
But by the time he'd cleaned the floor to  his satisfaction, the broom had worn right away, right down, to the handle.
So he had to start on another one.
And the same thing happened with that broom, too.
And the next, and the next; the mess made making each broom had to be cleared up with that same broom, and wore it away.
So at the end of the day there was a great big pile of twigs outside the hut, but not one broom left.’
‘That's silly!’
‘That's a waste, sure it is, dad?’
‘Both.
But the people had done it to teach the man a lesson.’
‘What lesson, dad?’
‘Ah-hah.
You'll have to work that out for yourselves.’
‘Aw, dad!’
‘Dad, I know!’
‘What?’
Kenneth asked Prentice.
‘Not to be so damn silly!’
Kenneth laughed.
He reached up and ruffled Prentice's hair in the semi-darkness; the boy's head was hanging out over the top bunk.
‘Well, maybe,’ he said.
‘Dad,’ James said from the lower bunk.
‘What happened to the merchant?’
Kenneth sighed, scratched his bearded chin.
‘Well, some people say he died in the town, always trying to make a broom that would last; others say he just gave up and wasted away, others that he got somebody else to make the brooms and found somebody to provide better twigs, and got people to sell the brooms in other towns and cities, and hired more people to make more brooms, and built a broom-making factory, and made lots of money and had a splendid house made…
And other people say he just lived quietly in the town after learning his lesson.
That's a thing about stories, sometimes; they have different endings according to who you listen to, and some have sort of open endings, and some don't actually have proper endings yet.’
‘Aw, but dad…’
‘But one thing's definite.’
‘What, dad?’
‘It's light-out time.’
‘Aw…’
‘Night-night.’
‘Night, dad.’
‘Yeah; night.’
‘Sleep tight.’
‘Don't let the bugs bite.’
‘Right.
Now lie down properly; noddles on pillows.’
He made sure they were both tucked in and went to the door.
The night-light glowed softly on the top of the chest of drawers.
‘Okay…
Dad?’
‘What?’
‘Did the man not have any family, dad?’
Prentice asked.
‘In the story: the merchant.
Did he not have any family?’
‘No,’ Kenneth said, holding the door open.
‘He did, once, but he threw them out of his house; he thought he wasted too much time telling his two youngest sons bed-time stories.’
‘Aww…’
‘Aww…’
He smiled, padded back into the room, kissed the boys' foreheads.
‘But then he was a silly man, wasn't he?’
They left Margot to look after the children and set off in the car, heading for Gallanach.
Kenneth smiled when he saw the hand-painted sign at the outskirts of the village that said, ‘Thank You.’
‘What are you grinning at?’
Mary asked him.
She was bending down in her seat, staring into the little mirror that hinged up from the glove-box flap, inspecting her lip-stick.
‘Just that sign,’ he said.
‘The one that goes with the Slow Children sign at the other end of the village.’
‘Huh,’ Mary said.
‘Slow children, indeed.
I hope you weren't  telling my bairns horrible stories that'll keep them awake all night.’
‘Na,’ he said.
The Volvo estate accelerated down the straight through the forest towards Port Ann.
‘Though maggoty meat and people with one eye did come into it at one point .
‘Hmm,’ Mary said.
She snapped the glove-box closed.
‘I heard Lachy Watt's back in the town; is that true?’
‘Apparently.’
Kenneth rotated his shoulders as he drove, trying to ease the nagging pain in them that too much drink the night before always seemed to give him these days.
They had spent Hogmanay at home, welcoming the groups of people roaming the village as they came round.
The last revellers had finally been seen off at nine in the morning; they and Margot had done some cleaning up before going to bed, though Ken had anyway had a couple of hours' sleep between three and five, when he'd fallen into a deep slumber on the wicker couch in the conservatory.
The boys had gone out to play on the forestry tracks with their new bikes on what had proved a bright but cold day; Mary had got three hours' sleep before they came back, noisily demanding to be fed.
‘Haven't seem him for…what?
Ten years?’
Mary said.
‘Has he been away at sea all that time?’
‘Well, hardly,’ Ken said.
‘He was in Australia, wasn't he?
Settled down there for a while.
Had some sort of job in Sydney, I heard.’
‘What was he doing?’
‘Don't know; you could ask him yourself.
Supposed to be coming to Hamish and Tone's shindig tonight.’
‘Is he?’
Mary said.
The Volvo hissed along the dark road; a couple of cars went past, holes of white light in the night, scattering spray which the water jets and wipers of the Volvo swept away again.
Mary took a perfume spray from her handbag, applied the scent to wrists and neck.
‘Fergus and Fiona are coming tonight, aren't they?’
‘Should be,’ Ken nodded.
‘Do you know if Lachy and Fergus still talk to each other?’
‘No idea.’
He laughed.
‘Don't even know what they'd talk about; a member of the factory-owning Scottish gentry and a second mate — or whatever Lachy is these days — who's spent the last few years in Oz.
What is there to say; aye-aye, captain of light industry?’
‘Fergus isn't gentry, anyway,’ Mary said.
‘Well, good as.
Might not have a title, but he acts like he does sometimes.
Got a castle; what more do you want?’
Kenneth laughed lightly again.
‘Aye-aye.
Ha ha.’
The lights of Lochgilphead swung into view ahead, just as rain started to spot the windscreen.
Kenneth put the wipers on.
‘Ayeaye!’ he sniggered.
Mary shook her head.
‘Going to the dogs, if you ask me.’
‘Fergus, people like you have been saying that since somebody invented the wheel.
Things get better.
They're always looking up.’
‘Yes, Kenneth, but you're basically Bolshie, so you would think so.’
Kenneth grinned, took a drink of his whisky and water.
‘It's been a good year,’ he nodded.
Fergus looked suitably disgusted, and threw back the remains of his own whisky and soda in one gulp.
They stood in the lounge of Hamish and Antonia's house, watching the others help themselves to the buffet Antonia had prepared.
Neither of the two men had felt hungry.
‘You might not be saying that when the refugees come back from Australia,’ Fergus said sourly.
Kenneth glanced at him, then looked round for Lachlan Watt; he was sitting on a distant chair, a plate of food balanced on his knees, talking to Shona Watt, his sister-in-law.
Kenneth laughed as Fergus refilled his glass from one of the  whisky bottles on the drinks trolley behind them.
‘Fergus, you're not talking about the Domino Theory by any chance, are you?’
‘Don't care what you call it, McHoan; not saying it'll be next, either, but you just watch.’
‘Fergus, for God's sake; not even that asshole Kissinger believes in the Domino Theory any more.
The Vietnamese have finally got control of their own country after forty years of war; defeated the Japs, the French, us, and the most powerful nation in the history of the planet in succession, with bicycles, guns and guts, been bombed back into the bronze age in the process and all you can do is spout some tired nonsense about little yellow men infiltrating the steaming jungles of the Nullarbor Plain and turning the Aussies into Commies; I think a Highland League side winning the European Cup is marginally more likely.’
‘I'm not saying they won't pause to draw breath, Kenneth, but I can't help feeling the future looks black for those of us interested in freedom.’
‘Fergus, you're a Tory.
When Tories say freedom they mean money; the freedom to send your child to a private school means the money to send your child to a private school.
The freedom to invest in South Africa means the money to invest there so you can make even more.
And don't tell me you're interested in freedom unless you support the freedom of blacks to come here from abroad, which I know you don't, so there.’
Kenneth clinked his glass against Fergus's.
‘Cheers.
To the future.’
‘Huh,’ said Fergus.
‘The future.
You know, I'm not saying your lot won't win, but I hope it doesn't happen in my lifetime.
But things really are going to the dogs.’
Fergus sounded genuinely morose, Kenneth thought.
‘Ah, you're just peeved your lot have elected a woman leader.
Even that's good news…even if she is the milk snatcher.’
‘We got rid of an old woman and replaced him with a younger one,’ Fergus said, mouth turned down at the corners, staring over his whisky tumbler and across the room to where his wife was  talking to Antonia.
‘That's not progress.’
‘It is, Fergus.
Even the Tories are subject to change.
You should be proud.’
Fergus looked at Kenneth, a wealth of sombre disdain in his slightly watery-eyed look.
Kenneth gave him a big smile.
Fergus turned away again.
Kenneth looked at the other man's heavily jowled, prematurely aged face and shook his head.
Chiang-Kai-Shek and Franco dead, Angola independent, Vietnam free at last…
Kenneth thought it had been a great year.
The whole tide of history seemed to be quickening as it moved remorselessly leftwards.
He felt vaguely sorry for Fergus.
His shower had had their reign, he thought, and grinned to himself.
It had been a good year for Kenneth personally, too.
The BBC, bless its cotton socks, had taken some of the stories from his first collection; a whole week of Jackanory to himself, just six weeks before Christmas!
At this rate he could start thinking about giving up teaching in a year or two.
‘I wish I shared your enthusiasm for change.’
Fergus sighed, and drank deeply.
‘Change is what it's all about, Ferg.
Shuffling the genes; trying new ideas.
Jeez, where would your damn factory be if you didn't try new processes?’
‘Better off,’ Fergus said.
He looked sourly at Kenneth.
‘We're just about making enough from traditional paperweights to keep the Specialist Division afloat.
All this hi-tech stuff just loses us money.’
‘Well, it must be making money for somebody; maybe you weren't able to invest enough.
Maybe the big boys'll take over.
That's the way things go; capitalists all want to have a monopoly.
Only natural.
Don't get depressed about it.’
‘You won't be saying that if we have to close the factory and put everybody out of work.’
‘God, Ferg, it isn't that bad, is it?’
Fergus shrugged heavily.
‘Yes, it is.
We've told them it might  come to that; the shop-stewards, anyway.
Another strike, or too big a pay rise, and we might go under.’
‘Hmm,’ Kenneth said, sipping at his whisky.
He wondered how serious the other man was.
Industrialists often made that sort of threat, but they rarely seemed to be carried out.
Kenneth was a little surprised that Hamish hadn't said anything about the factory being in such dire straits, but then his brother did seem to put the church and the factory above family and friends.
‘I don't know.’
Fergus shook his head.
‘If we weren't tied to this bit of the country, I'd almost think about chucking it all in and heading off somewhere different — Canada, or Australia, or South Africa.’
It was Kenneth's turn to look sour.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘Well, you'd probably get on fine in the RSA, Ferg.
Though that's the one place I wouldn't recommend if you want to keep well away from the red tide.’
‘Hmm,’ Fergus nodded, still watching his wife, now talking to Shona Watt.
‘Yes, you may be right.’
He knocked back his drink, turned to the bottle-loaded table behind and poured himself another large whisky.
Antonia clapped her hands, singing out: ‘Come on, you boring lot; let's all play charades!’
Kenneth drained his glass, murmured.
‘God, I hate charades.’
‘Henriss…never liked him either; fat lipped beggar…queer, y'know; thass wha he's singing you know; d'you know that?
‘Scuse me while I kiss this guy…’ disgussin…absluley disgussin…’
‘Fergus, do shut up.’
Scuse me, while I kiss this guy’…bloody poofter coon.’
‘I'm sorry about this, Lachy.’
‘That's okay, Mrs U. You no goin to put your seat belt on, no?’
‘No; not for short journeys —’
‘Lachy?
Lachy…
Lachy!
Lachy; I'm sorry about your eye…really really sorry; never forgave myself, never…here, shake…’
Fergus tried to lever himself up from the rear bench seat of the old Rover, but failed.
He got as far as lifting his head and getting one shoulder off the seat, but then collapsed back onto the leather, and let his eyes close.
The car rumbled about him…even more restful than the noise of train wheels in the old days; he tried to remember the old days…
‘You sure you don't mind doing this, Lachy?’
Fiona said, swinging the car off the main road and onto the drive that led to the castle.
The headlights made a tunnel of the trees and rhododendrons.
‘Na, it's okay.’
Lachlan Watt had been about to leave Hamish and Antonia's party when Fergus had fallen over and Fiona had decided it was time to take her husband home; she had offered Lachy a lift back to his brother's house, but when they'd got there Fergus had seemed fast asleep, snoring loudly and taking no apparent notice of Fiona shaking him and shouting at him; Lachy had volunteered to come back to the castle to help get Fergus out of the car and upstairs to bed; Fiona would run Lachy back afterwards.
‘God that man's a nuisance,’ Fiona said, as they turned the corner in the drive and the lights of the castle came into view against the coal-dark night.
‘Like I say; I could have got the baby-sitter to help me with him, but she's just a skelf…not our regular girl.
She's built like a rugby player, could probably put Ferg over her shoulder, but not this girl.
Leanne's her name…that's her car there; doesn't look old enough to drive if you ask me…’
Fiona brought the Rover to a halt behind a beaten-up mini, standing on the gravel in front of the castle's main entrance.
‘This really is awful good of you, Lachy.’
‘Aye, it's no problem, Mrs U.’
Fiona turned to him.
She smiled.
‘Lachy; it's Fiona.
You make me feel old when you call me Mrs U.’
‘Sorry; Fiona.
’ Lachy grinned.
He had been a thin, light-framed boy, and he had grown to become a lean, wiry man; the years of life on merchant ships, and then in Australia, had left his skin looking well-used, like soft and fine-grained — but slightly distressed — leather.
His hair was unfashionably short, and both eyes glittered.
It was a spare, uncluttered, characterful face, especially compared to Fergus's.
‘That's better.’
Fiona smiled.
She turned and looked in disgust at the body in the back seat, just as Fergus started to snore again.
‘Well; better get this lump out of the car, I suppose.’
Fergus had gone back into a deep sleep.
They couldn't wake him.
Fiona went in to tell the baby sitter she was free to go, while Lachy tried to rouse Fergus.
‘Hoi you; Fergus.
Ferg; wake up, man.’
‘Aarg…
Henriss, bassard.’
‘Fergus; wake up, Fergus.’
Lachlan tried slapping the man's cheeks; his heavy jowls wobbled like jellies.
‘Hhnn…’
‘Wake up,’ Lachlan said, slapping Fergus's cheeks again, harder.
‘Wake up,’ he said quietly.
‘Ye upper class cunt ye.’
He fairly walloped Ferg on one chop.
Fergus awoke suddenly; arms waving about, eyes wild and bright, making no sound other than a faint gurgling noise.
Then he rolled off the seat into the footwell and immediately started snoring again.
‘Any luck with the sleeping beauty?’
Fiona said, coming down the steps alongside a slim, blonde-haired girl who was zipping up an anorak.
Lachlan turned round.
‘Na; he's sound.’
‘That'll be the day,’ muttered Fiona.
She glanced in at Fergus, then turned to the girl.
‘Thanks, Leanne, dear; now drive carefully, won't you?’
‘Aye, Mrs Urvill,’ the girl said, taking out some keys and heading for the mini.
‘Night-night.’
‘Bye now.’
Fiona and Lachy took an end of Fergus each; Lachy held him under the shoulders, Fiona by the ankles.
They struggled up the steps, through the entrance hall, rested in the main hall, then took him up to the first floor.
‘In here,’ Fiona said, nodding.
Lachy supported Fergus's shoulders with one knee while he twisted the handle of a darkly-stained wooden door.
It swung open to darkness.
‘There's a light, aye?’
‘Just there; down a bit.’
The room was small and bright; there was a single bed, a dressing table and chair, and a wardrobe.
There was a print of a hunting scene on one wall, opposite a small window.
‘Guest room's good enough for him tonight,’ Fiona grunted as they swung him onto the bed and dropped him.
‘Shooch!’
Fiona said, collapsing onto the floor.
Lachy sat down on the pillow at the head of the bed, breathing hard.
Fiona wiped her brow.
She got up shakily.
‘That was hard work,’ she said.
She pulled Fergus's shoes off and nodded to the door.
‘Come on; let's break into the old bugger's best malt before we run you back.
You deserve it.’
‘Fair enough,’ Lachy said, smiling.
‘No takin his clothes off, no?’
‘Ugh.
Certainly not,’ Fiona said.
She drew back a little against the door to let Lachy go past her into the hallway.
‘He's lucky we didn't leave him in the car.’
She turned out the light.
Fergus woke in utter darkness, wondering where he was; he felt as though he was falling backwards forever into darkness.
For an instant he thought perhaps he was dead, consigned to perdition and gloom until the end of time, his only sensation that of falling back and back and back, head over heels forever.
He heard himself moan, and felt with his hands: bedclothes.
He was still wearing his own  clothes, too.
Here was his shirt on his wrist; there his trousers, sweater…shoes off.
He flexed his feet, feeling his toes in his socks.
His hands found the sides of the bed; it was a single, then.
It was still totally dark.
He tried to remember where he'd been last.
The party; Hamish and Antonia McHoan's.
Of course.
He must still be there, as this wasn't his own bed.
Put to bed.
Bit bad, that; probably in the dog-house as far as the lady wife was concerned, too, but then what was new?
He put one hand out, feeling for a table; he found what felt like one, and then a long cold metal stem.
Reaching up he felt a switch.
The light clicked on and suddenly everything was white and horribly bright.
He shielded his eyes.
God, his head felt fuzzy, and sore.
He needed a drink very badly; water would do.
He looked round the white-painted room, thinking that it looked somehow familiar.
Perhaps he had slept here before.
Or maybe he'd given the McHoans some bits and pieces of furniture.
He listened but couldn't hear anything.
The door of the room looked familiar, too.
Odd to find a door so comforting, somehow.
He got up, wobbled across to the door.
He was quite cold.
He opened the door; a dark hall.
Funny; the place didn't smell like the McHoans' house did.
It smelled of wood and a sort of quite pleasant mustiness.
This place smelled of stone and polish.
Bit like the castle.
He went out into the hallway, felt along the wall for a light switch; he found one, switched it on.
Stairs led up; the wood-panelled hall led to another set of stairs going down.
There were old paintings on the walls.
He felt very dizzy, and sat down on the bottom step of the stairs.
He was home.
This was the castle.
He got up, walked up the stairs.
The door to the short flight of stairs that led to the two topmost floors was locked.
He didn't understand.
He searched his pockets but could find no key.
He pushed at the door again.
He gathered a chestful of air to shout at Fiona — dozy bitch had locked him out of his own fucking castle, his own bedroom — but then thought of the children.
Might  wake the little beggars up.
Didn't want that.
He went down through the lower hall to the kitchen, drank some water.
His watch said it was two o'clock; so did the kitchen clock.
There ought to have been keys hanging by the door to the utility room, but they weren't there.
Bloody fishy.
Had Fiona hidden them?
Did she think he was dangerous, was that it?
Maybe she thought he would get up in some drunken stupor and ravish her.
‘Huh, that'll be right,’ he said to himself.
His voice sounded rough in the quiet kitchen; he cleared his throat, coughed, and felt the dull pounding of his headache suddenly sharpen.
Damn it all.
Perhaps he was being punished.
Maybe she was punishing him forgetting drunk.
Had he done anything disgraceful?
He couldn't remember, but he doubted it.
He usually held his drink well, and behaved like a gentleman even when he did have one too many.
He looked at his reflection in the window over the sink.
He pulled one splayed hand through his hair.
Maybe he ought to have a shower or something.
There was always the bathroom on the first floor…
He felt bloody annoyed, Fi locking him out of their apartments like that.
Then he remembered the observatory.
You could get up to it by the stairs to the roof.
He'd been up there, in the roof space when the men had been installing the dome.
For that matter, he'd seen that loft being put together, knew it almost as well as that self-opinionated young architect had.
He'd crawled around in there, him and the builder, with a torch, discussing where the observatory could be built; what joists and supports would have to go, what extra bracing would be needed.
He chuckled to himself, put down the cup he'd been drinking the water from, wiped his lips.
He padded through the hall, up the four flights of stairs to the little landing where you either went straight ahead and out onto the battlements, or ducked through the wee door into the observatory.
It was bitterly cold inside the aluminium hemisphere.
He wished  he'd thought to put shoes on before he'd started on this piece of nonsense; feet felt like blocks of ice.
Still.
He opened the door that gave into the extended cupboard under the roof.
Dark.
Damn; should have thought to bring a torch, too.
‘Sloppy, Urvill, bloody sloppy,’ he breathed to himself.
He squeezed inside the little cupboard.
Really must lose some weight.
Well, festive period well and truly over now; time to go on a diet, or do a bit more exercise.
He wriggled to the rear of the cupboard; felt for the wooden battens on the panel at the end of the dark space.
The panel came away after a little while; he put it on the floor in front of him, and wriggled through on his elbows and knees into the darkness beyond.
‘Getting too old for this sort of thing,’ he told himself.
It was very nearly totally dark in the roof space; only a little light came from behind him, through the cupboard from the dome of the observatory.
He felt his way across the joists in front of him, got his legs free from the cupboard and was able to get up into a crouch, balancing on a joist, hands just above his head, holding on to rough, undressed wood.
He swung one foot out, to the next joist, then put out one hand and felt for the next rafter; he transferred his weight carefully.
There; did it.
He was aware of the lath and plaster clinging to the bottom of the joists; put a foot through that and you'd be right through the ceiling below; chap could fall slap into the bath from here, probably; or into the twins' room, maybe; perish the thought; daddy coming crashing through the ceiling, give the little perishers nightmares for the rest of their lives.
He swivelled from joist to joist, raker to rafter, feeling horribly like a monkey and getting very cold feet in the process even though he was breaking out in a sweat at the same time.
His knees and his neck were making ghastly creaking noises and protesting like hell.
He looked back at the light coming from the observatory cupboard, now a good twenty feet away, and thought about going  back; this whole prank was becoming a bit much, really.
But he'd started, so he'd finish.
He saw the faintest of glows ahead, from between two of the joists.
He smiled.
‘That's the ticket,’ he breathed to himself.
With the next joist it came closer; then he could see one edge of the little hatch; then he was over it.
A soft light gave away the outline of the door.
He heard voices.
God, the silly woman had probably left the radio on.
He got down on his knees again, feet supported on the joist behind; his knees gave sharp twinges of pain, taking almost all his weight.
He felt for the edges of the square door, found them and lifted it gently.
What a locked-room mystery this would present the old girl with, if he could get in without her hearing him, and get undressed and slide in beside her!
She'd never be able to work it out.
Of course, he thought, as he levered the hatch door open slowly, letting more soft light spill out from underneath, he'd have to cover his tracks in the morning; damn silly to have left the cupboard back there open, and the light on in the dome.
But never mind.
Fi hardly ever went up there anyway.
He'd lifted the near edge of the door up about three inches above the top of the joist in front of him.
He held it there, lowered his head, peeped into the room, smiling, wondering if he could see Fi from this angle.
Voices.
Warm air and voices.
‘Oh…
God, God, God, God; yes, yes, yes, yes…’
It took him a moment to work out what was going on.
But then he realised.
That was Fiona, in the bed, on the bed, covers half off, the only light in the room coming from a little candle by the bedside, her hair spilled on the pillow (the other pillow was on the floor)…and that was Lachlan Watt, wrapped round her, body bucking like some horse, his hands at her neck, at one breast, in her hair, cupping her neck; the covers sliding off, Fiona putting her arms wide, clutching at the bottom sheet of the bed at one side, clutching the edge of the  bedside table with the other.
Her head beat from side to side and she said, ‘Yes, yes, yes, yes,’ again, then Lachlan — wiry, athletic-looking, skinny shanks ramming back and forth like some skinny bull — reached under her, pulled her up, his legs spreading, kneeling; she hung onto him, arms round his neck, then after a few vertical stabs he threw her down, back onto the bed; she grunted, arms still tight round his back, then she brought her legs up, right up over his thin, plunging, globe-buttocked behind, until her ankles were in the small of his back, rocking to and fro, feet crossed one over the other, locked there; with one splayed hand she held onto his back, pressing him to her, and with the other hand she felt down the length of his body, over ribs and waist and hips, and with another grunt reached round and under, taking his balls in her hand, pressing them and kneading them and squeezing them.
‘Aw Christ!’ he heard Lachlan Watt say, body arching.
Fiona shuddered, her voice almost a squeal as she took a series of sudden, deep in-rushing breaths, and buried her head in the hollow between Lachlan Watt's shoulder and neck.
Fergus let the little door down without making a noise.
He felt very cold, and he had pissed himself.
The urine was warm around his balls and tepid down his leg, but it was cold at his knees.
He knelt there in the darkness, listening to the sounds of the subsiding passion in the room below, then swivelled silently and with even greater care than before, and feeling far more sober, moved back towards the thin, escaping light at the far end of the chill, cramped roof space.
11
If the year of our folly 1990 had started inauspiciously for me, then the Fates, Lady Luck, Lord Chance, God, Life, Evolution — whoever or whatever — immediately thereafter set about the business of proving that the entangled disasters distinguishing the year's first few days were but a mild and modest prelude to the more thorough-going catastrophes planned for the weeks and months ahead…and this with a rapidity and even an apparent relish which was impressive — if also bowel-looseningly terrifying — to behold.
Gav and my Aunt Janice got on like a house on fire, a combined location and fate I occasionally wished on them as I lay awake listening to the sounds of their love-making, a pastime I sometimes suspected I shared with people in a large part of the surrounding community, not to say northern Europe.
I had made the mistake of volunteering to sleep on the couch in the living room on the nights that Janice stayed at our flat; this offer was made with what I thought was obvious sarcasm one  evening while Gav and Norris were attempting to develop a technique for cooking poppadoms in the microwave.
They were having an intense and appropriately heated discussion on the problems of cold-spots (as evinced by the fact that their first attempts came out looking like braille roundels), and on the unfortunate instability of three poppadoms balanced together — caused not so much by the jerk they received when the turntable started up as by their movements while they cooked and swelled — but eventually my flatmates settled on the concept of standing the things up individually on the glass turntable, and so instigated what they termed a ‘brainstorming session’ in an attempt to find a suitable support mechanism.
(I suppressed the urge to point out that the chances of two such patently zephyr-grade minds producing anything remotely resembling a storm was roughly equivalent to the likelihood of somebody called Cohen landing a pork scratching concession in Mecca during Ramadan.)
‘An alligator clip with the chrome bits removed.’
‘Naw; still metal.’
‘Maybe we could shield it.’
‘Na; has to be plastic.
Yer non thermosetting stuff, for preference.’
‘Well, look, Gav,’ I said from the kitchen doorway.
‘I only overhang the couch by a foot or so at each end; why don't I attempt to curl up there when you and Janice are in residence, if not flagrante, in the bedroom?’
‘Eh?’
Gav said, swivelling that thick neck of his to look at me, his massive brows furrowing.
He scratched at one rugby-shirt shrouded armpit, then nodded.
‘Aw; aye.’
He looked pleased.
‘Thanks very much, Prentice; aye, that'd be grand.’
He turned back to the microwave.
‘Maybe we could suspend them from this bit in the middle with a length of thread,’ Norris grunted, sticking his head almost right inside the appliance.
Norris, still clad in his white lab coat, was one of those medical students whom fate has seemingly marked out to spend the bulk of their studies and initial training suffering from  quite stupendous hangovers incurred through the intake of near-fatal levels of alcohol the night before, and their subsequent professional careers sternly finger-wagging at any member of the general public who dares to consume over the course of a week what they themselves had been perfectly happy to sink during the average evening.
‘I mean, don't let the fact I'm the longest serving flat-dweller put you off; the last thing I want to do is embarrass you, Gav,’ I said (just a tad tetchily).
‘Na, it's all right, Prentice; ta,’ Gav said, then crouched down by Norris and squinted into the lit interior of the microwave.
‘Nowhere to attach it,’ he told Norris.
‘Anyway; wouldnae turn, would it?’
They both looked thoughtful, heads side by side at the open oven door, while I wondered what the chances were of both heads fitting — and jamming — inside and the door safety-catch somehow short-circuiting.
‘Na,’ Norris said.
‘We're looking at some form of support from below, know what ah mean?
Come on, Gav, you're the engineer…’
‘I mean, that old duvet's bound to cover most of the important parts of my body, and the chances of the pilot on the fire blowing out again and gassing me in my sleep can't really be that high,’ I said.
‘Hmm,’ Gav said.
He straightened, then bent forward and tapped at the white plastic strip on the kitchen window ledge which retained the cheaply horrid secondary double-glazing the flat's owners had fitted.
‘Just a block of wood, maybe,’ Norris said.
‘Get hot,’ Gav said, looking more closely at the white plastic strip.
‘Depending on how much water there is in the wood; could warp.
Still think plastic's your best bet.’
‘After all, Gav, I can just stay up till your drinking pals have decided to head home, or Norris's card school chums finally drag themselves away, or crash out and snore on the Richter scale, whatever; the fun rarely extends beyond three or four o'clock in the morning…why, that would leave me a good four or five hours’ sleep before an early lecture.’
‘Aye, that's great, Prentice,’ Gav said, still closely inspecting the window sill.
Then he stood up suddenly and snapped his fingers.
‘Got it!’ he said.
What, I thought?
Had my tone of reason in the face of monstrosity finally registered?
But no.
‘Blu-tack!’
‘What?’
‘Blu-tack!’
‘Blu-tack?’
‘Aye; Blu-tack.
You know: Blu-tack!’
Norris thought about this.
Then said excitedly.
‘Aye; Blu-tack!’
‘Blu-tack!’
Gav said again, looking wide-eyed and pleased with himself.
‘The very thing!’
Norris nodded vigorously.
I shook my head, quitting the kitchen doorway for the comparative sanity of the dark and empty hallway.
‘You crack the Bollinger,’ I muttered.
‘I'll just phone the Nobel Prize Committee and tell them their search is over for another year.’
‘Blu-tack, ya beauty!’
I heard from the white-glowing crucible of cutting-edge technological advancement that our humble kitchen had become.
‘You mean you haven't read them all?’
‘I went off the idea,’ I said.
I was sitting in what had effectively become my boudoir; our living room.
Aunt Janice seemed to prefer staying here with Gavin to travelling out to Crow Road most nights.
Gav and Janice sat on the couch, loosely attired in dressing gowns and watching a video.
I had been sitting at the table housed in the living room bay window, trying to write a paper for a tutorial the next day, but Gavin and Janice had chosen to punctuate their highly audible coupling sessions (in what the more tenacious core-areas of my long-term memory still sporadically insisted had once been my bedroom) with an almost equally noisy episode of tortilla chip eating.
The corny raucousness which ensued of course meant that the television volume had to be turned up to window-shaking levels so that the happy couple could savour the exquisitely enunciated phrasing of Arnold Schwarzenegger's lines over the noise of their munching.
I had admitted defeat on the subject of the links between agricultural and industrial revolution and British Imperialism, and sat down to watch the video.
Perhaps appropriately, given the inflammatory nature of the effect Gav and Janice seemed to have on each other 's glands, it was called Red Heat .
‘Oh,’ I'd said.
‘A Hollywood movie about two cops who don't get along at first but are thrown together on a case involving drugs, foreigners, lots of fights and guns and which ends up with them respecting each other and winning.
Sheech.’
I shook my head.
‘Makes you wonder where these script-writer guys get their weird and zany ideas from, doesn't it?’
Gav had nodded in agreement, without taking his eyes off the screen.
Janice Rae had smiled over at me, her hair fetchingly disarrayed, her cheeks flushed.
‘Oh yes, Prentice,’ she'd said.
‘What did you think of Rory's work, in that folder?’
Hence the exchange above.
Janice looked back at the telly and stretched one leg out over Gavin's lap.
I glanced over, thinking that she had much better legs than a woman of her age deserved.
Come to that, she had much better legs than a man of Gav's mental age deserved.
‘So you haven't found any hints about what it was Rory had hidden in there?’ she said.
‘I've no idea what he wanted to hide,’ I said, wishing that Janice  would hide a little more of her legs.
I was uncomfortable talking about the poems and Rory's papers; the bag lost on the train coming back from Lochgair at the start of the year had stayed lost, and — stuck with just the memory of the half-finished stuff that Janice had given me originally — I'd given up on any idea I'd ever had of trying to rescue Uncle Rory's name from artistic oblivion, or discovering some great revelation in the texts.
Still, it haunted me.
Even now, months later, I had dreams about reading a book that ended half-way through, or watching a film which ended abruptly, screen whiting-out…
Usually I woke breathless, imagining there was a scarf — shining white silk looped in a half-twist — tightening round my neck.
‘It was something he'd seen, I think.’
Janice watched the distant screen.
‘Something…’ she said slowly, pulling her dressing gown closed.
‘Something…over-seen, if you know what I mean.’
‘Vaguely,’ I said.
I watched Gavin's hand move — apparently unconsciously, though of course with Gav that could still mean it was fully willed — to Janice's polyester-and-cotton covered thigh.
‘Something,’(I suggested, watching this,)‘seen voyeuristically, perhaps?’
‘Mmm,’ Janice nodded.
Her right hand went up to Gav's short, brownish hair, and started to play with it, twirling it round her fingers.
‘He put it in…whatever he was working on.’
She nodded.
‘Something he'd seen, or somebody had seen; whatever.
Some big secret.’
‘Really?’
I said.
Gavin's hand rubbed up and down on Janice's lap.
Gav's face gave no sign he was aware of doing this.
I pondered the possibility that the lad possessed some dinosaur-like secondary brain which was controlling the movements of his hand.
Palaeo-biological precedent dictated such an organ be housed in Gavin's ample rear, and have responsibility for his lower limbs — not to say urges — rather than his arms, but then one never knew, and I reckoned Gavin's modest forebrain — doubtless fully occupied with  the post-modernist sub-texts and tertiary structuralist imagery of Red Heat — could probably do with all the help it could get.
‘Really?’
I repeated.
‘Mmm,’ Janice nodded.
‘So he said.’
She bit her lip.
Gavin had a look of concentration on his face now, as though two parts of his brain were attempting the tricky and little-practised operation of communicating with each other.
‘Something about —’ Janice moved her hips, and seemed to catch her breath.
‘— the castle.’
She clutched at Gav's hair.
I looked at her.
‘The castle?’
I said.
But too late.
Perhaps lent the final impetus necessary for successful reception by the proximity of the area of stimulus to that of cognition, this hair-pulling signal finally seemed to awaken Gavin to the perception that there might be something else going on in his immediate area other than the video, undeniably captivating though it was.
He looked round, first at his hand, then at Janice, who was smiling radiantly at him, and finally at me.
He grinned guiltily.
He yawned, glanced at Janice again.
‘Bit tired,’ he said to her, yawning unconvincingly once more.
‘Fancy goin' to —?’
‘What ’ Janice said brightly, slapping her hand down on Gavin's bulky shoulder, ‘— a good idea!’
‘Tell us how it ends, eh Prentice?’
Gav said, nodding back at the television as he was half hauled out of the room by Aunt Janice, en route to the land of nod after a lengthy detour through the territories of bonk.
‘With you going ‘Uh-uh-uh-uh-uh!’'
I muttered to the closed door.
I glared at the screen.
How it ends,’'I muttered to myself.
‘It's a video, you cretin!’
I returned to the changes in British society required to bring about the Empire on which the light of reason rarely shone.
It was going to be a long night, as I also had to finish an already over-due essay  on Swedish expansion in the seventeenth century (it would have to be a goodish one, too; an earlier remark — made in an unguarded moment during a methodically boring tutorial — ascribing Swedish territorial gains in the Baltic to the invention of the Smorgasbord with its take-what-you-want ethic, had not endeared me to the professor concerned; nor had my subsequent discourse on the innate frivolity of the Swedes, despite what I thought was the irrefutable argument that no nation capable of giving a Peace Prize to Henry Kissinger could possibly be accused of lacking a sense of humour.
Pity it was actually the Norwegians.
I remembered a joke about Kissinger (‘no; fucking her.’)
and found myself listening to Gav and Janice.
They were still at that stage of their coital symphony where only the brass section was engaged, as the old metal bed creaked to and fro.
The wind section — essentially vox humana — would join in later.
I shook my head and bent back to my work, but every now and again, as I was writing or just thinking, a niggling little side-track thought would distract me, and I'd find myself remembering Janice's words, and wondering what exactly Uncle Rory might have hidden within his later work (if he really had hidden anything).
Not, of course, that there was much point in me wondering about it.
For about the hundredth time, I cursed whatever kleptomaniac curmudgeon had walked off the train with my bag.
May the scarf unravel and do an Isadora Duncan on the wretch.
‘Uh-uh-uh-uh-uh!’ came faintly from what had been my bedroom.
I ground my teeth.
‘Married?’
I gasped, aghast.
‘Well, they're talking about it,’ my mother said, dipping her head towards the table and holding her Paisley-pattern scarf to her throat as she nibbled tentatively at a large cream cake.
We were in Mrs Mackintosh's Tea Roomes, just off West Nile Street, surrounded by straightly pendulous light fitments, graph-paper pierced wooden screens, and ladder-back seats which turned my usual procedure of hanging my coat or jacket on the rear of the seat into an operation that resembled hoisting a flag up a tall mast.
‘But they can't!’
I said.
I could feel the blood draining from my face.
They couldn't do this to me!
My mother, neat and slim as ever, ploughed crunchingly into the loaf-sized meringue cream cake like a polar bear breaking into a seal's den.
She gave a tiny giggle as a little dollop of cream adhered to the tip of her nose; she removed it with one finger, licked the pinky, then wiped her nose with her napkin, glancing round the restaurant through the confusing topography of slats and uprights of the seats and screens, apparently worried that this minor lapse in hand-mouth coordination was being critically observed by any of the surrounding middle-class matrons, perhaps with a view to passing on the scandalous morsel to their opposite numbers in Gallanach and having mother black-balled from the local bridge club.
She needn't have worried; from what I had seen, getting a little bit of cream on your nose was practically compulsory, like getting nicked on the cheek in a ritualised duel before being allowed to enter a Prussian drinking sodality.
The atmosphere of middle-aged ladies enjoying something wicked and nostalgic was quite palpable.
‘Don't be silly, Prentice; of course they can.
They're both adults.’
Mother licked cream from the ice-cave interior of the meringue, then broke off part of the superstructure with her fingers and popped it into her mouth.
I shook my head, appalled.
Lewis and Verity!
Married?
No!
‘But isn't this…’
My voice had risen a good half-octave and my hands were waggling around on the end of my arms as though I was trying to shake off bits of Sellotape.
‘…rather soon?’
I finished, lamely.
‘Well, yes,’ mum said, sipping her cappuccino.
‘It is.’
She smiled  brightly.
‘I mean, not that she's pregnant or anything, but —’
‘Pregnant!’
I screeched.
The very idea!
The thought of the two of them fucking was bad enough; Lewis impregnating that gorgeous creature was infinitely worse.
‘Prentice!’
Mother whispered urgently, leaning closer and glancing round again.
This time we were getting a few funny looks from other customers.
My mother smiled insincerely at a couple of Burberried biddies smirking from the table across the aisle; they turned sniffily away.
My mother giggled again, hand to mouth, then delved into the meringue.
She sat back, munching, face red but eyes twinkling, and with those eyes indicated the two women who'd been looking at us; then she raised one finger and pointed first at me, then at her.
Her giggle turned into a snort.
I rolled my eyes.
She dabbed at hers with a clean corner of napkin, laughing.
‘Mother, this is not funny.’
I drank my tea, and attacked another chocolate eclair.
It was my fourth and my belly was still growling.
‘Not at all funny.’
I knew I was sounding prissy and ridiculous but I couldn't help it.
This was a very trying time for me, and the people who ought to be offering support were offering only insults.
‘Well,’ mother said, sipping at her coffee again.
‘Like I say, there's no question of that.
I mean, not that it makes much difference these days anyway, but yes, you're right; it is a bit soon.
Your father and I have talked to Lewis and he's said they aren't going to actually rush into anything, but they just feel so…right together that it's…just come up, you know?
Arisen naturally between them.’
I couldn't help it.
My obsessed, starveling brain was conjuring up all sorts of ghastly images to accompany this sort of talk; things arising, coming up…
Oh God…
‘They've talked about it,’ mother said, in tones of utmost reason, with a small shrug.
‘And I just thought you ought to know.’
‘Oh, thanks,’ I said, sarcastically.
I felt like I'd been kicked by a  camel but I still needed food, so I polished off the eclair, belched with all the decorum I could, and started eyeing up a Danish pastry.
‘They're in the States right now,’ mother said, licking her fingers.
‘For all we know they might come back married.
At least if that happens it won't come as quite such a shock now, will it?’
‘No,’ I said miserably, and took the pastry.
It tasted like sweetened cardboard.
It was April.
I hadn't been back to Gallanach yet this year, hadn't spoken to dad.
My studies weren't going so well; a 2.2 was probably the best I could hope for.
Money was a problem because I'd spent all the dosh I'd got for the car, and I needed my grant to pay off the overdraft I'd built up.
There was about a grand in the old account — my dad's money came by standing order — but I wouldn't use it, and what I regarded as my own finances were judging from the tone of the bank's increasingly frequent letters somewhere in the deep infrared and in serious danger of vanishing from the electromagnetic spectrum altogether.
I had paid my rent early on with the last inelastic cheque I'd written, hadn't paid my Poll Tax, had tried to find bar work but been unsuccessful, and was borrowing off Norris, Gav and a few other pals to buy food, which comprised mostly bread and beans and the odd black pudding supper, plus a cider or two when I could be persuaded to squander my meagre resources on contributing to the funds required for a raid on the local off-licence.
I spent a lot of time lying on the couch in the living room, watching day-time television with a sneer on my face and my books on my lap, making snide remarks at the soaps and quizzes, chat shows and audience participation fora, skimming the scummy surface of our effervescent present in preference to plumbing the adumbrate depths of the underlying past.
I had taken to finishing off the flat beer left in cans by the members of Norris's itinerant card school after its frequent visits chez nous , and was seriously considering starting to steal from bookshops in an attempt to raise some cash.
For a while I had been ringing the Lost Property office at Queen Street station each week, still pathetically hoping that the bag with Uncle Rory's poems and Darren Watt's Möbius scarf would somehow miraculously turn up again.
But even they weren't having anything to do with me any more, after I'd definitely detected an edge of sarcasm in the person's voice and lost my temper and started shouting and swearing.
Rejected by Lost Property; it seemed like the ultimate insult.
And Aunt Janice never did remember any more about whatever Rory had hidden in his later work.
Mum sipped her coffee.
I tore the Danish to bits, imagining it was Lewis's flesh.
Or Verity's underclothes — I was a little confused at the time.
Well, let them get married.
The earlier the better; it would end in tears.
Let them rush into it, let them repent at leisure.
They weren't right for each other and maybe a marriage would last a shorter time than a more informal, less intense liaison; brief and bitter, both of them on proximity fuses with things coming rapidly to a crunch, rather than something more drawn out, where they might spend long periods apart and so forget how much they hated being together, and enjoy the fleeting, passionate moments of reunion…
I fumed and bittered away while my mother finished her coffee and made concerned remarks about how thin and pale I was looking.
I ate another Danish; mother told me everybody else was fine, back home.
‘Come back, Prentice,’ she said, putting one hand out across the table to me.
Her brown eyes looked hurt.
‘This weekend, come back and stay with us.
Your father misses you terribly.
He's too proud to —’
‘I can't,’ I said, pulling my hand away from hers, shaking my head.
‘I need to work this weekend.
Got a lot to do.
Finals coming up.’
‘Prentice,’ my mother whispered.
I was looking down at my  plate, licking my finger and picking off the last few crumbs, transferring them to my mouth.
I could tell mum was leaning forward, trying to get me to meet her eyes, but I just frowned, and with my moistened finger-tip cleared my plate.
‘Prentice; please.
For me, if not for your dad.’
I looked up at her for a moment.
I blinked quickly.
‘Maybe,’ I said.
‘I don't know.
Let me think about it.’
‘Prentice,’ my mother said quietly, ‘say you will.’
‘All right,’ I said, not looking at her.
I knew I was lying but there wasn't anything I could do about it.
I couldn't send her away thinking I could be so heartless and horrible, but I also knew that I wasn't going to go home that weekend; I'd find an excuse.
It wasn't that this dispute between my dad and me about whether there was a God or not really meant anything any more, but rather the fact of the history of the dispute — the reality of its course, not the substance of the original disagreement — was what prevented me from ending it.
It was less that I was too proud, more that I was too embarrassed.
‘You promise?’ mother said, a slight stitching of her brows as she sat back in the ladder-backed seat the only indication that she might not entirely believe me.
‘I promise,’ I nodded.
I felt, wretchedly, that I was such a moral coward, such a sickening liar, that making a promise I knew I had no intention whatever of keeping was hardly any worse than what I had already done.
‘I promise,’ I repeated, blinking again, and set my mouth in a firm, determined way.
Let there be no way out of it; let me really make this promise.
I was so disgusted with myself that I wanted to make myself suffer even more when I did — as I knew I would — break my word.
I nodded fiercely and smiled bravely, utterly insincerely, at my mother.
‘I really do promise.
Really.’
We said goodbye outside, in the street.
I told her the flat was in too  disgusting a state for her to come and visit.
She hoisted her umbrella to ward off the light drizzle that had started to fall, gave me a couple of twenty-pound notes, said she'd look forward to seeing me on Friday, kissed my cheek, then went off to do her shopping.
I had dressed as well as I could that morning, in more or less the same stuff I'd worn for Grandma Margot's funeral.
Minus the lost Möbius scarf, of course.
I turned up the collar of my fake biker's jacket and walked off.
I gave the money to a thankfully dumb-struck fiddle-player on Sauchiehall Street and walked away feeling like some sort of martyred saint.
As I walked, this mood was gradually but smoothly replaced by one of utmost depression, while my body — as though jealous of all the obsessive regard my emotions were receiving — came up with its own demands for attention, evidenced by an unsteady, fluid shifting in my guts, and a cold sweat on my brow.
I felt fainter and fainter and worse and worse and more and more nauseous, unsure whether it was the bitterness of sibling-thwarted love, or just too much starch and refined sugar.
It felt like my stomach had decided to take a sabbatical; all that food was just sitting there, unprocessed, locked in, slopping around and making me feel horrible.
After a while I stopped telling myself I wasn't going to be sick, and — resigned to the fact that I was going to have to throw up at some point — kept telling myself instead that I'd manage to hold it in until I was back in the flat, and so do it in private, rather than into the gutter in front of people.
Eventually I threw up into a litter bin attached to a crowded bus shelter on St George's Road.
I was still gagging up the last few dregs when somebody punched me on the cheek, sending the other side of my head banging against the metal wall of the shelter.
I spun round and sat down on the pavement, a ringing noise in my head.
A tramp dressed in tattered, shiny trousers and a couple of  greasy-looking, buttonless coats bent down, looking at me.
He smelled of last year's sweat.
He gestured angrily up at the litter bin.
‘Ye wee basturt; there might a been somethin good in there!’
He shook his head in obvious disgust and stalked off, muttering.
I got to my feet, supporting myself on the side of the shelter.
A wee grey woman wearing a headscarf peered out at me from the end of the bus queue.
‘You all right, sonny?’ she said.
‘Aye,’ I said, grimacing.
‘Missus,’ I added, because it seemed appropriate.
I nodded at the bin.
‘Sorry about that; my stomach's on strike and my food's coming out in sympathy.’
She smiled uncomprehendingly at me, looking round.
‘Here's ma bus son; you look after yoursel, okay?’
I felt the side of my head where it had hit the bus shelter; a bruise was forming and my eye felt sore.
The wee woman got on her bus and went away.
‘Oh, Prentice!’
Ash said, more in despair than with disgust.
‘You're kidding.’
She looked at me in the candle-light.
I was past caring about feeling guilt and shame and everything was collapsing anyway, so I just looked straight back at her, resigned, and after a while I shook my head.
Then I picked up a bit of naan bread and mopped up my curry sauce.
The naan bread was big; we'd both stuffed ourselves with it during the meal but it was still big.
When it had arrived it had needed a separate table just to accommodate it; luckily the restaurant wasn't busy.
‘Not so much a naan bread, more a toasted duvet,’ I'd said.
Ash had laughed.
During the course of the meal we'd reduced the blighter to the proportions of a couple of pillows, not to mention disposing of portions of chicken kalija and fish pakora to start, followed by garlic chilli chicken, lamb pasanda, a single portion of pulao rice, and side dishes of Bombay potato and sag panir to accompany.
Two dry sherries and a couple of bottles of Nuit St Georges had washed it all down and now we were onto the coffee and brandy.
It was Ashley Watt's treat, of course; I still couldn't afford to eat out unless it was in the street and out of a paper poke.
Ash was passing through Glasgow and staying with us on her way to a new job down in London.
It was mid-summer, and unseasonably warm for Glasgow; Ash wore a long, rough silk shirt, and leggings.
A light cotton jacket hung over the back of her chair.
I was still wearing out the regulation Docs and the thick black jeans.
I had borrowed one of Norris's big paramilitary-style fawn shirts to wear as a jacket over my anti Poll Tax T-shirt.
I'd left it to the end of the meal before I said anything about being arrested.
‘Aw, man,’ Ash said, sitting back slackly in her seat.
The candlelight reflected in her glasses.
‘Why , Prentice?’
The Anarkali was dark and quiet and a lot of the light was coming from the candle between us.
She looked sad; concerned for me, I thought.
I rather liked it.
I liked the idea of other people feeling sorry for me, even though I also despised them for it, because I wasn't worth their sympathy and that made them fools.
Of course, I despised myself for despising them for showing such genuine and unselfish emotions, but that's just one of the things you have to get used to when you're in a serious self-destruction spiral.
Mine was feeling rather like a power-dive right now.
I shrugged.
‘Why not?
I needed the money.’
‘But your family's rich!’
‘No, they're…
Well, they might be fairly well…’
I smiled, sat closer, took up my brandy and cradled it in front of the candle flame.
‘Actually, there's quite a good exchange on those lines in Catch-22 , the movie — much underrated film — which isn't in the book, so Buck Henry must have written it, where Nately's been killed and Yossarian's been to Milo's whorehouse to see Nately's whore and Milo's picked him up in the half-track and he's saying Nately died a rich man; he had such-and-such a number of shares  in Menterprises, and Yossarian says —’
Ashley was glaring at me over the candle flame the way a hawk must glare at a field mouse the instant before it parts mouse from field forever.
I saw this predatory, outraged expression building on Ash's face like a line of dark clouds on the horizon, and stopped talking, though entirely out of inquisitiveness, not trepidation.
‘Shut the fuck up about Catch-22 , ya cretin;’ Ash said, storming forward and planting both fore-arms on the table cloth.
‘What the fucking hell are you doin stealing books for money when you've no need to, eh?
Just what sort of dick-head are you, Prentice?
I mean, what the fuck are your parents going to think if they hear?
How are they goin to feel?
Or is that it?
Are they supposed to feel bad?
Are you tryin to get back at your dad because of this stupit religious thing?
Well, come on; are you?’
I sat back, amused.
I played with the dumpy stem of the brandy glass, smirking at Ashley through the candle flame.
Ashley's long hair was tied back and she looked rather attractive, now I thought about it.
I wondered what the chances were of bedding the girl.
A little recreational fornication would go down quite well just now.
I wondered if Ash was into rough sex.
I had no idea whether I was into it myself, but for some reason just then the idea seemed rather intriguing.
I smiled at her, gave a small laugh.
‘Really, Ashley, I didn't think you'd take it all so melodramatically.
It's only shoplifting, after all.
Just one silly book, too; worse things happen at C &a 's.’
I sat back, still smiling; legs crossed, arms crossed.
Ash's face was close to the flame, its yellow oval glowing like some magical caste-mark on her forehead.
Much closer and she'll melt her glasses, I thought.
She appeared to be trying to out-stare me, but actually I'm rather good at that sort of thing when I want to be, and I didn't let my eyes flicker.
A waiter was approaching from behind her, I noticed, without taking my eyes off hers; I felt the grin broaden on my lips.
The waiter would distract her, especially as she had ordered the meal  and was obviously paying, and anyway she almost certainly hadn't heard the waiter approaching.
Ash reached one hand out across the table and spilled my brandy into my lap.
Just as I was reacting, going ‘Wha —!’ and jerking forward, Ash turned smoothly to the waiter and with a broad smile said,
‘The bill, please.’
‘It does look like I've pissed myself!’
I protested as we walked back to the flat.
‘Those people were definitely laughing at me.’
‘Oh, shut up, Prentice.’
‘You're telling me to shut up!’
I laughed.
The July night was warm and muggy and the traffic rumbled like thunder down Great Western Road.
‘You throw drink all over me, expect to sleep in my flat tonight and you tell me to shut up!’
Ash paced purposefully on, long flinging strides I was having difficulty in keeping up with.
She was still glaring, though straight ahead now.
I noticed people coming towards us weren't getting in her way.
‘I didn't throw the drink, I tipped it,’ she told me.
‘And I'm only coming back to the flat to get my bag, if that's the way you feel.
I'll sleep in the car.
Or find a hotel.’
‘I didn't!’
I protested, waving my arms and running after her as I saw the possibility of getting into Ashley's increasingly attractive body slipping away from me.
‘I didn't say that!
I just don't like being told to shut up!
I'm sorry!
I mean, I'm really sorry I'm annoyed that you spilled — or tipped — drink all over me!’
Ash stopped so suddenly I wondered where she'd gone for a moment.
I turned, looked, and went back to her, standing looking furious in the light of a Spud-U-Like.
‘Prentice,’ she said calmly.
‘You've practically exiled yourself from your family and your home and your friends, you think  you've failed your finals but you say you've no intention of sitting your re-sits even if you have; you've no money and you haven't even been looking for a job; you're getting done for shop-lifting and you're acting like such a fucking dick-head you seem determined to get shot of the last few pals you do have left…and all you can do is make smart-ass remarks.’
I looked through her bright red glasses into her light grey eyes and said, ‘Well, so far so good, certainly, but let's not count our —’
She stamped on my right big toe, forcing me to produce an involuntary and appallingly undignified yelp.
She stormed off; I half limped, half hopped after her.
‘Let's not count our vultures before they're hatched, eh?’
I laughed.
She powered on, ignoring me.
I hopped after her.
‘Spare a shekel for a healthy beggar?’
I cackled.
‘Able was I ere I saw Michael; where can you land a Palin?
And in what?’
Ash kicked my other shin.
Wonderful girl; didn't even seem to break stride.
She disappeared into an off-licence.
I waited outside, rubbing my shin and inspecting the damage to my Docs; luckily the scuff on the right toe didn't show up the way it would have with polished boots.
Ash reappeared with a bag; she swept past me, briefly showing me the bottle of Grouse it contained.
I skipped after her down the street.
‘After trying the fluid on a small unnoticeable area, you now wish to wash all of my trousers the spirited way, am I right, madam?
Now; will you swap these two bottles of warm urine for that one bottle of our product?’
She shook her head, not looking at me.
‘You and I are going to get filthily drunk, Prentice, and if by the time we get to the bottom of this bottle I haven't got some sort of sense out of you I'm going to break it over your thick fucking skull.’
She turned, beamed a toothy non-smile at me for about a micro-second, then strode determinedly on.
I tried to keep up.
I looked at the bottle in the bag.
‘Couldn't  you just leave the whisky, I'll drink it all, wake up in the morning no, make that the afternoon — with a head that feels like you hit me over the skull with the bottle, and you sleep in the car ready for that long and demanding journey down the notoriously dangerous A74 tomorrow?’
Ash shook her head.
We got back to Grant Street.
I looked up, saw some lights on in the flat.
Maybe, I thought, Ash would be so turned on by the sounds of frantic coupling emanating from Gav and Aunt Janice in the bedroom that she'd tear my clothes off.
Or maybe Norris and his pals would distract her from this crazed idea of getting air-locked drunk by suggesting a friendly game of cards.
Ash followed my gaze.
She held the bottle up in front of my eyes.
‘Ready for this, Prentice?’
‘Drink doesn't solve anything, you know,’ I told her.
‘Just dissolves brain cells.’
‘I know,’ she said.
‘I'm working on the principle that most people are okay unless they get muroculous with drink, when they become arse-holes; you're behaving like an arse-hole now, so maybe drink'll make you okay.’
I tried to look as sceptical as I could.
‘I bet you believe in crop circles, too.’
‘Prentice, I believe you seem determined to fuck your life up, and I just want to know why.’
‘Oh,’ I said brightly.
‘That's easy; my affections have been rejected by the one I love and her carnality is being most thoroughly investigated by my elder and smarter brother on a more or less hourly basis, so I am spurned and she is spermed; my father believes his children should be free to make up their own minds, but preferably only out of the spare-parts that he provides…
And apart from that…
I mean the exams and getting nicked and stuff …
Well,’ I sighed, looking up to the night sky, where the clouds were starting to blot out the few stars that the city lights did not obscure.
I spread my arms wide.
‘…I'm just a waster.’
Ash looked at me.
I could see her chest move in and out inside the light cotton jacket.
‘Naw, Prentice,’ she said quietly, after a while.
‘You're just a bairn.’
I shrugged.
‘Maybe.
Come on.’
I indicated the close.
‘Let's get as drunk as you think we have to, and you can tell me all the reasons I'm so childish.’
I glanced at my watch as we headed for the stairs.
‘Better get started, though; we've only got all night.’
We climbed the stairs, reached the flat.
‘You know,’ Ash was saying, breathing hard and looking down the stair-well as I opened the door.
‘I don't know anybody who lives in a flat who doesn't live on the top floor.’
‘Friends in high places,’ I said, opening the door to Janice Rae.
Aunt Janice was clothed (shirt and jeans), which made rather a refreshing change, and standing in the hallway.
She looked distraught.
Her eyes were red and her mascara had left what appeared to be a diagram of the Los Angeles freeway system down her cheeks.
Beyond her Gav stood looking awkward and sheepish.
I glanced from Janice to Gav and back again, while Janice looked at me, lip trembling.
Let me guess, I thought; they've finally done it; they've broken the bed.
‘Oh, Prentice!’
Janice said suddenly, throwing herself at me and enveloping my upper torso in a hug that would have done credit to a grizzly.
I wondered what had brought this on, and how to peel Aunt Janice off.
What must Ashley be making of all this?
(She'd be getting jealous, with any luck.)
Janice pulled away; I could breathe again, and promptly did so.
‘Oh, Prentice,’ she said again, holding my head in both hands and shaking her own.
Her eyes closed, she turned her face away, released her hold on my cheekbones and let me go on into the hall.
Gav stood by the hall table, shifting his weight from side to side  and glancing nervously down at the phone now and again.
He avoided my eyes.
I took a couple of steps forward, then heard something whispered from behind me, and looked back to see Janice hugging Ash, almost violently.
They'd never met before.
How shocking, I thought.
Where was that traditional British reserve only abandoned for cloying camaraderie under the influence of injuriously vast quantities of alcohol?
I wondered, if nervously.
Ash was looking over Janice Rae's shoulder at me, those grey eyes behind the bright red glasses filling with tears.
‘Um; you've to phone home,’ Gav mumbled, apparently addressing his trainers.
‘ET or BT?’
I heard myself say to him, though the different sections of my brain seemed to have slipped out of synch somehow, and I was aware of all sorts of different things at once, and time seemed to have slowed down and at the same time some part of my brain was racing, trying to come up with some logical explanation for what was going on that didn't involve calamity…and failing.
‘It's —’ Gav said, this time seemingly directing his remarks to his rugby-shirted chest.
‘It's your dad,’ he whispered, and suddenly started to cry.
12
This is the Specialist Glass Division,’ Hamish said, opening a door.
They found themselves in a long corridor with one glass wall that looked out into a bright, modern, open-plan and spacious area.
Everything gleamed and the few people visible wore white coats; apart from the exposed brickwork of a couple of rotund furnaces, linked to the ceiling by shining metal ductwork, the place looked more like a laboratory than a factory.
There was a silence none of the three brothers seemed inclined to fill.
Hamish, an immaculate white coat over his three piece suit, gazed with a rapt expression at the almost static panorama on the far side of the glass.
Kenneth looked bored.
Rory stood at Janice Rae's side, humming something monotonous, one arm round Janice's waist and attempting to tickle her, just above her right hip.
‘Very clean,’ Janice said eventually.
‘Yes,’ Hamish said gravely.
He nodded slowly, still observing the scene beyond the glass.
‘It has to be, of course.’
He turned to  the tables against the wall behind them, on which lay various glassy-looking objects, some in display cabinets, most loose, all with explanatory notes stuck to the wall above them.
From a wooden plinth on one table, Hamish picked up a dull black cone that looked a little like a Viking helmet without the horns.
‘This is a missile nose-cone,’ he said, turning the cone over in his hands.
He held it out to Janice.
She took it.
‘Hmm.
Quite heavy,’ she said.
Rory tickled her again and she nudged him.
‘Yes, heavy,’ Hamish said gravely, taking it back and carefully replacing it on its wooden block.
‘Strictly speaking, this is a glass ceramic rather than ordinary glass,’ he said, adjusting the precise position of the nose cone on the plinth.
‘The basis is lithium aluminosilicate, which withstands heat very well.
Cooker hobs are made from this sort of thing…and obviously missiles need to withstand a lot of heat from friction with the air.’
‘Obviously,’ Kenneth said.
He and Rory exchanged looks.
Hamish turned to another exhibit; a broad bowl, also dull and dark, and over half a metre across, it was like a gigantic plate with no lip.
He lifted an edge so that they could look underneath, where it was criss-crossed with a lattice of deep ribs.
‘Satellite aerial?’
Kenneth said.
‘No,’ Hamish said, though a hint of a smile crossed his dour face.
‘No, this is a substrate for an astronomical telescope mirror.’
‘Like the one Fergus has in the castle?’
Rory asked.
‘That's right.
All the substrates and optics for Mr Urvill's telescope were made here.
Though of course they were on a smaller scale than this piece.’
Hamish lowered the edge of the bowl and flicked a bit of dust off one edge.
‘This is made from the same type of material as the nose cone there.
It resists distortion under thermal shock.’
‘Hmm,’ Janice in a tone that suggested that she was really trying to be interested as well as sound it.
‘Over here,’ Hamish said, plodding towards another table, ‘we  have what are called the passivation glasses, related to the Borate glasses but made from zinc-silicoborate…’
‘All I said was I'd like to see the factory,’ Janice whispered to Rory as they moved to follow Hamish.
‘The outside would have done.’
‘Tough shit,’ Rory said, and tickled her with both hands this time, producing a yelp.
Another man in a white coat came up to Hamish from the far end of the corridor.
‘Excuse me a moment,’ Hamish said to the others, and turned to talk to him.
Kenneth turned to Rory and Janice.
He tugged on Rory's sleeve and in a low monotone said, ‘Dad, I'm bored, dad; dad, are we nearly finished yet, dad?
Dad, want to go home, dad.’
He leant one hand against the glass wall, glanced back at Hamish — still deep in conversation, and nodding — and rolled his eyes.
He looked at Janice.
‘My elder brother,’ he said quietly.
‘The man who put the Bore in Boro-silicate.’
‘You don't have to stay.’
Rory grinned.
‘We could get a train home.’
Kenneth shook his head.
‘No; it's okay.’
He glanced at his watch.
‘Maybe we can drag the Tree out for lunch soon.’
‘Sorry about that,’ Hamish said, coming up behind them.
They all smiled at him.
Hamish moved one arm up to indicate they should move down the corridor to where they could see the exciting zinc-silicoborates.
He took a pristine white handkerchief out of his pocket and rubbed at the faint hand-print Kenneth had left on the glass partition as he said, ‘These passivation glasses are of much use in the semi-conductor industry, and we have high hopes that with the burgeoning of the Scottish computer industry Silicon Glen as it is sometimes jocularly called — we shall shortly be supplying…’
‘And to think, all that could have been mine.’
Kenneth sighed with pretended regret, putting his feet up on the low wall of the terrace  and rocking his seat back on its rear legs as he shaded his eyes with one hand.
He brought his drink up to his lips with the other.
Janice and Rory were tucking into their salads; the terrace of the Achnaba Hotel was crowded with tourists, and on the road in front of the hotel cars, caravans and coaches hummed past, heading for Lochgilphead, Gallanach, or Kintyre.
A brisk warm wind blew from the south west, laden with the vanilla smell of gorse blossom, mixed with pine off the forests and a salt hint from the sea.
‘Well, that's just the way it goes, Ken,’ Rory said.
‘Hamish got to be manager of the factory and you didn't.
No use crying over spilled boro-silicate…’
Kenneth grinned, staring out over the balustrade of the terrace towards the hills on the far side of Loch Fyne.
‘I wonder where that saying comes from.
I mean, why milk?
If it means something not very valuable, why not water?
Or —’
‘Maybe crying over milk was unlucky,’ Rory suggested.
‘It was years before I realised it was even common parlance,’ Kenneth said, still staring out to the loch.
‘I used to think it was something only mum came out with.
Like ‘I couldn't draw a herring off a plate.’
I mean, what the hell does that mean?
Or, ‘Och aye; that's him away the Crow Road.’
Jeez.
Opaque or what?’
‘But they might all have some…some basis in reality,’ Rory insisted.
‘Like crying over milk was bad news; spoiled it.’
‘Maybe it spoiled un-spilled milk,’ Kenneth nodded.
‘Some chemical reaction.
Like they say thunder can curdle milk; ions or something.’
‘Ah,’ Rory said.
‘Then maybe you were supposed to cry over milk, because it helped preserve it, or made it easier to turn into cheese.
And so it was a waste crying over spilled milk.’
‘I think this is where we came in,’ Kenneth said.
He squinted at a car on the road as it hurried north.
‘Isn't that Fergus?’ he said, nodding.
‘Where?’
‘Racing green Jag; heading north.’
‘Is that what Ferg's driving these days?’
Rory said, rising up in his seat a little to watch the car pass.
It swept round the long bend that carried the road towards the forest.
He sat back down and took up his fork again.
‘Yeah, looked like Ferg.’
‘This is Fergus Urvill, who owns the factory?’
Janice asked.
She sat back in the white plastic chair, fanning herself with her napkin.
Kenneth looked at her.
‘Yep, that Fergus,’ he said.
‘Of course, you haven't had the dubious pleasure yet, have you?’
He put his glass down on the circular table, and inspected the rolled up sun-shade that protruded from the centre of the table like an unopened flower.
‘No,’ Janice said.
‘What's he like?’
Kenneth and Rory exchanged glances.
‘Bearing up remarkably well,’ Kenneth said.
Janice looked puzzled for a second, then said, ‘Oh; yes, of course; Fiona…’ she looked embarrassed.
Rory patted her hand on the table.
Kenneth looked away for a moment, then cleared his throat.
‘Yeah; anyway.’
He stretched his shoulders, sat back.
‘Fergus…
Upper-class; huntin'-shootin'-fishin' type…
Could be worse, I suppose.’
‘Still,’ Rory said.
‘Not what you'd call a happy man.’
‘Well, of course,’ Janice said quietly, and bit her lip.
Kenneth frowned.
‘His precious factory's making a profit,’ he said briskly, draining his glass.
‘The Greedy Party's in power.
What more does he want?’
‘A wife?’
Rory suggested, and then sucked on one finger.
Kenneth looked down, studying his glass.
There was silence.
Rory rubbed a mark off the white table's surface.
Janice lifted the scooped neck of her bright print dress and blew down.
‘Want some shade?’
Kenneth asked Janice.
She nodded.
Kenneth stood, lifted the stalk of the sun-shade and opened the big parasol, casting a shadow over Janice and Rory.
‘Did you know,’ Janice said to Rory, squeezing his hand.
‘In the Dewey Decimal System, glass-making comes under the code six six six?’
‘Woo,’ Rory whistled.
‘Number of the beast!
Spooky, eh?’
‘Not many people know that,’ Janice said.
She smiled.
Kenneth laughed.
He sat back in his chair again, dragging it round so he was under the shade too.
‘Shame Ferg isn't superstitious.’
He chuckled.
‘Mind you, Hamish is.
Maybe we should tell him that.
The Tree has some pretty weird ideas about religion; he might just swallow the idea he's been working for the devil all this time.
Renounce the whole business, start going round smashing windows.’
‘Really?’
Janice said.
‘What is he?
I mean what religion?’
Kenneth shrugged.
‘Oh, just Church of Scotland; but if they had a Provisional Wing, I think he'd be on it.’
‘He's always had a soft spot for the royal family —’ Rory began.
‘Yes; his head,’ Kenneth said.
‘— Maybe he could start the Royal Church of Scotland.’
‘Maybe he could start thinking like a rational human being instead of a caveman frightened by lightning,’ Kenneth said tartly.
‘Oh, you're so cruel,’ Rory told him.
‘I know,’ Kenneth sighed, rolling the base of his glass around on the table top.
‘Time for another drink, I think.’
‘My round,’ Janice said, rising.
‘No,’ Kenneth said, ‘Let —’
‘Sit down,’ Janice told him, taking his glass from his hand.
‘Same again?’
Kenneth looked glum.
‘No; Virgin Mary this time.
Gotta drive.’
The two men watched Janice head for the bar.
‘What did Fergus ever say to you?’
Kenneth asked Rory.
‘What?’
Rory said, blinking.
‘What about?’
‘God, I hate it when you're mysterious!’
Kenneth shook his head.
‘You know damn well.
Before the crash; way before.
What did Fergus ever tell you?
Was it after you came back from India  that second time; before you went back to London?
You two went hill-walking a lot then, didn't you?
Old Ferg spill some beans up in them there hills?’
‘We talked,’ Rory said awkwardly, using his fork to push bits of lettuce around his plate.
‘He told me things, but…
I don't want to go into it, Ken, it would only complicate matters.
It's nothing that directly touches you.’
‘What about Fiona?’
Kenneth said, voice low, staring at his brother.
‘Did it touch her?’
Rory looked away, across the loch.
He shrugged.
‘Look, Ken, it isn't something you'd benefit by knowing, all right?
Just leave it at that.’
The fork continued to shift the lettuce leaves around the plate.
Kenneth watched his brother for a moment, then sat back.
‘Oh well, serves me right for being nosey.
Let's change the subject.
How's this new project thing coming along?’
‘Oh, I'm still working on it.’
‘I wish you'd let me look at it.’
‘It isn't finished yet.’
‘When will it be?’
‘When it is,’ Rory said, frowning.
He put the fork down.
‘I don't know.
Look; it's sort of a personal story …
‘Ah,’ Kenneth said.
Rory leaned forward over the table, closer to his brother.
‘Look,’ he said, glancing round towards the french windows that led to the bar.
‘I've had a few more ideas…well, I've thought about…areas I didn't think I could use that I now think I can, and I want to develop that stuff, and —’
‘What stuff?’
Kenneth said, laughing in exasperation and throwing his arms wide.
‘Just tell me what sort of stuff!’
Rory sat back, shaking his head.
‘I can't say.
Really.’
He glanced up at Kenneth.
‘But things…things might start to happen soon, anyway.
I can't say any more for now.’
Kenneth shook his head sadly.
‘They might have happened by now if you'd just let me see  this…opera, TV series, pop-up-book, whatever the hell it is;and if you'd let me talk to a few people.
I mean, if it's just that you're too close to it and you don't want me to look at it, there are people I know who're good at that sort of thing; they can see the wood from the trees; they could —’
‘Aw, come on, Ken,’ Rory said, a pained expression crossing his face.
He ran a hand through his short, straight hair.
‘This is my show; this is the way I want to do it.
Just let me, all right?’
‘I don't know, Rore,’ Kenneth said, sitting back.
‘Sometimes you play your cards so damn close to your chest I don't think you can see them yourself.
You should open up a bit more, share your problems.
Share some secrets.’
‘I do,’ Rory said, biting his lip and looking down at his glass.
‘Rory,’ Kenneth said, sitting forward and lowering his voice to conspiratorial levels, ‘the last secret I remember you telling me was that it was you who set fire to that barn on the Urvill's estate.’
Rory grinned, stirring his finger through a little patch of moisture on the side of his glass.
‘Hey, I'm still waiting to see if you tell anyone.’
Ken laughed.
‘Well, I haven't.
Have you?’
Rory smiled, sucking air through his teeth at the same time, clinked one thumbnail against his glass.
He glanced at his brother.
‘Don't worry; my secret is safe with us.’
He shook his head, then shrugged.
‘Okay,’ Rory sighed, trying to suppress a smile, looking away.
‘There might be a job with Aunty in the offing, okay?’
‘What?’
Kenneth laughed.
‘The Beeb?
You going to be a TV star?’
‘It's not definite yet,’ Rory shrugged.
‘And it's…’ he frowned at his brother.
‘Shit, Ken; it's just more hack-work.
It's better paid, is all.’
‘What is it though?’
‘Oh, a fucking travel programme, what else?’
Rory rolled his eyes.
‘But anyway; we'll see, okay?
It's not definite, like I say, and I don't want to get anybody's hopes up, so keep it quiet; but things might start to happen.’
‘But that's great news, man,’ Kenneth said, sitting back.
‘Talking about me, I hope, boys,’ Janice said, returning with their drinks on a tray.
‘…said, ‘My God , Rory, I've never seen one that big!’ and I said — oh; hello dear,’Rory grinned, pretending only then to notice Janice.
She sat down, smiling.
‘Talking about the size of your overdraft, are we, dear?’
‘Gosh-darn,’ Rory said, snapping his fingers, looking at Kenneth.
‘Caught telling tales again.’
‘Runs in the family,’ Kenneth said, taking up his glass.
‘Cheers, Janice.’
‘Your health.’
‘Slange.’
They left after that drink and went back to the house at Lochgair; Rory and Kenneth cleared a tangled choke of bushes and shrubs at the rear of the garden, where Mary wanted the lawn extended.
They sweated through the insect-loud afternoon, while the sun shone.
Janice sunbathed, and later helped Mary and Margot prepare the evening meal.
Janice had taken that day off from the library.
She and Rory left on the last train back to Glasgow that night.
It was the last time Kenneth ever saw Rory.
Fiona sat in the passenger seat of the car, watching the red roadside reflectors drift out of the night towards her.
She was thrown against one side of the seat as Fergus powered the Aston round the right-hander that took the road out of the forest, down, into and through the little village of Furnace.
She was pressed back against the seat as  Fergus accelerated again.
They swung out and past some small, slower car, overtaking it as though it was stationary; headlights ahead of them glared, the on-coming car flashed its lights and she heard its horn sound as they passed, a few seconds later.
The sound was quickly lost in the snarl of the Aston's engine.
‘If you're driving like this to try and prove something, don't bother on my account,’ she said.
Fergus was silent for a while, then, in a very controlled and even voice said, ‘Don't worry.
Look, I just want to get home as soon as possible.
All right?’
‘Everything'll suddenly get better once we're home, will it?’
Fiona said.
‘Kiss the kids on the head and get Mrs S to make some tea; stiff whisky for you, G and T for me.
Maybe we should call up the McKeans to say we got back safely; you can ask after Julie…’
‘For Christ's sake, Fiona —’
For Christ's sake, Fiona’,’ Fiona sneered, imitating Fergus's voice.
‘Is that all you can say?
You've had half an hour to think up another excuse, and —’
‘I don't need,’ Fergus sighed, ‘any excuses.
Look; I thought we had agreed to just leave this —’
‘Yes, that would suit you fine, wouldn't it, Ferg?
That's your way of dealing with everything, isn't it?
Pretend it hasn't happened, maybe it'll go away.
If we're all terribly polite and decorous and discreet, maybe the whole horrid thing will just…’
She made a little fluttering motion with her hands, and in a high-pitched, girlish voice, said, ‘Disappear!’
She looked at him; his broad, soft-jowled face looked hard and set in the dim light shining from the car's instruments.
‘Well,’ she told him, leaning over as far as she could towards him.
‘They won't just go away, Ferg.’
She tried to make him look at her.
He frowned, put his head slightly to one side and lifted it, trying to look round and over her head.
‘Nothing ever goes away, Fergus,’ she told him.
‘Nothing ever doesn't matter.’
She strained over a little more.
‘Fergus —’ she said.
He pushed her away with his left hand, back into her seat.
She sat there, mouth open.
He seemed to understand the silence and glanced over, a weak smile flickering on his face.
‘Sorry,’ he said.
‘Getting in the way a bit there.
Sorry.’
‘Don't you push me!’ she said, slapping his shoulder.
She hit him again.
‘Don't you ever dare push me again!’
‘Oh stop it, Fiona,’ he said, more exasperated than angry.
‘One minute I'm in the dog-house because…well, because I'm not all over you all the time; next second —’
Not all over you all the time’?’
Fiona said.
‘You mean not fucking me, Fergus, is that what you mean?’
‘Fiona, please —’
‘Oh.’
Fiona slapped one palm off her forehead, then crossed her arms, looked away, out of the dark side window.
‘Fuck; did I swear?
Oh fuck.
Oh what a silly fucking cow I must fucking be.’
‘Fiona —’
‘I said something straight.
I'm so sorry.
I actually said what I meant, used the sort of word you'd normally only hear from your golfing chums or your rugby pals.
Or does Julie use that sort of language?
Does she?
Do you like her to talk dirty?
Does that get you going, Ferg?’
‘Fiona, I'm getting rather tired of this,’ Fergus said through his teeth, his fingers gripping the wheel harder, rubbing round it.
‘I'm sorry you think what you do about Julie.
As I have tried to tell you, she was the wife of an old friend and I've kept in touch since she got divorced —’
‘Still stuck on that, Fergus?’
Fiona said, impersonating concern.
‘Oh dear; we had that line back at Arrochar, I seem to recall.
And what was the rest of it?
Oh yes, one of her sons has leukaemia, poor little kid, hasn't he?
And you've helped her and the little darling with BUPA out of the goodness of your heart —’
‘Yes I have, and I'm sorry you choose to sneer about it, Fiona.’
‘Sneer!’ laughed Fiona.
‘It's a joke, Fergus.
Jesus, she was practically taking your zip down.’
‘Oh, don't be ridiculous.
It's not my fault Julie got a bit tipsy.’
‘She was smashed out of her brains, Fergus, and about the only thing she remembered was that she wanted to get your trousers off.
God knows why, but she seemed to associate that with pleasure.’
Fiona gave a sort of strangled laugh, then put one hand up suddenly to her nose, and looked away, and sobbed once.
Fergus drove quickly on, trees flicking past like green ghosts to the right, the waters of the loch just a dark absence on the left.
Fiona sniffed.
‘Trying the great silence again, eh, Ferg?’
She pulled a handkerchief from her handbag on her lap, dabbed at her nose.
‘Still pretending it'll all go away.
Still sticking your head in your precious fucking optical-quality sand.’
‘Look, can't we talk about this in the morning?
I mean, when you're…’
‘Sober, Fergus?’ she said, looking over at him.
‘That what you were going to say?
Blaming it on drink again?
Is that all it was?
Of course, silly me.
I should have realised.
Dear Julie gets drunk and for some bizarre reason suddenly starts feeling you up under the table while we're nibbling our cheese and biscuits, and making pathetic double-entendres, and attacks you outside the bathroom; totally unprovoked, of course, and it's all just the drink talking.
And I'm just being hysterical, I suppose, because I've had too many of John's terribly strong G and Ts and it'll all look different in the morning and I'll come to you and say sorry and wasn't I being a silly girl last night, and you can pat me on the head and say yes, wasn't I?
And we can still go for cocktails at the Frasers’ and bridge at the McAlpines and tee off with the Gordons and cruise with the Hamiltons with a united front, a respectable face, can't we, Fergus?’
‘Fiona,’ Fergus said, face set and teeth clenched.
‘I don't know,’ he breathed, ‘why you're making such a big thing of this.
It's just one of those things that happens at parties; people do get drunk and they do do things they wouldn't normally think of.
Maybe Julie has…or has had, in the past, a crush on me or something.
I don't know.
Maybe —’
‘A crush on you,’ said Fiona.
‘Jesus.
Well, that's a better try, Ferg.
But I don't think you're quite as good a liar as you think you are.
And she's not that good an actress.’
Fiona looked down, twisting the handkerchief in her fingers.
‘Oh God, Ferg, it was so fucking obvious.
I mean.
I knew there was something going on; all those trips away, and getting drunk and not being able to come home, staying at one of your chums’delightful little pied-à-terres.
Oh, sorry, no, you can't phone back, he's only just got it and it hasn't had a phone put in yet.
Or coming back with bruises; how you suddenly became so very clumsy or so easily marked.
But at least I could still kid myself, at least I didn't have my nose rubbed in it.’
‘Fiona!’
Fergus shouted, knuckles white on the steering wheel.
‘For God's sake, there's nothing to have your nose rubbed in!
Julie's just a friend.
I haven't touched her!’
‘You didn't have to, she was touching you,’ Fiona said, voice quiet, looking away from Fergus, out to the darkness of the loch.
A few weak lights shone on the far side, and headlights on the Otter Ferry road, two miles away across the black expanse of waves, swung out briefly, like a lighthouse beam…and then dimmed and disappeared.
The car roared through another small village before the trees hid the view again.
Fiona kept her face away from him, looking out into the night, watching the vertical bright line of light the car threw onto the serried mass of dark conifers.
Even there she could not escape him; she could see his distorted image in the slanted glass of the car's windows, dim in the background, still lit by his instruments.
She wondered how she could ever have thought that she loved him, and why she had stayed with him for so long after she'd realised that if she ever had, she did not love him now.
Of course she could say it was for the children, as people always did…
It was true, up to a point.
How terrible it was to have those easy phrases, trotted out so often in the course of gossip, or heart-to-hearts, or in magazine articles, or even court cases, become so real.
It was never the sort of thing you thought about when you were young, when you were — or thought you were — in love, and all the future shone with promise.
Problems belonged to other people.
You might imagine supporting them, talking with them when they needed to talk, trying to help, but you didn't imagine that you would be the one desperate to talk (or the one too embarrassed to talk, too ashamed or too proud to talk); you didn't imagine you would be the one who needed help, not even when you told friends that of course there might be problems, or agreed with your beloved that you would always talk about things…
Staying together for the children.
And for the adults, she thought.
For the sake of appearances.
God, she had thought she was above that sort of thing, once.
She had been bright and free and determined and she had decided she was going to make her own way in the world, just as well as any of her brothers might.
She'd been a sort of feminist before it became fashionable; never had much time for all that sisterly stuff, but she was positive she was as good as any man and she'd prove it…
And marrying Ferg had seemed like an extra boost to her life-plan.
London had been exciting, but she had not shone out there, she felt, the way she had here.
She had never felt any affection for the place and had made no friends there she would miss; and anyway, she would find fields to conquer up here, coming home triumphant to wed the lord of the manor.
But it had not been as she had imagined.
She had expected to be the centre of things in Gallanach, but the McHoans as a family had so many other things happening to them; she had felt peripheral.
The Urvills' own history, too, made her feel like something unimportant on the family tree, for all that Fergus talked of responsibility and duty and one's debt to the next generation.
She was a leaf, expendable.
A twig — maybe — at best.
Somehow all her dreams had disappeared.
It seemed to her now that all she had ever had had been the dream of having dreams; the  goal of having goals one day, once she had made her mind up what it was she wanted.
But that had never happened.
First Fergus, then the twins, then her own small part in the society of the town and the people there, and in the wider, still circumferential concerns of this wee country's middle-to-ruling classes, and in the more dissipated commonwealth of mildly powerful people who were their peers beyond that — in England, on the continent, from the States and elsewhere — took up her time, sapped her will and replaced her own concerns with theirs.
So now, she thought, I am married to a man whose touch disgusts me, and who anyway does not seem to want to touch me.
She looked at Fergus's dim reflection, distorted in the glass, then tried to re-focus on her own image.
Can he find me as repellent as I find him?
I can't look that bad, can I?
A few grey hairs, but you don't notice them; still a size twelve, and I've looked after myself.
I look good in this, your standard little black number, and I still get into a tight pair of jeans…
What's wrong with me?
What did I do?
Why does he have to spend half his time with that drunken, brassy bitch?
God, the best time I've had in the past five years was one night with Lachy Watt, angry at Ferg, and more surprised than anything else.
They way he just took my hair in one hand, while we were standing looking up at that God-awful window in the great hall, and turned my head to him, and pulled me close; tongue down my throat before I knew what was happening, and there was something adolescent and desperate beneath all that working-class directness, but Jesus, I felt wanted …
She shook her head.
That was best left out of it.
Once was once; dismissible.
Ever again would set a pattern.
Lachy had been back one time afterwards that she knew of, a year later, and he had called, but she'd told him she wouldn't be able to see him, and put the phone down on him.
No, that didn't matter.
She looked at the reflection of Fergus again, as he pulled the wheel; the car tunnelled into the forest, the wall of trees on either  side a blur, their greenness more remembered than seen.
I could leave him, she thought.
I could always have left him.
But mother's too close for comfort; there'd be too many nearby friends, too many chances of bumping into people I'd rather not bump into; too much mitigating against the clean break; new start.
God, I'm pathetic, though, that's so petty.
Why haven't I the sheer drive to just get up and go, take the twins and emigrate to Oz or Canada?
Or live in wild eccentricity in London or Paris?
Or I can stay, as I know I probably will.
Muddle through.
Look after the twins and try to make sure they negotiate the reefs of puberty and adolescence, set them up to make their way in the world, and do so without becoming just like me…
She looked out, into the grey sweep of road ever rushing towards them.
Fergus powered the car down out of the forest, through some more houses and a few lights.
The car lurched.
Fergus looked over, smiled at her.
She didn't know whether to smile back or not, and she wondered what that expression had meant, and what had been going through his head for the last few miles.
The car jiggled on its springs, lurched again and settled.
She clutched at her seat, looking forward.
The engine roared.
She looked back at Ferg, saw tears in his eyes.
‘Ferg?’ she said.
The car skidded a little, came straight; she glanced forward at the road, saw the corner and the trees.
She clutched at the dashboard with both hands.
‘Ferg!’ she screamed.
‘Look —!’
