I
LOOMING DANGERS
‘It is not possible to have high inflation and high unemployment at the same time’(The views of a respected economist, mid-1970's)
One cannot ignore the persistent nature of our unemployment figures and little imagination is needed to visualise the hopelessness of the unemployed.
For those unemployed and with a family, the added worry of responsibility for the next generation must be bewildering.
Youngsters, who have in the past turned to parents for guidance and example, have their confidence seriously undermined by their seniors' inability to offer any sort of explanation or hope.
World trends come and go but the army of unemployed grows forever; now economists are predicting that there will be no foreseeable end to the trend of the last few years.
Youngsters with inquiring minds will ask what the Government are doing by economic policies to bring lasting future employment and human dignity to the present and likely future unemployed.
In what way are our vast oil revenues being used to create new industries or jobs, and what happens when they run out?
The trend of national statistics reveals that there will be an increasing number of retired and elderly people to be provided for by a progressively fewer number of workers.
Either taxes will have to increase to cover the social and medical needs of the retired and elderly, or their standard of living will diminish sharply.
And what part does the microchip play in all this?
Can our Nation risk the social consequences to our way of life by ignoring the possibility of any viable alternative?
It might be difficult and changes be necessary, but would this not be better than what we have now?
Ultimately, politicians will have to face the questions raised and deal with them.
Regretfully the pattern of past legislation leaves little  confidence that satisfactory answers will be found.
The early stages of long term problems are already visited upon us.
The proceeds of our Oil Reserves are presently being used to cover short term deficiencies and there are really no increased national resources in spite of several years of additional oil revenue.
Even if the policies of successive governments since World War II had been successful in all respects, would we now be in a different situation fiscally and socially?
The answer suggested is regretfully, no.
It is all very well to be phlegmatic and hope that all will come right in the end but surely it would be better to stimulate discussion with a view to obtaining fresh ideas on how to deal with new circumstances which have never before confronted the capitalist world?
Not many years ago, economists expressed the view that inflation and high unemployment could not go together; we have seen that they were wrong.
The old rules have to be revised or discarded because they applied to the circumstances that existed when they were formulated, a hundred years ago.
Life has changed radically since then and fresh thought is necessary to carry us into the 21st century.
It is not the responsibility of governments to run the industry of the nation, but rather to provide a stable environment which will allow private capital to create jobs and wealth for the general good.
The leaders of our nation do however have a charge to stimulate discussion and ideas if none is forthcoming from the industrialists.
In the past, Government has interfered in industry, with disastrous results, by attempting to alter economic trends; increasing and then curtailing expansion, increasing interest rates, taxation, credit, consumer demand and the like.
If anyone wants to judge the competence of government in industry they only have to look at the results of our nationalised companies as a guide.
The object of this book is to give one person's view on the possible causes of the present situation and to stimulate discussion, hoping that new and, if necessary, radical ideas are created in the spirit that it is better to express a constructive view rather than to passively accept a disagreeable situation with discontent.
No particular doctrine is intended and if my expressed conclusions attract adverse comment, or my suggestions are ridiculed, it is sufficient that discussion and consideration took place with the aim of helping the many unfortunate people of our country who are at present without hope.
As to whether change is necessary or not one cannot help pay  some regard of that phenomenon of the post war world, Japan: If time travel was a fact and it was possible to transport someone from the middle of the social scale of Victorian Britain to the present time, he would think a revolution had taken place; but the basic ground rules of social life and commerce would shortly become comprehensible to him.
The equivalent Japanese, transported to modern Tokyo would think he was on a different planet!
It is suggested that they have changed for the better, while we have not.
II
THE PRESENT SITUATION
There are 2 million fewer people employed now in our production industries than 25 years ago, and in its present form industry could probably produce more, with incentives and organisation, without taking on more labour.
If industry was equipped with more computer aids such as numerically controlled machines and robots, production per man/woman employed could be even further increased.
The future prospect of existing industry creating a really significant number of jobs — sufficient for instance, to halve our present unemployment — looks remote.
It has been proposed that a reduction in pay rises of 1% could create 200,000 jobs but before the jobs are created the demand must exist for our goods.
As our currency has dropped in value so drastically in recent years, the demand should already have revealed itself.
Out good are now very much cheaper abroad than they were yet there seems no pressure upon manufacturers to step up production and increase the labour force.
Home demand is surely not going to be stimulated by a reduction of half a percent or so in price and in any case, with 4 million unemployed, is a thriving domestic market a real possibility?
If this is indeed the case, the country will be faced with a permanent pool of three to four million unemployed and an increasing number of pensioners: and add to this the fact that there are a greater number of industrialised nations than ever before, including many, in the Far East in particular, not only affecting, but embarrassing, large sections of our established business.
Economic trends occur swiftly and become established before large industries can scale up and take advantage of new demands.
Because our industrial base is contracting, any resurgence of consumer demand would result in a flood of imported goods to supplement our own under-producing industry with disastrous effects on the balance of payments.
The government have therefore controlled the money supply, creating in effect a mini-depression to avoid this likelihood, but  unfortunately they have also stifled the very lifeblood of a healthy industry, a buoyant home market.
Reductions in taxation are therefore a two-edged sword, when used as a device to create jobs.
Although world trends are blamed for our present problems, to a certain extent they result from bad legislation.
How, for instance, can we be sure that annual budgets by the Chancellor of the Exchequer are related to our true economic circumstances?
Are they a means of merely reapportioning the existing cake?
The distribution will depend on political hue, and whatever one party says the nation needs, the opposition will offer convincing arguments that they are wrong, seemingly sniping at one another to score party points.
Yet it never seems to have occurred to politicians that maybe the whole system is wrong and needs a radical overhaul.
Other countries apparently more successful than us, never seem to mind change, the British do for fear that it diminishes their lot in life.
This, it is suggested, is a hangover from Victorian and Colonial days.
But what is wrong with change for the better and doing what one is good at?
The Japanese learned that their Far Eastern neighbours were better at making portable radios and black and white televisions and for some years now have passed over production of these items when only 10 years ago they were world leaders.
A change for the better, for now the Japanese can concentrate on the new industries of Computers and Lasers where, because there is not yet the world competition as in radios and televisions, they can recover better margins making their industries more wealth-creating.
Maybe other industrialised Nations will affect European trade in the future, as the Japanese have over the last 10 years.
What are the prospects of the embryonic Korean Car Industry undermining the small car market we currently enjoy?
Europe now produces more food than she needs and has for some years been supporting a section of industry that provides employment for less than 1% of our National workforce; good for British agriculture, but how much better if the support had gone to those industries that took up a greater proportion of the work force, i.e. the engineers with 10%.
Successful engineering business would create jobs in building, for new factories, transport, for moving goods, steel, power, etc.
But it wasn't to be and as a result we now have fewer engineers and probably fewer skilled people in industry than ever before: crumbly foundations to build upon if it is going to be built along the old traditional lines.
Now that change of policy has been forced upon the E.C.C., it is taking the form of decreasing production of food when half the world is starving.
Is not some examination of our moral responsibilities called for, and how much better if it could be associated with economic success.
Surely if the skills desert the greater proportion of working men and women; fewer apprenticeships being served for the faster rewards of assembly; we have to look to new industries with high labour content as opposed to high capital content for our long- term social remedies.
Undoubtedly the service industries should receive greater attention, with their greater labour contents.
The pattern of employment has altered radically since our traditional industries began.
Many years ago the workforce was predominately male but with the greater use of automation and assembling of sub-assembly-type work, female workers form a greater proportion of the total than, say, 50 years ago.
The dexterity of the woman in the electronic industry is renowned and invaluable and if the new technology of computer science is to grow significantly it will do little to help the man of the house to regain his dignity as the main provider and head of the household.
If our country is to maintain economic stability based upon traditional industries it needs a greater proportion of locomotive, shipbuilding, power stations, etc., than we currently enjoy.
This is the type of work which has long term duration, carrying the associated industries through peaks and troughs of consumer demand and varying world trends, and was the back-bone of the industrial stability we enjoyed in the past.
On the production line, a motorcar takes only hours to make, and a washing machine merely minutes.
In the anticipation of reduced demand, it is very easy to adjust production to avoid holding excessive stocks.
In its existing form industrialised Britain makes for constantly variable labour needs, and this gives little security to the employees.
With the exception of the computer industry, little effort seems to have been made to develop new industries; instead there has been concentration on making our existing industries more efficient and competitive.
If the methods adopted are to reduce the claims of our labour force then even those employed will be relatively worse off.
Without debating the relative merits of this policy, the facts exist.
If continued, the social consequences of this trend cannot be overlooked.
The government seems set on a policy of reducing the  percentage of labour contained in total costs: If this is done to make our goods more competitive abroad, the depreciation of our currency has already taken care of that aspect.
If the aim is to make the manufacturing industries more efficient, this will not create jobs.
More seriously, the relative situation of those remaining in work will be worsened and not only will this reverse the trend of improving the quality of life but it will lower the ability of the mass of taxpayers to support the anticipated needs of the elderly and sick.
The shades of the nineteenth century seem to loom larger than the prospects of the 21st Century which is what we should be aiming for.
The world has always looked to Britain for stability, inventiveness and general mental agility, yet our National Prestige is low, our currency is less than one third of its immediate post-war value against the dollar and cannot be explained entirely as a result of market speculation.
The world has lost confidence in us and now doubts Britain's ability to successfully deal with its economic problems — this at a time when we are major producers of oil!
There has been much discussion recently about the value of the pound compared to the dollar.
Anybody who visited America at the time when the exchange rate was two dollars to the pound will confirm that they could purchase a pound's worth of goods for a dollar; that is, at half the price they would pay at home.
Typical examples were motorcars, boats, hotel accommodation, clothes and food.
At that time there was effectively two values for the dollar; one for the value of goods that it could purchase within the coastal boundaries of the U.S.A., and another in the International Monetary System, amounting to about half its internal purchasing power.
What has actually happened effectively as a result of the massive exchange movements of 1984 and early 1985 is that an American citizen can now go anywhere in the world and purchase goods for the same price abroad as he can at home.
There seems little wrong with that, for we have been living in a fools paradise for years and also depriving the Americans of value.
The usual way of bolstering the value of the pound is to increase interest on the international scene: But this action invariably effects small business adversely: This makes their survival more difficult, because of increased costs and pressure from suppliers who want their bills for supplies paid quicker to minimise their own costs.
But what is the result of maintaining such a false value of our currency?
If  the foregoing is true, then prejudicing that section of industry which is most likely to reduce the unemployment numbers — the small family businesses — seems ill-advised indeed.
Recent legislation has enabled tax relief to be obtained on money invested in new and, in many cases, new and modest-sized businesses.
This is an attempt by Government to bring help to the traditional type of industry.
It was assisted by the government Guaranteed Loan Scheme, which supported High Street banks in lending money to family businesses by guaranteeing up to 80% of the banks' risk.
The criteria for deciding whether the banks would support an application for funds led many banks to the conclusion that, if a case warranted support, the government's guarantee was superfluous, as a good business proposition was worth considering anyway — some have effectively withdrawn from the scheme.
Generally speaking the businesses that obtained government-guaranteed loan funds have produced problems: They require greater monitoring and supervising than the banks normally like to devote to small businesses and, as the type of support is very often a last resource, they must be considered more risky than the norm.
But, most importantly, before a proposition can be submitted to the traditional source of lending it has to be accepted in traditional terms, or have a proven track-record of success.
This rules out radical new ventures.
Despite its lack of inspiration, this type of help and legislation demonstrates the government's concern over unemployment as well as its willingness to help.
But surely this smacks of charity; well-meaning but in many cases misguided.
Take, for instance, Third World countries.
Merely supplying their populations with food and money does not remove the true nature of the problem — far better that the conditions be changed by giving opportunity to the inhabitants to provide for themselves, because when the money of the charity runs out, the unsolved problems and starvation return.
So it will be with industry if the money was needed to make good the other deficiencies of sales potential and management then the scheme will fail.
That is why so many ‘start up’ schemes finish as early as they do.
The potential for expansion in traditional terms is simply not there.
III
A LOOK BACK
It might be helpful to look back and see what might have caused our present ills — the ‘British sickness’ as it is called abroad.
The great strength of the British, its mental agility, was the drive behind the building up of the greatest Empire the world has known.
Britain probably has a greater percentage of gifted men and women per head of population than any country in the world.
If ever a comparative survey of the I.Q. of the nations of the world was undertaken, there would be no particular surprise if we came top of the league table: It is as clear that we have the ability to solve our problems as to win the only battle that really counted in World War II — the last one!
Even when things had apparently gone well for fifteen years, the thinking population had been saying that the good times can never last: Surely enough, they came to an end in the mid 1970's.
The influence of Britain on the rest of the world is immense.
Everywhere one goes, one meets British doctors, engineers, scientists and technicians.
At its height, the British Empire — the forerunner of our present society, controlled:—
50% of World silver production
75% of World gold production
80% of World precious stones
25% of World food production
80% of World rubber production
Our Merchant Navy carried 75% of world cargoes, and British technological enterprise was everywhere.
The wealth generated by our overseas possessions was channelled back to Britain and allowed fortunes to be made and investments to be made in many new industries, including cotton, fabrics, and diverse engineering products.
These prospered because the sales outlets for our manufacturers to the Empire were guaranteed.
We enjoyed a monopoly  in this trade, but unfortunately for those successful in the boom, it couldn't last forever.
Business therefore expanded at a great rate and labour was not as well organised or well informed as it is today.
Undoubtedly abuses took place which, happily, could not be made today.
Resulting from those abuses, a further piece of the overall jigsaw-puzzle of British industrial social life was added — that of the trade unions.
The wealth accumulated from the Empire was not always invested in a way which bettered the lot of artisans, and much investment was in land, property, and works of art.
There were substantial investments abroad underlining the class differences which successive governments have since tried, without much effect , to eliminate.
With the loss of the Empire, and in particular, the wealth of India in 1946, Britain was still left wealthy and influential, but inherently vulnerable.
Advances in education and communications throughout the world have forced governments to try to lessen social and financial difference among their people.
Taxes on income and capital, on commercial incentives, and so on, have all been tried without real effect.
As it takes about two years to convert an idea to law through our parliamentary system, new legislation is often implemented at a time when the circumstances which gave rise to the idea have substantially altered.
This often makes the new law ineffectual in the prevailing conditions, rather than in producing a solution.
The latest government practice, of having an additional mid-year budget each November, confirms the fact that grand strategies devised with the full confidence of the ruling party, and which consequently become Acts of Parliament every July, frequently provide inadequate in as little as six months.
In the 19th Century the working classes, exasperated by their plight and the lack of initiative of their employers, formed into trades unions to give themselves the corporate strength which individuals lacked.
The unions have steadfastly tried to improve the lot of their members, often, it sometimes seems, at the expense of the workers' own industries.
In the past, the unions have demanded, and got, a larger slice of the existing ‘cake’— the profits of the industry in which they work.
If it happened that the particular industry or business was working less efficiently than its foreign competitors, it was simply further relatively weakened.
The available reserves of its accumulated profit were reduced by workers' demands, and by high taxation too, so that there was little money for the much-needed capital investment in new plant  and machinery or for research and development.
New equipment was therefore brought sparingly or deferred altogether, thereby slowing relative progress still further.
Meanwhile, beyond our shores, the world's industrial practices and capacities advanced.
In the late 1960's, a Volkswagen car took 19 man-hours to build, thanks largely to semi-automatic aids.
The most efficiently-built British car of comparable size took 85 man hours.
At a time when standards of living were rapidly rising at home, our goods abroad, manufactured with the disproportionate vulnerability of too many man-hours at high wage rates, became unattractively priced.
Sales began to drop.
It took the devaluation of our currency to partially restore the situation.
In the long-term the cost was a noticeable drop in our living standards at home.
As a result, British industrial life seems to have progressed downwards since the 1939/45 war.
The progression is familiar — demands by labour; followed by rising prices, leading to inadequate investment; followed by loss of overseas markets; then devaluation; loss of jobs; and higher taxes to try to maintain expected standards of living and of medical care.
When will the spiral end, and what will be the lot of the individual then?
What has been the attitude of successive Governments while all this has gone on?
Naturally, they wished to maintain the standard of living, but in particular for those who elected them.
But this meant greater taxes in whatever form.
New taxes were soon devised, but the sectors most usually affected were those with little political influence — the wage-earner and small businesses.
Over the years the impact of new taxes have invariably been harsher on small businesses.
This leads to the sudden shedding of their work-force because of enforced savings made in an attempt to survive.
Unfortunately, the industrial skills of the area are learned in the very businesses which are most harshly hit by taxation.
Governments seem not to have attempted to stimulate new ideas to guide the country to solutions, but have merely implemented outdated principles, the broad bases of which were devised 50 or 100 years ago, varying slightly with political emphasis as to where the Inland Revenue collections should fall.
Because there has been so little change in British industrial and fiscal policies in a changing world, the emerging nations are overtaking us, gaining access to our markets at home and abroad.
This at a time  when our much valued and valuable oil revenues are at their height: and on top of this our currency continually drops in value abroad.
What are the prospects for us if no change takes place?
Are we to continue with the same inadequate medicine for the same old obstinate sickness?
An equivalent medical prognosis would be pessimistic to say the least, and it is time now to explore alternatives which will allow us to approach the 21st Century with confidence instead of indecision and fear.
IV
THE EFFECTS OF TAXATION
In the capitalist society, natural growth can only come from retained earnings.
The exception is when a new type of national resource, such as North Sea oil, is discovered when, if it is subject to a tax or royalty, can lead to distribution to the general public.
In some of the small newly-rich oil states of the Middle East, where no established industrial base has previously existed, money obtained by the state could, and has been, physically distributed to its citizens.
But any distribution in a country such as Britain has to be indirect: It might take the form of a grant to create new jobs and whole new industries, or in reduction of direct taxation so that a greater percentage of earnings can be retained for spending, saving, or giving away.
Although North Sea oil revenues have been considerable, unemployment is greater now than before they commenced.
By definition, therefore, if the Government has been using oil revenues to create jobs they have been unsuccessful.
Nor have direct taxes or VAT lessened, which suggests that no gain has been allowed to the individual taxpayer.
Our capital programme for new railways, better roads and other infrastructures has slowed down noticeably, and although new schools and hospitals are being built, generally speaking there is a run-down in the state of these facilities.
One wonders why taxpayers continue to accept a situation that allows schoolchildren to be educated in sub-standard conditions, hospitals to deteriorate, and local authorities to be denied funds to repair damaged roads, when the taxes pay for the subsistence of people forced into idleness who would rather be employed remedying those situations.
Why tolerate the misery of unemployed people when, if given jobs on works of improvement, it would make a Britain with better services than it has at present?
To allow capable men and women who are eager to work to dissipate their active years in unemployment means that the actual workers in the country are earning not only their own living, but that of a growing  number of others who are idle, while also having to accept steadily falling conditions of health care, education, and communications infrastructure.
If these conditions prevailed in a public company, the shareholders would sack the board of directors out of hand, while in a private company, bankruptcy would soon occur.
The time may well have come when the taxpayers of our country need their own union to ensure that they receive better value for their money — rather like local authority ratepayers' committees.
If our oil revenues are used merely to pay the unemployed, who now cost an estimated £18,000 million each year, the burden to those in work will suddenly increase by this amount when the oil revenues cease.
So daunting is this prospect, that many taxpayers should look afresh at the best forms of taxation and the best destinations for the proceeds.
The most economic tax in Britain is VAT, costing less than 1% of gross proceeds to administer.
Some taxes, such as capital taxes and land development taxes merely political in origin, are often unproductive and cost more to collect than the gross proceeds.
These taxes are surely indefensible, because they are not only unproductive to the country, but actually put up the costs of producing our goods and make them less attractively priced for the overseas market.
Other effects of taxes are too often overlooked by governments.
At a time when it was urgently necessary to keep our goods attractively priced for export, taxes amounting to 83% of earned income and 98% of unearned income was levied.
But governments seem unable to learn that the high taxes are inevitably passed on to the consumer as part of the cost of operating a business: Taxes have to be paid, and just as fuel and power bills are borne, tax liability forms part of the overall cost-recovery necessary for the survival of a business.
For a small but ambitious business, high tax on income leaves less to be spent afterwards which often results in reduced expansion and development into viability.
Strangely, it is not only high tax rates that encourage avoidance, for it often occurs where tax rates are as low as 14%.
Clearly, governments should take this feature of human nature into consideration when formulating tax plans, for it is a sad fact of fiscal life that as soon as new tax is devised an army of tax-avoidance experts is assembled: Though helpful to the few, they are counter-productive for the country as a whole.
These experts contribute to throwing the Chancellor's calculations awry, thus directing the major tax burden  on to fewer people, who then have to pay more than was originally envisaged.
It is true that many people who are hourly-paid avoid work on a Saturday morning because they feel it costs them money — the total tax for the week exceeding the Saturday pay.
This equation is, of course, a fallacy, but the complicated mental arithmetic implemented at all levels when it comes to personal taxation is truly baffling.
Anyone who has the experience of employing workers will confirm the clear work incentive when less money is deducted at source from employees' pay, even if the same overall sums are collected by Stamp Duty, VAT, and the like, for this later allows personal discretion as to what to do with one's own money; and such choice is important to people at every level of industrial life.
These negative effects of direct taxation cannot any longer be ignored.
Not many years ago, with income tax ranging up to 98%, and death duties on legacies as much as 75% a testator's family was allowed to retain only 0.5% of the fruits of his labour.
That situation lead to the proposed wealth tax being stillborn, although the machinery for collection was at an advanced stage, and offices had been constructed.
Had the tax been implemented at the time it would have noticeably increased the number of tax exiles who were leaving the country, for never mind pop-stars and sportsmen, it would have been even worth the while of middle management to seek a place in the ex-colonial countries, or to learn a new tongue for residence in a foreign land, simply in order to achieve some savings and improve his family life and provide for dependants.
Although a government may state its intention to reduce taxation, the truth may not always be as declared.
Take, for instance, a small family business constantly renewing its plant and equipment.
The table overleaf shows what happens under the new (and reducing) capital allowances:
The tax payable actually increases even though the rate of tax has decreased.
What is more, when inflation is taken into account, the present middle-income earners have relatively less disposable income under the present higher tax rate of 60% than they did under the old regime of tax charged at the highest rate of 83% such is the falling-behind effect of tax allowances granted in recent years.
If they feel that taxation is unfair, intelligent people take advantage of vastly improved financial communication and look about the world.
Sweden is a case in point; over £100 million of that country's wealth has found its way to our shores because Britain's top rate of tax at 60% makes us a relative tax haven compared with Sweden with a top rate of 100%.
It is surely reasonable that taxes should be designed to be easy and cheap to collect, difficult to avoid and should not be a discouragement to the enterprise and effort of those paying them.
Taxes should be designed to encourage greater effort and levied only when wealth is achieved.
This points to shifting the emphasis away from direct tax on people's incomes and on to taxes on wealth or on spending.
While a wealth tax would be difficult and cumbersome to administer, it could perhaps form a part of a total or partial replacement to existing income taxes.
On the other hand, VAT has clearly been an economic success.
It is easy to understand, cheap and simple to administer and can be varied in rate on different commodities to support the less well-off, by exempting food, for example.
Stamp duties on contracts and land  transactions, and the taxing of proceeds from sales are infinitely preferable to other forms of tax which dissuade people from making real effort in their work.
If each employed man and woman worked one extra hour a day it would increase national production by over 7%.
In Britain, it seems a recession is noted when national production goes down 1%: A recession in Japan is when the annual increase in production falls below 15%!
Admittedly, it will be difficult to unscramble the present system, but it is not yet too late to extend VAT and other forms of sales taxes to relieve and even eliminate the direct pressures on the country's earners.
As we all have the choice of spending or saving, some simple form of wealth tax could be considered, too.
The ideal is to have several simply-administered taxes to support the national exchequer, levied after people have earned their pay or income.
All money which people save has to be invested somewhere, and when it is taken out of circulation it helps to reduce inflation.
An international problem for many years, inflation is in part fuelled by governments printing money simply to maintain standards of living — unfortunately this technique has led to the undermining of the future prospects of the very people it was supposed to help.
Above all, if we are to retain our position in the world league, all internal taxes must be designed so as not to adversely affect the price of our goods abroad.
But there might be other solutions.
If we let our imagination run a little, we may wonder what would be the effect of turning Britain into a tax haven, charging no taxes on profits or earnings and, instead, simply taxing spending.
There are a number of actual and quasi-tax havens around the world, and they certainly seem to prosper.
If the president of one of our major trades unions is right when he asserts that no company now pays mainstream corporation tax (that it only pays tax on the dividends paid to its shareholders), it would cost the nation nothing to do away with mainstream corporation tax, but think what a boon that could be.
If a distribution to shareholders was classed as a form of spending by a company, such payments would be taxed as now, leaving the undistributed profits to accumulate free of tax; what an encouragement it would be to foreign manufacturers to start business here, with all the advantages to us of new jobs created and a resulting trade improvement.
And why stop at corporation tax?
Why not income tax, too?
The total proceeds from the income tax on wage-earners' and small private business was £27,000 million in 1983, while the proceeds of VAT was £14,000 million.
It might well be worth considering the effect of substituting VAT for income tax, classing all distributions to the proprietors of small private businesses as a Spending by that business, and to levy a withholding tax accordingly, thus allowing the business to prosper, unaffected by further government demands.
There would, of course, be a temptation for small partnerships and sole traders to convert to the Limited Company form of operation just to avoid tax on distribution to the proprietors, so it might be necessary to levy a Stamp duty on companies as part of their annual running costs; this would compensate the national exchequer for any abuse.
As there are 100,000 limited liability companies currently active in England and Wales alone, a Stamp Duty of £1000 per company would give the Exchequer £100 million in new revenue.
The probability is that all but the very smallest business would be conducted as limited companies, making the proceeds of the proposed new duty substantially greater.
This fund would be further augmented by the new overseas-owned companies taking advantage of the tax haven conditions.
There would be a substantial tax yield for government, because the first call on the profits of any sole-trader or partnership is always the living expenses of its proprietors, and this distribution would be taxed.
The rates of VAT would have to go up from 15%, and the figures are discussed later.
There would be a boost to industry from the greater net disposable income, and at no cost to the consumer in need, because VAT does not apply to food and necessities.
The net effect of creating more available money could be to fire inflation, but the suggested increase in VAT would cream off a good deal of that extra money.
The system would probably need strict control of money supply too, keeping its growth in line with national wealth.
Foreign investment and foreign cash deposits in Britain could also be subject to discriminatory interest rates.
At present, interest earned in this country by overseas nationals is subject to tax but, if a tax haven state was created in Britain, this liability would disappear and make such deposits more attractive.
But the same rates of interest should not necessarily be paid to non-residents and residents alike.
We would remove some of the speculation from world currency markets on UK currency, because of the new capacity to create stability without affecting interest rates for industry, some greater flexibility on the part of the Bank of England would become possible and make demand for UK currency and deposits constant.
A two-tier interest system would have many benefits.
Banks could earn further sums when lending the money deposited with them from overseas.
Negative interest rate, as exercised by Swiss bankers, is not at this stage suggested, but it is an option which Swiss experience would help us to achieve if needed in the future.
An overhaul of the tax system along the lines suggested would make collection cleaner and more administratively efficient, costing less than 1% of receipts and probably releasing many non- productive industries, thereby increasing our national productive potential.
For years, an important desire of many working people has been to take annual holidays in the sun.
Today, many unfortunate people have too much enforced leisure, when they would actually prefer to be occupied.
Although world trends are blamed for much of the plight of the unemployed, some blame must lie in bad fiscal policy.
Successive income tax Acts have penalised the small businesses which are the nursery of the nation's skills.
They are providers, as subcontractors to the major manufacturing companies who build the sub-assemblies into consumer goods.
The cost to an employer of employing his workers includes government levies of 11.45% of wages paid.
Until recently there was even a payroll tax, called the Selective Employment Tax, which, like many such measures in recent years, had the opposite effect to that desired: It drew workers from the productive manufacturing industries into the supporting service industries, from engineering to the Post Office, for instance.
This effect lessened our national productive capacity and placed a higher burden on the primary manufacturing industries like Engineering, Car manufacture, Aircraft makers, in order to keep an increasing number of nonproducers.
A good example of effective reversal of fiscal policy took place in California recently, when state property taxes were abolished.
This left a greater disposable income in the hands of Californians and, as anticipated, they spent it on consumer goods, creating an estimated 250,000 new jobs in the process.
Internationally, this did no harm whatever, relieving as it did part of the burden on the social services, leaving prices unaffected and giving a better standard of living to existing residents and the newly-employed alike.
If total sales income is assumed to consist of costs of one- third  for labour, one-third for raw materials, and one-third for overheads and profit, it would need national spending of about £60,000 million per year to absorb our current unemployed into jobs.
This is clearly beyond our means, and a better method has to be found, and without delay.
V
LEISURE AND FANTASY
It had been suggested that many futurologists that greatly increased leisure for the multitudes will result from automation, computerisation, nuclear energy and other technological advances.
The main constructive effort in providing for the future leisure activities of this national has been by Spanish and other Mediterranean resort countries, and predictably they have been the gainers.
It is probably true that more of our population own caravans and boats than ever before.
But with the exception of Aviemore in Scotland, no serious attempt has been made to set up leisure communities in Britain.
In appraising our industrial capability one sees that, with certain exceptions, our post-war performance has not been good, and we have gradually reduced our share of world markets.
It was George Bernard Shaw who claimed that Britain was an island consisting of coal and iron-ore, surrounded by a sea full of fish: It took the British to create a shortage of all three at the same time!
Some British steel factories, using identical machinery to our foreign competitors, use up to 40% more labour to produce the equivalent amount of steel.
The pricing policies of our car factories, which show very low profits, mean that foreigners can sell their vehicles in Britain at a higher profit than in their own home markets.
And yet the inventiveness of the British is without parallel: There is a legend about an American engineer who sent a package to a British engineer.
Inside was an extremely fine needle, with the threading hole cleverly tapped: It was promptly sent back, drilled and tapped along its entire length!
It is easy to believe this story, and sadly expertise in such design, principles and skills, devised in our country, have been neglected here and instead developed abroad to give commercial advantage to other nations.
Undoubtedly, international industrial competition is hotting up.
There are more manufacturing countries than ever before, some of which use a style of labour relations based on the industrial dark ages.
So, should we, and could we compete with these sorts of practices?
The truth is, that the clock cannot be put back.
Even Japan has given up the fight in some market areas where they used to be world leaders: And even the new industrial nations, in their turn, will eventually be undercut and have to move on: To what?
Let's look at the state of our marketplace.
It is true that our goods sell abroad, but with our currency at only a third of its post-war value, so they should!
Our Government buys the weapons we need to keep our state safe — from producers abroad.
Our empty shipyards cannot refurbish our cruise liners to the same time-scale as overworked but competitive foreign yards.
So let us fantasise, and see industry and agriculture in a new light.
It seems obvious that the time is now ripe for a completely new approach to our commercial position in the present and future world, by using our new natural resources, creating new jobs and new industries, and utilising our known talents, facilities and advantages to the best possible effect.
would it be possible to utilise taxes to provide jobs directly?
And consider the cast of grants by Britain to overseas nations in need: Today, these gifts, and that is what they are, are handed out without strings, allowing the benefiting nation to spend British taxpayers' money wherever it likes.
In many cases this is with our industrial competitors.
As a nation, we can only help others as long as we ourselves are strong, and it is therefore essential that our own national position be considered, as well as that of the country receiving the grant.
Simply, if we donate money, we should expect it to be spent on British goods.
Not only in agriculture, but in industry generally, grant money should have strings attached.
There is nothing wrong with ensuring that a benefiting nation spends its gift vouchers in our national shops.
Foreign manufacturers could only benefit by starting new factories in Britain, again creating jobs.
The UK grain harvest forecasts are usually 20 million tonnes per year.
But there is another 7 million tonnes, of equivalent calorific value, in the straw of the wheat and barley which has in the past been burnt in the fields after harvest.
The social outcry against the pollution caused has led to new regulations which require farmers to deal with the stubble differently in the future, and straw-chopping for incorporation into the soil is now contemplated.
In order to break down the  straw, a greater use of chemicals will be required to encourage bacterial growth in time to assimilate the product, before the new crop emerges.
The additional costs in terms of new machinery, fuel, damage to soil structure, and additional chemicals, will be considerable to the farmer.
This at a time when British Agriculture is being cut back in margins and output.
The risk of disease being carried down into the soil could be extremely serious.
Grain farmers have a once-a-year production and sale cycle, and any crop failure could affect individual farming businesses, leaving the nation to import up to £2,000 million of replacement grain!
But there is an alternative.
The 7 million tonnes of straw could, by proper conversion into animal feed, product 600,000 tonnes of beef, which alone is worth £1,000 million at wholesale prices, not to mention additional processed meat and pet-food.
Supposing the Government made a grant to starving nations of £1,000 million on condition that they bought food from us to that value, what would be the effect?
A complete new industry in straw baling would spring up, because there would be about 3,000,000 acres to be baled; transport would be required to carry the straw bales to other sites, and these could be situated in high-unemployment areas; the livestock industry would be required to expand to produce the extra million calves required.
Semi-industrial units for converting straw to animal feed would be started first and then the calf-rearing would commence.
New legislation to make grain farming more labour intensive, leading to extra revenue, should also be considered.
All this could lead to as many as 50,000 jobs being created, saving us social services costs of £250 million.
With this extra 1,000 million being spent, the general stimulation to trade would also require industry to expand, offering further jobs and leading to further savings in social services.
So the £1,000 million would, in reality, cost only a fraction of that sum and yet create greater national stability and harmony.
While it is unwise to have a national plan based on a single feature, we could easily test the system scientifically to see if it would work on a small scale, and widen it if successful.
So far, we have dwelt only on existing, traditional industries already within the government's fiscal philosophies.
Let's now look at alternatives.
What new industries could be created to provide really large-scale employment?
Agriculture, with only 1 man needed per 200 acres on arable  land, and industries like car-manufacturing with its increasing robotic aids, are unlikely candidates, and employment numbers in these areas are bound to fall.
It is more labour-intensive service industries which need be created.
This fact, coupled to our urgent need to export at least a third of our gross national product, simply to maintain ourselves, points to an obvious answer to our problems, for service industries and export together, suggests leisure and tourism.
The traditional formula for British economic life has been to have the production industries producing not only the articles for sale but also the wealth of the nation.
The service trades have always followed in the wake of the producing industries.
The most significant difference between the two types is that the latter require large investment of capital to buy plant and equipment, jigs, tools and dies, factories to stock raw materials and so on; while the service trades do not.
Gross output per man or woman employed in production is considerable, because the value of goods passing through the various processes have to carry a return and recovery on the capital employed to make those processes possible in the first place.
In order to ensure continuity of supplies and dispatch of finished goods afterwards, to monitor efficiencies, to provide funds, insurance, and financial services, a host of smaller businesses spring up which provide expertise and man-hours to maintain the giant.
Whilst service industries are parasitical in nature, neither they nor the prime industries could function efficiently without the other.
The manufacturer might easily founder for want of capital to finance expansion, or because he misinterprets the requirements of the market: And without the producer, there would be no service industry jobs.
Service trades offer the opportunity to create jobs quicker because they fulfil a requirement that already exists, rather than attempting to create a market for a new product and often having to wait for factories to be built and machinery installed.
Both types of business, industrial and service, require investment, one in money and the other in man-power.
The profits of a manufacturing company are achieved by selling the goods it makes at a price in excess of its costs.
A service company makes its profits by hiring people at one price and selling their time at a higher price.
The workshop of a garage is a typical example of a service trade.
Employing mechanics at, say, £3 per hour the workshop repairs cars for a charge of £10 per hour.
Because service trades require less capital, they are easier to start up and  provide relatively more jobs than the production industries which are becoming more and more automated.
Typical recent examples must be the many importers of foreign made consumer goods of all natures fulfilling a need or a price structure that our goods do not.
Somebody must have spotted a niche in the market to justify importing German chipped potatoes for instance, and now gives employment to clerks, insurers, salesmen here supporting German agriculture and food processors.
If the nation is to create the jobs necessary to reduce the unemployment list rapidly, we have to find a way of creating or expanding service industries without the need for their dependence on the existing producing industries.
This means that the new generation service industries have to be wealth-producers in their own right.
There is therefore, a far greater responsibility for originality placed upon them, as they will in future have to be leaders rather than followers.
This idea is not so far-fetched as may appear at first glance.
Take, for instance, the British film industry's recent successes.
Even modest investment in British films such as‘Gregory's Girl’ and ‘Chariots of Fire’, have led to international acclaim and, presumably, good earnings.
The ‘Music’ industry received a shot in the arm, with the success of the Beatles in the sixties.
A multi-million pound industry in its own right, it cost 3 guitars and a drum kit to commence business.
Seizing on the early success of the ‘Liverpool sound’ has lead more recently to the establishment of the video business and a start in the revival of our film industry.
The latter has the respect of the world including Hollywood, especially when it comes to creating films with special effects.
Both industries are good exporters, producers of foreign currency and wealth to this country.
What we need is more of the same type of good ideas, but in a form to give employment to a much greater number of unskilled, as well as skilled, people.
If we consider the lessons that exist around us now, we may be able to see the projected increase resulting from using the latest technology as a medium for job creation instead of job loss.
In order that the leisure industries are utilised fully, greater spending money must be available, and reducing taxation plays an important part of that programme.
Increasing wages so as to give greater net disposable income increases costs on the international market and makes our goods less competitive.
Reducing taxes does not increase costs, but achieves the  same desired end.
The danger is that an increased demand for imported goods could be created, so local facilities must exist and be really comprehensive when a new tax policy is instigated.
In the past, we have tended to become a dumping ground in which foreign manufacturers take advantage, and so import duties could be used to protect our jobs against this.
Where countries use their own devices to protect their domestic industries artificially from genuine overseas competition, they must expect us to do the same.
Additional revenue could be obtained by the Exchequer from this source and it would deter demand for imported goods by making them appear expensive in our shops.
Putting the VAT rate up from 15% to 25% would produce £10,000 million, leaving £17,000 million from the ‘old taxes’ to be spent.
If the surplus £17,000 million was spent in the service industry, the VAT at 25% would total £4,000 million; and the net balance spending money, amount to £13,000 million would doubtless stimulate British industry to expand production, and thus further jobs would be created.
One can imagine the savings in foreign exchange if British people took their holidays at home instead of abroad.
When 8 million people holiday abroad and spent £200 each on accommodation, food and pocket money, the cost to the nation's reserves is £1,600 million.
Many go to establishments set up especially to deal with British national tastes in food, drink, and entertainment.
The main factor which takes most holidaymakers abroad is undoubtedly the better weather.
Why not, therefore, consider trying to accommodate that feature?
The Houston Astrodome in Texas was built many years ago and offers 24 acres of covered facilities.
It is so large that, without the special ventilation provided, clouds would form in its roof, causing light rain!
We have the experience to build that sort of construction, and the technology.
If we can send men to the moon, and allow men to inhabit space for months on end, the simple construction of devices to shelter holidaymakers from any inclement conditions must be relatively easy by comparison.
The British provide a stable government and a way of life recognised and admired by many foreigners.
In general, the British present a pleasant disposition to others and a cheery approach to life.
Our countryside has unrivalled spectacle and variation within quite  short distances.
Our culture is admired the world over, and our art galleries, theatres, museums and academic centres are the envy of most.
It is time we utilised all these advantages to far better economic effect.
Of course, it would be foolhardy to go into any scheme of national reappraisal of this sort without the support of all sections of the population.
Too often jobs have been available and unfilled whilst social support is being paid to an immobile work force.
Wherever possible, jobs could be created at localities of most need, but a greater worker mobility than has been displayed in the past should be expected, and where it is not obtained, financial restrictions should be exerted to encourage fit, able but reluctant people to move from the old, worked-out pockets of industry to new opportunities elsewhere.
Just as forbearance on the part of workers would be asked for when real effort was made in creating jobs for them, so too would the landowners have to contribute, by releasing the land for needed facilities designed for the national good.
Britain is at the stage when we must no longer expect sections of our land to be retained for the benefit of the few, when they could be used to provide jobs for the many.
That is not to say that reasonable protection from development should not be given to particular areas, for it is important to retain the character of the land and to ensure that all tastes are catered for: For instance, some people like to climb dangerous rocks in pouring rain.
Anyone who has travelled north of our major industrial centres will confirm there is a lot of quiet, open land.
A great deal of it is subject to misuse as agricultural land by unfortunate farmers.
These farmers are obstinately trying, sometimes with help of subsidies, to make a living — a true case of trying to make an agricultural silk purse out of a sow's ear.
If land is not suitable for efficient farming, we can ill afford it being used for inefficient agriculture.
If a farmer cannot raise more than 30 cwt. of wheat per acre, when more successful farmers are averaging twice that, it would be far wiser to use the land for other, more profitable, purposes.
If weather protection is provided, hotels, golf courses and pony-trekking could well be considered in such areas.
A 600-acre farm employing four people could provide facilities for a thousand-bedroom hotel, three golf courses, several restaurants and full pony-trekking facilities.
Imagine how many jobs would be provided per acre!
In order to avoid unreasonable profiteering, only normal farming rents, presently £40 and £50 per acre, would be paid to affected landlords.
Owner-occupier farmers with higher annual income, who in any case spend much of their profits each year on new equipment, could still maintain their standard of living by collaborating with developers by granting long leases.
Careful attention to, say, Arabian, Asian, or African requirements could draw successful people from the emerging nations to our shores to spend their money, which will sometimes be our grant assistance.
If it is only our climate which would prevent an expanded leisure industry from being successful, we should surely look at ways of doing something about it.
In 1983, 12 million visitors came to our shores.
If they each spent £400 on average, the Exchequer must have benefitted by £5,000 million from our labour-intensive tourist industry.
It is unfortunate that our summer season is so short, and although the tourist boards must be congratulated on their efforts, it is easy to see how much better would be the results if the season lasted twice as long.
At present, there are too few places that cater properly for tourists, yet we could easily create facilities which would attract more visitors, and encourage them to spend more, too.
By quadrupling the number of visitors, our foreign exchange would be enhanced by nearly £20,000 million.
A quarter of our unemployment bill would be paid for by foreign visitors!
What is more, as the tourist industry is very labour intensive, the £20,000 million additional gross revenue would create hundreds of thousands of new jobs in the new hotels and other facilities required.
The total income from tourism would then equal our present income from North Sea Oil — heralded in the past as a saviour and bonanza.
The hotel industry, the entertainment business, and gambling are all facets of tourist facilities which ought to be taken into consideration.
It is a fact that gambling is less general in Britain than in earlier days, but if we are to become the leisure centre of the developed world, a review of our present legislation should be undertaken.
In Las Vegas, some of the larger hotels now bank takings of $1 million each per day!
The gambling tax in Nevada pays for a considerable part of their social services; so their state sales-tax is less than in neighbouring states, while capital taxes are non-existent.
Can we learn from their example?
If gambling was licensed and large-scale leisure facilities together with associated climatic protection were constructed there would be no shortage of venture capital, and the building industry would be revived overnight, creating many new unskilled jobs for the unskilled workers who are the greatest number of  unemployed.
If we anticipate reversing the fact that much of our population holidays abroad, so that instead we have more people from overseas holidaying with us, a straightforward reversal of where the money is spent would beneficially affect the foreign exchange by £1,600 million.
In aiming for all-year round facilities, the cost of, say, £100,000 per acre and for a controlled environment, will generate income sufficient to pay for about 16,000 new covered acres a year — the equivalent of 100 golf courses or pony-trekking courses.
There would be every justification to grant-aid this type of work, leaving developers and speculators to concentrate on additional building when they see that they can utilise the facilities throughout the year.
Imagine, no more rained-off days at cricket, or Wimbledon, and a walk in the park when ever you want!
The suggestion is not that Britain be turned into a glasshouse containing a mass of Disneylands and Mafia-run casinos; merely that we take a serious and professional look at extending our all-year capacity to give people what they want.
This implies maintaining the general character of our land.
The probability is, that given equal weather, other conditions, and price, the average British holidaymaker would prefer to holiday at home: What we would have to do is extend that appeal to people abroad, by service, value and the many unique features which Britain had on offer.
Of course, the solution to the nation's problems will not lie in any one particular step, but in a planned meld of many contributions.
It is interesting, however, to consider one particular aspect of climate and leisure facilities to see if they could be coupled with other national benefits and needs.
The Wash Barrage proposition is a case worth examination.
The east coast of Britain has notably less rainfall than the country's average.
It would probably be an area acceptable to those contemplating setting up home anew on retirement, and their previous homes would then be freed to each new generation of wealth-producers.
Assume there are a million retired British living abroad, enjoying the sun and the lower taxes of a grateful foreign country; assume also that on average such a family spends £25,000 on house, furnishing, car, and so on, in order to become established abroad.
The sum of this outflow of British funds amounts to £12,500 million, permanently invested abroad.
The likely annual cost to all these people of annual  housekeeping, food, clothes, entertainment, replacing vehicles etc. is about £2,500 million.
How much better to entice these expatriates back to Britain to spend their £15,000 million here!
Can it be done?
The answer is probably yes, provided there were concessionary tax rates for the retired and proper facilities for their leisure and recreation; for surely these people only go to a foreign land for these reasons?
For this reason the Wash Barrage proposal could be particularly important, because money spent on this east coast project could well cause the start of an international controlled-environment industry.
The effect of a barrage or sea-wall being built from, say, Gibraltar Point just south of Skegness to Holme in Norfolk, would create a tide-free inland lake of approximately 400 square miles.
To begin with, the lake would be of salt water, but as the water from the various rivers flowed into it, it would become fresh and provide an abundance of water for all the country's foreseeable requirements.
The construction of climatic protection would surely encourage entrepreneurs to invest in leisure and entertainment facilities that would be without equal in the British Isles and would rival or eclipse most facilities abroad.
It would be certain that they would be usable for a far greater number of hours than is now practical with our known meteorological patterns.
Walks; golf played on courses good enough to attract major tournaments; tennis facilities attractive enough to major sponsors and sailing, as well as a general atmosphere of recreation, relaxation and entertainment would quickly attract those interested in spending their retirement days in such pursuits, as well as many holiday-makers.
As the pattern of industrial life goes on and the health of the nation enables people to live longer, the number of retired people will increase and new, attractive facilities will have to be made for them in Britain, or they will be lured away to live on the continent of Europe and spend their money there.
In the many pockets of expatriates living around the Mediterranean coastline, with its constant inflow of foreign exchange, the governments and entrepreneurs of those countries have developed mini-townships of inexpensive residences, varying from traditionally constructed apartments to sophisticated semi-huts in specially landscaped settings.
It could easily be done here.
Studies by government, public relations consultants and opinion polls could established whether constructions of the nature suggested would attract firm enquiries sufficient to justify the initial funding.
If the Government can seriously  contemplate investing £3,000 million in a company employing 100,000 people, they should also be prepared to start the discussion by studying the proposition with a view to supporting a project which could be of tremendous advantage to the nation as a whole.
VI
MATHEMATICS OF MODIFICATION
Can the likely outcome of some of the policies we have examined be justified by calculation?
During 1983 the Inland Revenue received £27,000 million from wage-earners and small businesses, much of which was used to defray the cost of the nation's social welfare responsibilities.
These obligations cannot be ignored.
Undoubtedly, the proceeds of offshore oil taxes, by which method the Exchequer benefits from North Sea oil, covered the cost of unemployment benefits; but our tax bill to the companies who extract the oil is no less than 90% of the sale price.
Whilst oil barons may be prepared to suffer this while oil is in relatively short supply, they will probably adopt a different attitude if demand falls, and this could come about in many ways — perhaps by substantial on-shore reserves being discovered elsewhere in the world.
We cannot ignore, therefore, the possibility of our oil tax revenues running out or reducing, and it is important to find ways of becoming independent of them as soon as possible.
Nor should we any longer ignore change in the changing world: We should grasp the opportunities offered now, because if action is delayed circumstances can soon turn against us, as they have so often in the past.
It is surprising to recall that between the wars, and well within living memory, the entertainment capital of the world was Shanghai, known as the Las Vegas of the ‘Thirties: The hoteliers and entrepreneurs brought a wealth- producing enterprise to the local population and foreign exchange to the country, too.
It seems incredible now, but no doubt the loss of revenue when conditions changed had deep and long-lasting effects.
It would be wrong morally, as well as dangerous to propound a scheme that lessens the standard of living.
Indeed, in the materialistic twentieth century, a life which offers no hope of betterment must be a prescription for social disaster.
We can hardly expect adolescents to  have respect for the possessions of others if they have no hope of attaining any of their own.
So by some means we must devise solutions that produce at least what we have at present; that is to say , the £27,000 million which the Inland Revenue collected by direct taxation.
In addition, we must try to augment our oil revenues so as to enable the government to invest them for future development in industry and for processes and inventions at present unknown to us.
If we assume no tax being paid on earnings, but paid instead on spending, few of us would object to VAT on general goods being increased.
Necessities, such as food and children's clothing would be exempt.
At a time when our currency has low international exchange value, foreign tourists would see no effects in increased prices, but their spending here would nevertheless benefit the national exchequer, and ease the burden on our taxpayers.
Our present VAT rate, at 15%, is lower than in many countries: As part of a general restructuring, it could rise to 25%, the level that was once adopted as part of a two-tier system.
This VAT rate increase would raise about 10,000 million, amounting to well over 10% of our 30% standard rate of tax.
Our calculations now show the following situation.
This total falls well short of the sum required but, significantly, the burden on the taxpayer is nearly halved.
Looking beyond the extra revenue generated by holidays at home, increased tourism and relieved direct taxation (some £20,000 million) being spent mainly in industries which are very labour intensive, it would be reasonable to assume also that there would be sufficient jobs created to satisfy our social requirements.
The surplus of over £15,000 million,(that is the gross proceeds, less VAT), would find its way into circulation, while VAT at 25% would probably make up half of the £M 7,000 needed, making our  entire oil revenues surplus to current budget.
Theoretically at least, if tourism was to increase by £20,000 million,(four-fold), and if holidays previously taken abroad were taken at home, the calculations justify the transfer of tax burden entirely from earnings to spending.
The beneficial effects of tax-haven status would undoubtedly attract more industry and jobs, while the wealth produced would help foreign exchange and increase VAT income on subsequent spendings.
If Sweden has lost £100 million because its tax rate is higher than ours, how much money would be attracted to Britain if our tax rate was Zero?
In an economy as complicated as ours, action cannot be taken very quickly, and any change in our national taxation system would take years to complete.
If we decided to construct the facilities for substantially increased wealth-producing tourism and leisure, it will take years to ascertain exactly what demands require to be satisfied.
Thus the process would have to be a gradual one.
Economic life moves in cycles of peaks and troughs, and we must take advantage of the peaks so as to withstand the pressures of the troughs.
The temporary bonanza of revenue from North Sea oil should unquestionably be invested for the future.
In view of the obstinate pattern of unemployment, coupled with the emergence of the new industrial states of the East, the leisure industry and tourism offer an attractive alternative from head-to-head international manufacturing confrontations, with cheap labour — the trump card always in the hands of our competitors.
The present level of oil tax revenue will build about a million hotel rooms per year, providing really excellent facilities of the standard expected by overseas visitors to our country.
Surely a policy decision should be taken soon, before we miss the opportunity and no longer have the funds to invest in a future first class tourist industry?
Provided there is opportunity for profit, private money will be invested in schemes for this purpose and it would only be necessary to create the fiscal environment and to add encouragement, perhaps with grants, to fire the motivation of entrepreneurs.
If Disneyland, which is only 150 acres in size, can attract 10 million visitors a year, the opportunity must exist for us to attract our own type of tourist.
With sponsors and entrepreneurs to create what the international public wants we can create the jobs the people of Britain so sorely need, and a world wide reputation for excellence which can have very wide political benefits.
VII
CONCLUSION
It was 50 years from the first signs of the rundown of the British Empire to our going cap-in-hand to the International Monetary Fund for financial support.
If we do not invest our oil reserves wisely, for the future, we may not get off so lightly next time.
It is up to government and industry, as well as those with resources in land and money, to make a concerted effort to secure our country's wealth and heritage for the future.
The micro-processor, enabling previously labour-intensive work to be carried out by robots, will give us greater leisure; the leisure industry is labour-intensive; therefore, paradoxically, instead of reducing the number of jobs, the micro-processor has actually given us the potential to create more careers than it destroys — but only if we plan the leisure it gives us in a comprehensive and professional way.
As a nation, we will soon have to choose between our traditional manufacturing industry and the service industry, to provide the jobs we need.
It is hard to believe that we can become sufficiently competitive at making cars, ships, refrigerators, TV sets, computers or aircraft, to create four million new jobs.
If there are 26 million people at work in Britain, an increase in demand of not less than 10% would be needed to mop-up 4 million unemployed.
However, with a little incentive our present industry could expand production by 10–15% without taking on labour; so we are probably considering a 25% increase in gross national product to satisfy our need for jobs.
Past experience has shown that the imported raw materials would exhaust our cash reserves unless this expansion took place very gradually.
It would probably be too slow to bring the hope now needed to avoid social unrest and possible collapse.
If we recognise that only the service trades are sufficiently labour-intensive to provide the jobs needed, what do we aim for?
Not more accountants, solicitors, estate agents and bureaucrats — what a  disaster that would be!
Instead, the leisure industry can offer the solutions, provided it is geared to attract many more overseas visitors, as well as UK residents.
Whilst the cost of unemployment in terms of human misery and risk of social unrest must be considerable, the attempt to seek a remedy must not be looked at as merely a social gesture.
The cost to the Nation of having 10% of its work force idle is equivalent to the loss of the oil revenues currently estimated at £20,000 million per year.
If this is an alternative, let it be aired before it is too late to act, for the quality for life of ourselves and for our children rests upon our careful deliberation and action now: We can no longer afford the luxury of complacency and continuous contingency reactions
