THE SANITARY PRINCIPLE IN DOMINANCE: MEDICAL HEGEMONY AND FEMINIST RESPONSE 1860–1880
1 MEDICAL HEGEMONY AND SOCIAL POLICY 1850–1870
The medico-moral strategy was consolidated in the period after the initial reforms of the 1830s and 1840s.
Environmental medicine, working in conjunction with religious principles of moral education, formed a dominant response to the problems posed by the working-class in the period between 1850 and 1870.
But the history of mid-century educational reform or the public health movement shows how partially the sanitary principle was actually enacted.
The solutions, across a variety of fields of intervention, were the product of complex compromises between the various political forces in play.
The radical programmes drawn up by the experts were severely qualified.
Experts were themselves ‘educated’ into the political realities lying outside their own specialist domains.
Central government intervention into public health, sanitation and housing was cautious and piecemeal in comparison with Chadwick's conception of a centralized supervisory network.
It is tempting, but completely illegitimate, to slide from analysis of the production of official solutions to their implementation.
The two elements need to be understood as distinct and often disjointed moments of state policy.
The Board of Health was disbanded in 1858 amid a welter of political intrigue and orchestrated opposition.
Chadwick himself had been forced out of office four years earlier by a powerful lobby of anti-centralizers, private drainage and water authorities and those with a personal antipathy to the ‘wizard of Whitehall’.
The Times, once an ardent supporter of Chadwick, was particularly vicious in its appraisal of his administrative career, chortling that Mr Chadwick would receive his final reward ‘when he falls at last a sanitary martyr to a choked two-inch pipe drain and is carried by policemen…to an extramural cemetery’.
The board was replaced by a Medical Office within the Privy Council — that refuge for unpopular  branches of government which needed shielding from the glare of parliamentary scrutiny.
Changes in personnel reflected shifts in overall public health strategy.
The appointment of John Simon as first Medical Officer heralded the replacement of the grandiose principles of sanitary engineering by preventive medicine.
Chadwick had always insisted that ultimate sanitary authority needed to remain with non-medical administrators.
Simon was a medic, with a background in medical research and a proven record against cholera as Medical Officer to the City of London between 1848 and 1855.
His approach to public health combined effective administration (involving a team of inspectors, control of the water-supply and the removal of nuisances) with an emphasis on research into the causes of infection.
Simon worked for discreet administrative transformations within government, avoiding until late in his career clashes with ministers over contentious issues of policy and principle.
Through skilful manoeuvring he was able to build up a research department which concretized the new importance awarded to scientific inquiry in public health campaigns.
His annual reports between 1859 and 1871 were exemplary statements of this dual focus on sound administration and pioneering research.
Like Chadwick, Simon saw public health as an important asset for an industrial nation But the new Medical Officer gave this conception a more ethical and humanitarian gloss.
The improvement of the physical and moral health of individuals was one of the prime duties of a Christian country, for the level of national health reflected the degree of civilization attained by the state.
Simon's public health philosophy was informed by his commitment to Christian socialism, a strong current among many social reformers in mid-century.
He formed part of a loose network of clerics, philanthropists and intellectuals, including Ruskin, Charles Kingsley, Louisa Twining, campaigner for workhouse improvement, and Octavia Hill, the housing reformer.
Simon's burgeoning career at the Medical Office in the 1860s coincided with the consolidation of the status of the medical profession, both as a privileged domain of expertise and as a distinctive cultural grouping within the middle-class.
The new Medical Officer, a highly visible public figure, was instrumental  in pushing for increased professional status, especially in the campaigns over the Medical Act of 1858, the single most important measure governing medicine.
The act established for the first time the statutory definition of a medical practitioner, together with a register and a General Medical Council to watch over conduct and education.
The growth of experimental science, with the new technology of the microscope and the more rigid principles of research established in the laboratory, also contributed to medical ascendancy within social policy.
Following the recent work of Pasteur and other European scientists on the micro-organic causes of disease, Simon embarked on major programmes of research into the chemistry of morbid processes and the aetiology of contagion.
He attached his team's findings to his own reports, as quiet but conclusive proof of the steady advance of scientific progress and its ultimate conquest over infectious disease.
On the wider political stage, in the face of continuing opposition to public health, these statements were designed to promote the image of the doctor as a serious and high minded quester after truth:
Every step in the physiological sciences, every better knowledge of the origins of the living body, and of their material and functional fluctuations under whatever influences is of actual or potential gain to us; and such knowledge constantly gives more and more success to the provisional practice which it enlightens.
As regards the anatomical studies of late times, with very varied utilization of the microscope, and the otherwise greatly improved means of minute structural investigation, I need hardly say that, by them during the last thirty years, great parts of the science of disease have been completely transfigured.
This quasi-evolutionary conception of painstaking scientific progress, with its stress on technical control over human life, proved a powerful input into the work of Simon's new department.
Administratively, growing medical prestige and authority was visible in the series of mid-century acts addressing the health, housing and sanitary condition of the urban working class.
In practice, the net result of these medically directed  reforms was often to exacerbate the housing and sanitary conditions of the urban poor, especially in London.
Local medical officers were usually committed to a purely professional radicalism, transfixed with the reduction of their magic figures, the disease and death rates, in local sanitary areas.
All the statutes lacked compulsory clauses to enforce rebuilding schemes and the temptation was to ‘shovel-off’ the poor onto neighbouring districts.
Conceptually, the acts continued to be underpinned by a dual commitment to physical improvement and moral regulation.
Simon, concluding his report for 1870, staked out the familiar equation between lack of sanitation, immorality and the depressed quality of working-class life:
where grievous excess of physical suffering is bred, large parts of the same soil yield, side by side with it, evils of another kind…in some of the regions of insanitary influence, civilization and morals suffer almost equally with health…education…is little likely to penetrate, unless with amended sanitary law, nor human life to be morally raised while physically it is so degraded and squandered.
It was this sanitary principle which exerted a major structural influence on the Contagious Diseases Acts of 1864, 1866 and 1869.
This was the single most important legislative intervention addressing sexuality throughout the nineteenth century.
Extensive state-backed medical involvement in the regulation of venereal disease and female prostitution crystallized an approach which had its origins in the public health programme of thirty years before.
It was these acts, together with the resistance they provoked, which resulted in the growing specification of the sexual within official discourse and a marked polarization of political positions.
2 THE CONTAGIOUS DISEASES ACTS AND MID-VICTORIAN SOCIAL REFORM
In an immediate sense the legislation was a response to growing official pressure among medics and military chiefs for some form of sanitary scrutiny of the armed forces.
Military returns had reported a steady increase in venereal infection among the men since the 1820s.
A series of government inquiries in the 1850s and 1860s, precipitated by the Crimean War, testified to the seriousness with which the dual problems of VD and sexual immorality among the lower ranks was regarded in official circles.
From the 1840s public anxiety had also been focused on prostitution, the ‘great social evil’, by studies from evangelical clerics and medics, and by rescue and reform societies campaigning for a police crackdown on the London streets.
The jurisdiction of the 1864 Act applied to a number of naval ports and army garrison towns in England and Ireland.
Under its schedules, both police personnel and medical practitioners (acting under the direct supervision of the War Office and the Admiralty, rather than the local constabulary) were empowered to notify a justice of the peace if they suspected a woman of being a common prostitute.
The woman would then be taken to a certified hospital for medical examination, where she could be detained for up to three months.
Infringement of the hospital rules, or quitting without medical consent, carried penalties of up to two months imprisonment.
There were also penalties for brothel keepers.
The acts of 1866 and 1869 extended the geographical locations covered by the regulations, while the Admiralty and the War Office were now mandated to provide hospital facilities for inspection and treatment.
Provision was also made within hospitals for adequate moral and religious instruction of the women and for the regular fortnightly inspection of former detainees, while the period of compulsory detention was extended to six months.
What concerns us is not so much a detailed account of the politics which led to the passing of the acts and to their eventual repeal in the 1880s.
These aspects have received sustained analysis from recent feminist and social historians.
Rather, the purpose here is to build on that recent research in order to situate the debates on sexuality and disease in the light of the longer-term history of medico-moral regulation.
Within this context the acts represented a high point of sanitary interventionism.
From the 1850s the sanitary principle had been used to justify demands for state intervention regulating sexual disease and immorality.
As The Lancet declaimed, the state interfered in the case of a diseased woman on the same grounds and by the same right that it interfered with the typhus fever or smallpox patient — to avert the spread of disease.
In 1850 The Westminster Review urged that the newly created Board of Health should establish a system of periodic inspection of prostitutes, enforceable at law.
Twelve years later, Sir John Liddel, Director-General of the Naval Medical Department, justified arguments for the hygienic control of diseased prostitutes by invoking the general principles of state medicine.
Medical authorities on venereology, like William Acton, pointed to the longstanding concern of French medics and social reformers with the health threat posed by prostitution.
Much impressed with the continental system of state hygiene, they were determined to implement a similar programme in Britain.
Here was a new putsch for compulsory state action on sexual and moral issues, backed by specialist medical expertise.
The medical profession was the most significant group in support of the new legislation.
Numerically, medics were dominant on all the parliamentary inquiries into the working of the acts between 1867 and 1881, pushing hard for their extension to a national system of inspection and detention of prostitutes.
In 1867 a report of a committee of the Harveian Medical Society of London called for the expansion of the 1866 legislation to London and other large towns.
The enthusiasm generated by this investigation led to the formation of the Association for Promoting the Extension of the Contagious Diseases Acts to the Civilian Population.
Its membership was drawn from the ranks of the Tory Party, the Anglican clergy and the aristocracy, but it was dominated by the intellectual voice of the medical profession.
The growing hegemony of state medicine written into the new regulations bore witness to a substantial shift in the balance of forces within the sanitary movement.
Men like Acton used the twin issues of prostitution and venereal disease to insist that medics rather than moralists now had far greater claim to authority on social and environmental issues.
At a meeting of the Royal Medical Society in 1860 he gave his own gloss on the prostitution debate.
Philanthropists and clergymen had to admit that their own reforming schemes had completely failed.
The problem needed to be handed over to scientific investigation.
Moral intervention was by itself at best a mere palliative unless co-ordinated by official sanitary regulation.
Prayer and lamentation would not arrest the deterioration of national fibre.
Schemes of reformatories and maids' protection societies were but ‘paltry, peddling scratches on the surface of evil’.
Statements such as these reflected growing confidence and optimism among members of the profession; the conviction that state-backed medicine, as opposed to voluntary and charitable effort, provided the ultimate solution to pressing social problems.
The Lancet, smug from recent public health victories, captured the new mood of medical optimism in 1871 when it claimed success for the recent improvements in working-class habits.
Medics were the true friends of the labouring classes, for they knew more about the genesis of poverty and the needs of the working man than any other groups in the community.
It was a confidence borne of a quarter-of-a century of growing medical ascendancy, which was to have far-reaching effects on the sanitary alliance.
Supporters of the acts did not see the principles of state hygiene as contradicting the moral emphases of the public health movement.
Far from the state sanctioning male vice by providing men of the forces with a clean supply of women, it was claimed that the acts were essentially moral in aim and intention.
Campaigners against the regulations were working to undermine the time-honoured alliance between medicine and morality but the healer who deployed his art ‘honourably and fully’ could never be in antagonism with divine law.It was believed that the curative functions of medicine provided their  own moral guarantee.
Medics presented glowing testimonies to successive government inquiries on the marvellous conversion worked by the acts; where before the conduct of prostitutes was miserable in the extreme, now they had common decency and self-respect.
The Report from the Royal Commission on the Administration and Operation of the Contagious Diseases Acts, 1871, pointed out that the ‘decorous and wholesome’ improvement in the manners and habits of the people was a direct result of expanded sanitary regulations.
In the same way, the contagious diseases legislation would both sanitize and moralize the people, by purging towns and encampments of those ‘miserable creatures who were mere masses of rottenness and vehicles of disease’.
Many of the medical supporters of the legislation had a history of involvement in hospital and sanitary work among the poor, as local medical officers and poor law doctors — work which reinforced their commitment to the acts as part of the wider politics of public health.
Their biographies provide us with access to the professional and class alliances which fed into the politics of mid-Victorian social reform.
John Brendon Curgenven, joint secretary to the extensionist association, was typical of the newly professionalized medic who spearheaded the regulationist campaign.
From a provincial background, outside the ranks of the medical élite, Curgenven characteristically sought increased professional status by a series of official posts rather than through private practice.
In 1852 he was appointed medical officer to the Royal Free Hospital, Hampstead, where he handled the local offensive against cholera during the 1854 epidemic.
Later he served in the Crimea, officially as medical attendant to Lord Ward but enlisting as a volunteer surgeon with Florence Nightingale.
In addition to his work promoting the Contagious Diseases Acts, in the 1860s he also served on the Parliamentary Bills Committee of the British Medical Association, helping to draft legislation on habitual drunkenness, infant mortality and the examination and registration of midwives.
A member of the sanitary committee of the Paddington Vestry, he was influential in forming a local section of the Charity Organization Society in 1869 and was medical representative on a number of philanthropic bodies.
Curgenven represented one type of medical supporter; Matthew Berkeley Hill, his colleague as joint secretary on the extensionist association, came via a different route.
Hill was the third generation of a family of prominent educationalists and social reformers, who had their origins in the radical Unitarian culture of eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century Birmingham.
It was the same sort of low church dissenting background which had produced many first generation medics like Kay and Wakley.
But by the 1860s Berkeley Hill had become integrated into the culture of London's professional gentry, where experts rubbed shoulders with the leaders of upper middle-class and aristocratic society.
Hill was professor of surgery and pathology at University College, London, with strong links to the military hierarchy through his marriage to the daughter of Sir Thomas Howell of the War Office.
Rising professional status involved a negotiation of establishment culture, and Hill dropped many of the public trappings of his evangelical background — embracing Anglicanism and sending his son to Eton and Oxford.
For him, regulationism meant adherence to the values and ordered hierarchy of the governing elite as much as to sanitary reform.
Hill must have been typical of many mid-Victorian medics who reorientated their social and political allegiances as a result of a shift in class and professional status.
The Contagious Diseases Acts not only involved a subtle shift in the balance of forces within moral environmentalism, they also marked a new and more particular specification of sexuality within sanitary discourse.
Early nineteenth-century environmentalism had focused on sexuality as part of a general concern with the habits and morals of the urban working-class.
Legislation on public health, sanitation and industrial conditions did not contain prescriptions for the direct regulation of sexual conduct.
We have seen that it was often difficult to isolate the various sub-domains condensed and subsumed under the general categories of morality and immorality.
In contrast, the acts implicated the state and medical expertise in a much more precise and extensive discourse on sexuality — inciting and crystallizing representations, especially around female sexuality.
This was quite new.
It involved the co-ordination of a number of government departments which was extensive by  the standards of nineteenth-century administration.
But such a phenomenon cannot be explained by recourse to general principles of ‘bureaucratization’ or administrative expansion.
It was part of the intensified scrutiny of female behaviour and the sexual habits of the urban poor, under the impact of social and political conditions in mid-nineteenth-century Britain.
The process represented a refined and more detailed application of the principles of environmentalism.
Environmentalism in its first phase had advanced its hegemony through a grandiose moral and scientific logic.
But at the level of implementation such as totalizing conception of social disciplining often lacked precision when it came to dealing with specific problems.
Simon's shift of approach away from Chadwick's grand sanitary plan was not only an administrative necessity in the face of political opposition, it was also an acknowledgment of this difficulty.
From the early 1850s environmentalists began to define social questions and their solutions in much more specific terms.
There was a gradual move away from insistence on the inter-related nature of all social, political and economic problems and a shift towards specialization.
Medical research into the causes of contagion, secular and religious education, charity and philanthropic schemes, moral reclamation of prostitutes, the work of the temperance movement, all signalled this change of direction, as did the growing tendency towards the pathologization of recalcitrant individuals such as criminals, prostitutes and the insane.
It was facilitated by the transformations within the administrative process itself.
Legislation now produced separate apparatuses and spheres of activity, with distinctive forms of knowledge and expertise.
Simon himself was a product of the first phase of this process, while reform of the civil service structure outlined in the Northcote-Trevelyan report of 1854 proposed a new tier of secular administration within the state.
The move towards specialization was encouraged by changes in the overall economic and political situation from the 1850s.
The relative stabilization of the economy after the wild fluctuations in the business cycle in the previous decade, together with the defeat of Chartism and early militant trade-unionism, assisted social reformers in their attempts to treat issues as discrete and separate, rather than interdependent.
The National  Association for the Promotion of Social Science, founded in 1865, typified the new problematic.
A loose umbrella reform group, whose members in the early years included both regulationists and their opponents, it embraced an ameliorist approach to social problems, shying away from any attempt to see them as structurally related.
Patient and painstaking empirical investigation would reveal the optimum measure of reform.
It was a belief backed by the conviction that society was essentially a good order, and that there existed a general professional consensus on the treatment of social ills.
Passing through Parliament with little immediate opposition, the contagious diseases legislation was a significant manifestation of consensus politics, marking the application of precision social engineering to the domain of sexuality.
The acts were concerned with the regulation of the sexual and moral habits of two particular groups within the urban poor — female prostitutes and the lower ranks of the armed forces.
But the tactics used to discipline these two groups were very different.
For what lay behind the assumptions of the legislators were the gender-specific, male-defined norms which had been embedded in the reforming programmes of the 1830s and 1840s.
These were now crystallized in an expanded discourse on male and female sexuality.
As an intervention into the health of the army and navy the legislation developed a new ‘enlightened’ approach to the lower ranks, advocated by the 1857 Royal Commission and in part the outcome of the Crimean War débâcle.
Witnesses to the Select Committee on Venereal Disease, 1867 testified to the environmental and sanitary improvements which had already been adopted.
Healthy exercise, rational recreation, better living conditions and temperance campaigns were all designed to morally arm the men against temptation.
On the vexed question of how far soldiers and sailors should themselves be subjected to compulsory periodic genital inspection, medics and military chiefs were divided.
Some like William Hickman, the Royal Navy's Secretary and Paymaster, put the case for compulsory ablution on sanitary and moral grounds.
Yet he acknowledged that ‘any thorough examination…would be an extremely difficult thing to carry out on account of the prejudice of the men’.
Others, like Dr Barclay, a staff surgeon-major, argued  that such a system would destroy the men's self-respect and counteract the good effects of environmental reforms, a position upheld in the report of the 1871 Royal Commission.
It was women who were defined as the human agents of infection, threatening national health and security and challenging the social order by their active and autonomous sexuality.
The acts introduced a more coercive form of medico-legal regulation of prostitutes, together with an intensified system of police surveillance.
When, flushed with success, proregulationists pressed Gladstone's government to extend the statutes in the late 1860s, many supporters made the traditional connection between the threat of the prostitute and wider anxieties about public order and moral habits among the unrespectable poor.
In a paper to the Social Science Association in 1868, Curgenven insisted that the acts not only promoted the moral reform of fallen women but also raised the standard of public order on the streets.
The newly established British Medical Journal was quick to stress the general benefits to public morality if the legislation were imposed on the northern cities.
Prostitution, drunkenness, vagrancy and other ‘unrespectable’ manifestations of urban popular culture had long been a headache for local borough councils.
Increasingly, local government used its legal powers to separate out specific groups as targets for police intervention.
As early as the 1850s Plymouth City Council embarked on this new tack, passing a series of by-laws to promote police control of the streets and common lodging houses, with explicit reference to prostitutes.
In the following decade many local police forces were given new powers to discipline drunk and disorderly street-walkers, powers strengthened under the Licensing Act, 1872.
Central to this coercive policing was a concerted effort to isolate the prostitute from working-class culture.
A new and powerful medical ideology, crystallizing definitions of normal and deviant female sexuality was the cornerstone of this process.
3 FEMALE SEXUALITY
Before the passing of the acts prostitutes were relatively integrated into the cultural and economic life of the casual poor in the garrison towns.
As Judith Walkowitz has demonstrated, prostitution was used by many working women as a temporary move to supplement the pitifully low wages gained from needlework, dressmaking or domestic service.
A move back to respectable status through marriage was still possible; it was often the route taken by many women in mid-career.
The medical and clerical inquiries of the 1840s had frequently complained about precisely these difficulties of identifying ‘immoral’ women.
Medical definitions implemented in the Contagious Diseases legislation made visible the perceived threat of the prostitute, by focusing on her sexuality and isolating it as unnatural and deviant.
Acton typified this new medical discourse.
Like that of Curgenven, his own rising professional career was bound up with a commitment to expansionist sanitary reform.
Son of a provincial clergyman, with a background of work among the poor at the Islington Dispensary, he specialized in venereology as medical consultant to the London Lock Hospital and as an externe to the Female Venereal Hospital in Paris.
A vigorous campaigner in support of regulationism, and a major witness on all the parliamentary inquiries, his studies Prostitution and Functions and Disorders of the Reproductive Organs, both published in 1857, were key contributions to the new medical discourse on sexuality.
The whole tenor of Acton's approach was to insist on the primacy of medical knowledge — dismissing popular beliefs, especially those put forward by midwives, as dangerous quackery.
Sexuality, he pontificated, was one of ‘the areas of social life that are revealed only to medical men, in the hope that they may be in a position to suggest some mode of relief’.
Drawing heavily on French physiological science, Acton premised his theory on a belief in the absolute difference  between male and female physiology and their related forms of sexuality.
Male sexuality was defined as an instinctual force which, while needing constant medical supervision, was an essential attribute of masculinity.
It was a power and a privilege, giving man ‘his dignity…his character as head and ruler, and…his importance’.
Pre-Darwinist concepts of comparative natural history were used to show certain fundamental connections between man's physical organization and that of the lower mammals.
The strength of the male instinct was proof of this biological link.
The other central feature of this early sexology was its stress on the direct relation between mind and body.
Here Acton followed the general materialist principles of contemporary physiology, in which ideas and sensations were conceived as the direct product of physical processes or environmental influences.
Male ‘sex passion’ was either the result of stimulation from external sensations, or of involuntary influences coming from the sexual organs themselves.
Sensations were conveyed from the brain through the nervous system, resulting in erection.
Men could only achieve full physical and mental gratification by discharging their semen in the act of copulation.
There was a constant tension in Acton's writing between his assertion that the male sexual instinct was capable of intellectual and moral control and his stress on male sexuality as a powerful, inevitable expression of basic physiological processes.
Acton did advise restraint for men, both inside and outside marriage, as a solution to the problem of promiscuity and infection.
Restraint was also necessary because of the massive drain on the body which occurred during intercourse.
This was especially dangerous for the urban, professional paterfamilias, ‘the hardworked, intellectual married man residing in London’, whose health was at risk from the cumulative strain of metropolitan life and frenetic mental labour.
These formulations were grounded in the early hydraulic model of the circulation of energy derived from fluid mechanics; the body possessed only a fixed quantity of semen, once expended it was lost forever.
Implicitly, the emphasis on conserving energy registered the austere virtues of hard work and cultural restraint which were the hallmark of the professional gentry.
Control was possible by exerting the power of the intellect and those ‘moral  capabilities’ which distinguished man from the animals.
In the practical application of his theory Acton became much more pragmatic.
Here medical theory intersected with wider class and gender assumptions about sexual behaviour.
While male continence was necessary, it could not be guaranteed, because of the strength of the male urge.
When this logic was applied to the lower ranks of the armed forces it also carried the gloss that these men were less capable of intellectual control, being more animal and closer to nature.
In contrast, women were defined in terms of the norm of asexuality and the absence of sexual desire.
Acton again explained this as a biological phenomenon, present in all forms of the female species.
He noted approvingly that ‘in a state of nature wild female animals will not allow the approach of the male except when in a state of rut’.
Motherhood, marriage and domesticity were basic female instincts which Acton compared to the ‘unnatural’ sexual desire of the prostitute, the nymphomaniac and the courtesan.
Once more the argument was physiological; maternity and suckling made such vital demands on a woman's organs that ‘sexual desire is almost annihilated’.
Acton's work is usually represented as the highpoint of mid-Victorian distinctions between the asexual bourgeois lady and the sexually depraved working-class prostitute.
What is less often recognized is that it was distinctly innovatory, marking important breaks with earlier theories of female sexuality and helping to generate an intellectual climate favourable to regulationism.
His polarized oppositions between pure and impure women connected with a whole range of representations regulating female behaviour in the 1850s and 1860s.
These were present in literature and art as well as in medicine.
The growth of an overtly moralizing genre of English painting from the 1840s staked out similar representations of female purity and immorality.
Pre-Raphaelite artists like Holman Hunt and Dante Gabriel Rossetti, whose work was popular with the northern bourgeoisie, juxtaposed images of the middle-class home against a range of social outcasts.
Representations of fallen women, or images of women as fatal seductresses, were central to these didactic narratives.
Often such paintings pointed to the maxim that prostitution led to death, confirming the prostitute as the member of an outcast group.
The extent of the shift registered by these approaches becomes clear when compared with its antecedents.
Earlier accounts of prostitution by Congregationalist ministers like William Bevan, Ralph Wardlaw and Robert Vaughn, physicians such as Ryan and Tait and the temperance and moral reformers William Logan and John Talbot had worked to define the prostitute as a distinctly pathological female type.
But she was not juxtaposed against an asexual image of respectability.
Moreover, in the handbooks on marriage, reproduction and bourgeois hygienics of the 1840s the respectable woman was defined through marriage and the family but female asexuality was not the guiding principle.
Rather, what was emphasized was the family as the source of conjugal love, happiness and companionship, within which sexual and emotional relations between husband and wife played a valid part.
Procreation was of course the ultimate goal, but sexual satisfaction in marriage was important for both partners.
The importance awarded to sexual fulfilment within marriage owed much to the rationalist dissenting tradition of Quakers, Unitarians and Congregationalists.
Bevan, Wardlaw and Vaughn were themselves all Congregationalist ministers, defining marriage as a civil and religious contract — the basis of a stable and well-ordered society in a world disrupted by industrialization.
But for Wardlaw and other dissenters marriage was also the perfect compact between men and women ‘by which they engage in mutual love and friendship for the purpose of procreation’.
Pleasure and enjoyment were seen as natural, legitimate and God-given, provided they were not excessive and were linked to the desire for procreation.
Morality was contravened only when pleasure was sought ‘independently of the end which pleasures are only meant to subserve’.
Equally for Ryan, a moderate exercise of the sexual function for both marriage partners was essential to good health as well as conjugal happiness regulating ‘the functions of the brain or nervous system and consequently of the whole body’.
He condemned the practice of marital chastity as highly dangerous, leading to infertility in women, impotence in men and even to death.
Bourgeois hygienics, at least for these male reformers, had some conception of acceptable pleasure for women.
In the 1860s medical interventions into the contagious diseases debate polarized earlier representations of female sexuality.
They marked out clear distinctions between the asexual respectable married woman on the one hand and the depraved prostitute on the other.
In Acton's famous phrase ‘the majority of women…are not very much troubled with sexual feeling of any kind’.
Those few women who shocked public feeling with a display of sexual desire were branded either as prostitutes, nymphomaniacs or lunatics.
Schemes put forward by regulationists for the reform of prostitutes in the lock hospital institutionalized the distinction between ‘pure’ and ‘impure’women.
Once inside the hospital, prostitutes were subjected to a programme of physical and moral disciplining, which reinforced their distance from respectable women.
Lessons in personal hygiene and ablution were combined with a stress on class deference and a belief that ‘fallen women’ needed to re-learn their femininity through moralizing domestic labour.
Needlework and laundrywork provided an effective class and gender strategy, designed to prepared the prostitute for her correct place in the female labour force and to re-educate her into an approved feminine role.
Medical isolation of the prostitute in the 1860s went hand-in-hand with a range of related social demarcations.
These included the respectable/unrespectable divisions made by many philanthropic organizations, distinctions drawn by the newly founded Charity Organization Society between the deserving and undeserving poor and the healthy/diseased oppositions employed by medical officers of health to identify the carriers of contagion.
All such pathologies registered the move towards the particularization of social problems and their solutions.
The new medical polarizations clearly worked to regulate the sexuality of all women.
They visibly sharpened at the end of the decade as medics were forced onto the defensive by a growing feminist campaign demanding the repeal of the acts — itself part of the wider upsurge of the mid-Victorian women's movement.
In his defence of the legislation before the Association of the Medical Officers of Health in 1869, Acton countered opposition by resorting to increased extremism.
The public needed to be made aware that prostitutes were not ‘soiled doves’, but were a class of women who were almost ‘unsexed’ and had lost all  ‘womanly feeling’, consorting with as many as ‘eight to twelve different men in the same night’.
Medics also responded to the feminist challenge by drawing on their new sexual ideology to label the ‘shrieking sisterhood’ as immoral and impure for daring to speak publicly about sexuality.
Acton's 1875 edition of The Functions and Disorders of the Reproductive System carried a diatribe against the revolting and intolerable insubordination now suffered by husbands from their wives.
Parliamentary speeches opposing women's emancipation singled out feminist repealers-'a defiant sect who would have nothing sacred, nothing veiled, nothing hidden' — as the precursors of what was to come if women were to enter the public arena.
Similar dirty tactics were employed in other medical debates.
The Lancet's sustained opposition to the first women doctors, the ‘advance guard of the Amazonian army’ as it dubbed them, was argued on the grounds that young ladies would be rendered indelicate, and by implication immoral, by attending lectures and dissections on human anatomy and pathology.
This strategy of imputing impurity to women who challenged medical hegemony had its effects.
In the 1870s leaders of the women's movement, particularly teachers working for the extension of educational opportunities, were caught over support for the repeal campaign.
Practically all of them felt it was impossible to back the repeal movement publicly for fear that involvement would jeopardize their own campaigns.
When Annie Besant was prosecuted with Charles Bradlaugh for publishing The Fruits of Philosophy, a book of contraceptive advice in 1877, she faced public abuse and insinuations about the immorality of her private life, culminating in the successful attempt to deprive her of the custody of her young daughter.
As she confessed much later, it was not the thought of failure which made Bradlaugh and herself pause at the outset:
It was the horrible misconception that we saw might arise; the odious imputations on honour and purity that would follow…
To me it meant the loss of the pure reputation I prized, the good name I had guarded — scandal most horrible a woman could face.
It was no accident that medical misogyny, with its powerful definitions of moral and immoral female behaviour, reached a peak at precisely the moment when middle-class women were beginning to challenge the hegemony of the male professions.
4 MALE DESIRE
If the mid-nineteenth-century witnessed the increasingly polarized representations of women around the definitions of asexual purity/immorality, these oppositions also had a profound impact on class-specific forms of male sexuality.
We have already noted the erotic fantasies of men like Jelinger Symons over the appearance and behaviour of the pit girls.
Turning to the private letters, diaries and pornography of aristocrats and professional men we can see how their sexual desire was structured around notions of private debauchery, lust and licentiousness.
Here desire was incited and pleasure produced through transgression of the sanctioned norms of middle-class marriage and domesticity.
More often than not it was the ‘depraved’, sexualized and socially inferior female prostitute who was seen to condense these aspects of male fantasy.
The most elaborate and highly wrought codes in this area were of course those of contemporary pornography.
Here the new physiological theories of the uncontrollable male instinct were incorporated into erotic fantasy.
‘Walter's My Secret Life, the fictional narrative of a debauchee, constructed male desire as an illicit but physiologically based animal appetite, which drove men on to fresh excess.
The growing market in visual pornography, with the improvement of photographic techniques, provides the most striking illustration of the way male sexuality was being socially shaped.
By mid-century, many scientific and professional groups had grasped the value of the new medium as an aid to empirical verification.
According to The Lancet in 1859 photography was so ‘essentially the art of truth — that it would seem to be the essential means of reproducing all forms and structures which science seeks for delineation’.
This realist definition of photography as truth and evidence was reworked in pornographic texts to consolidate the notion of male sexual desire as instantly aroused and  requiring constant relief.
Visual codes, with their deeply embedded resonances of actuality, reinforced the immediacy of the male urge, responding spontaneously to sensory stimuli.
Both written and visual pornography represented women for the male gaze across the virtue/vice, innocence/depravity oppositions.
The clearest examples were in the early photographic studies of child prostitutes dating from the 1860s and 1870s, where childhood innocence was erotically framed against visible signs of immoral sexuality, such as exposed genitalia or the depraved stare.
Similarly, in My Secret Life sexual pleasure was signified in total opposition to the norms of bourgeois married life and sexual relations with one's wife:
I tried to love her (my wife).
It was impossible.
Hateful in day, she was loathsome to me in bed.
Long I strove to do my duty, and be faithful, yet to such a pitch did my disgust at length go, that laying by her side, I had wet dreams nightly, sooner than relieve myself in her.
In such accounts ‘duty’, ‘faithfulness’ and conjugal union were defined as innately unpleasurable.
In contrast, the perceived coarseness and animality of working-class women was the focus for male arousal, producing an experience of sex as illicit and furtive, breaking the boundaries of class and gender:
Never did a woman enjoy a poking more…
She'd lost of course all modesty, if she ever had any, but she must have been reared like a pig…her language was indescribably common and coarse, and whether eating, drinking, speaking, washing or even pissing, her vulgarity and idiocy were intolerable.
She was a magnificent bit of fucking flesh and nothing more.
These male fantasies reduced working women to a series of purely physical functions organized around sex.
They had a continuity with the rites of upper-class masculine culture acted out in the clubs and pleasure haunts of the Haymarket and other areas of the metropolis from the 1840s.
When Flora Tristan, the French feminist and socialist, visited London in 1839 she noted not just the extent of prostitution but the complex ritualization  of male debauchery.
Luxurious private supper rooms in the West-End known as ‘the finishes’ organized part-orgies part entertainments which centred on the ‘erotic’degradation of women by male clients.
One of these involved plying a woman with drink until she fell reeling to the floor, where glass after glass of liquor was poured over her until she became ‘merely a confusion of filth’.
Arthur Munby's diaries from the 1850s through to the 1870s, point to further examples of middle-class male desire centred on the physical coarseness of working women.
Munby was a cultivated lawyer and civil servant, working for the Ecclesiastical Commission in Whitehall.
A social investigator and lecturer, he established a cross-class liaison with Hannah Cullwick, a Shropshire servant, in the 1850s.
Central to Munby's experience of the relationship was a form of sexual desire structured around the cultural polarities of class.
Here is Munby's description of Hannah when she was working as a servant in a Margate boarding house in the early 1860s:
I presently see a figure approaching from a hundred yards off, up the middle of the street: a tall young woman, in a close white cap, and a short frock of lilac cotton, and coarse sack-cloth apron, and strong boots.
Her hair is blown about by the wind, for it is cropped like a charity girl's: her arms are bare servile arms, touched with redness and roughness: she carries a pail in either hand.
She is but a servant maid, and one of the lowest kind: yet look at her face, as the light of recognising love spreads over it.
Munby's codes of observation drew on the protocols of official inquiry, with which he was personally familiar from his studies of Wigan colliery girls.
Hannah was a thing to be explored, dissected through detailed empirical investigation.
But, like Symons' case-studies, the male gaze was eroticized through the cultural distance between observer and observed, exemplified in Munby's fascination with the emblems of Hannah's working class physiognomy.
We should be cautious in building too many general conclusions from these specific cases.
But they do point to the complex inter-relation between official discourses and the domain of  constructed personal experience and pleasure.
All examples reveal a link between the growing polarization of official definitions of female sexuality and the sexualization of those representations in the fantasies of certain groups of men.
It is possible that what we are dealing with here is the experience of sections of the professional gentry, though it was not confined to that group alone.
What is clear is that such private desires were not sealed off from the world of public representations.
These forms of sexuality were dependent on specific codes and rituals to give them meaning.
5 THE REPEAL CAMPAIGN AND THE COLLAPSE OF THE MEDICO-MORAL ALLIANCE
The expansionism of preventive medicine was severely checked by the political opposition provoked by the Contagious Diseases Acts, resulting in their suspension in 1883 and their final repeal three years later.
Recent feminist historians have insisted that the repeal struggle needs to be seen not just as one of the single-issue campaigns which characterized the reform politics of radical liberalism, but as a landmark in the history of the nineteenth-century women's movement and in the development of a feminist politics of sexuality.
In terms of our longer history of medico-moral politics the battle over the legislation certainly marked a watershed in mid-Victorian social reform.
The combined forces of opposition ruptured the earlier environmentalist consensus, making opponents out of former allies, staking out a new regime of sexual regulation and defining sexuality as a crucial site for feminist intervention.
The consequences for state medicine were far-reaching and profound.
How did the women and men of the repeal movement contest the discourses of medical expertise and military authority which underpinned the acts?
What languages did they draw on to fracture the earlier consensus and what historical forces enabled them to orchestrate their campaign as a national  protest?
Such questions are important because they probe the conditions under which political and cultural resistance is generated.
Movements of struggle are rarely spontaneous eruptions from below.
Their forms of organization are partly structured by the dominant network of power and authority and they are dependent on specific languages to endow their protests with meaning.
Medical efforts to extend the acts first provoked organized opposition at the Social Science Congress at Bristol in October 1869.
The newly founded National Anti-Contagious Diseases Acts Association excluded women from its first meeting.
Though the association was quick to change its policy, women, led by Josephine Butler, broke away to form the separatist Ladies' National Association (LNA).
Almost immediately, the Ladies' Association issued a strongly worded protest in The Daily News, signed by prominent figures like Harriet Martineau and Florence Nightingale, claiming that the acts were not only an attack on the civil liberties of all women but also implicated the state in sanctioning male vice.
This women's protest was received with expressions of outrage and puzzlement by men within the dominant political culture.
One MP confided to Butler that her manifesto had shaken the house very badly.
Politicians, he confessed, knew how to manage organized opposition, ‘but this is very awkward for us-this revolt of the women.
It is quite a new thing; what can we do with such an opposition as this?’
The women in the repeal movement encountered not only the power and outright misogyny of medical and military chiefs but also the restrictive codes of parliamentary politics, which defined the issues touched on by the acts as indecent and immoral.
Divorce, prostitution and women's emancipation were designated as outside the parameters of political discourse, and MPs customarily prefaced speeches on these topics by apologizing to the house for intruding on parliamentary time.
Discussion of immorality was particularly problematic, given the strongly held belief that to name it and put it into discourse was a dangerous incitement to further acts of depravity.
As early as the 1836 debate on divorce bills, proceedings had been referred to select committee ‘to obviate the necessity  of painful and disgusting exhibitions at the bar of the House…calculated to excite feelings of shame and disgust’, which were ‘grossly indecent in their character’.
Repealers were forced to adopt similar tactics.
In the Commons' debate on the Contagious Diseases Acts Repeal Bill, 1873, Henry Fowler, the proposer, prefaced his speech with the usual apology for intruding on members' time with so disgusting a subject.
This parliamentary etiquette was much more than mere expression of ‘Victorian prurience’.
The moralization of public life, under pressure from evangelicals, was producing a new language of politics and an insistence that men holding public office should outwardly subscribe to respectable standards of personal conduct.
Prior to the 1830s, personal morality had not been seen as necessary for political eminence.
Sexual intrigues were almost part of the culture of high politics, and were commonplace in big Whig and Tory families in the early nineteenth century.
Lord Palmerston was a notorious rake, having had a long-standing affair with Lady Cowper, whom he finally married in the late 1830s.
The evangelical Lord Ashley viewed the prospect of marrying into such a family with trepidation, particularly as it was rumoured that his bride-to-be was the illegitimate daughter of Palmerston and Lady Cowper.
Already by the 1830s these aristocratic codes of libertinism were beginning to be challenged, both by organized evangelical pressure groups and by the structural shift in the overall balance of power in favour of the middle-classes.
The result was not so much the realization of Ashley's vision of national regeneration but a growing acceptance by those holding high office of the need to subscribe publicly to an upright moral code.
At the level of parliamentary discourse the net effect was a gradual transformation of the field of the political.
This involved the crystallization of a grammar of politics which defined a whole range of sexual and moral issues as apocryphal, irregular and outside the codes of gentlemanly conduct and civilized political debate.
Repealers quickly grasped that this parliamentary language surrounding prostitution and venereal disease increased their difficulties in launching an effective campaign.
Thomas Biggs, in his address to the Social Science Association in 1870, complained  that such a ‘painful…topic is not considered a proper theme for discussion…by the great majority of the House of Commons’.
In their campaign to rupture parliamentary discretion and medical hegemony, the women and men of the repeal movement drew on the only vocabulary able to bear the moral and intellectual weight of their challenge.
This was the militant language of radical dissenting religion.
Many other languages fed into the movement and made significant contributions: the secular discourse of anti-statism and personal rights, the tactics of pressure group politics, even the heavily patriarchal morality of the newly enfranchised labour aristocrats in the industrial north.
But religious language not only provided a link between different political constituencies, it offered a set of concepts, a rhetoric of resistance and a strength of moral certainty powerful enough to take on the weight of the medical and political establishment.
Even more importantly, it supplied many mid-Victorian feminists with a critical perspective on existing social relations.
If the growing power of the medical profession was in part derived from the certainty and coherence of its discourse, then the success of repeal opposition was dependent on the mobilization of an alternative language capable of challenging professional power and expertise.
Repealers launched a double-edged assault on medics.
One strategy involved tackling the profession on its own terms, refuting statistics and medical claims that the acts led to improvements in morality and public order through a mass of published tracts and pamphlets.
The other approach worked with a scathing moral and religious attack on the concepts of hygiene and sanitation embedded in the legislation.
For James Stansfield, a prominent repealer, the critique of regulationism was founded on the belief that ‘humanity is governed by a providential law which can only come from one source’.
A sanitary code which sought to evade fundamental moral principles could never ultimately succeed.
Acts which contravened moral law were ‘calculated to degrade and debase the manhood and womanhood of this country’, entangling them ‘in the meshes of its wide and sweeping net’.
At the International Congress of Geneva, 1877, attended by Butler and other women repealers, delegates avowed that the hygienic principles governing sexual conduct needed to be steeped in the highest  personal morality.
The indispensable basis of the health of individuals and nations was ‘self-control in the relations between the sexes’.
Public health could not be restricted to the surveillance and prevention of specific maladies.
Nor, it was argued, could medics pursue a mere blind materialism, for the absorbing devotion to material progress, without the subordination of that pursuit to the highest interests of humanity, had generated a crisis of the utmost gravity for morality.
The profession's eagerness for scientific advance had impaled it on the horns of a dilemma, forcing an unnatural choice between science and morality.
Repealers scored a notable success when Simon, in his annual report of 1868, came out against any extension of the acts.
As a Christian moralist Simon could not tolerate the seemingly deliberate flouting of principle by the extensionist lobby.
He emphasized that respectable ratepayers would object to contributing to the cost of giving artificial security to their neighbours' looseness of life.
Moreover, since venereal disease was contracted by a man at his own risk he could not claim protection from the medical arm of the state.
The real priority was a greater stress on moral responsibility in the education of the sons of the upper class.
More than anything else, Simon's report put an end to any immediate prospect of the acts being extended to civilian towns.
The pervasive influence of a combative religious morality was evident not only in the repealers' language but in the common culture which bound many of them together.
Though the group which dominated the executive board of the National Association tended to be drawn from the secularist, radical circles of the metropolis, the women and men who effectively led the repeal movement came from the same provincial backgrounds which sustained many other mid-century reform groups.
Living in the northern cities, they had a deep commitment to the radical wing of the Liberal Party and were overwhelmingly nonconformist in religion.
More specifically, it was the radical and fundamentalist sects in the dissenting tradition (Quakers, Unitarians and Congregationalists), with their longstanding opposition to the power of the established church and their vigorous anti-statism, which produced the majority of leaders.
Mary Priestman and Margaret Tanner, prominent in the LNA, were strict Quakers, in touch with reforming politics via their elder sister's marriage to the Quaker politician John Bright.
Butler herself had rather different origins.
Aristocratically connected, she came from a Northumberland background of prominent agricultural landowners with strong Liberal and reforming links.
Though an Anglican, she was very much an adherent of the evangelical, low church wing of her religion.
Many of the men had direct connections with northern industrial capital.
Stansfield, one of the few prominent radicals in Gladstone's cabinet of the early 1870s, was from a Unitarian brewing family.
Henry Wilson from Sheffield typified the northern male repealer.
A self-made industrialist, with capital in smelting and spinning, both he and his wife Charlotte were Congregationalists, involved in the anti-slavery and temperance movements.
Elected to Parliament in 1885, Wilson was able to bring pressure to bear on the Liberal Party, both for repeal and for a wider programme of moral reform and social disciplining.
In their private lives, many of the repealers sought to live out the ideal of companionate marriage.
This was seen as an equal union between husband and wife, founded on a strong sense of religious purpose and cemented by the power of human love.
Butler described her marriage as ‘a perfectly equal union with absolute freedom on both sides for personal initiative in thought and action’.
Her husband, the Rev. George Butler, understood it as a true reflection of divine love.
The Wilsons' daughter, Helen, testified to a similar if more patriarchal version of the same model in her own parents' marriage.
Repealers were at pains to stress the immense cultural distance which separated them from their opponents; they positioned themselves as wholly outside the political and military elite which upheld the acts.
For Butler, medics were always ‘those terrible aristocratic doctors’ who violated women and were destroying English civil liberties.
In fact, the lines of demarcation between the two camps were much less distinct.
Many repealers and regulationists shared a common culture and held similar positions on class and social behaviour — one of the characteristics of mid-Victorian consensus politics.
Throughout the 1860s feminists like Martineau and Elizabeth  Wolstenholme worked together with their future antagonists in the Social Science Association.
The repeal campaign effectively heralded a deep split within the medico-moral consensus over the regulation of sexuality, fracturing the earlier discourse of sanitary interventionism.
But in class terms it marked a split within the ruling bloc, not the totalizing rupture from without that repealers claimed.
The growth of the middle-class women's movement was central to this break in ruling alliances.
6 RELIGION, MORALITY AND REPEAL FEMINISM
Butler, in her retrospective account of the repeal campaign, insisted that the movement had been characterized less as ‘the revolt of a sex’ than by ‘the depth and sincerity of the moral and religious convictions of the mass of the population’.
Her analysis may have been inflected by the upsurge of a new wave of militant feminism in the early twentieth century from which she felt distanced.
For in looking back she underplayed the impact of feminist discourses on the repeal struggle.
The use of the term feminism here requires explanation.
In a strict linguistic sense the concept is anachronistic, since it was not referenced in England until the 1890s.
Yet the majority of women repealers clearly identified, if not with feminism, then with a body of ideas and aspirations variously known as the woman question, the emancipation of women, the rights of women and so on.
This points to the existence of a distinctive women's politics and culture prior to the entry of the term feminism into linguistic usage.
But Butler was correct in her insistence that moral and religious conviction was central to the repeal campaign.
Moral and feminist discourses were absolutely inseparable.
Religious language provided women with a powerful critique of male sexuality, a language of outrage which gave them their means of representation into the male world of public political debate.
This was not the first time feminists had mobilized politically around religion, both to mount a searching critique of patriarchal society and to envisage more egalitarian forms of social  organization.
Barbara Taylor has shown how women within the Owenite socialist movement in the 1830s and 1840s had struggled to advance a feminist politics through the language of radical religion.
In a related way, the religious morality of repealers was not merely a passive vehicle for feminist politics; it actively empowered women and gave them the confidence to develop critical concepts.
As Butler herself pointed out in language resonant with evangelical fervour, men:
had had the opportunity for many years of looking at the question in its material phases, of appreciating its hygienic results…
Now, for the first time…they are asked to look upon it as a question of human nature, of equal interest to men and women, as a question of the heart, the soul, the affections, the whole moral being.
As a simple assertion of one woman speaking for tens of thousands of women, those two words we rebel are very necessary…
The cry of women crushed under the yoke of legalized vice is not the cry of a statistician or a medical expert; it is simply a cry of pain, a cry for justice and for a return to God's laws in place of these brutally impure laws invented and imposed by men…
The slave now speaks.
The enslaved women have found a voice in one of themselves…
It is the voice of a woman who has suffered, a voice calling to holy rebellion and to war.
Here biblical images of ‘rebellion’ and ‘holy war’were fused with recent experiences of anti-slavery and republican struggle to forge a discourse of political representation for women — the enslaved women who had found a voice, a point of identification in one of themselves.
In passages such as this it is not only the content which is important (the attack on organized vice and male expertise) but the language through which the ideas are expressed.
The two are inseparable; the critical concepts are very much a function of the language.
The LNA launched a dual offensive, attacking both the medical profession and the double-standard on which the acts were premised: ‘the false idea that there is one code of morality for men and another for women…which has more or less  coloured and shaped the whole of our social life.’
Feminists isolated male sexuality as the target for reforming intervention, in the interests of creating a higher standard of purity among men.
According to the Social Purity Alliance, founded in 1873, male vice lay at the heart of the problem of immorality.
The ‘new and final solution’ to this evil was to lay moral responsibility and obligation on men, every other method being ‘fatally incomplete’.
Many women believed that these reforms involved transforming the whole tenor of English public life and creating an ethical and moral climate founded on the teachings of religion.
Here feminists drew heavily on the evangelical stress on marriage and the family as the foundation of upright national government.
They foregrounded the importance of women for national regeneration, thus forcing a connection between public and private and breaking open the separate spheres ideology.
Often their attack was tempered by an anticapitalist critique.
As Mary Hume-Rothery put it in her letter to Gladstone's Liberal government in 1870, men and women had to be raised above the grovelling materialism of handsome houses, slothful ease and sensual indulgence.
Only by emphasizing the sanctity of domestic life and the ultimately spiritual nature of the marriage union would national morality be re-made in the image of the Maker.
It was through the use of tactics such as these that the leaders of the LNA sought to shift the representations of sexuality which had been crystallized by the medical profession and their sanitary supporters.
Feminists campaigned to disrupt the gender-specific equation of active female sexuality with vice, filth and animality.
The prostitute was not the source of contagion and moral corruption, but the upper-class male, backed by ‘the medical lust of handling and dominating women’.
As a political strategy it was highly effective, successfully confronting the medical discourse which lay behind regulation.
But this judicious shift of definitions carried its own problems.
Middle-class women consolidated their feminism through a moral politics which implicitly reinforced the polarized representations of male and female sexuality, albeit in a reversed form.
Repealers tended to view sex not merely as male-defined but as male, while women were promoted as the agents regulating immorality — powerful but asexual guardians of  the nation's morals.
The political and social tensions thrown up by this strategy became visible in the plans for the rescue and reform of prostitutes which feminists put forward as their alternative to regulation.
Such tensions had their genesis in the class and gender contradictions inherent to mid-Victorian feminism.
7 WOMEN AND SOCIAL DISCIPLINING
Repeal feminists justified their entry into the political arena on the grounds that the issues raised by the acts touched on all the great trusts of their womanhood — the questions of virtue, purity, decency and social welfare.
They insisted that these issues were of paramount importance to all women because they were fundamental to marriage and the family and to its valid extension in female charity work and social reform.
In arguing their case the LNA were clearly drawing on those traditions of philanthropy which emphasized the central role of women in the reform of moral conditions.
Nowhere more than in the repeal movement was the link between philanthropic work and an emergent feminist discourse more clearly visible.
Many of the women repealers had a history of involvement in the type of philanthropy and social reform which we have already observed in Ellen Ranyard's bible missions.
Elizabeth Kell, wife of a Unitarian minister in Southampton, and Mrs Hampson of Plymouth were both extensively concerned with work among the poor.
Butler had also thrown herself into similar work in Liverpool in the 1860s, setting up an industrial home for working-class girls.
Her account of her first visit to the oakum sheds of the workhouse must have been typical of the experience of many women from her background.
Desolate from the death of her infant daughter, with her husband immersed in his career as principal of Liverpool College, she ‘became possessed with an irresistible desire to go forth and find some pain keener than my own:
It was not difficult to find misery in Liverpool…
I went  down to the oakum sheds and begged admission.
I was taken into an immense gloomy vault filled with women and girls — more than two hundred probably at that time.
I sat on the floor among them and picked oakum.
They laughed at me and told me my fingers were no use for that work, which was true.
But while we laughed we became friends.
I recalled that they should learn a few verses to say to me on my next visit.
I recollect a tall, dark, handsome girl standing up in our midst, among the damp refuse and the lumps of tarred rope, and repeating without mistake in a not unmusical voice, clear and ringing, the wonderful 14th Chapter of St John's Gospel — the words of Jesus all through…she had seated herself and they listened in perfect silence, this audience — wretched, ignorant, criminal some, wild and defiant others.
The tall, dark-haired girl had prepared the way for me, and I said ‘Now let us all kneel, and cry to that same Jesus who spoke those words,’ and down on their knees they fell every one of them, reverently, on that damp stone floor, some saying the words after me, others moaning and weeping.
It was a strange sound, that united wail — continuous, pitiful, strong — like a great sigh or murmur of vague desire and hope issuing from the heart of despair, piercing the gloom and murky atmosphere of that vaulted room, and reaching to the heart of God.
This remarkably self-conscious passage captures many of the contradictions present in middle-class women's involvement in rescue work.
Here were not only class tensions and antagonisms but also the yearning —‘that united wail’— for a different form of social relations which would link all women.
As always, this visionary, pre-figurative language was religious in tone and content.
For Butler evangelical religion, working in the world as practical Christianity, was the means of forging a common bond with outcast women which would transcend class differences.
Like Ranyard she consistently argued that the personal, cross-class, woman-to-woman dialogue espoused by philanthropy promoted reform where state-centred initiatives had failed.
The feminist repeal movement was highly successful in challenging the gendered power relations inscribed within medical interventionism.
Its success checked sanitary dominance  and set the tone of moral regulation for at least a generation.
Many women used the campaign as a means of deepening feminist consciousness and as a platform for launching a wider programme of demands.
Mary Hume-Rothery, for example, stressed that the sexual oppression of poor women brought to light by the acts was all the more reason to give women the vote and extend their educational provision, so that they could exercise formal political power.
Nevertheless, much repeal work still displayed the ambiguities which had always marked middle-class women's participation in the domain of social reform.
Temperance-style mass meetings, schemes for moral reclamation and placing prostitutes in domestic service, the setting up of rescue homes — these were all part of the feminist alternative to medical regulation.
Elizabeth Kell made it clear in her evidence to the 1871 Royal Commission that she believed only ‘moral measures’, carried out by ‘voluntary effort’ rather than the state, could achieve lasting reform.88 She countered medical arguments that repealers were not concerned with remedial measures by outlining her own moralizing schemes for reclaiming prostitutes in Southampton.
The point was reiterated by F.C.
Banks, secretary of the National Association, amid efforts to revive the flagging campaign in Plymouth in 1876.
It was a deliberate lie on the part of regulationists to accuse repealers of having no desire to rescue women from prostitution.
Since 1870, Banks insisted, the association had had an office in the town devoted exclusively to the rescue of women and children.
The following year, Plymouth and Devonport branches produced an enthusiastic review of their reclamation work in the association's national journal, The Shield.
The glowing survey read like a standard report from a charity organization:
Out of the eighty cases, thirty three have been dealt with in the following manner — 23 sent to Homes in Plymouth and London; 1 sent to service in London, where she is doing well, 5 married and doing well; 2 returned to their parents; 1 provided with employment as a machinist and doing well; 1 with children sent to the workhouse.
Male repealers in Plymouth, like Banks, heartily warmed to  the growing focus on reclamation within the movement.
In the hands of many such men, ‘rescue’ meant a punitive and puritanical regime which reinforced the status of prostitutes as fallen women, though the ostensible aim was rehabilitation.
This traditionalist stress also received strong support at a rank and file level within the feminist LNA.
Alice Berwicke, visiting Plymouth for the association in 1881, found reclamation and educational work in full swing in the local branch.
Berwicke like many leading women repealers, found the work disturbing and felt that what was needed was a revival of the repealers' message of anti-statism and personal liberty.
Nevertheless, she joined enthusiastically in traditional debates on the moral effects of overcrowding, and the relation between lack of cleanliness and the growing local trade in child prostitution among the poor.
Feminists' commitment to moral improvement and environmental reform had a direct influence on their image of the prostitute.
They tended to stress that these women were the hapless, passive victims of debauched aristocrats and manipulative medics, who were eager to be reformed given the necessary moral intervention from without.
Rescue and reclamation could restore the prostitute to her ‘pre-fallen’ state of virtuous morality and asexual purity.
Repealers were particularly intolerant of unreformed and unrepentant women, adopting a punitive attitude towards them and explaining their resistance as a product of the demoralizing effects of forced medical inspection.
Kell testified that prostitutes in inspected towns were ‘vain girls’ under no restraint and lacking any sense of innate morality.
They were indolent and addicted to a life of pleasure: ‘They get up at any hour they choose, and go out and amuse themselves.’
Feminist debates over prostitution contained no positive representations of active female sexuality, either for prostitutes or for women in general.
Members of the LNA were themselves caught in the powerful polarizations of female behaviour embodied in official discourse and lacked a language to articulate alternative representations.
It was felt that married women like Butler should lead the movement, because her status as wife and mother gave her more authority to speak about the delicate issue of sexuality.
Single women and there were many among the repealers-occupied a more ambiguous position.
Feminists were not opposed to reforming intervention per se.
What they contested was the presumption that moral reform could be achieved through a centralized programme of sanitary intervention which reinforced the sexual oppression of women.
Their struggle was over precisely how sexuality was to be regulated and who was to co-ordinate regulation; sanitary surveillance of prostitution through state medicine or moral reform through private philanthropy and rescue work.
The campaign over the contagious diseases legislation aggravated and made explicit the tensions between male and female hierarchies of expertise which had been present in the alliance between medics and lady philanthropists from the 1850s.
Butler took up precisely this issue in her introduction to Women's Work and Women's Culture, 1869.
She argued that contemporary social reform was becoming too institutionalized and bureaucratic; the present tendency was towards ‘centralization of rule, to vast combinations, large institutions and uniformity of system’.
What this harsh and regimented scheme urgently needed was the integration of feminine and domestic influences, setting free ‘feminine powers into Workhouses, Hospitals, Schools, Orphanages, Lunatic Asylums, Reformatories and even Prisons’.
Her insistence on the importance of middle-class women's participation in social disciplining was clearly an attempt to guard against their displacement by the growing authority of state sanctioned professionals in the mid-Victorian period.
The struggles over the Contagious Diseases Acts need to be read both as a feminist challenge to male power and as a battle within the power bloc over the disciplining of the working-class.
It is only by locating repeal feminism in the broader history of moral environmentalism that we can begin to understand the more obvious class and gender contradictions which surfaced in the politics of the social purity movements in the 1880s and 1890s.
It is to these struggles that we now turn.
FROM STATE MEDICINE TO CRIMINAL LAW.
PURITY, FEMINISM AND THE STATE 1880–1914
1 PROLOGUE
In July 1885 the Salvation Army launched a nationwide purity campaign.
In less than three weeks the army gathered nearly four thousand signatures for a petition demanding a new criminal law amendment act, raising the age of consent to eighteen and giving the police increased powers to search and arrest brothel-keepers.
The monster document, nearly two-and-a-half miles long, was drawn in a waggon to the House of Commons by cadets from the Clapham training home.
Over the cart was a white canopy bearing the inscription: ‘In the name of the people and the Queen, mother of the country, the Salvation Army demand that iniquity shall cease.’
Behind the cadets marched three hundred uniformed women soldiers of the army.
The whole line of the route, through the working-class districts of Hackney, Shoreditch and Bishopsgate, was filled with crowds.
At Whitehall the petition was unloaded and carried on the shoulders of eight officers into the Commons.
This dramatic demonstration was part of a series of campaigns and rallies which took place in the summer of 1885, as an immediate response to the revelations by the Pall Mall Gazette of the horrors of juvenile prostitution.
The new popular press played a crucial role in orchestrating public opinion over the affair.
In early June W.T. Stead, the paper's editor, had published ‘The Maiden Tribute of Modern Babylon’.
Drawing on polarized representations of the passive, innocent child-victim and the debauched male client (the stock-in-trade of much popular literature), Stead's articles exposed the underlying depravity in aristocratic and fashionable London society.
His sexual script employed the language of moral outrage both to fuel growing demands for law reform and to present a lurid, titillating account of the prostitution trade.
This exposé and the Salvation Army spectacle were symptomatic of a carefully organized campaign by purity workers  and feminists to press the Liberal government to pass the Criminal Law Amendment Bill, which had been before Parliament since 1883.
After the Maiden Tribute scandal Josephine Butler convened a special meeting with Mrs Bramwell Booth of the Salvation Army and Ellice Hopkins, a prominent member of the new purity movement, to discuss tactics.
Protests culminated in a mass rally in St James Hall on 21 August, followed by an open-air meeting next day which drew over a quarter of a million people.
Support came from a broad coalition of clergymen, prominent liberals, purists, feminists, trade-union leaders and some socialists.
Stead waxed lyrical, envisaging a new moral order of the ‘forces of Democracy and Socialism’, which would abolish the ‘immolation of the daughters of the people as a sacrifice to the vices of the rich’.
The outcome was the formation of the National Vigilance Association (NVA), whose membership included leaders of women's organizations and prominent feminists.
The constitution of the association contained a strong commitment to feminist demands for the reform of male sexuality, together with a coercive policy of sexual regulation.
The traditional stress on preventive and rescue work was now twinned with an emphasis on legislation to outlaw obscenity, indecency and the foreign traffic in young girls.
Intent on winning working-class support, in October the NVA launched a nationwide crusade throughout the industrial centres of England and Scotland.
The purity movement's stress on the criminal law to promote morality marked an important shift away from traditional strategies of environmental reform and private philanthropy.
The NVA saw the criminal law as an instrument for improving public morals-positively educative rather than simply repressive, to be used in conjunction with preventive work.
William Coote, the association's secretary, believed that the law was ‘schoolmaster to the whole community’.
Legislation was the best reflex of public opinion, the real moral thermometer of the country.
This was a quite new perception of the state's capacity for transforming sexual and moral behaviour.
In the thirty years before the First War purists and feminists consistently argued that criminal law legislation was the key to improving the nation's morals.
As Coote himself never tired of pointing out:
There is a very popular cant phrase that you cannot make men good by Act of Parliament.
It is false to say so You can, and do, keep men sober simply by an Act of Parliament; you can, and do, chain the devil of impurity in a large number of men and women by the fear of the law.
The 1885 Criminal Law Amendment Act signalled a new, more coercive system of state intervention into the domain of sexuality.
Subsequent legislation followed the same pattern, extending legal control over familiar areas such as indecency, prostitution and brothel-keeping and creating new offences around male homosexuality and incest.
In an immediate sense, purity campaigns for more stringent legislation coincided with the renewed official panic over the urban poor in the 1880s.
Worsening economic conditions, the growth of the new socialist and trade-union movements, together with the perceived failure of traditional programmes of philanthropy, all contributed to widespread alarm in official circles about the immorality of the unrespectable poor, or ‘the residuum’.
As in the 1830s and 1840s the discourse of social investigation, circulated by novelists and journalists, social scientists and government commissioners, represented working-class immorality as a major source of anxiety.
Lurid semi-fictional accounts by James Greenwood, George Sim and Jack London alluded darkly to acts of debauchery not fit even for the pages of The Lancet.
The Bitter Cry of Outcast London, written in 1883 by Andrew Mearns, Congregationalist minister in Chelsea, exposed a vast mass of moral corruption and absolute godlessness at the centre of the greatest metropolis in the world.
The most extensive moral survey was contained in the Report of the Royal Commission on the Housing of the Working Classes, 1884.
Incest, as the rector of Christchurch, Spitalfields, bemoaned, was the direct result of overcrowding.
The one-room system encouraged children to be sexually precocious, so that they found out everything about physical matters from their home experience.
In the familiar language of environmentalism, Mearns demonstrated that overcrowding spread the infection of immorality from the dissolute to honest and upright working-class families.
Purity demands for legislation against  prostitution, brothel-keeping and other acts of immorality often explicitly addressed problems posed by the culture of the urban poor and the difficulties of keeping public order on the streets.
Agitation may have been couched in a vocabulary which spoke of national morality, but it was clear who were being singled out as the recipients of purity action.
Yet one grouping was conspicuously absent from these campaigns.
The medical profession did not contribute to the new crusades nor was there any resurrection of the medico-moral alliance.
The balance of forces around sexuality had definitely shifted.
Sanitary science and state medicine were now in partial eclipse.
2 THE ECLIPSE OF STATE.
MEDICINE
The repeal of the Contagious Diseases Acts marked a severe defeat for the medical profession.
It was a defeat which was to have profound and far-reaching consequences for state medical regulation of sexuality.
Though The Lancet and the BMJ fought a rearguard action right up to the moment of final repeal, it was obvious that the sanitary principle had been successfully challenged by moralists.
By their action, the women and men of the repeal movement had effectively re-defined the terms of the debate over sex.
This defeat was itself part of the wider eclipse of state medicine in the 1870s and 1880s, which opened the space for purity groups to push for their own conception of sexual reform through the criminal law.
The initial setbacks came as part of the local government reforms of the early 1870s.
As Simon himself acknowledged, English public health administration had developed in a piecemeal and ad hoc fashion for much of the early nineteenth century, with national supervision divided between his own Privy Council Medical Office and the Poor Law Board.
Under the Local Government Act, 1871 the two departments were amalgamated to form the new Local Government Board.
But the new act created more political problems than it solved.
The old Poor Law Board and the Medical Office had  developed highly distinctive forms of administration which were fundamentally conflictual in terms of aims and professional practice.
Both departments were heir to the Chadwickian and Benthamite politics of the 1830s but each had crystallized a specific mode of social intervention.
The Medical Department pushed for reform and regulation through the hegemony of state medicine.
The Poor Law Office, on the other hand, inheriting the most utilitarian forms of social disciplining, was fundamentally opposed both to medical expertise and to any further large-scale financial outlay in aid of poor relief.
After 1871 the policy of the new Local Government Board was shaped by the poor law tradition, with the ministerial backing of its first president, James Stansfield.
Stansfield's own personal antipathy to medical involvement in the contagious diseases acts, together with his ignorance of scientific matter she knew as much of science as a cow does of conic sections, according to one contemporary — may have exacerbated Simon's problems at the board.
What was clear was that the new department was intent on circumscribing medical influence within the state.
The battle was fought out as an intense personal rivalry between Simon and the new permanent secretary to the Local Government Board, John Lambert.
Lambert was himself a skilled administrator, with a working knowledge of sanitary reform.
A member of the 1868 Royal Sanitary Commission and a vigorous promoter of public health as Mayor of Salisbury, he was not fundamentally opposed to state medicine.
But he typified a new breed of civil servant.
Methodical, precise and administratively cautious, he carried over from his earlier experience as a member of the Poor Law Board a determination to subordinate medical experts to the lay administration .
He succeeded in winning Stansfield's confidence and in stamping his personal authority on all areas of the new department, including Simon's, by intercepting correspondence and seizing responsibility for the smallest details of policy.
The result was that though Simon and his staff were retained the poor law secretariat began to create an inner circle of administration, relegating medics to the peripheries.
After a protracted battle, which raised The Times and the whole of the medical establishment against Stansfield and Lambert, Simon  resigned as a civil servant in 1876, but the overall situation remained unchanged.
Like the contagious diseases defeat, Simon's resignation was received as a serious blow by the medical profession.
Going beyond the clash of personalities, The Lancet probed the underlying causes of this medical decline.
It concluded that the Simonian concept of state medicine was far in advance of public opinion and was likely to remain so for some time to come.
Such explanations were comforting, if only because they pointed forward to the ultimate vindication of medical science.
Yet they obviously failed to grasp the political and administrative realities within which state medicine was increasingly caught in the 1870s and 1880s.
The key here lies not with personal rivalries, as administrative historians would have us believe.
Much more significant were the conflicting claims of medical expert and lay civil servant over control of social policy, and the shifting relation between politician and bureaucrat in the nineteenth-century state.
Simon outplayed the politicians and Treasury staff with his expansionist policy in the 1860s.
However, his action provoked significant comment from Treasury permanent secretaries, committed as they were to a Gladstonian ideology of ‘cheap government’ and to the subordination of the extravagant missionary zeal of medical reformers.
When Simon pressed and won his claim for an assistant inspector to supervise the national vaccination scheme in 1871, the current permanent secretary, Ralph Lingen, issued a general warning in the accompanying minute: ‘I do not know who is to check the assertion of experts when the government has once undertaken a class of duties which none but such persons understand.’
Lingen typified the new breed of generalist civil servant.
Arts-based and classically trained, he was convinced that professional experts of Simon's calibre did not conform to the new conception of the broad-based administrator.
For Lingen, state medics represented a clear political force in their right, rather than the steady, methodical cadre of intellectuals envisaged by the Northcote-Trevelyan reforms of the 1850s.
With the growing crystallization of powers within the state from the 1860s, the reform of the civil service and the abandonment of political appointments, Simon's cunning politicking now seemed out of place.
Further, the growth of a discourse of formal political representation and its implementation in the 1867 Reform Act, made politicians uneasy about the political power wielded by civil servants, especially when they operated as statesmen in disguise.
The rise of the purity movement in the 1880s needs to be seen in relation to these medical defeats, for state medicine had lost the initiative not only in the field of sexual regulation but in many other areas of social intervention.
Under Simon's successors the medical officership was a much more limited project than previously.
Certainly there was no attempt to resurrect the grandiose principles of sexual and sanitary hygiene.
On the issue of central health policy the annual medical reports from the Local Government Board were muted in the extreme.
Apart from the important field of theoretical research into the causes and treatment of epidemic disease, the influence of the department was severely curtailed.
According to Sir George Buchanan, Medical Officer between 1879 and 1892, the current conception of state medicine was but a pale shadow of what it once was.
In the closing decades of the nineteenth century it was moralists and feminists who set the pace in the field of sexual politics.
Their campaigns for legal enforcement were backed by a powerful language which identified whole new technologies of sex and forged them into a popular crusade for reform.
This broad coalition of forces was central to the enactment of criminal law legislation; organizing, investigating, petitioning the state to act.
Government itself was rarely the active initiator in the move to criminalize immorality.
Hence we now move substantially away from the state and its experts to examine these voluntary movements and popular struggles.
3 PURITY AND SCIENCE
The language of purity demonstrates how popular scientific concepts were re-worked to advance a new moralized discourse on sex.
It also shows how far state medicine had been checked over sexual regulation.
Purity campaigners were not adverse to drawing on science but for them it was a tool to validate  morality.
True scientific investigation always revealed the workings of divine law, and the medical profession needed to be kept under constant surveillance, because their narrow commitment to materialistic principles overlooked moral considerations.
With the experience of the Contagious Diseases Acts in mind, Ellice Hopkins tartly remarked there were ‘one or two things which the medical profession has yet to grow out of under the influence of an enlightened public opinion’.
Elizabeth Blackwell's career both as a purist and a medic displayed the new approach to ‘Christian physiology’.
Blackwell was the first woman doctor, graduating in New York in 1849 and later opening a dispensary on New York's lower east-side.
Her origins were similar to those of many leading figures in the repeal movement.
She came from a prominent Bristol family of nonconformists and industrialists, where her father had long been active in the abolitionist movement.
Broadly committed to Kingsley's brand of Christian socialism, she established the National Health Society in London in 1871, aimed at improving the health of the working classes.
In her writings and lectures Blackwell demonstrated a firm belief in the intimate connection between physical and moral health, addressing women on domestic hygiene and on the relation between health and religion.24 Her book The Human Element in Sex, 1884 was adamant that medicine could not become an end in itself but needed to discover the workings of moral law.
Sex morality was the area par excellence where medics had to be governed by religious responsibility.
This moral appropriation of scientific discourse was common in the 1870s and 1880s.
Darwinism had initially shaken the deistic foundations of contemporary science, fuelling the avowed agnosticism and sense of spiritual crisis experienced by a generation of mid-Victorian intellectuals.
Many moralists responded to the challenge less by denying evolutionism than by arguing that the new biological theories could be integrated with older moral concerns.
In 1872 the Catholic Archbishop Cardinal Manning announced that the majority of clerics now believed that there was nothing incompatible between evolutionary science and their own theological system.
Darwin's own Descent of Man, published the previous year, also marshalled evidence to show how the growth of moral faculties like  self-control, love and altruism were key elements in progressing towards a higher moral culture.
Purity workers developed their own re-reading of the Darwinist debate, though they placed less stress on integrating the two systems and more on the subordination of science to the dictates of morality.
Mothers were to use stories drawn from plant and animal life to instruct children both about the reproductive cycle and the evolutionary progress from lower organisms up to man.
All this was presided over by an all-seeing God.
For though evolution taught that the human race was linked to plants and animals, it also demonstrated that man was separate from other species: ‘a spiritual being, incarnate in an animal body’.
According to Blackwell, morality involved the evolution of self-consciousness which had developed only in the human species.
The moral faculty needed to govern the sexual instinct, organizing it on ‘broad, well-marked mental foundations’ .30 Chastity, continence and self-control were the highest forms of sexual development because they were regulated by reason and a knowledge of the providential laws of human nature.
Yet evolutionary science also pointed to the precariousness of moral progress-how it could so easily slip back into animal chaos.
This was the human dilemma.
In their efforts to curb immorality purists carefully distanced themselves from a world view totally determined by heredity.
They were at pains to prove that moral or immoral development was not fixed or inevitable, for all the evolutionary stress on inherited characteristics.
The link between sex and morality needed to be cultivated and worked at, using every resource of civilization.
Animal passion could be refined to become part of the higher stages of evolution, or it could deteriorate into moral evil:
Sex is capable of great devotion towards good or towards evil…
It may grow into a noble sympathy, self-sacrifice…and joy…
It also allows that perversion and extreme degradation of sex observable in the human race.
Religion coupled with morality could ‘alter the evil conditions’ and ‘cut into the chain which is otherwise endless and circular’.
Such insistences provided one important rationale  for the criminal law approach to sexual reform.
Criminalizing legislation was not simply repressive , it was in Coote's phrase ‘positively educative and improving’.
4 PURITY AND POPULISM
Purity was a self-consciously popular movement in a way that even the repeal campaign had not been.
This was evident not only in its mass organization, but also in the efforts to address working-class audiences and write them into the discourse of moral reform.
In that sense purity marks a distinctive break with the earlier sanitary approach to sexual regulation which had been dominated by the elite voice of professional experts.
It needs to be seen as part of the renewed offensive launched by militant evangelicalism in the 1880s, which influenced a whole range of single issue campaigns and brought pressure to bear on the Liberal Party hierarchy.
A loose network of campaigning groups formed the base of the new purity movement, with large-scale meetings and the mass publication of tracts and pamphlets.
Speeches were often followed by the distribution of membership or pledge cards, when audiences were encouraged to declare their personal adherence to the rules of the movement.
Dramatic cases of moral conversion and last-minute rescues from the brink of hell-fire were a particular favourite.
In practice, teaching the working-class to understand moral law usually meant an Old Testament affirmation of the preordained retribution which followed in the wake of sinfulness.
Masturbation was most often used to demonstrate how the transgression of divine law inevitably brought down the wrath of God: ‘For he that soweth his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption.’
While the working-class was the principal target for purists' interventionary zeal they also provided rank-and-file recruits for the new movement.
Some organizations laid primary stress on preventive work and moral re-education, especially among working-class girls: for example the Anglican-run Girls' Friendly Society, founded in 1874, Ellice Hopkins' Ladies' Association for the Care of Friendless Girls, 1876, and the Band of Hope Mission, 1879.
Other groups, like the Boys'  League of Honour and the Church Lads' Brigade, addressed the leisure activities of working-class boys, setting up night schools and organizing sport and mutual improvement societies to counter the idleness which was the first step towards dissipation and self-abuse.
Lady visitors were also co-opted in campaigns designed to instruct working-class mothers on practical morality m the home, supervising children's play and paying careful attention to the bathing and sleeping arrangements of sons and daughters.
The populism of the movement foregrounded a specific ideology of nationalism and national culture.
Demands for the purification of national life were matters of importance which stood above class differences and the petty divisions of party politics.
Practically, purity usually worked by forging alliances between sections of the evangelical middle-class, the petty-bourgeoisie and the respectable working-class against the aristocracy.
Attacks on the immorality and decadence of aristocratic culture were the staple diet of purity tracts and speeches.
They focused popular discontent over the double-standard and the complicity of aristocratic men in child prostitution.
The movement also played off representations of English morality against the decadence of foreign habits.
The French were a favourite target, and the new popular press was instrumental in crystallizing xenophobic imagery.
When Henry Vizetelly was prosecuted in 1888 under the obscenity laws for publishing an English translation of Zola's novel La Terre, purists seized the opportunity to mount a sustained assault on the morally pernicious influence of French culture.
Complaints in The Standard pointed to the rising tide of juvenile depravity caused by the availability of cheap editions of continental literature.
The Oscar Wilde trials of 1895 condensed representations both of aristocratic debauchery and the corrupting effects of foreign morals.
Wilde, depicted as the leader of the aesthetic movement, with its unnatural taste for the sensual and the erotic, was pilloried in court as a foreign parasite.
He was seen to be attacking the moral, manly roots of English public life with the aid of effeminate, aristocratic tastes.
The Evening News summed up the affair by calling for greater public vigilance to root out the canker of immorality: ‘England has  tolerated the man Wilde for too long…he was a social pest, a centre of intellectual corruption…who attacked all wholesome, manly, simple ideals of English life.’
These new codes of popular journalism, investigative expose combined with sensationalist melodrama, were part of the repertoire of purity campaigns.
Stead's crusade against child harlotry or the press onslaught on Wilde were designed to fuel outrage and orchestrate the demand for moral action.
But their injunctions did not simply denounce immorality.
Purity language was transformed through these journalistic codes to produce highly wrought sexual imagery.
Rituals of transgression, sensationalist violation and titillating naughtiness became the stock-in-trade of popular news reporting in the late nineteenth century.
The success of this language itself needs to be read in the context of purity's growing hegemony.
5 SPEAKING OUT
In all areas of intervention the first step for purists was to speak out about sex.
The aim was to confront the conspiracy of silence and shame which surrounded the subject and create a climate where immorality could be tackled seriously.
Caution and silence were contrary to God's law.
They were dangerous and hypocritical, providing a fertile breeding-ground for evil.
Here purists were deliberately challenging official arguments which opposed fresh legislation or greater public discussion on the grounds that this would only draw attention to sex and incite immorality.
In the debates over proposed changes to the criminal law, politicians continued to argue that to speak about sex was to corrupt.
In 1903 the Earl of Halsbury, Lord Chancellor, wrecked legislation criminalizing incest with such arguments.
In contrast, social purists argued that to speak out was vital.
Ignorance was to play into the hands of the enemy; knowledge through education was power:
It is argued that to speak out on this subject is only to suggest the very evil you want to cure, and to do more harm than good…
Let us recognize once and for all that the modest silence…has landed England in child harlotry.
Enforced silence was no guarantee of innocence or security.
To classify and measure the extent of immorality — to quite literally put it into discourse — was central to getting the problem under control.
The quest for greater knowledge was underpinned by a highly gender-specific discourse on sexuality.
Politically this was informed by the demands coming from women's organizations and intellectually by the moralized language of evolutionary science.
Images of male sexuality twinned evangelical concepts of the struggle between flesh and spirit with an evolutionary stress on the lower and higher impulses of human nature.
Campaigners launched a direct offensive against contemporary medical theories which talked of the inevitability of the male sexual urge, arguing that they failed to take proper account of Darwinist insights.
Man's nature was two-sided, only half of it led to wrong-doing, the other half prohibited sin.
Purists conceived of masculinity as a never-ending battle, requiring constant watchfulness and careful supervision.
The dramatic conflict between good and evil either brought out heroic qualities in boys, or it exposed those who were cowardly and unmanly.
In an end-of-term address at Clifton College, Bristol, the Rev. J.M. Wilson presented his students with a dramatic choice: ‘It has to be settled whether you are to be your own master or slave; whether your body shall be kept under, and you will be strong enough to rule it; or whether your body shall be the target.’
Muscular Christianity was the hoped-for goal, with self-control to be attained through strict mental and physical discipline.
The Purity Alliance's rules for daily life advocated cold baths, regular vigorous exercise, moderation in eating and drinking, as well as prayer to guard against moral evil.
Those men leading the movement, like Alfred Dyer and Wilson, projected a chivalric vision of masculinity which championed the ideal of asexual, dependent womanhood.
Boys were to be taught their knightly duty to serve their mothers and sisters.
Many purity leagues drew on emblems from the legends of Christian chivalry, appealing to men and boys by a play on protective and gallant manhood.
In the emblem of The White Cross League, founded in 1883, white stood for purity, the  league for disciplined strength and the cross for the underlying truth of the fight for Christ.
The language of purity opened a space for women to define their own images of female sexual identity.
Speaking out enabled female purity workers to project a vision of moral femininity, which, though problematic, did address the hopes and aspirations of many women.
They pressed for a particular re-reading of Darwin to add weight to the older evangelical claim that women had a rightful place in regulating sex.
For Hopkins, as for Blackwell, women's moral power lay in their capacity to harness and control male sexual energy by drawing out the spiritual impulses of human nature.
This was guaranteed by women's reproductive role, which put them in contact with the great physical and mental powers of the race.
Blackwell glossed reproduction in a highly original way, fusing it with claims for an active female sexuality.
Countering medical assertions that sex passion was absent from most normal women, she pointed out that because of reproduction the physical aspect of sex weighed more heavily on them than on men:
Physical sex is a larger factor in the life of the woman, married or unmarried, than in the life of the man…
Those who deny sexual feeling to women…quite lose sight of…(the) immense spiritual force of attraction which exists in so very large a proportion in their nature.
Blackwell insisted that biological reproduction actively contributed to women's higher spiritual self, in contrast to many medics and evolutionary biologists who saw women as closer to nature because of their ‘animal’ function.
In her view, it was bourgeois women who were most oppressed by social definitions of female purity.
Taught to believe that sex was shameful, they were denied the spiritual experience of sex passion which involved the transfiguration of the lower by the higher elements.
Blackwell's radical ideas point to the tentative beginnings of a discourse on active female sexuality.
As recent research is beginning to uncover, the 1880s witnessed the beginnings of a questioning of current forms of sexual morality from feminist intellectuals — a move which was stimulated by the various public sexual scandals of the decade.
Blackwell herself discussed her ideas at the Men and Women's Club, a progressive middle-class coterie whose membership included Olive Schreiner and the social purist Maria Sharpe.
For these women, speaking out often led to a wider debate on sexuality and gender.
But for the majority it was purity which provided the language both to challenge men's immorality and to stake out their own claim to speak about sex.
6 FEMINISM AND SOCIAL PURITY
In the years from the repeal campaign to the suffrage movement women's struggles were a major force in sexual politics.
Women's organizations and feminist leaders emerged as a powerful pressure group whose influence was felt by male politicians and professionals at the level of the state and in public debate.
by no means all purists identified with feminism, but the rapid growth of the women's movement in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century cannot be understood without reference to the purity crusades, which drew thousands of women into the political arena for the first time.
All this marked a significant break with the earlier history of medico-moral politics.
Women were empowered to speak about sex, challenging the authority of the experts and drawing attention to their gendered power relations.
Yet as the tensions inherent in the repeal movement have already shown, this feminist discourse was itself caught in hierarchies of power around sex, retaining strong links with the environmentalist regime of social disciplining.
Such contradictions were highlighted in women's growing demands for more coercive criminal law legislation.
In the 1880s and 1890s women like Blackwell, Hopkins, Laura Ormiston-Chant, Millicent Fawcett and Mrs Bramwell Booth argued that the law was central to implementing feminist demands.
Their protests gained renewed impetus in the suffrage struggles immediately before the First War.
They were focused on a massive campaign against the double-standard and its enshrinement in law.
The immediate contrast with earlier feminist sexual politics could not have been sharper.
For  behind the new purity feminism lay the legacy of anti-statist struggle against the Contagious Diseases Acts.
As we have seen, repeal feminists had not been opposed to moral disciplining but they had promoted it through the more ‘feminine’ domain of voluntary agencies, attacking the statist solutions of male professionals.
Despite this a number of prominent women repealers, among them Butler herself, sat on the first executive council of the NVA and gave support to coercive state legislation.
Admittedly, after the initial euphoria following the passing of the 1885 act, some like Butler began to distance themselves from the purity movement.
Nevertheless, many feminists did throw themselves wholeheartedly into the purity campaigns.
The political and historical problem is how to understand that involvement.
Recent social and feminist historians who have considered the question have bid for explanation on the back of contemporary allegiances.
This moment in the history of sexual politics is fast becoming a battleground for voicing current debates and disagreements.
Edward Bristow and Jeffrey Weeks fail to see anything specifically feminist in the purity crusades.
For Weeks, the purity movement was only significant as a moment of moral panic over sex, condensing wider social and political anxieties.
Judith Walkowitz, on the other hand, acknowledges that the latter stages of the repeal struggle were marked by dramatic contradictions within feminist sexual politics.
Tensions submerged in the earlier campaign now came to the fore and led more and more to a coercive policy of sexual regulation, especially of working-class prostitutes.
By contrast Sheila Jeffreys' recent account, informed by the politics of revolutionary feminism, stresses that social purity was a landmark in the offensive against male sexuality and downplays the contradictions intrinsic to the movement.
What needs re-affirming, and re-examining, is the complex inter-relation between moral languages and the history of nineteenth-century feminism.
As we now know, the discourses of practical religion and philanthropy provided women with a means of representation into the male-defined world of public political debate.
They also enabled women to challenge male professional power while at the same time implicating them in coercive class regulation .
To write the history of late  nineteenth-century feminist sexual politics as a ‘seduction’ by the conservative purity movement, is to ignore this much longer, contradictory history of women's participation in social reform.
These tensions were graphically illustrated in the career of Ellice Hopkins.
7 ELLICE HOPKINS
In February 1883 Ellice Hopkins addressed a mass meeting of working men at the mining village of Bishop Auckland, on the invitation of the Bishop of Durham.
After prayers and a stirring speech, purity pledge cards were distributed among the men, listing rules for personal conduct:
1
To treat all women with respect, and endeavour to protect them from wrong and degradation.
2
To use every possible means to fulfil the command, ‘keep THYSELF pure.’
3
To endeavour to put down all indecent language and coarse jests.
4
To maintain the law of purity as equally binding upon men and women.
5
To endeavour to spread these principles among my companions, and to try and help my younger brothers.
The meeting was an enormous success.
Out of an audience of some three hundred miners and clerks, one hundred and thirty came forward to pledge themselves for purity.
Ellice Hopkins was a central figure in the feminist agitation for criminal law regulation in the 1880s.
She was an ‘organic intellectual’ of the new purity movement.
Her rise to prominence was the culmination of a career which combined a feminist commitment to challenging male sexual behaviour, with traditional beliefs in moralizing philanthropy directed at the poor.
The daughter of a distinguished Cambridge mathematics tutor, she began work as a Sunday school teacher in the 1850s.
In 1860 she turned her attention to the condition of male agricultural workers in the village of Barnwell, near Cambridge.
Through her efforts a mission hall was built, where she started to lecture on moral purity.
Hopkins always maintained that work with men was her favourite form of campaigning.
It posed  a challenge both to her religious motivation and her feminist principles.
In An Englishwoman ‘s Work among Workingmen, 1875 she recounted how the dramatic language of evangelical religion enabled her to press her case:
But how did I try to get this influence over working men?
I will try and reply in some detail.
In the first place, it was quite useless to preach ready made doctrine to them.
My first effort, therefore, was to get them to believe in moral law…
And little by little they came to see the great Christian doctrine that eternal sin must be, in the very nature of things, eternal punishment or eternal misery.
As a populist Hopkins was well aware of the problems facing middle-class reformers in the dialogue with working-class audiences.
She warned fellow women workers that it was useless to address workingmen with ‘plain commonplaces’; what was needed was vivid and dramatic language: ‘the men want strong meat, thoughts as racy as their own expressions; they reject sweet pap fit for children.’
Evangelical religion furnished Hopkins with a powerful rhetoric to arouse mass meetings and personally motivated her to embark on a public career exposing immorality.
She represented it quite literally as a call to God's service.
On the death of her father in 1866 she suffered physical and mental breakdown, confiding in a letter that it was her religion that held her up.
While recuperating in Brighton she plunged into work at the Albion Hill Rescue Home.
The job was not easy, and the girls themselves were resistant to her crusading philanthropy.
Hopkins saw the need for a revival of the personalized approach to rescue work.
Rather than organizing mass midnight meetings to confront the evil in working-class areas she judged it more effective for women to go into the ‘dens of infamy’ in the morning as friends and advisers.
Her efforts sometimes backfired, when she was confronted by a robust culture from the prostitutes themselves.
Her own power and presence as a speaker was perhaps her greatest asset in converting audiences.
Many had testified to Josephine Butler's impact on the rostrum.
Hopkins had an equally clear awareness of the importance of personal presentation  and she worked hard to perfect an appropriate style of public speaking.
‘If anyone supposes’, she wrote, ‘that my power of speaking was a gift that came naturally to me, without any effort on my part, let them once and for all dispossess themselves of any such ideas.
’ Throughout her career she was subject to a range of nervous disorders.
In common with Butler and Florence Nightingale, illness related to the strain experienced by middle-class women who moved into the public sphere.
But these women also employed medical definitions of physical and mental weakness as an effective tactical weapon in the battle with men.
Hopkins used her frailty, her diminutive size and a ‘beautiful speaking voice’ as symbols of the power of female purity.
She counselled other women to do the same: ‘You can make your womanhood a sort of external conscience to them.
You can appeal to them never to say or do things which they would be ashamed for you to know.’
All this was done in the face of considerable hostility from her male audiences.
On one occasion in the early 1880s she was persuaded to address male students at Edinburgh University medical school.
It seems that medics have not changed much over a hundred years.
She recalled that many eminent men had declined to give the address because of the expected barracking.
Hopkins tamed the students with a characteristic blend of religious fervour and moral conviction:
Spirit and flesh both quailed before so difficult and rowdy an audience on so difficult and perilous a subject…as I sat in the committee room while the order of the meeting was being arranged, and heard my audience shouting, singing, crowing like cocks…and keeping up a continuous uproar, I thought to myself, ‘I have got to go into that and control it somehow so as to be heard’…
The only thing was to push me at once to the front; and almost immediately, after a very few brief words from the distinguished chairman, I found myself face to face with an audience that evidently meant mischief.
By some instinct I told them…about the lost and degraded womanhood of England, the hosts of young girls slain in body and soul…met with at night in our terrible streets.
This seemed to strike and sober them…a thing which to all of them was  so familiar, and to many had been only the subject of coarse jest.
They listened to me with profound attention, and I could see that my words went home.
It was not only the antagonism of male audiences that Hopkins was up against.
The opposition her public career provoked — as a single woman speaking about sexuality — showed that despite the gains made by repeal feminism, women still risked censure and social ostracization when they crossed the boundaries from the private to the public sphere.
Hopkins was clear about the dual strategy of the new purity movement.
It needed to focus on the reform of male sexuality and the improvement of working-class morals.
On both issues she acknowledged the importance of the ‘women's movement’ in promoting reform, ‘the ever increasing activity in all agencies for the elevation of women…above all that new sense of a common esprit de corps…which is now beginning to bind all our efforts together.’
For Hopkins as for Blackwell, feminism centrally meant bringing the private sphere of bourgeois womanhood to bear on the public world of social and moral problems.
Here again is the connection between feminism and the philanthropic tradition.
Women were the ‘conscience of the world’, social reform concerned women because it touched on ‘all the great trusts of womanhood, the sanctity of the family, the purity of marriage, the sacredness of marriage, the sweet innocence of children’.
Both argued that women needed to play a decisive role in public debate over the nation's morals, precisely because it was women who were centrally concerned with sexuality.
Hopkins was militant and uncompromising about the source of moral evil.
Male sexuality was the fundamental problem.
Prostitution was the direct result of men's immorality, creating an outcast class of women tacitly sanctioned by church and state.
Along with many women in the purity movement Hopkins increasingly looked to the criminal law to enact feminist demands.
This is the key to understanding purity feminists' commitment to coercive legislation in the 1880s.
The law could be used to ‘protect’ women and children, to educate men into self-control and chastity, and to reform working-class morals.
Looking back on these campaigns at the end of her life, she  defined the law as the chief agency for enacting God's work and for abolishing the double-standard, which menaced the young and ultimately contributed to the disintegration of the state.
Men's immorality not only threatened the stability of the family but in the end posed a danger to the foundations of good government.
It was imperative that the state should intervene to preserve the higher life of the nation:
When shall we learn that whoever touches the higher life and well-being of the family still more vitally affects the wider family of the State, and threatens its disintegration…the State as an organized polity, capable of embodying, preserving and promoting the higher life of the nation.
In forging this connection between familial morality and the strength of the nation state, Hopkins was drawing on a long-established tradition of moral philosophy dating at least as far back as the late eighteenth century.
But the idea that the ethical state had an obligation to protect the weak, to promote actively moral conduct and encourage human evolution was specific to the late nineteenth century.
Purity ideas here resembled philosophic conceptions of the ethical and organic state outlined by T.H. Green, and slightly later by theorists like J.A.
Hobson and L.T. Hobhouse.
For these new liberal thinkers, society was viewed as a biological organism, with state intervention designed to promote healthy functioning of the body politic as an integrated totality.
However, in Hopkins' case the aim of reforming intervention remained the overt regulation of working-class behaviour, especially of working-class women.
She stressed that middle-class ladies needed to unite with their poorer sisters if men's immorality was to be effectively challenged.
‘Feminism’ had to be a movement which cut across class barriers.
But the dialogue purists envisaged between women of different classes was still the traditional bond of philanthropy, which linked the middle-class ‘donor’ to her working-class recipient through notions of moral and material charity.
Hopkins appealed to working women in the name of ‘the common dignity…of our womanhood’, but moral responsibility was often seen to be precisely what these women lacked and what middle-class women could  give.
Contradictions such as these were glaringly apparent in her pleas to working women:
be sure of this…no one class can fight this evil alone.
We must all combine together.
And if I speak a bit plain…just think of me as the woman who gave up everything to save you girls from their worst dangers Dear sisters there is not one of us ladies…who won't tell you that we have learnt our most precious lessons of faith…and patience, and self-sacrifice and contentedness under trials from you.
But on the other hand, our large houses, our separate bedrooms, our greater education, make us…more particular in our ways than you — make us feel the importance of little things, little decent ways, little safeguards, and the little constant watchfulnesses in bringing up our children, which the terrible struggle for existence and the pressure of space but too often make you forget and grow careless about.
Many of the women's purity associations were shot through with similar class divisions.
Purists could be utterly ruthless about the menace working-class immorality posed to the middle-class home.
Hopkins advised against sending reclaimed prostitutes into domestic service because of the danger to middle-class sons: ‘better a thousand times that this fearful social evil should be localized in certain spots, which we call dens, than by our hasty and injudicious benevolence it should be struck into the very bosom of our families.’
Middle-class ladies needed to vet prospective female servants; they could so easily be morally defective.
Purity workers believed they had an obligation to reclaim their ‘fallen’ sisters, but the problem of prostitution was always tackled by a mixture of benevolent charity and coercive threat.
These disciplinary aspects of Hopkins' work had already become apparent in the later stages of the repeal struggle.
They were particularly visible in the campaigns over the Industrial Schools Amendment Bill.
In 1879 she visited repealers in Plymouth to canvass support for the new bill, which proposed that the courts should remove children living in the society of depraved and disorderly persons and place them in industrial  schools.
The measures became law the following year.
They were explicitly aimed at the unrespectable poor, subjecting their children to the full disciplinary regime of the new training schools.
The Vigilance Association for the Defence of Personal Rights, a radical anti-statist grouping whose members included some repealers, launched a counter-attack against the new act, complaining that: ‘Miss Hopkins…is at present…crying for the wholesale kidnapping of little girls who may not have perfect domestic surroundings and their consignment to large prison schools.’
But Ellice went a stage further; she began to construct alliances with regulationists-especially with the local police chief, Inspector Aniss, bête noir of the repealers — who warmed to her clear message of rescue backed by greater control of the streets.
Declaring that the local rescue home was far too laxly run, she demanded a stricter system of surveillance.
The repeal movement's national leadership, alarmed about Hopkins' activities, wrote warning her against any collusion with the enemy.’
At other moments Hopkins, along with many purity feminists, displayed a real awareness of the class contradictions embedded in the new movement.
A Special Report of the Girls' Friendly Society in 1879 pointed out that middle-class women tended ‘to over regulate those women whom we would serve’, because they were ignorant of working-class life.
Hopkins understood that purity workers needed greater self-awareness of the class power they wielded.
Sometimes this consciousness developed into a critique of middle-class morality and economic exploitation.
The home happiness, refinement and sheltered grace of middle-class women, she insisted, was bought at the price of other women's toil and suffering.
Girls from the upper classes were brought up to believe ‘that they were born with a prescriptive right to their social advantages, their graceful culture’ Hopkins stands very much as representative of the new-style purity feminist.
Her biography displays many of the class and gender contradictions which bedevilled women's participation in the purity campaigns of the 1880s.
These ambiguities were not merely the result of unfortunate political alliances but of the much longer history of middle-class women's involvement in the field of social regulation.
Once again it points to the power  of particular historical languages in constructing individuals and shaping their political demands.
The moral discourses of purity feminism were neither a reactionary barrier to feminist progress nor were they the simple expression of militant feminist consciousness.
They were the battleground on which conflicting aims and intentions struggled for space.
8 PURITY, FEMINISM AND THE RELUCTANT STATE
The tensions in the purity feminist position, and the government's own difficulties in coming to terms with the new movement, surfaced in the debates surrounding the 1885 Criminal Law Amendment Bill.
The proposed legislation appeared to mark a stronger move towards direct state regulation of sexuality.
But the struggles over the bill bring to the fore much more general questions about how we understand state intervention.
They point to the dangers of seeing official action in a unified or monolithic way.
The state's approach here fragmented into a number of competing positions: parliamentary and cabinet debate, ministerial and administrative directives, government inquiries and reports.
Further, the decision to implement criminal law legislation did not originate with the state in the narrow sense at all, but with purity and feminist groups who were increasingly taking the lead in sexual politics.
The call for fresh legislation was stimulated by the perceived growth in child prostitution and the traffic in girls to the continent — the so-called ‘white slave trade’ of Stead's Pall Mall Gazette revelations.
During 1879 and 1880 Alfred Dyer and George Gillet paid several visits to Brussels as representatives of the Society of Friends.
Their investigations exposed a well established trade in English girls, who, Dyer maintained, were being held in tolerated houses in the city.
Great publicity was given to their allegations in the British press, with demands for government action.
Josephine Butler, together with Stead and Henry Wilson, set up the London Committee for Suppressing the Traffic in British Girls.
Butler herself presented a memorial to the Foreign Secretary, signed by a thousand women and  calling for changes in the law, so that‘it should be impossible for any young girl to be deprived of her liberty by fraud or force’.
The government found itself in a difficult diplomatic position, given the fierce denial of the allegations by the Belgian authorities.
Rather than intervening directly, the Home Office appointed an independent commissioner, whose report vindicated Dyer's accusations.
A series of prosecutions took place and a number of Belgian officials were dismissed or resigned.
In the face of mounting pressure the British government at last sensed it was incumbent on them to act.
Instead of introducing immediate legislation, the Home Office responded with time-honoured delaying tactics.
It set up a House of Lords Select Committee in 1881 to examine the extent of juvenile prostitution.
The recommendations advocated widespread changes in the criminal law.
They proposed raising the age of consent from thirteen to sixteen and extending the provisions of the Industrial Schools Amendment Act.
Most controversially, they recommended stronger police powers to search and arrest brothel-keepers and make soliciting on the streets illegal.
Political pressure for these latter proposals came from the police themselves, who now formed a strong lobby for increased state regulation.
Superintendent Dunlap of the Metropolitan Police and Inspector Arnold of Whitechapel Division argued a convincing case before the Lords' Committee on the advantages of greater state powers.
More stringent legislation, they claimed, would lead to improved morality and decency on the streets and bring benefits to public order.
They also stressed that prosecutions should be taken up by a state prosecutor, rather than left to the ineffective parish vestry committees
At the same time women's purity organizations made their move, petitioning the Home Office for a new bill.
In February 1884 Sir Vernon Harcourt, Liberal Home Secretary, received petitions from Bath Preventive Mission and Ladies' Association for the Care of Friendless Girls, calling for immediate legislation raising the age of consent to eighteen and giving the police greater powers.
In April the London Women's Christian Association appealed directly to Gladstone for better laws to protect children and young girls.
The Home Office response was cautious.
It made public declarations supporting the work done by purity groups, insisting  that child prostitution was one of the burning issues of the day.
But in private the department held deep reservations about the benefits of fresh legislation and about its purity protagonists.
In January 1883 Henry Thring, the Attorney-General, drew up a draft bill which incorporated the main recommendations of the Lords' Committee.
The bill was introduced by Lord Rosebery, Under-Secretary of State at the Home Office.
But despite apparent government support a number of ministers objected and the proposals made little headway.
Ministers' main worry was the issue of greater police powers, and with it the question of increased state involvement in regulating sexuality.
Lord Hartington, the War Secretary, initially welcomed the proposals as filling the gap created by the recent suspension of the contagious diseases legislation.
He was sure that the clauses extending police action would have a beneficial effect on national morality.
But Hartington soon became alarmed at the plans to give increased powers to what he termed ‘fanatical local authorities’, and he wrote to Rosebery asking him to withdraw support for the measures.
Like a number of other senior ministers he was ambiguous about purity campaigners.
The discourse of feminists and evangelicals cut against official Home Office ideology, with its deeply embedded male attitudes towards immorality and its implicit stance of toleration.
Hartington confided that he did not really believe that prostitution could ever be eliminated.
Fresh legislation would only drive it into some more objectionable form.
Similarly, the Town Clerk of Hereford, in a letter to the Home Office, claimed that the bill actively discriminated against men by ignoring the innate immorality of many women and girls.
Outside the state apparatuses public opinion was becoming increasingly polarized over the contentious issue of greater state powers.
Opposition from the Vigilance Association for the Defence of Personal Rights and from parliamentary Liberals and trade-union leaders focused on the growing threat to personal liberty.
They saw the bill as part of the renewed offensive against the poor, following in the wake of the Contagious Diseases Acts.
The repealer James Stuart wrote to Samuel Smith the purity MP complaining that the bill had ‘far too much of the police in it’.
Opponents alleged that police powers had dangerously expanded in recent years while police  accountability had diminished.
As ever, their remedy for immorality was not a centralized state system of surveillance but a co-ordinated network of voluntary efforts directed towards moral education and rescue work.
The purity movement was itself divided over the new proposals.
There were those like Hopkins who saw legislation as a growing sign of the improved moral climate in the country and its changing attitude towards women.
Others, including Stead, attacked the bill for increasing the arbitrary power of the police on the streets.
He believed that public outrage about the prostitution trade could be far more usefully channelled into forming local vigilante groups, as residents in the St Jude's Parish of King's Cross had done.
The sticking point for purists was over the balance to be struck between state power and voluntary efforts.
Many of them supported the move to recruit the law into their plans for moral reform, but they did not wish to see their own efforts displaced by police powers.
Anna Wilkes, who ran a rescue home in Poplar, outlined a form of regulation in which purity workers shared responsibility with the police and the courts, preserving the delicate balance between voluntary bodies and state institutions.
It was this solution which was incorporated into the working of the 1885 act in its final form, when the new Conservative government dropped the contentious clauses extending police powers of search and arrest.
What became enshrined in the new legislation were more stringent penalties for brothel-keepers and the raising of the age of consent to sixteen.
Along with these measures went the catch-all clause, introduced at the last moment by the Liberal MP Henry Labouchère outlawing all forms of male homosexual contact.
General responses were mixed.
The Times, which had hitherto kept a dignified silence on such a distasteful subject, pronounced itself well-pleased with the modified outcome.
But successive editorials warned against ‘trusting in showy mechanical remedies’ to the exclusion of examining the deeper causes of juvenile misery and vice.
Jubilant reaction from the purity camp showed just how central legislation had now become to their programme.
When the Salvation Army met on 18 August to hold a thanksgiving service for the passing of the act, William Booth emphasized that the connection between legislation and  morality was the keynote of victory.
Mrs Booth closed the meeting by announcing that as soon as sufficient numbers of rescue homes had been opened, female ‘soldiers’ in the army would make a series of daring raids on London's streets to rescue as many fallen women as they could.
9 THE COMPROMISE SOLUTION
In the early years after 1885 purity groups received little or no help from the state in implementing the new act.
It soon became disappointingly clear to the NVA that what had been conceived as a two-way process between voluntary bodies and the state, in practice placed the burden of day-to-day regulation on private initiatives.
A number of factors influenced this highly cautious approach by central government, local councils, the police and the courts.
Some arose from the difficulties of practical implementation, others had to do with the longer term history of state involvement in sexuality.
In an immediate sense it was clear that local authorities were ill-equipped to begin the type of prosecutions purity groups were pressing for.
In the months after legislation was passed, the Home Office was inundated with letters from local police chiefs and magistrates demanding clarification on the extent of the new police powers of prosecution.
Police evidence to the Lords' Committee had already shown that parish vestry councils were generally incompetent, badly run and lacked the funds to embark on private prosecutions.
The police themselves did not possess the necessary internal organization to root out specific forms of vice, which often necessitated painstaking investigative work.
It was only late in the 1890s, under pressure from the NVA that New Scotland Yard established a special department to deal with indecent books and pictures.
Until then, police practice involved turning a blind eye to minor breaches of public decency rather than embarking on lengthy prosecutions.
Moreover, as Coote acknowledged, magistrates themselves were initially hostile to the aims and methods of purity groups.
They were loath to convict, especially in cases which seemed to contradict common law.
The difficulties in the working of the new act quickly came to  a head.
In December 1886 the Home Office received a memorial from the Clapham Vigilance Association, complaining that Clapham Common was ‘infested’ with prostitutes of the lowest type and that actual fornication was shamelessly committed on benches close to the public roadway.
Ratepayers who formed this local group grumbled that the police were conspicuous by their absence.
Records show the local constabulary to have been remarkably tolerant towards prostitutes and apparently sensitive to the sexual practices of the poor.
One suspects that police constables had more in common with local popular culture than with evangelical vigilantes.
The superintendent's report asserted that though prostitutes did ply their calling on the common they conducted themselves in an orderly manner, as did large numbers of respectable, well-dressed courting couples who ‘roamed about the place after dark caressing each other’.
As the metropolitan police complained three years later, the whole question of dealing with prostitutes was fraught with problems.
While many citizens clamoured for the removal of public women from the streets, any attempt to introduce a continental system of tolerated areas would be rejected immediately as implicating the state in the immoral recognition of vice.
Under these circumstances it was hardly surprising that the police adopted a laissez-faire policy.
But nervousness and vacillation over direct state intervention was more than just a problem of administration.
The doubts expressed by ministers and Home Office officials in the 1880s were symptomatic of much deeper structural problems.
Central here was the political and ideological legacy of the Contagious Diseases Acts.
Successive Liberal and Conservative governments had lost the battle for the state medical regulation of women, largely as a result of sustained feminist opposition.
Politicians did not relish a repeat performance of the humiliating defeat they had suffered over the suspension and repeal of the acts.
Added to this was the deep suspicion felt by senior ministers, influential judges and lawyers about purists themselves.
As an aristocrat Hartington was not untypical in regarding them as evangelical fanatics who needed restraining.
For Sir Vernon Harcourt the issue was even more clear-cut.
All the great middle-class moral reforms of the age had been achieved at the expense of pleasure  and enjoyment.
The English were in danger of becoming a nation dominated by dullness and decorous solemnity.
Many senior politicians regarded the purity movement as beyond the pale; an unwelcome intrusion of issues and personnel which had no rightful place in the discourse of parliamentary politics.
A number of the purity leaders, like Coote and Alfred Dyer, came from respectable working-class or petty-bourgeois backgrounds.
Their strident moralism jarred with both the measured middle-class radicalism of the repealers and the dominant patrician language of high politics.
The suspicions of establishment politicians were fuelled by the renewed nonconformist assault on the Liberal Party in the 1880s.
Purity MPs like Smith and Wilson mounted a direct challenge to the political and cultural assumptions of men like Hartington and Harcourt.
Wilson himself noted enthusiastically that ‘the backbone of the Party is more and more teetotal in its sympathies’.
When the prominent Liberal Sir Charles Dilke and the Irish nationalist Charles Parnell became involved in divorce scandals, it was Stead and the Methodist leader, Hugh Price-Jones, who were instrumental in politically destroying them.
It was also clear that feminist involvement had much to do with the opposition purity provoked — especially from men within the state apparatuses.
Administrators and politicians had been keen to circumscribe the power of scientific experts like Simon.
But they were alarmed to discover that sanitarians had been displaced by a new force in sexual politics: the militant voice of articulate middle-class women who pointed to men as the root cause of immorality.
For many men within the power bloc this was a direct challenge to their own masculinist culture, rupturing the ideology of separate spheres and the double-standard.
As the women's movement became increasingly central to purity campaigns before the First War, Home Office officials developed a range of tactics to stifle feminist pressure, from diplomatic stone-walling to outright misogyny.
At a different level a key factor affecting the uneasy dialogue between purists and the state was the partial transformation of political discourse itself.
We have already noted the crystallization of parliamentary language working to exclude sexuality in the repeal struggles.
The late nineteenth century witnessed a  heightening of this process.
Focus on the two-party system, the growing strength of the organized working-class and the gradual decline of the big single-issue movements which had been such a central feature of the mid-Victorian political scene were visible signs of this transformation.
The political itself was redefined.
Successive governments from the 1880s hesitated to introduce fresh legislation on immorality partly because the area was seen to lie outside formal politics.
Home Secretaries like Reginald McKenna and Herbert Gladstone consistently refused to pledge their government to support a new criminal law amendment bill in Parliament.
As Coote himself protested, both men were privately committed to legislation but believed they could not involve the government on the issue.
The highly cautious approach to purity demands undercuts any simple notion of more active state intervention over sexuality in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century.
In the fields of economic management, labour relations, political ideologies and educational and welfare programmes the state began to exercise a new and constitutive function in this period.
It redefined the nature of social and political problems and their solutions.
It altered the relation between dominant and dominated groups by creating new apparatuses with different modes of administrative rationality, and drew in key intellectuals and professional experts.
The state was not the originator of all these transformations but it was implicated in them in quite new ways.
Compared with these other fields of intervention, the state itself rarely took the lead in the area of sexuality.
There was no expansion of government departments here; no recruitment of intellectuals into the state apparatuses; no equivalent of H. Llewellyn Smith at the Board of Trade or Sidney and Beatrice Webb on social policy.
The criminal law emerged as more and more significant for sexual regulation before 1914 but the impetus did not come from the state.
Government was a relatively junior and often passive partner in the dialogue with purists and feminists.
Purity groups remained absolutely central to the enactment of legislation.
There was no shift away from these private voluntary initiatives.
Between 1890 and 1910 the dominant strategy of regulation involved a pragmatic compromise between the state and private  organizations.
In the early years the executive committee of the NVA, angry at the tentative approach of the Home Office, police and the courts, decided to initiate prosecutions themselves.
In a test case of 1887 the Home Office ruled that vigilance associations could not recover their costs for prosecutions from government funds.95 Out of the NVA's annual income of two thousand pounds, half was spent on legal work.
Prosecutions concentrated on indecent advertising, the music halls, prostitution and pornography.
Occasionally the NVA's enthusiasm brought members into direct conflict with state agencies, as for example in its campaign against the Rabelais Picture Gallery in the early 1890s.
An exhibition of paintings by the French artist Jules Garnier, illustrating the work of Rabelais, was launched amid a blaze of hot publicity.
The association complained of obscenity and Coote brought his case to the House of Commons in an effort to persuade Sir Richard Webster, the Attorney-General, to take up the prosecution.
Webster's reply demonstrated the government's extreme caution: ‘It is utterly impossible…
We cannot help you.
I am in hearty agreement with you, and privately I am quite prepared to subscribe towards it.
But officially the Government cannot be identified with it.’
The NVA faced similar problems in their efforts to press successive governments to introduce fresh legislation.
As early as 1886 its legal sub-committee had drawn up a whole series of amendments to the criminal law which it wanted to see on the statute book.
These included raising the age of consent to eighteen, abolishing the notorious ‘escape clause’(allowing male defendants in assault cases to claim they believed the girl to be over sixteen), extending the time limit for prosecutions and criminalizing incest and male importuning.
It took until 1922 before all these measures had been passed, under continuing pressure from feminist and purity groups.
In the 1890s purists began to make headway at a local level by persuading the police and the courts to support their programme.
A number of local police chiefs became members of the association, like the Chief Constable of Birmingham and the notorious Inspector Burroughs in Manchester.
A two-way system of regulation began to be established, whereby purity groups either presented information to the police or the police referred cases to purists themselves.
Co-operation of this kind  was most effective in cities with strong nonconformist councils.
In Manchester, Sheffield, Leeds, Liverpool and Cardiff the police and the NVA worked in close contact, closing brothels, prosecuting for obscenity and investigating cases of abduction.
In Liverpool purity became a hot political issue, when purists succeeded in overturning the lax Tory council sympathetic to publicans and brewers.
Incest was another area which pointed up the growing convergence of opinion between purists, women's groups, the police and the Home Office.
The offence was still not covered by any effective punishment under law.
By the early 1890s the NVA had begun to pass on evidence of cases to the Home Office, complaining of the difficulties of prosecuting under existing legislation.
In 1894 the Ladies' National Association, veterans of the repeal movement, mounted a campaign to amend the 1885 act to criminalize incest.
Though no progress was made when Henry Wilson introduced a bill in 1896, there was growing police backing for legislation.
A letter from the NVA to chief constables in 1899 revealed that almost all police chiefs were in favour of a law prohibiting incest.
Opposition came mainly from lawyers and magistrates, protesting that prosecutions would increase the number of offences on account of the publicity.
Pressure for reform was also mounting from women's organizations.
The National Union of Women Workers, NUWW (a philanthropic offshoot of Hopkins' Ladies' Association for the Care of Friendless Girls formed in 1895), launched a fresh assault on the conspiracy of silence over incest at their annual conference in 1906.
When the Incest Act was finally carried in 1908, purity feminists claimed it as a personal triumph.
But it was prostitution which continued to be the major preoccupation for purity workers at a local level.
In 1901 many of the newly organized London borough councils appointed their own officials to monitor the trade and liaise with purists.
The increased closure of brothels as a result of this drive forced poorer women to solicit in the open, where they were subjected to police harassment.
In 1905 the number of women charged with public indecency rose dramatically.
This problem was examined in the 1908 Royal Commission on the Metropolitan Police.
Allegations by prostitutes of police bribery and unjust  and arbitrary exercise of powers of arrest were discounted in favour of evidence from purity workers.
Coote, along with other campaigners, backed the new aggressive police action, testifying to the special relationship which now existed between purists and the police.
The Rev. F.B. Meyer, minister of Christ Church Westminster , felt that it had been encouraged by the fact that ‘Christian men’ were backing their efforts.
Coote, to his credit, did object to the double-standard enshrined in police practice, and recommended that the existing law should also be used to prosecute male clients.
The royal commission's report countered this by reasserting the fundamental difference between occasional soliciting by a man (‘addressed to a woman who does not resent it’) and the prostitute's immoral business, which was offensive to public decency.
Besides, it was argued, prosecutions against male clients would not be acceptable to the community at large.
Despite this setback Coote pronounced himself well pleased with the state of the streets in the metropolis.
London was now ‘an open-air cathedral’, whereas forty years earlier ‘it was vicious in every particular’.
Coote bothered little about the effects of his work on the prostitutes themselves.
He was much more intent on maintaining public order.
What was needed was more of the same — intensified police action backed by the ever-watchful vigilance of the purity movement.
10 SUFFRAGE AND SEXUALITY: 1908–1914
Sexuality was a major political issue in the suffrage movement.During the years before the First War the history of sexual politics became intimately bound up with the progress of feminism.
Alongside the battle for the vote, women launched a major campaign to transform male sexual behaviour and to protect themselves and their children.
Legislation was seen as the key to securing reforms that were in women's interests.
It was the language of purity which mobilized many women to develop a trenchant critique of male sexuality.
Purity became hegemonic in the early women's movement, though it did not go entirely unchallenged.
Other feminists, often from libertarian  or utopian socialist backgrounds, rejected purity and worked to forge a new discourse, stressing women's right to active sexual pleasure.
The first decade of the twentieth century witnessed the polarization of these positions under the impact of growing political activism.
The purity language of outrage, like the militant tactics of suffragette politics with which it was linked, continued to provide women with a powerful weapon to challenge men.
Feminists perceived that in a world where men and masculinist attitudes had monopolized notions of physical sexual pleasure, purity stress on chastity and the importance of human love provided a positive alternative.
Coupled with this language went a growing stress on the state to enact feminist demands, in the moral as well as the political arena.
Many women saw a clear convergence of interests between their own struggle for the vote and purity pressure for legislation.
There was in fact no clear-cut division between purity associations , suffrage groups and women's organizations — membership often overlapped.
Millicent Fawcett, a moderate suffragist and President of the National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (NUWSS), was also prominent in the NVA as head of its preventive and rescue sub-committee.
Many women in the NUWW also belonged to purity groups.
In the period immediately before the First War, the growing political militancy of the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), along with the publication of feminist books and pamphlets on sexuality, radicalized the older, more traditional women's organizations.
Groups like the British Women's Temperance Association and the NUWW began to define their long standing crusade for purity and the reform of male sexuality as part of the contemporary feminist struggle.
Though the NUWW continued to foreground traditional philanthropy, its annual conferences displayed a growing concern with the problems of male sexual behaviour, informed by current feminist demands.
106 The LNA also became repoliticized under the impact of suffrage politics.
Conference delegates at the 1903 Congress of the International Abolitionist Federation insisted that prostitution needed to be opposed because it isolated women as an outcast class.
It sanctioned the sexualization of women by men, making them ‘a thing, an instrument devoted to appeasing the sexual  passion of the man’.
Here was a new wave of feminist militancy, proclaiming that women had the right to a life of their own and should not be the sexual property of men.
Throughout, the memory of Josephine Butler's early struggles acted as a powerful motivating force.
Following her death in 1906, The Shield produced extracts from Butler's speeches and writings, and in 1912 the NUWSS republished a de-luxe edition of her Personal Reminiscences of a Great Crusade.
The Suffragette proclaimed: ‘the work of this dedicated woman has sown the seeds of a mighty harvest which others are about to reap’
11 MOBILIZING A LANGUAGE
Feminists combined practical demands for criminal law legislation with an effective propaganda campaign.
In books, pamphlets and speeches women drew on and re-worked the languages of purity, religion, medicine and even mysticism to develop a critical feminist discourse.
Representations of female sexuality here were not merely negative, they now offered women positive images of their own autonomy through a stress on celibacy, evolutionary superiority and the power of human love.
The vocabulary of social purity was employed to demonstrate that male immorality was the problem to be addressed , not the norm against which women should be defined.
Religious and biological concepts of moral and natural law were used to argue that chastity and self-control were essential to personal health and to the future progress of the nation.
Feminists were effectively articulating what had been implicit in much of moral purity — an opposition to the idea that the male sexual urge was uncontrollable, and that frequent intercourse was necessary for men's health.
Many feminists insisted that celibacy was a positive step in women's self-advancement.
Evidence exists from the period before the First War to show that some women were choosing not to have sexual relations with men as a political act.
Anti-feminist articles in the press noted with alarm the growing trend towards celibacy in women, attributing ‘spinsterhood’ to degeneracy or an aversion to motherhood.
But as Lucy  Re-Bartlett asserted, chastity was part of women's revolt against false social conditions.
Cicely Hamilton's Marriage as a Trade, 1909 was a superb polemic in favour of celibacy, which reasoned that marriage represented a narrowing of women's hopes and ambitions.
Through the sex act, men secured women's continuing subordination, by cutting off every avenue of escape from the gratification of their desire, and by denying female sexuality any outlet other than compulsory heterosexuality.
Men hated and despised spinsters, Hamilton claimed, because the ‘perpetual virgin' proved that the sex act was not ‘an absolute necessity for women’.
In polemicizing for celibacy and spinsterhood feminists were challenging the growing sexualization of all women in medicine, psychology and in the work of male sexual radicals like Havelock Ellis and Edward Carpenter.
Both Christabel Pankhurst and Hamilton argued that such recent theories were deeply linked to male attitudes, which saw women as ‘primarily created for the sexual gratification of men’.
In the future evolution of society under women's guidance, sex would be raised to a higher plane, where physical passion would be transmuted by the power of human love.
Quasi-religious languages derived from theosophy or mysticism were used to formulate a new spiritualized conception of sex relations, freed from male control.
Frances Swiney, who began writing in the 1880s, published a large number of books and pamphlets on female sexuality.
As president of the Cheltenham branch of the NUWW, she was a prominent lecturer and speaker in the suffrage movement, where her ideas on sexuality were influential.
Her own career was remarkable.
She was brought up in the colonial culture of India and married to a senior military figure.
In her fifties she began developing an elaborate theory-part religious, part mystical — on the natural supremacy of women and the need to return to a matriarchal society.
Her cosmic vision prophesied that as the race evolved intercourse would only be practised for the purpose of reproduction, and then only at carefully spaced intervals under women's direction.
Swiney orchestrated a mass of medical, anthropological and religious material to back her arguments.
The bible was reinterpreted; even Christ, she argued, had spoken of the eventual disappearance of the male  species.
For as women delivered them from the sex obsession, men would become more and more like women.
This was what Christ really meant when he spoke about the unity of the male with the female in one flesh.
These ideas were circulated in her theosophical society, The League of Isis, which listed rules on chastity and continence, aimed at promoting women's higher self.
Many women were interpellated by this religious and mystical imagery, because potentially it projected a spiritualized fusion of sex and love.
Traditions of feminine religious experience, expressing a mystical, quasi-sexual communion with God, had always been a current within Catholicism and in many Protestant sects, and some women drew on its potential.
But religion was now twinned with other languages to define pleasure more positively.
Evolutionary theory, theosophy, even platonic idealism, all played their part.
Bartlett talked extensively of the great evolutionary movement to spirituality through passion: ‘Spirituality is, of course, the great counteracting force and ultimate conqueror.
But spirituality has to be aroused, and passion is often the medium — the conducting channel.’
12 PETITIONING THE STATE
As the suffrage struggle intensified many feminists began to insist that their campaign for citizenship and demands for legislation to curb men's immorality were interlinked.
The vote was perceived as bringing political and moral benefits to women.
Christabel Pankhurst argued that ‘when women are citizens they will have the power to secure the enactment of laws for their protection’.
Militant feminists pointed out that sexual antagonism lay at the heart of the suffrage struggle and could never be resolved within the discourse of political liberalism.
Bartlett, herself closely associated with the WSPU, claimed that sexuality was the underlying issue in the feminist movement:
The public roughly seems divided between people who deny the struggle any sexual significance at all, and those  who, seeing the significance, attribute it to sexual morbidity and hysteria.
The situation with which we are face to face represents indeed a sex war…
It is a war which signifies vitality, not decadence.
Purity feminists viewed the state as the tool to circumscribe male power in the moral as well as in the political sphere.
Hamilton asserted that in ordinary life it was the strong arm of the law and not the strong arm of the husband which protected women from hurt or molestation.
The state-orientated approach adopted by many feminists clearly related to their affiliations with social purity.
Yet it also had much to do with the overwhelmingly middle-class and aristocratic composition of the suffrage campaigns.
Many came to the women's movement from backgrounds where the state was viewed as an instrument for enacting their own class specific demands.
In as much as feminism represented a split within the dominant classes, creating multiple fractures within liberalism, there were many women who carried with them their class perceptions of the ethical and beneficent state.
But feminists rapidly became aware that the state itself was patriarchal and needed profound transformation if they were to be fully represented in the nation's political and moral life.
Christabel Pankhurst reasoned that the state was composed of men who not only denied women the vote but also tacitly condoned male immorality and sexual violence.
Men had all the power in the state and therefore made both its laws and its morality.
As women escalated their campaign of militant action in 1912 and 1913 they were acutely conscious that male attitudes-deeply embedded in the legal profession, the police and the courts-sustained not just men's political power but also women's sexual oppression.
Suffrage papers began to carry reports of cases of sexual harassment and male sexual violence, in an effort to raise consciousness and sustain pressure for law reform.
The Vote reported one incident of child assault in Surrey, where a man was sentenced to only four months hard labour.
Feminists organized a local protest over the issue at election time, returning a woman to the local council on the specific platform of curbing male immorality.
The Common Cause, reporting a case of the wrongful arrest of a woman for  alleged prostitution, commented that the suspect was ‘taken to a man's court, tried and sentenced by men under men's laws for a fault she cannot commit alone’.
One suffragette, Rosa Lamartine Yates, recounted that she had witnessed the double-standard in action while standing bail for two women at the west London police court.
The preceding case had involved prostitution:
After, two women filed into the dock, and with a whisper of mock modesty an official suggested that I should leave the court as the case concerned prostitution.
‘Are you a respectable woman?’ quickly interpolated the magistrate when I said I wished to remain.
As Yates argued, the women's movement was dedicated to abolishing the distinction between ‘respectable’ and ‘fallen’women which was reproduced by the state, upheld in official attitudes and predicated on ‘fallen men’.
The NUWW and the LNA had long been campaigning for legislation to raise the age of consent to eighteen and to enforce more stringent penalties against procurers and brothel-keepers.
The government's attitude, and its relation to feminists and purists, displayed all the hesitations and ambiguities which had characterized similar debates in the 1880s.
Male sexual attitudes were deeply entrenched among senior politicians and civil servants, revealing themselves in suspicion of feminist demands and often in outbursts of anti-feminism and misogyny.
Behind the doors of the Home Office, feminist pressure for moral reform, combined with the escalation of the suffrage campaign, was confronting the ‘gentlemanly’ conventions of state administration.
Home Office records for the period show how politicians and administrators negotiated feminist pressure by a mixture of amused contempt and double-dealing.
While pledging themselves publicly to legislation, they worked privately to block many of the attempts to secure new acts and statutes.
A new criminal law amendment bill had been drawn up in 1909.
This was a result of pressure brought to bear on the Home Secretary by the Jewish Association for the Protection of Girls and Women and the NVA, concerned about fresh revelations in  the press over the white slave traffic.
When an influential purity deputation petitioned the Home Office, Herbert Samuel, then Under-Secretary of State, expressed himself personally committed to legislation in the interests of national honour, but he refused to pledge the government to introduce proposals in the house, or even to support them publicly.
Here were familiar ambiguities over state support for purity demands first experienced by Coote twenty years before.
The government kept aloof, if not quite deliberately obstructive.
It was true, as successive home secretaries explained to pressure groups, that the government was committed to a mountain of fresh legislation in the new Parliament.
What was looming was the protracted constitutional wrangle over Lloyd-George's budget and the House of Lords.
However, the usual suspicions over purity aims and intentions were now intensified by the militant stance of suffrage feminists, especially the WSPU.
Civil servants were keen to discern how widespread public support was for the new measures, though they were aware, as they euphemistically put it, that there would be ‘cause for complaint’ with the government if the bill were blocked.
And official hesitation as to whether legislation on immorality was a proper area for state intervention continued.
In response to parliamentary questions, demanding that the government introduce their own bill rather than relying on private members' initiatives, the Home Office made its familiar position clear: ‘We strongly support the proposed Bill…but do not see how it is possible for the Government to undertake legislation.’
Meanwhile, purity groups and feminist organizations stepped up their pressure with a nationwide campaign.
In April 1911 the NUWW had convened an emergency meeting in the face of continuing delays, ‘expressing the desire that the government will give immediate facilities for the passing of the Criminal Law Amendment Bill’.
The LNA acted as the focus for protests, organizing a mass rally in June 1912 at Caxton Hall, with deputations from leading feminist and purity groups.
A special Pass the Bill Committee was formed and the Home Office was inundated with letters and memorials from suffrage societies.
The LNA forwarded to Asquith nearly three hundred resolutions in favour of the bill, with over seventy  coming from feminist organizations.
McKenna, the new Home Secretary, again pledged his personal support but insisted that he could not guarantee the bill government time.
By this stage even Asquith was worried about government inactivity.
He wrote to McKenna, concerned about the continued obstruction and urging that the Home Office should speed up the bill's progress.
In the face of mounting political and industrial unrest, Asquith may have been anxious to head-off further confrontation with feminists.
The bill became law in December 1912 as the Criminal Law Amendment Act.
But in its final committee stages the clauses giving the police greater powers to search and arrest brothel-keepers were revised, rendering them almost useless.
Though the original clauses were eventually restored, feminists and women's organizations were deeply split on the issue of increased police powers.
Just as thirty years before, here again were feminist divisions over using the repressive state to enforce women's demands.
There were those in the LNA, the NUWW and the NVA who argued that a more coercive police approach was essential to protect innocent women and children.
In a telling exchange at the NUWW annual conference in 1912, one delegate asked if the new police measures would infringe the liberty of prostitutes on the streets.
Lady Laura Riding, speaking in support of the proposals, declared that if prostitutes were at times ‘liable to be harried’, that was the consequence of their own actions.
Purity feminist support for these clauses of the bill accepted the traditional polarities of ‘pure’ and ‘impure’women.
Lady Laura was insistent: ‘though we may feel deep pity for them, their trade is not one of blessing to the nation, to our fathers, sons, husbands; you have to think of that.
It is not a trade that should be specially protected.’
The NUWSS on the other hand warned that though the bill deserved general support, the clauses extending police powers needed careful monitoring, ‘lest they should lead to further harrying of the unfortunate women’.
The Common Cause argued that coercive legislation was no substitute for tackling the more fundamental problems of poverty and men's immorality which stimulated the prostitution trade.
These feminist differences surfaced in a more extreme form in the months after the passing of the act.
The LNA saw the new measures as only a  beginning.
The Shield insisted that there was enough conviction and enthusiasm among women to carry further legislation, despite the blatant obstructionism from men at the Home Office and in Parliament.
The Pankhurst-led WSPU made the twin issues of male immorality and white slavery central to their whole campaign in 1913, as part of a new militant offensive.
When Emmeline Pankhurst was tried at the Old Bailey in April she drew attention to the white slavery issue in her speech from the dock.
Women, she claimed, believed that the horrible evils now ravaging British civilization would never be removed until women got the vote.
Not all feminists were so enamoured with such tactics.
Teresa Billington-Grieg of the Women's Freedom League condemned the strategy of coercion and the sexual ideology implicit in the new act.
In an article in The English Review in 1913 she argued that the legislation had been carried by hysterical stories circulated by ‘neuropaths and prudes’ about the entrapment of white women.
The government had yielded to sensationalist claims by the three chief agents of irrational emotion — Parliament, the pulpit and the press.
Grieg's was a rationalist and intellectual critique.
She reasoned that the law and the police had long been shown to have little or no educative or preventive power, and that the only way forward was a changed moral outlook and a gradual reorganization of economic and political conditions.
And she went even further.
Pointing her finger at the misplaced moral fervour of the WSPU and the LNA, she claimed that these ‘dabblers in debauchery’ had set middle-class women on the rampage against an evil they knew nothing about.
They were ‘feeding and flattering’ misconceptions which pitted the moral perfection of women against ‘the bestiality of men’.
Nothing had been done for the women who were exploited by prostitution.
All that had been achieved was a more punitive regime, while the cause of sex reform had been set back by the whitewashing of women and the doctrine of the uncleanness of men.
Grieg's attack was reinforced by Sylvia Pankhurst's Women's Dreadnought, paper of the East-End Suffrage Federation.
Reports pointed out that though the act had been passed for women's protection, it seemed it was being used almost exclusively to punish poor women.
Other critics developed similar lines of argument.
The Freewoman (an individualist feminist weekly pledged to a ‘new morality’ of free sexual unions) strongly criticized the purity lobby and the coercive consequences of its campaigning.
In 1912 the pages of the journal featured a heated debate between self-styled ‘new moralists’ and purity feminists over the implications of the new act.
Purists were quick to counter-attack accusations that the legislation threatened individual liberty and encouraged prudish self-satisfaction.
Contributors emphasized that purity was a positive advance for women and that the paper's editors should declare themselves on the side of reverence and self-control.
Others insisted that the so-called toleration of new moralists would merely lead to licentiousness and hinder women's real sexual freedom.
Nevertheless, it appeared that the legislation was dividing the movement, bringing to the surface awkward questions which had remained invisible in earlier purity campaigns.
13 THE LIBERTARIAN CHALLENGE
Feminist differences which erupted around the 1912 amendment act were symptomatic of growing divisions within the women's movement over sexuality.
Though purity remained hegemonic in the years before the First War, there was another feminist strategy for speaking about sex.
This was the libertarian and utopian discourse of new moralists and sex reformers.
The fierce debate between these two tendencies pointed to the difficulties — and personal anguish — women often experienced when they tried to develop positive representations of their own sexuality.
Here again, questions of discourse and power surfaced in women's attempts to develop a feminist sexual politics.
New moralists, as much as purity feminists, were confronted by the power relations embedded in existing languages and the difficulties of transforming them.
Broadly influenced by new continental theories of sexology and psychology, including Freudian psychoanalysis, new moralists projected ‘sexual liberation’ as part of a wider utopian  socialist vision, or as a radical liberal ideal of individual self-realization.
The Legitimation League was a characteristic example.
Founded in 1893 with the American feminist Lillian Harman as president, it worked to liberalize the law and educate public opinion towards freedom in sexual relationships.
Those associated with the League included utopian socialists such as Edward Carpenter and George Bedborough and radical individualists like Orford Northcote.
They placed great emphasis on the individual's freedom to enter into personal relationships independent of church or state.
All were careful to insist that ‘free love’ was not to be confused with ‘libertine sexual intercourse’, but that it involved a combination of the aesthetic and spiritual sides of the human personality, with a frank and open attitude towards sex.
A major part of this enterprise stressed the importance of female sexuality and women's valid right to sexual pleasure that is, in relationships with men.
New moralists argued that contemporary society denied women ‘those varied love-makings from the other sex’, which would arouse in them a desire to fill life ‘with a space of joy and delight’.
Sexology and psychology had proved that men and women had the same instinctive need for pleasure and fulfilment.
The problem was that through centuries of doctrinaire education and repression women had become ignorant of their own sexuality.
They needed to be initiated into sexual pleasure by men!
Men tended to dominate these movements, both personally and intellectually.
It is often hard to gauge the exact nature of feminist involvement.
We do know that responses by women members of the Legitimation League were cautious and ambiguous, highlighting the tensions felt by feminists in committing themselves to a libertarian politics.
Harman herself warned that men's libertarianism only meant that women became the common property of the herd, instead of the property of one man.
An anonymous correspondent to the league's journal complained that there was no recognition that woman could be ‘the property of herself’.
Men and women members had quite different understandings of the political implications of free love.
For many men it implied that women would be introduced to freedoms and pleasures previously enjoyed only by themselves, and conceived in exactly the same terms.
In the  words of one man: ‘Women have a right to all they can get.’
Feminists like Harman glossed free love quite differently.
It meant that women could work towards defining their own autonomous sexuality, independent of the social institutions of marriage and the family which had fixed them in oppressive relationships with men.
New moralists caricatured purity feminism as a repressive moral code based on ignorance and punitive condemnation.
Stella Browne, the Canadian socialist feminist, argued that female desire was a powerful natural force and that women had a valid right to sexual enjoyment.
Browne's radicalism owed much to Havelock Ellis' writings on sex psychology.
But her use of the language of sexology carried its own problems.
Calls for positive definitions of female sexuality were inevitably projected as compulsory heterosexuality for women, organized around penetration.
Such a vision was heavily normalizing.
Though Browne did see masturbation as a valid outlet for women, it was only permissible when ‘normal sexual relations are difficult or impossible’.
144 ‘Artificial lesbianism’, as opposed to‘true’ homosexuality of the ‘congenital invert’, was condemned as the product of a culture which segregated the sexes and manufactured perverts out of women who instinctively preferred the love of a man.
The exchange of letters in The Freewoman gave this debate a public airing.
Purists argued that celibacy and spinsterhood were positive acts of self-determination, in contrast to the illusory freedom of libertarianism.
The alternative put forward by new moralists celebrated the power and joy women could discover within active heterosexuality.
Sex passion was conceived in almost messianic terms, as a form of psychic union with the consciousness of another.
Their emphasis on the absolute centrality of heterosexual experience made it impossible for them to see that purity feminism had anything to offer, with its emphasis on celibacy, and its view of sex as male-defined, vicious and depraved.
In reality, these increasingly polarized discourses offered women a ‘choice’ only between celibacy and heterosexual dependence on men.
While purity was silent on questions of pleasure and desire, libertarianism sat uneasily with feminist demands and priorities.
The problem was quite literally the lack of alternative languages developed by women themselves.
In the inter-war period the growing sexualization of women and the concerted attack on celibacy in sexology and marriage manuals effectively challenged the credibility of purity feminism.
But if purists lost out, so too did those who envisaged greater freedom and equality in sexual relations with men.
The optimism and confidence invested in heterosexuality proved to be greatly misplaced.
14 CONCLUSION
The campaigns of the purity movement marked a distinctive moment in the history of medico-moral politics.
The growing centrality of the criminal law in the years between 1885 and 1912 represented a sharp break with the earlier sanitary principle governing sexuality.
State medicine's defeat over the Contagious Diseases Acts effectively heralded the displacement of the medical profession by a new force in sexual politics, with a different conception of the state's responsibilities in the moral sphere.
There was no continuous, uninterrupted growth of scientific expertise or medical control over sex throughout the nineteenth century.
What we have encountered is a much more unstable hegemony, which was successfully challenged by competing groups.
This history of purity forces us to reassess accounts of ‘modern sexuality’, such as Foucault's, which stress the subordination of legal controls to the growth of more dispersed techniques of discursive power.
In legislative terms the reverse occurred in this period.
The law dominated the field, but it did not operate through the simple mechanisms of censorship and repression.
The law was itself productive: seeking out and redefining forms of dangerous or ‘deviant’ sexuality, organizing the cultural experience of dominated groups and stimulating their political demands.
There was no neat distinction between juridical and discursive forms of power.
This transformation in sexual regulation was not the product of some internal dynamic in the technologies of power.
The move to a more strongly state-oriented approach was not the result of initiatives taken within government at all.
It was the outcome of protracted political struggles taking place ‘outside’ the state in the narrow sense on the terrain of civil society.
Purity campaigns not only registered a shift in modalities of control, but a change in the personnel responsible for sexual regulation and in the sites from which power was exercised.
As a significant movement of popular protest over sex purity marked a successful assault on the authority of male professionals, thereby drawing into the political arena groups hitherto denied access or without a voice.
At the same time the stance of the purity movement was deeply contradictory.
For it provided a continuing source of private regulation — and the political will for further coercive measures — in an area where government remained cautious about direct involvement.
Feminist purity campaigns were built on this contradiction.
Purity provided women with a language which challenged men's sexual power and projected images of their own autonomy.
Feminist campaigns around the state effectively unmasked the unofficial masculine culture of politicians, experts and administrators.
They exposed the deeply misogynist attitudes which formed the hidden element in policy making.
But these positive achievements were enmeshed with the longer history of middle-class women's involvement in social regulation and class disciplining.
To reiterate, the purity movement was neither a conservative barrier to women's sexual freedom, nor was it the passive vehicle for an emergent feminist consciousness.
It was the battleground on which conflicting aims and intentions struggled for space.
FROM PURITY TO SOCIAL HYGIENE: EARLY TWENTIETH CENTURY CAMPAIGNS FOR SEX EDUCATION
1 THE DRONFIELD CASE: THE TEACHER AND THE GIRLS SHE TOLD
In the autumn of 1913 scripture lessons for the pupils of Dronfield Elementary School, Derbyshire, took a radical turn.
The girls from standard six were reading the bible with their class teacher and headmistress, Miss Outram.
One of the set texts for Advent dealt with the birth of John the Baptist.
The verses prompted questions from the children about pregnancy and childbirth.
At first Miss Outram told them to ask their mothers, but feeling she might lose the girls' confidence if she blocked their curiosity she took a more direct approach.
Telling them to close their bibles, she read them two stories; one about the beginnings of life, the other a warning on the dangers of immorality.
Part of the accounts went as follows:
The First Story
Shall I tell you a story of how God made things in the beginning, a true story?
Well, once upon a time there was no world at all.
Doesn't it seem strange to think about it?
And everything was dark.
But away back in the beginning God was there just the same.
And God said, ‘Let there be light,’ and there was light.
Then God made the wonderful world that we live in…
Now, how do you suppose God planned always to have plants on the earth?
God said, ‘Let them have seed, each after its kind.’
He knew that by-and-by, when they were ripe, they would drop down into the ground; there they would keep soft and warm for a while, then they would grow into more plants, with seeds, so there would always be plants on the earth…
Then God wanted to have fish in the waters, so He made a mother fish to lay eggs in the water  and a father fish to swim about over the eggs and take care of them…
‘And God saw that it was good.’
…Now how do you suppose God planned always to have animals on the earth?
Every living thing was to come from a seed or an egg.
We saw how it was with the plants and the seeds, and the birds and their eggs but the animals God made could not make nests and lay eggs, because they were so much larger.
Such large nests and so many of them would be in the way on the earth.
The eggs would get broken if the mother animal tried to keep them warm, as the mother bird does, because she is so heavy.
So God did not make the mother animal to lay her eggs.
Instead, the eggs stayed safe inside the mother animal's body until they grew into little animals right there.
Then, when they were large enough, God brought them out and the mother took care of them until they grew big enough to take care of themselves.
‘And God saw that it was good.’
Perhaps some of us knew before of God's plan for the animals.
I know of a lovely teacher who told her boys and girls in school about God's plan for the animals and they had a mother bunny in her cage right in the schoolroom.
The children knew that the little bunnies were coming and they were so careful of the mother when they fed her with lettuce and cabbage.
One morning when they went to school the little bunnies were there in the cage and they were all very happy.
But I must tell you of God's plan for the people.
‘In the beginning’ there were no people on earth and God said, ‘Let us make man in our image,’that is, like ourselves.
So he made a man, tall and strong like father, to take care of the plants and animals.
And when God saw that the man was lonely He made a beautiful woman like mother to be his wife and to help him.
‘And God saw that it was good’.
The people were the best of all that God had made, so God planned always to have people on the earth.
Shall I tell you about the very first little baby?
Just think, there had never been a little baby on the earth.
God knew it would be the most precious of all.
He wanted it kept very safe from all harm.
So He made a tiny egg, so small that it could not even be seen, and a little room, on purpose for it to grow  in, right inside the mother's body.
It stayed there and grew for a long time, until it was a real baby.
Then when it had grown enough God brought the baby out and the mother took him in her arms.
There he was, the very first baby boy.
Nobody had ever seen a baby before, and when the mother saw his little body and his little feet and hands, and his little cunning face, she thought ‘why he just looks like a little man.’
She was very thankful and happy and she said ‘I have gotten a man from the Lord.’
This is part of God's wonderful plan always to have people on the earth.
Once each of you was a tiny egg inside of mother's body.
And when father came and took mother for his wife, to live with her and to take care of her, the little egg began to grow and grow into a real little baby.
Mother knew you were there and she loved you.
She carried you there near her heart a long, long time while you were growing.
The food she ate made you grow too, so she was very careful to eat only good food and to take nothing that might harm her little baby.
You were really a part of her.
The fresh air she breathed made pure blood for you, and often during the day she wondered what you would be like, whether your eyes would be blue or brown, and prayed God to make you a good child.
Then when you had grown enough and mother had carried you there nearly a year, God opened a door for you and brought you out into this world.
The Second Story
‘Where is Jack?’ asked Mr Rogers, as he came in at six o'clock.
‘He was late last night for dinner and he's going to be late again to-night.’
I saw him with that Jones girl,’ answered his sister Dorothy.
‘She is a new girl in town, very pretty, but terribly bold.
I'm sure she's not nice.
I do wish Jack wouldn't go with her’.
Presently the door opened and Jack came in.
‘Jack,’ said his father, ‘I want to show you something.’
Relief and interest showed instantly in the boy's face.
The dread question was not to be asked after all.
Mr Rogers led the way to his workroom in the attic.
There were his carpenter's bench and his tools and his lathe, and in the corner was the dynamo that worked it.
Jack had seen them all many times.
‘What is it, father?’ he asked.
Mr Rogers laid his hand upon the dynamo.
‘Jack, by means of this, a mysterious power becomes mine.
We call it electricity, but no one knows what it is.
We only know that if we treat it in the right way it will enable us to do wonderful things.
It will work our mills, and light our houses and streets, and run our cars.
It will enable man to do more than any other power that has been discovered.
But at the same time, if you treat it in the wrong way, it will strike you dead.’
‘Yes, father, I know that,’ said Jack.
His father turned toward him with an earnestness that Jack had never before seen in his face.
‘There is another power, very like this in its results.
There is the mysterious feeling that men have for women and women have for men.
Treat that right, and it will bless your life and ennoble it, and make you ten times, yes, a hundred times, the man you could ever be without it…
But, treat that feeling wrong, and it will curse you, and blast your life, and kill your immortal soul.’
For a moment they looked at each other square in the eye.
Then together they went downstairs in silence.
In the hall below, Jack put his hand on his father's arm.
‘I know what you mean, father, and I'll follow the right,’ he whispered.
Miss Outram claimed to have obtained her stories from an American publisher, yet they were typical of early twentieth-century British sex education teaching.
Emotive and negative purity style moral warnings pointed to the twin dangers of promiscuous women and the threat of VD.
These were combined with more positive guidance, where the language of evolutionary biology was used to represent sex as responsible parenthood.
The natural world, presided over by the image of the benevolent patriarch, was moralized to carry the significations of goodness, health and social harmony integrated through sound procreation.
On the other hand, modern science was used to list a new vocabulary of transgression.
This was distanced from the earlier stress on Old Testament religious morality by its rationalism; as in the story's metaphor of  electricity, wondrous yet calculable, which demonstrated the inexorable consequences of wrong-doing-disease, death and social degeneracy.
The juxtaposition of these polarized accounts of sexuality in the headmistress's teaching was intentional.
The girls of standard six, like so many of their contemporaries, were offered the ‘choice’ between radiant motherhood and unlawful promiscuity.
Outram was not naive in introducing sex education into her teaching.
She may also have anticipated trouble with her school managers.
Earlier in the year she had discussed circumcision, infertility and basic ante-natal care with her twelve-year-old girls, as part of classes on domestic economy and home-management.
She was a committed eugenist (involved in a local campaign to get ‘race hygiene’ onto the syllabus of elementary schools) and an equally strong feminist, having read the children extracts from The Suffragette.
These two discourses of eugenics and feminism, seemingly distinct yet so often linked in the political language of many early twentieth-century feminists, had clearly influenced Outram's educational thinking.
According to the extracted deposition of one pupil, Doris Harrison, Miss Outram had told the older girls about the forced feeding of suffragettes in prison.
How: ‘One woman went to prison and she would not eat anything so, to open her mouth, they broke her teeth and put something down her throat.’
There had already been one heated exchange between herself and the school managers, when Outram had pointedly refused to apologize for introducing controversial subjects.
The managers, all men, had been incensed.
They were clearly on the lookout for a second opening to pillory their headmistress.
Inevitably, news of Miss Outram's exploits travelled fast in Dronfield.
This tightly-knit community, lying six miles south of Sheffield on the Derby coalfield, had a population of less than four thousand.
Most of the men were employed in local iron and steel foundries and in metal manufacturing.
It was the intellectuals of the skilled, respectable working-class, in alliance with the local petty-bourgeoisie and small professional men (the grocer, publican, magistrate, two doctors and the Anglican vicar), who set the tone in the village and orchestrated public opinion.
A number of children told their parents about the new-style scripture teaching.
The publican's daughter told  her elder sister, who told her aunt, and so it got back to the girl's parents.
One pupil told her grandmother, who was so shocked she had to be calmed down by her son and daughter-in-law.
All the children said that Miss Outram had impressed on them not to ‘go home and tell your mothers and make a bother about it’.
The parents were outraged; the managers had got the opportunity they had been waiting for.
The contest which followed involved parents, the school managers and their headmistress, and eventually implicated the local and central state.
The case typified the competing forces and class and gender conflicts which surfaced in early sex education campaigns.
The first clash occurred at a school managers' meeting the following January.
The headmistress was summoned to account for her actions, following a formal complaint by Mr Bradwell of the Victoria Inn.
Bradwell was clearly a force to be reckoned with in the village.
He used his pub to orchestrate his case as a ‘non-conformist conscientious objector’.
He condemned Outram's teaching in the language of purity outrage as: ‘most disgraceful and disgusting and abominable and I won't have my child taught like what she is teaching’.
Bradwell also claimed that the issue highlighted conflicting rights of parents and school over the moral education of the children.
The publican's aggressive stance towards the headmistress touched on deeper currents which were becoming condensed in the affair.
Outram, the feminist and progressive, was clearly the target of an unrelenting campaign of bigotry and misogyny organized by the local working-class and petty-bourgeoisie.
Parents identified the headmistress as an agent of professional control, setting her knowledge against theirs and condemning their own cultural and moral values.
Their anger and frustration may also have been fuelled by Outram's highhanded dismissal of their protests, evident in her exchanges with Bradwell.
She consistently refused even to acknowledge his right to protest, let alone answer his questions.
As she put it: ‘That man is not here to ask me questions.
I refuse to answer his questions.’
She insisted she would only address herself to the managers.
How far Outram's hostility to Bradwell stemmed from a feminist critique of his chauvinist behaviour, how far from the conflicting claims of expert and parent is impossible to say.
The two elements were probably interlinked.
For the managers the issue was clear-cut.
Their headmistress had wilfully departed from the scripture syllabus and her stories had stimulated a prurient interest in sex, thereby corrupting childhood innocence.
In her defence, Outram explained that the teaching had led quite naturally out of the children's questions.
Right knowledge was a necessary safeguard against the immorality and perversion which stemmed from ignorance.
Their exchange illustrated a major bone of contention in early debates over sex teaching:
Miss Outram
…
I should not have discussed it at all if I had not been asked the questions.
Managers
Do you mean to tell me that the girls ask you for such stuff as you have been reading?
I shall never believe it.
Miss Outram
Well.
I was asked questions, and this led out of it.
Managers
…
The very effect of reading was knowledge to the girls.
Miss Outram
But this was the outcome of their questions.
Managers
That story you have read is not in the syllabus.
You have no authority to read stories like that.
Miss Outram
I acknowledge it was a mistake.
I shall be careful in the future.
It is a lovely little story all the same and there is no harm in it.
We all make mistakes.
I was not wilfully doing anything wrong.
I do not acknowledge that I have done wrong…
Moreover, the managers saw a clear link between Outram's feminist politics and her interest in sex education.
As one of them sneered, ‘I have heard of several ladies in Dronfield having these books and recommending them.
There seems to be a movement of that sort amongst a certain class of the people.’
They decided to ask the County Education Committee to dismiss Outram at once, though there were disagreements among them over the rights and wrongs of sex education.
The local doctors believed that when undertaken by the child's mother it could have positive effects but fundamentalists like the magistrate insisted that any such teaching was morally wrong.
Unfortunately for the managers their plan misfired.
The county council committee refused to comply with the request to remove Outram, pronouncing themselves well-pleased with their head-teacher.
Almost inevitably the issue had become caught up in a tangled web of local education politics.
It is unclear whether Derbyshire Education Committee actively endorsed Outram's sex education lessons.
But there had been a long-standing dispute between managers, parents and the county over school premises.
The county authority claimed that this was the real reason for local hostility to the headmistress.
Parents were merely using it as a front to hit back at them over the premises issue.
Dronfield responded with an open public meeting, where the residents mounted a strong defence of their parental rights systematically vilifying Outram into the bargain.
This time local mothers were to the fore.
They protested that the teacher's disgusting and abominable information had undermined the sacredness of the home and the mothers' authority.
Many perceived the affair as a struggle between the competing claims of parents and teachers over the education of the child.
The fundamental question was: who had the right to initiate children into the laws of sex and with what precise forms of knowledge?
Did authority reside in the parents, with their popular language of purity (and one suspects a commonsense discourse about the naturalness and inevitability of procreation and parenthood), or with the power of professionals?
Mrs Milnes was clear in her own mind that parental authority was being usurped :
It is too disgusting for the children to know; they have not the same respect for their parents when they know that.
(Weeping) There is a proper time and place to tell children.
They are old enough when they leave school…
I think it is time the thing was put a stop to.
Other parents complained that Outram's action was tantamount to an assault on the moral innocence of childhood.
The girls who had been ‘initiated’ were corrupting their brothers and sisters and there had been marked signs of mental deterioration in these children.
The parents' defence of their own  interests was complicated by a vicious attack on Outram as the archetypal spinster.
One mother claimed: ‘She would not have said such a thing if she had been married.
That is what is the matter with her.’
Another had told her daughter that Miss Outram knew nothing about babies.
The managers carefully channelled resentment towards the county council, who, they suggested, were in league with their headmistress.
A unanimous resolution, backed by a petition with twelve hundred signatures, demanded Outram's prompt dismissal.
This was accompanied by a thinly veiled threat that her retention would cause a serious impediment to the educational efficiency of the school.
By February the local press had got wind of the affair.
If the doctor, the vicar and the local publican represented one major force constructing public opinion in this small community, then the popular press was the other.
Articles in The Weekly Dispatch and The Derbyshire Times presented the case through a familiar blend of factual reportage and lurid sensationalism designed to titillate local audiences.
The Dispatch led with the headline: ‘Teacher and the Girls She Told’, and carried a picture of the wicked Miss Outram surrounded by her innocent young charges, while The Derbyshire Times called for the Board of Education to step in to arbitrate.
The board was in fact already informed; its response was superbly bureaucratic.
Fearing there might well be public outcry and an appeal to its authority, the central secretariat had asked one of the inspectors, W.J. Hands, to report on the affair.
Hands was thorough.
He saw his own role as something between a scientific investigator and a secret agent, and he sent a verbatim report of the managers' meeting back to the board, together with a sheaf of press cuttings.
The inspector counselled caution.
It seems likely that his real mission was to find an escape route for the board, so that it could steer clear of the incident and avoid involving the central state in any direct decision over sex education.
As with contemporary campaigns around the criminal law, the state opted for a neutral course of non-intervention.
It was unwillingly propelled into action by the competing forces within civil society.
Hands kept well away from Dronfield, staying at a hotel in Derby, on the grounds that the appearance of an HMI would only implicate the board in Outram's dismissal.
His enquiries  revealed that the sex teaching had been given in scripture time.
Here was the escape clause the board was looking for.
The secretariat minuted that under the 1870 Education Act and the existing code the board had no control over the content of religious education.
On receiving the petition demanding Outram's resignation they stuck to the principle of laissez-faire.
Joseph Pease, the board's president, approved a tactfully worded reply to the Dronfield parents.
He explained that the appointment and dismissal of teachers was a matter for the local authority alone and that the board had no authority other than to help supervise the ‘educational efficiency’ of the school.
But educational efficiency had already been impaired.
The Derbyshire Times noted that defiant parents were voting with their feet by keeping children away from school.
Towards the end of April matters came to a head when parents were threatened with prosecution.
They remained firm; if anything their opposition had hardened, particularly against the Education Committee who they saw as pushing them around.
According to one parent:
The Committee had simply patted them on the back like spoilt children and told them, ‘Now just send your children back to school.’
Were the parents of Dronfield to be treated as naughty boys and girls, or were they to be treated as intelligent working people?
Miss Outram was still at school, and the parents' wishes had been ignored in London and Derby.
The protagonists looked to be heading for an all-out clash, but the outbreak of war in August put an abrupt end to the contest.
The local papers turned their attention to the German invasion of Belgium and the problems of recruiting while the Board of Education closed its file on the case without any apparent resolution.
The Dronfield affair was not an isolated incident.
In the first decades of the twentieth century sex education took on great importance within public debate.
A broad and often uneasy coalition — of medics, clerics, social purists, eugenists and some feminists — campaigned to raise the question as a matter of vital national and even imperial concern.
Books and pamphlets  directed at children and parents, conferences and public meetings, together with the formation of influential pressure groups, all testified to the seriousness with which the issue was being treated.
The sexual instinct, now re-defined as the racial instinct, was to be channelled into healthy and responsible parenthood.
In the words of the 1911 Manifesto of the National Council of Public Morals, an influential campaigning force, the solution to national immorality lay in educating young men and women into the physiological knowledge and lofty ideals of marriage.
Increasingly, sex education was advanced as the alternative to criminal law regulation.
There was a growing consensus that sex hygiene teaching held out the best assurance for eliminating vice.
Behind this gradual shift of emphasis lay the re-emergence of a broad and powerful alliance around the issue of national health.
It was backed by the renewed prominence of the medical profession and medical discourse as a voice within public debate.
2 IN CORPORE SANO
Though state medicine suffered a period of retrenchment in the closing decades of the nineteenth century, medical research enlarged its scope and sphere of influence.
Despite the restrictions placed on the Medical Department of the Local Government Board, investigations carried out by its research team into the aetiology of the major infectious diseases greatly enhanced its reputation.
Medics might bemoan the lack of any broad initiative in public health policy but they could point to this expanding area of research as a mark of contemporary achievements.
When the BMJ, in its special commemorative number for the Queen's Diamond Jubilee in 1897, reviewed the development of the profession over the previous sixty years it was this aspect that it chose to trumpet.
Discovery of the micro-organic causes of disease and the mode of their transmission had opened up a domain which ‘to the minds of our immediate ancestors seemed almost outside of the knowable’.
Major transformations within medical discourse provided the theoretical conditions for this perceived advance.
The gradual acceptance of the germ theory of infection, following  the research of Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch into viruses and vaccines in the 1870s and 1880s, had resulted in the rapid isolation of the bacilli of all the major infectious diseases.
Medical staff at the Local Government Board impressed the importance of these discoveries on their local health authorities through a constant barrage of memoranda, visitations and staff consultations.
Integral to this research was an understanding of how the healthy body provided its own defences against invading bacteria by developing anti-toxins.
This ‘medical semiotic’ produced a new conception of the body as the site of health and disease.
It was more and more focused on the internal biochemistry of the individual, as against the older and simpler individual/environment equation.
Parallel investigations into cellular pathology worked with the notion that disease had its origins at the level of the cell.
This medicalized scrutiny of the individual, and his/her role as an agent in the maintenance of health or the transmission of disease, formed a central tenet of medical discourse in the early twentieth century.
It was premised on a qualitative shift in the intellectual organization of medical concepts.
As a programme of state medicine it was quite as significant as that which had shaped the environmental reforms seventy years before.
For Sir George Newman, first Medical Officer to the newly created Ministry of Health in 1919, contemporary medicine was now entering its ‘biological setting’.
The concept of the environment possessed a new meaning, more personal, intimate and integrated, concerned with the ‘life history, heredity, family and domestic life, personal habits and customs’ of individuals.
In practice the administrative shift away from environmentalism was much less dramatic than ideologues like Newman were insisting.
There v.–as of course no sudden abandoning of the principles of nineteenth-century public health policy.
The broad programme of environmental medicine remained intact.
Health measures enacted at the Local Government Board between 1871 and 1918 extended and deepened state intervention in familiar areas: sanitation, working-class housing, the industrial environment, nuisances, water-supply, etc.
Where the new principles of bodily health posed a direct challenge to environmentalism, as in the eugenics movement, they were opposed by the majority of medics.
In corpore sano was given its  most expansive expression in the broad general pronouncements from the profession.
It was put forward in the reports of medical officers such as Newman and his colleague Arthur Newsholme and in growing public debate over national health in Parliament and the press.
At the level of policy implementation, impact centred on carefully demarcated areas.
Especially important was the growing state medical scrutiny of key individuals within the population — soldiers, mothers and children.
In isolating such groups for surveillance and regulation, the profession was drawing on changes within medical discourse.
These were themselves deeply implicated in the political and intellectual struggles of the conjuncture before the First War.
State medicine's involvement in campaigns for improved military efficiency and health regeneration has usually been loosely ascribed to the growing move towards ‘collectivism’ in the early twentieth century.
Medics have been cited as a key example of a modern breed of technical expert, instrumental in extending and deepening state intervention into new and familiar areas.
What is absent from these accounts is a structural analysis of the political and administrative conditions which enabled the profession to reassert its position, and to insist on increased representation within the state.
This involves grasping the dynamic inter-relation between new scientific knowledges and the much broader public debates over national efficiency and imperial survival.
From the late 1860s there had been repeated attempts to obtain greater state aid and recognition for science, in the wake of increased technical competition from Germany.
Such efforts had met with little success from Liberal and Tory politicians alike.
The Report of the Royal Commission on Scientific Instruction and the Advancement of Science, 1875 had polemicized for the importance of a Ministry of Science and Education.
But its recommendations were dismissed as utopian.
In the same way, attempts by a small but highly articulate pressure group around the journal Nature, founded in 1869 to argue for the social utility of scientific research, gained only limited success.
Within the state itself, as we have seen, scientific and technical experts were increasingly confronted by a hostile cadre of lay civil servants.
The immediate origins of a greater alliance between the state  and science lay in military anxieties over the Boer War debacle.
Britain's poor military performance sharpened the perceived economic, political and cultural threat to the predominance of the Empire from other burgeoning nations, especially Germany and to a lesser extent the USA and Japan.
Science now occupied a central place in the ensuing debate over national efficiency.
For diverse and often disparate groupings, the language of scientificity stood as a metaphor and a referent, which condensed specific anxieties and signified different solutions to different people.
Science in this sense came to stand as a meta-discourse, framed by the broader contours of the conjuncture.
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century the fabric of mid-Victorian hegemony was shattered by a series of structural contradictions, from economic retardation and industrial unrest, to growing socialist and feminist political militancy and intensification of anxiety over a whole range of social issues.
Each had their own particular history and political trajectory.
However, their multiple condensation at the level of the state makes it possible to speak, not just of a set of regional problems but of a general crisis of hegemony.
The swing back to scientific explanations and solutions and the re-entry of the expert into the state apparatuses, needs to be understood both in terms of the internal transformations within scientific knowledge and in the light of these broader economic and political developments.
The new cadre of experts were not mere effects of the wider crises and destabilizations.
But their professional debates were continually being penetrated by these extra-discursive conditions.
At the same time, politicians were increasingly pressed for answers to problems against which the measured, patrician tones of the lay administrator seemed amateur and outdated.
Medics in particular capitalized on this state of affairs, mobilizing the results of scientific research as part of their broader push for increased representation with the state.
Campaigns to improve the health of the armed forces represented a classic instance of the inter-relation between science and politics.
Recruitment was a major source of anxiety following Boer War revelations about the high rate of recruits rejected on grounds of ill-health.
More disturbingly, military statistics seemed to confirm the findings on poverty by Charles Booth  and Llewellyn-Smith.
Both sets of inquiries pointed to the existence of a degenerate underclass of the population which formed a residual pool of infection.
In 1903 the Director General of the Army Medical Services and the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons responded to these revelations by medically verifying the distinction between the healthy and respectable working-class and the diseased residuum.
Militarily, the demand was for major reforms in army training which took note of new developments in nutrition, hygiene and physiology.
Capitalizing on the alarm in official circles, the BMJ complained that military chiefs had still not learnt the terrible lessons of the South African war.
Bacilli were far more deadly than bullets in the battle for imperial survival.
Behind this medical pressure lay the thinly veiled threat that if the government refused to acknowledge its responsibilities towards the armies of the Empire, then the result would be destruction.
During the Russo-Japanese War of 1904–5, the BMJ noted ominously that the Japanese were capable of great feats of endurance on account of their strict attention to the laws of hygiene.
Moments of panic in the national efficiency debate often orchestrated by the new popular press — enabled medics to dramatically represent their new scientific concepts in ways that gained them intellectual hegemony and popular credibility.
The model most frequently projected by medics was of a militarized conception of health, which could be extended to key groups within civil society.
Though scientists were highly critical of the aristocratic amateurishness of many senior army administrators, they were keenly attracted to the image of a militarily organized society.
Their vision was of functionally integrated systems and ordered hierarchies, transcending the atomized, petty divisions of party politics.
This sort of militarism made professional sense to many medics because of its connection with their own reformulated medical discourse.
Here representations of organicism and physiological integration were pre-eminent, and biology frequently carried an overtly political message.
Moreover, as specialized professionals, medics warmed to an ideology of national efficiency precisely because it privileged rational experts over those generalist administrators who had earlier curbed the power of the Simonian specialist.
Pressure for health regeneration was not confined to the army.
The medical model of militarized efficiency was carried over into key areas of civil society.
Politically sensitive groups, notably the schoolchild and the mother, were specific targets for intervention.
The school system of physical training put forward by the Board of Education in 1902 in close consultation with the War Office, took its impetus directly from military methods.
Groups of exercises were designed to strengthen target areas of the body (limbs, trunk, bone structure, the nervous system) in order to promote greater physical efficiency in later life, at work or on the battlefield.
This military model of the disciplined body, responding instantly to word of command, remained paramount in the years before the First War.
Though it was aimed most directly at boys, girls were also addressed.
The board's medical department insisted that PT was a more effective way of improving national physique than compulsory military service, because army training began too late and excluded women and girls.
As always such a system was seen to deliver distinctive moral benefits.
For the working-class child correct physical development could help eliminate the immoral effects of a dissolute culture or unhealthy environment, contributing to a gradual improvement of national physique.
Medics and educationalists were keenly aware that the best way of inculcating the laws of health was through a stress on the pleasures to be gained from PT.
Pleasure was to be produced by the body's obedient and systematic conformity to certain physical norms.
As Sir Robert Morant directed in his introduction to the 1909 syllabus:
The Board desires that all lessons in physical exercise…should be thoroughly enjoyed by the children.
Indeed, freedom of movement and a certain degree of exhilaration are essentials of all true physical education.
The broadly conceived programme of health education not only demonstrated the ideal of militarized efficiency, it also embodied the new scientific concepts derived from physiology and biochemistry.
In the panics over the declining birth-rate and the continuing high levels of infant mortality, medics campaigned around these new knowledges to shift emphasis  away from environmentalism towards close scrutiny of the health of the mother.
Scientists like Dr John Ballantyre, Assistant Physician to the Edinburgh Royal Maternity Hospital, together with progressive local medical officers like Newman and Newsholme, insisted that recent research into pregnancy and embryonic pathology pointed to new methods of tackling the high infant death-rate.
The demand was for a state-backed campaign to educate women and girls.
They were to be prepared for their maternal duties and given material assistance to maintain a higher standard of motherhood.
More often than not the driving force behind this movement was a concern with population politics, a belief that a qualitative as well as quantitative increase in the birth-rate was the key to imperial progress and power.
Even Newsholme, who usually avoided the emotive rhetoric of the social imperialists, felt that the choices facing the Empire were stark and dramatic:
It cannot be regarded as a matter of indifference whether the unfilled portions of the world shall be peopled by Eastern races, by negroes, by Slavonic or other Eastern European peoples, by the Latin races, or by the races of Northern Europe.
3 RACIAL HEALTH
An emphasis on the racial component in health maintenance marked a significant development within contemporary medical knowledge.
From the 1870s Darwinist theories of racial progress and evolution had worked to transform the way in which physical and moral processes were understood.
For social Darwinists like Herbert Spencer, evolutionary theory demonstrated scientifically what earlier social scientists had only grasped in moral terms.
The individual and the nation needed to be seen as part of the evolutionary development of the race, through processes which obeyed observable and scientifically predictable laws.
The rise of the eugenics movement in the early twentieth century crystallized the intellectual and political imperatives of evolutionary biology.
The concept of eugenics was defined by its founder, Francis Galton, in the early 1880s as  the ‘study of those agencies under social control, which may improve or impair the racial qualities of future generations.’
But eugenics only gained theoretical legitimacy and an institutional base in the political and international conjuncture before the First War.
The Eugenics Laboratory, founded in 1907 under the psychologist and social imperialist, Karl Pearson, and the rival Eugenics Education Society, begun in the same year with its journal The Eugenics Review, brought together a broad coalition of biologists, medics, clerics and prominent intellectuals and politicians.
At the heart of the eugenist strategy lay a sustained attack on nineteenth-century environmentalism in all its forms — medical, charitable and philanthropic.
Environmentalism was unscientific.
It was at best a mere palliative and at worst it actively sustained the unfit and degenerate elements of the population in their reckless overbreeding.
Medical science mitigated suffering, but by preserving the diseased and degenerate it flew in the face of natural selection and the iron laws of heredity.
Eugenists insisted that it was crucial to redefine the terrain of social intervention.
The site needed to be shifted back to the regulation of life itself; to the study of sound offspring and to the elimination of all those racial poisons (alcoholism, venereal disease, feeble-mindedness) which were leading to national degeneration.
Havelock Ellis emphasized that the new aim of social reform was to purify conditions at their source.
For C.W. Saleeby, concern with race culture stood above politics, cutting across petty divisions of class and self-interest and pointing the way towards national regeneration.
Concern about the relation between national power and the strength of the population was not of course new.
There were distinct continuities here between eugenics and the population politics developed in the statistical societies and the General Register Office from the 1830s.
We have seen that this strategy had addressed the relation between certain population habits (what Farr had defined as the vital statistics of marriage and divorce, fertility and fecundity) and the nation's economic prosperity, health and happiness.
What distinguished eugenists from Farr and his colleagues were the laws and theoretical concepts used to assess the population.
Earlier statisticians had based population predictions on arithmetical averages, derived  from bills of mortality and other statistical tables, and had been primarily concerned with legal and moral intervention into the family.
Eugenists argued for a quite different understanding of how norms and averages were to be calculated.
Pearson's new science of biometry used calculus rather than arithmetic to conceptualize the population as a bounded space, with individual variation following predictable laws.
Increased mathematical precision was deemed to give a new scientificity to biological and evolutionary phenomena.
It pointed to man's ability to master his organic environment.
Allied with this theoretical shift went a reconceptualization of the role played by heredity in individual development.
For earlier social reformers, human progress or decline had been seen to depend on the constant interplay of the individual's moral faculties and the state of the environment.
This scheme had been modified with the introduction of Darwinist concepts of heredity.
But the theories of urban degeneracy put forward by Charles Booth and Llewellyn-Smith in the 1880s still followed the principle set by Lamarck — that acquired characteristics could be inherited.
Eugenists drew on recent research by the German biologist August Weismann to claim that the germ cells which controlled reproduction were distinct and independent of body or somatic cells.
Hence inherited characteristics could not be modified by environmental factors.
The way lay open for a sustained attack on environmentalism.
The medical profession was deeply divided over eugenics.
Pearson acknowledged that the new racial science could do little without the hearty co-operation of medics.
Yet his persistent efforts to woo the profession in 1912 only emphasized the distance between the two discourses on the heredity/ environment issue.
In fact, Pearson's entente cordiale involved a scathing outburst against the type of social inquiries undertaken by local medical offices of health.
Statistics, he claimed, were incompetently used, while sanitary science still perpetuated the pernicious myth that questions of back-to-back housing, privies and breast-feeding were more important than the hereditary character of the parents.
Proposals by Dr Robert Rentoul for the compulsory sterilization of the unfit had already been given short shrift by the BMA in 1904, on the grounds that they were contrary to medical  ethics.
Nevertheless, a number of prominent medics continued to push the eugenic case.
At the BMA's annual meeting in 1913, eugenists denounced medics' long-standing but misguided dependence on environmentalism, arguing for amendments to the marriage laws in the interests of eugenically fit unions.
The BM7 intervened swiftly with a lengthy editorial, bringing the profession out strongly against eugenics.
While acknowledging the supreme importance of physical and moral regeneration for national survival, the journal displayed the liberal assumptions of the medical establishment.
The BMA could not countenance the challenge eugenics posed to its specific brand of social and physiological individualism, with its stress on the importance of individual initiative and on the value of each and every human life.
Eugenics never achieved the overall hegemonic position that its advocates hoped for.
Eugenists gave evidence to the Inter-Departmental Committee on Physical Deterioration, 1904, as well as to other government inquiries into feeble-mindedness, alcoholism, marriage and divorce and venereal disease.
But their explanations of the deterioration of national physique in terms of the reckless breeding of the unfit, and their policies of forced segregation of degenerates and the issuing of marriage certificates, were not implemented.
It was hardly surprising that preventive medicine, and state medicine in particular, refused to give unconditional support to eugenics.
The ideology of environmentalism was cautiously optimistic about social amelioration and human progress.
Such optimism was too firmly embedded in the culture of the profession, and too deeply bound up with medical authority and status, for it to be in any way seriously threatened.
Environmentalism remained paramount.
What occurred was the expansion and deepening of its concepts to include racial and hereditary factors.
At the level of the meta-discourse of the profession, few statements on the future of the nation's health failed to reference the new dimensions of race and evolution.
Human biology was now to be studied as a series of stages in the process of evolution.
The life history of each and every individual needed to be grasped not merely in the context of his/her immediate environment, but as part of a broader racial history.
Newman was aware that when eugenics was deployed  in this way — shorn of its critique of environmentalism — it made a valuable contribution to the philosophical underpinnings of the profession.
It was useful in raising broad questions about human progress or decline and projecting a grandiose vision of health.
Such a vision was of course racist, patriarchal and antidemocratic.
In practice, the philosophy of racial health involved laying down expert injunctions to the working-class and to women on the importance of preserving imperial stamina and physique.
This was posed both against other competing ‘civilized’ nations and against those black and brown races who threatened to swamp the globe with their animal savagery.
Britain would advance to a higher stage of civilization via favourable environment and sound heredity.
In other words, by the harmonious integration of nature and nurture.
Racial theories fared best in policy areas already sensitized to the new conceptions of bodily health — motherhood, insanity and poverty, as well as birth-control and venereal disease.
Eugenics owes its specific place in our history to its influence on the emergent pedagogy of sex education.
4 SOCIAL AND MORAL HYGIENE
In 1917 the eugenist and social purist, the Rev. James Marchant confidently pronounced: ‘It is now being fully recognized that all moral reforms for the regeneration of mankind must be brought about by the combination of religion and science.’
Under the banner of social hygiene, moralists, clerics, eugenists and some feminists joined forces with medics to resurrect a dialogue between medicine and morality.
The new movement condensed a wide range of competing aims and strategies, but two linked concerns remained paramount in the early twentieth century.
On the one hand there were the claims of morality and religion, stressing the importance of self-control and discipline for racial progress, and on the other the new medical discourse with its reconceptualization of the rules of health and hygiene.
The resulting interchange of ideas and expertise redefined the terrain of moral problems.
It simultaneously produced a renewed moral emphasis within preventive medicine.
The holistic strategy for health forged by the social hygiene campaigns fixed on particular sites of intervention.
Along with the problems of adolescence and insanity, sex was singled out by hygienists.
The new movement worked vigorously to redefine the domain of sexuality-developing concepts of identity and sexual difference, even a vocabulary of satisfaction and pleasure, which was differentiated from social purity.
Training the sexual instinct cut against purity's criminalizing strategy, at the moment when purists were achieving their maximum effect in legislation.
Social hygiene took off in the years immediately before the First War as part of the growing debate over national health and efficiency.
Almost immediately the new coalition began to question the criminal law approach to moral problems.
In 1911 the inaugural conference of the National Council of Public Morals (NCPM) announced that prevention rather than punishment was to be the keynote in the regeneration of the nation's moral life.
According to their rhetoric, public morals were now not merely a job for the criminal law, but for a wide spectrum of social agencies.
Repression through fear, combined with rescue work for the fallen, was no longer enough.
Positive education, channelling the sexual instinct towards socially approved goals, needed to counter older, negative moralisms.
It would be wrong to over-emphasize the distance between purists and social hygienists; concepts and personnel often overlapped.
Those moralists who joined the new coalition were usually motivated by the same structural factors which brought together other groupings: the economic and military threat to Empire, alarm over the falling birth-rate and the residuum.
But as in the 1830s their participation involved a reworking of moral discourse.
Morality itself now began to be redefined.
Its significations were shifted away from the evangelical, nonconformist emphasis of the purity movement.
Nowhere was this clearer than in moralists' take-up of scientific logic and a language of rationality.
We have already noted the obstacles preventing any renewed dialogue between medicine and morality in the last decades of the nineteenth century.
The eclipse of state medicine, combined with the renewed political clout of nonconformist religion  and the stern voice of the purity movement, militated against a revival of the medico-moral alliance.
Purists had of course drawn on medical and evolutionary concepts, but always with the proviso that they were subordinate to the dictates of a higher morality.
It was the changed set of political and social conditions in the years before the First War which paved the way for the re-emergence of an alliance between medics, natural scientists and the established church.
Along with this rapprochement went a corresponding attack on the fundamentalist tenets of nonconformist morality.
The metaphor of scientific rationality and the figure of the state-sponsored expert were used to attack older voluntary and ‘amateur’ approaches to social reform.
National efficiency campaigners were particularly scathing in their critique of the ‘provincial chapel-going radical’, who was seen to promote sectional and petty self-interest at a time when national survival was in question.
Many historians have commented on the decline of nonconformism as a political force in the early twentieth century.
What is less often recognized is the emergence of a new type of moral discourse.
Here evolutionary science was fully integrated with moral pronouncements about society's future progress or decline.
This religion was more rationalist and ethical, much stronger in defence of the established social order and much less populist in tone and organization.
Old Testament morality, wreaking vengeance on the political establishment, was displaced by imagery of ‘the perfect man’, as Dean Inge of St Pauls called him, whose overriding concern was with ‘his’ duties to the state.
This ‘gentleman’ was to be the product not of a ‘fallacious biologism’, but of true evolutionary progress which preserved the physical and spiritual unity of the organism.
Anglicanism provided the largest number of clerical recruits to national efficiency and social hygiene.
Marchant, Dean Inge, Mandel Creighton Bishop of London and Canon Lyttleton were all prominent hygienists, equally committed to eugenics.
The Church of England may have found it easier to accommodate the cult of hygienics and efficiency.
It had a long-standing concern with the problems of authority and discipline, and its stronger philosophical tradition made it more compatible with the intellectual rigour of hygiene theories.
Dean Inge was  typical of the new type of moralist.
From the clerical aristocracy, he had been a leading Anglican theologian as Lady Mary Professor of Divinity at Cambridge before his appointment to the prominent public position of Dean of St Pauls in 1911.
Inge was a strong Tory, vigorous in denouncing ‘bolshevism’.
But he insisted that organized religion needed to meet the challenge of social unrest and moral decay.
A member of the Eugenics Education Society, the Clerical and Medical Committee of the BMA — where he campaigned for a stronger moral lead from the profession — and the National Council for Combating Venereal Disease, he moved freely between religious, political and scientific spheres.
Inge was important as the type of agent who linked the disparate cultures and intellectual milieus which formed the backbone of the social hygiene movement.
The reverse side of the coin was the renewed visibility of moral concerns within the medical profession.
Physiological theories provided the point of entry for a sustained moral logic.
Dramatic, popular depictions of cellular processes and biochemical reactions generated a language which was itself implicitly moral in its narrative stress on dynamic causalities, portrayed as inevitable and irreversible.
Eugenically-based metaphors lent themselves particularly well to this type of moralizing treatment.
Hygienists spoke of the need to grasp the actual moment when the nerve centres of life were poisoned through hereditary influence or degenerate living.
Newman was a master of populist medical rhetoric.
In his grandiose overview of the history of medical science published in 1919, he made a powerful case for a totalizing conception of preventive medicine.
Although disease was now increasingly defined as an internal malfunction of the body, its causes included the whole of the social and moral history of the nation:
The essentials of disease are thus…habit and the powers of resistance of man's body; the seeds or germs or cause of abnormal action…lastly, the whole process is profoundly modified by a vast concatenation of variable social, personal, external and even economic factors…
The creation of the Ministry of Health in 1919 registered a self-conscious application of this moralized medical ideology.
Under the banner of health education, the Ministry's aim was for the creation of an enlightened public opinion.
Sanitary legislation could only go so far in monitoring personal health; what was vital was a popular campaign stressing the individual's own responsibility to observe the rules of health.
Equally, voluntary initiatives like the People's League of Health, founded in 1917 under royal patronage, with a membership which included medics, moralists and eugenists, pronounced: ‘A Nation's Health is a Nation's Wealth.’
Popular pamphlets stressed heredity and environment as ‘the two determining factors in our lives’, and pointed to the inevitable moral consequences for those who broke the laws of health: ‘nature knows nothing about ‘Forgive us our trespasses’…she demands payment for every one of her laws which is broken.’
Commercial advertising, for Pear's soap, bleach and disinfectant, addressing women as consumers and domestic labourers, intensified the focus on home health and cleanliness in keeping the moral and physical threat of disease at bay.
Like Dean Inge, the careers and culture of leading medical intellectuals displayed distinctive connections between science and morality.
As so often in our account, an engagement with official agents pinpoints the way discursive structures were negotiated at the level of personal experience.
Both George Newman and Arthur Newsholme combined a commitment to the scientific principles of preventive hygiene with a muscular Christianity.
Newman began his career in the 1890s at Edinburgh University and King's College, London, where he was senior demonstrator in bacteriology and lecturer on infectious diseases.
He went on to became medical officer of health for Bedfordshire and then for Finsbury, during which time he published research on the bacteriology of milk and on infant mortality.
He later became Medical Officer at the Board of Education and then at the Ministry of Health, pioneering school medical inspection and education for motherhood.
An active Quaker throughout his life, editing the journal The Friend ‘s Quarterly Examiner for many years, Newman integrated his duties as medical administrator with more traditional forms of philanthropy and self-help.
He worked in the adult school movement in girls’ clubs run from the Friend's Meeting House in St Martin's Lane.
His interpretation of preventive  medicine was founded on an unswerving faith in the evangelical principles of his own religion and a fervent belief in the duties owed by the citizen to the nation state.
It also encompassed a eugenist and imperialist gloss on the importance of domesticity and motherhood.
For Newman, homes were the ‘vitals of the nation’, and the British Empire depended ‘not upon dominions and territory alone, but upon men, not upon markets, but upon homes’.
Arthur Newsholme, Newman's older colleague, had his origins in a similar nonconformist background.
Medical Officer for Brighton and later to the Local Government Board, where he championed statistical inquiries into infant mortality, Newsholme felt the evangelical revival of the late nineteenth century to have been a potent factor in the social hygiene movement.
His participation in the NCPM and the National Council for Combating Venereal Disease (NCCVD) stimulated him to write tracts and pamphlets on sex education and the perils of promiscuity.
Like Newman, he frequently used his official status to polemicize for a holistic conception of medicine, which took in moral and social factors as part of the new scientific advances.
The institutional and intellectual alliances illustrated by the careers of leading protagonists formed the backbone of the social hygiene movement in the early years of the twentieth century.
As in the 1830s and 1840s, this medico-moral domain specified key concepts of sexuality as part of its concerns.
But there was no simple continuity between the two movements, no simple development of knowledge about sex.
The hygienics of Newman and his colleagues was highly differentiated from the early social medicine of Kay and Southwood Smith — in the organization of their discourse, their forms of social regulation and in the political and institutional conditions through which they were produced.
The field of sexuality was now much more clearly specified and theorized, in comparison with its relatively undifferentiated treatment in the moral repertoire of earlier environmentalists.
Newman and Newsholme displayed a high degree of self-consciousness about the place of sex within social relations, which was absent from the work of Kay and Chadwick.
A further structural difference was the impact of feminism.
As we know, the history of medical politics from the  mid-nineteenth century witnessed a growing feminist presence in official debates over sex.
It is important to turn again to feminist involvement here.
For the hygienist alliance was forced to operate through a series of negotiations with the women's movement.
5 FEMINIST RESPONSES
How did feminists orientate themselves towards the cult of social hygiene?
In the early years of this century many women still retained a deep suspicion of medical intervention in the moral arena.
The sticking-point was the continuing legacy of the Contagious Diseases Acts, and the wider fear that the profession was still sunk in ‘blind materialism’.
Yet some, particularly purists, believed that the growing rapprochement between medics and moralists necessitated a serious re-think of attitudes towards state medicine.
How did this come about?
On the repeal of the acts in 1886 The Shield had ended its campaign.
But it quickly re-formed in 1897 to challenge fresh regulationism introduced into India, keeping up a constant barrage of propaganda against any return to compulsory medical inspection and detention of prostitutes at home.
By the first decade of the twentieth century the majority of medics saw return to enforced regulation of VD as out of the question.
Recent knowledge concerning the disease's diagnosis and treatment, and its redefinition as a primarily civilian rather than a military problem, made the regulationist strategy impracticable.
The changed stance on VD paved the way for a partial reconciliation between purity feminists and medics over the twin issues of morality and health.
Tentative articles in The Shield from as early as 1905 began to reconsider the role of science in promoting moral reform.
Provided medics stressed the absolute necessity for sexual responsibility and self-control then ‘the microscope need not be despised’.
As one delegate to the International Abolitionist Conference of 1906 argued, science with her austere voice ought to tell man that a higher stage of civilization depended on the mastery of his instincts.
Over the next ten years, the journal recorded an ongoing debate between old-style moralists and younger, often newly professionalized  women, who held a more rationalist approach to moral reform.
The growing dialogue with medics heightened the moral input into medical discourse.
Helen Wilson, daughter of the repeal campaigner and editor of The Shield, was herself a trained doctor, as was the purist and eugenist, Mary Scharlieb.
When in 1913 Alison Neilans of the Ladies' National Association announced that ‘we and our former antagonists can work cordially together’, Wilson explained that the olive branch was a result of the change of heart among medics and their new expansive definition of health.
Organizational shifts, alongside changes in the language of purity, reflected this new feminist position.
In 1915 the LNA merged with the British Abolitionist Association to form the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene, with Wilson and Neilans effectively in control.
The new name, with its medical inflection, still had the power to evoke old hostilities and suspicions among some purity feminists.
The Shield tactfully explained the shift.
In the past the association had been dedicated to the supreme claims of morality and to the exposure of the error of ‘so-called hygiene’, which sought to subordinate justice and personal liberty to alleged physical necessities.
However, abolitionists who began as moralists had been ‘constrained by the necessities of their struggle’ to become hygienists.
Purists had recently found that the name ‘abolitionist’ hindered further progress , implying a problem of ‘long ago and far away’and alienating potential allies.
Henceforward, members of the new body would be proud to call themselves hygienists, because they had rescued the concept from the degradation into which it had sunk during a ‘materialistic age’.
They had shown that science must take account of the whole man and not only of his body.
To lend weight to the claim, members were reminded of Sir John Simon's own expansive definition of the moral responsibilities of preventive medicine.
The readership was offered a vision of the new city of ‘Hygeia’ a recurrent image projected by both medics and moralists.
The irresistible force of the city was attracting pilgrims from ‘widely-sundered starting points’.
Like the New Jerusalem it was planned by God on the foundations of equal justice and morality, but this modern vision of a sanitized cosmopolis was governed by health-giving purity and the sanctity of family life.
Feminist responses to hygienism were rarely unambiguous, partly because physiological medicine and evolutionary biology were so powerful a mainstay of anti-feminist campaigns.
But these concepts did provide some women with categories of self-definition around which to mobilize, negotiate and occasionally disrupt and claim as their own.
For many, the issue of national health, like social purity, was used to advance women's influence in the social sphere.
It enabled them to hold their own in the face of calls from male experts for a greater professionalization of the field.
The Shield alerted its readers to the great possibilities opened up to women by the growing focus on hygiene.
The woman of the future would be far more than a nurse or consoler, she would have a positive religion to realize as a high-priestess of health.
Eugenists like Scharlieb and Alice Ravenhill insisted that biology now conclusively proved that responsibility for safeguarding the nation's morals lay with women.
For Scharlieb, it was women's unique position as reproducers which made them so central to the physical and moral training of future generations.
Ravenhill saw the revelations of medicine and eugenics pointing to a greater role for women, not only as mothers but as guardians of those aesthetic qualities which made for physical, intellectual and moral progress.
This alliance of some purists and moderate feminists with the medical profession needs to be contrasted with the ongoing hostility displayed by many.
The militant wing of the movement did consciously draw on medical and evolutionary concepts, but to extend and deepen their attacks on men.
Both Christabel Pankhurst and Swiney used medical authorities and statistics instrumentally to win specific arguments, while distancing themselves from what they saw as the corrupt power of male professionals.
The Great Scourge was not only a vigorous purity polemic, it mobilized the evidence of countless medics to insist that up to eighty per cent of the male population was infected with gonorrhoea — the race poison of the eugenists.
Speaking the language of race and nation, Pankhurst demonstrated that innocent wives were being continually infected by their adulterous husbands, resulting in degeneracy on a scale which heralded race suicide.
Her book concluded that continence was both physiologically and morally essential for the fit reproduction of the race.
As always, Frances Swiney's medical polemic was even more extensive, claiming women's innate biological and mental superiority over the rest of creation.
In a dazzling subversion of medical and eugenic theories she insisted that women, as the reproducers of life, were not merely central to perpetuation of the race but were the dominant motivating force behind the human species.
They were ‘the centre of gravity of the whole biological system’, while men were becoming more and more superfluous.
Swiney proposed that women's racial superiority was evidenced both by their physical and mental capabilities and in their internal cellular composition.
Darwin and Spencer had been wrong to argue that women were in a state of arrested development.
Man was the intermediate form.
The shape of woman's face was far in advance of that of man; in the number of teeth they were leading evolution; they had more grace and more perfect physical beauty.
Challenging the biologists Patrick Geddes and J.A.
Thomson, Swiney pointed out that ‘femaleness’ was due to the presence of a chromosome absent in the male.
Hence women displayed a more complex cellular composition, which was the positive force behind reproduction, whereas the katabolic male cells led to racial disintegration.
Current panics by eugenists and social reformers over national decline were misplaced in blaming the mother.
It was men who were the cause of racial decay.
In language which coupled purity outrage with a conceptual grasp of eugenics and the new biology, Swiney drew together the major social problems — disease, feeble-mindedness, degeneracy and insanity — to expose male vice as the root cause of national decline:
Well may Dr Rentoul claim that the health of the woman is our greatest natural asset, that the physically and mentally healthy woman has been so ruthlessly, so brutally, so generally mercilessly exploited by the male as women…
She stands as the martyr of organized and systematic sexual wrong-doing on the part of the man who should be her mate, and whom alone she has evolved to the human plane.
Church and state, religion, law, prejudice, custom, tradition, greed, lust, hatred, injustice, selfishness, ignorance, and arrogance have all conspired against her  under the sexual rule of the human male.
Vices, however, like curses, come back to roost.
In his own enfeebled frame, in his diseased tissue, in his weak will, his gibbering idiocy, his raving insanity and hideous criminality, he reaps the fruits of a dishonoured motherhood, an outraged womanhood, an unnatural, abnormal stimulated childbirth and starved poison-fed infancy.
Swiney's feminist hygienics and Pankhurst's medical polemic were part of their broader criminal law strategy to halt male vice.
But the fact that these arch-opponents of male professionalism now referenced the concepts of social hygiene — albeit in subverted form — was a measure of the changing language of purity feminism.
The feminist take-up of hygienics was in part a skilful form of campaigning, involving an imaginative reworking of dominant knowledges.
Yet it also testified to the increasing power of the new medical strategy and its ability to force a dialogue with competing political forces.
The decline of purity feminism in the 1920s and 1930s needs to be seen in relation to the overall decline of feminism, and especially to the unmitigated hostility of male sex reformers.
But it was also the result of the growing hegemony of the social hygiene movement.
In the period during and immediately after the war feminists were confronted by this changing situation across a whole range of sexual issues: venereal disease, birth-control and, crucially for our argument, sex education.
