STORMBOUND
‘I have felt the wind of the wing of madness’
Baudelaire
ONE
Jimmy sat in the back seat of the panda car, senses returned.
The alcohol inside was now only faintly blurring out the throbbing pain in his jaw.
He tried to rub it, and then realised that he was handcuffed to the Police Constable sitting next to him.
The Sergeant was driving, and the windscreen wipers were waving crescents of slush away from the glass as they headed on into the teeth of the storm.
‘So I'm arrested, then?’ asked Jimmy at last, shaking his handcuffed wrist so that the policeman's hand also jerked upwards.
Simpson angrily jerked their manacled hands down again.
‘Depends,’ said Sergeant Lawrence from the driving seat.
‘On what?’
‘On your being a good boy, Jimmy.’
Simpson blew his nose again, and Jimmy saw with satisfaction from the handkerchief that it was still bleeding.
‘This going to take long, then?’
‘Not long.
Maybe an hour at most,’ lied Lawrence, not knowing what the hell Cardiff wanted him for anyway.
‘Is that before or after we've stopped in some back alley somewhere?’
‘What?’
‘You mean you're not going to work me over as usual?
Not going to pay me back for the bloody nose, even if you did nearly knock my head off?’
‘Don't tempt me,’ mumbled Simpson into his handkerchief.
‘Enough of that!’ snapped Lawrence.
And then, to Devlin: ‘You know me better than that, Jimmy.’
‘Yeah, I suppose so,’ said Jimmy grudgingly.
‘But I wish I could say the same for your superiors.’
‘What's he mean?’ asked Simpson.
‘Never mind,’ replied Lawrence.
Jimmy gave a quiet, derisive laugh.
He looked out into the night at the rain-soaked pavement and the ravaged brickwork of empty and derelict factories, as if trying to recognise something.
His attention turned back to Lawrence.
He looked at the back of his head carefully for a while before speaking again.
‘Two years inside, Sergeant.’
‘You probably deserved it.’
Jimmy laughed again: ‘Before that, I had two years’ apprenticeship in the shipyards.
Then the shipyards sank without trace, and it was three years on the dole.
Suppose I deserved that as well?’
‘Nobody deserves that, Jimmy.’
‘Oh yes, I forgot.
You used to be a welder in the yards didn't you, Sergeant?’
Jimmy looked hard at the man who was driving.
Simpson could see that they knew each other much better than he'd presumed.
‘Thirteen years, son.
But you know all about that.’
‘Maybe I should have joined the force like you.
That would have been a laugh, wouldn't it?’
‘A scream, Jimmy.
An absolute scream.’
Jimmy's eyes were drawn to the garish reflection of neon on the pavement outside a working-men's club.
He had a fleeting image of a bar, of the people inside, of someone singing Chris Rea's: ‘Joys of Christmas, Northern Style’, and then it had all flashed by in less than a second.
Now they were in darker, dirtier streets.
But the fleeting images brought back piercing emotions.
And like the slide-show slats of light and darkness that washed into the car from passing streetlights as they sped onwards, those emotions were good and bad by turns.
He had met Pamela at a club.
She was a singer.
Not one  of those warbling songstresses who made endless rounds of the clubs with an anonymous backing group.
Pamela considered herself ‘Solo’, playing her own keyboards and singing cover versions of songs that, to Jimmy, were better than the originals.
From the very start, he had been in love with her, following her act around the clubs.
Too shy (and now, he smiled at the word shy ever applying to him) to approach her directly in the way that he usually did with women he found attractive.
Pamela was special.
Deep down, he knew that she would be put off by any direct approach.
He had seen others doing that to her in the clubs, and even though he'd felt like stepping in when their attentions were becoming too direct, he had watched her superbly effective ‘put downs’ and stood back in awe.
How could he let her think that he was one of them?
Eventually, she had noticed him.
And it had made him feel big in a way that had nothing to do with macho trappings.
She was special — and they had been good together.
She had been married before, of course, and he hadn't been surprised to find out.
She had two children: Cathy and Noel, seven and five.
Her ex-husband had walked out one day for unspecified reasons, never to be seen again.
Jimmy cursed him for a fool and thanked him for standing aside.
Pamela and he had been living together for a while and, until recently, Jimmy had been close to a happiness previously denied him; both as lover and as surrogate father.
But things had changed.
And the change had been with Pamela, not with him.
She'd visited him regularly when he was in prison; but he could see as the months went by that whatever that special something they'd had, it was withering away.
Pamela had been the reason he'd been put away.
She was the one with the debts and money problems; the one who'd suggested the jeweller's shop job.
But on his release and return, he knew that the time away had ruined everything.
And then one day he'd come home early and found her in bed with someone else.
The kids had been sent to her  mother's house, and now it seemed that they had a new surrogate father.
And then he remembered the presents.
‘Where's the presents?’
‘What presents?’ asked Simpson through the bloodied handkerchief.
‘The Christmas presents I bought for the kids.
You've left them behind in that bloody bar, haven't you?
‘Calm down.’
Lawrence picked up the handset and radioed into central headquarters, asking for a policeman to go back to the club.
‘Bloody idiots,’ muttered Jimmy.
‘If I know that club, they'll have been stolen by now.’
‘Sue us,’ said Lawrence, and the car swerved left off the highway and pulled into the forecourt of Fernley House.
Jimmy was temporarily blinded by the orange light which suddenly illuminated the car windscreen.
The orange light resolved itself into four roadwork lanterns — and then he saw the cordon and roadblock with its black-and-white wooden pole which had been set up ahead, blocking off the entrance road which led up to the office-block frontage and car park.
Now he could see a small knot of people in front of that roadblock, dressed in overcoats, caps and hats; attempting, it seemed, to talk their way past half a dozen yellow-anoraked policemen on the other side of that barrier.
The huddled knot of men and women saw the car approach and stop.
There was an unheard babble of excited conversation and now they were hurrying through the rain towards the car.
‘What the hell is going on?’ asked Jimmy.
And now the first of the small crowd had reached the car.
Faces were peering in on them, voices raised above the sound of the rain and the wind.
Knuckles were rapping on the car windows, breath steaming the glass.
Somewhere, a camera-bulb flashed and at last he knew who these people were.
‘Bloody press,’ muttered Sergeant Lawrence.
One of the yellow-jacketed policemen elbowed his way to Lawrence's window.
The Sergeant wound down the window, and now they could hear the clamouring questions as he showed the policeman his ID.
Ice-chilled air flooded the car.
‘Come on, Sergeant.
What's going on in there?’
‘Is it true that all of the people in there have vanished?’
‘You can't keep a mass murder quiet for long…’
‘Piss off!’ said the policeman examining Lawrence's ID.
‘Can we quote you on that?’ asked a white-faced, red-nosed newsman.
‘Look, come on, you've got to…’
‘We've got Jimmy Devlin in the back,’ said Lawrence.
The policeman stuck his head through the opened window and examined Jimmy as if he was some strange zoological specimen.
‘That's him, is it?’ said the policeman unnecessarily.
Lawrence grunted, and the camera bulb flashed again, immediately answered by a fizzling flash of blue-white electricity in the sky and a rumbling of thunder.
Too late, Jimmy quickly raised his non-manacled hand in front of his face.
‘We'll raise the barrier.
You can take him straight in.’
‘Whatever's going on,’ said Jimmy in awe, ‘I didn't do it.’
TWO
By the time that Jimmy had considered making a run for it, it was too late.
Hustled through the storm and into the reception area he felt like someone on their way to a firing squad.
Chilled and soaked, he was led past the reception desk and the hurried police activity (had there been a murder here?
Was that what this was all about?) and into the ante-room/office that was being used as the base for the investigation.
A gesture from Lawrence, and Simpson had unfastened the handcuffs.
For an instant, Jimmy wondered whether he should hurl himself at the plate-glass windows.
Then he saw the reflections there of computer equipment, green VDU screens and police personnel.
Lawrence pushed forward to another interior office, knocked and pushed the door open.
Jimmy halted between the two policemen when he saw Cardiff sitting behind a desk, rain pelting against the outside window.
The Sergeant and the Constable had continued on for two steps through the door towards their senior officer without realising that they had left Jimmy behind.
They started back for him, slightly embarrassed and anxious that he might decide to make a break for it but there was no need.
Jimmy wasn't going anywhere.
‘You,’ said Jimmy, hand held to one side, a crooked smile on his face which contained no humour.
‘Hello Jimmy,’ said Cardiff.
They held each other 's look for a long five seconds.
And then the Sergeant nudged Devlin and he walked up to the desk where Cardiff was sitting.
‘Alright, Cardiff.
You going to read me my rights?’
Cardiff leaned forward.
‘Depends on whether you're arrested or not, doesn't it, Jimmy?’
‘What do you mean?’
‘Well as far as I'm concerned you're just here assisting with enquiries.
After we've had a talk you're welcome to go back home to the wife and kids, enjoy your Christmas.
On the other hand, if you want to be awkward then we will press charges for assault.
I'll read you your rights, you can make a call and then spend Christmas in the cells.’
‘You're a bastard, Cardiff.
Always were.’
‘Well?’
‘Alright…but I'm due home soon.’
‘To wrap up the presents?’
‘Watch your mouth, Cardiff.
If I do have to stay in the cells over Christmas I'll make sure I ruin your wedding tackle before they take me down.’
‘Alright, Jimmy.
Alright.
Let's be polite with each other, then.’
Cardiff pointed to the seat opposite his desk and Jimmy grudgingly sat down.
‘Want this taped, sir?’ asked the Sergeant.
‘No, I don't think so,’ Cardiff replied, eyes still on Jimmy.
‘Not yet.’
Cardiff looked up then at the Constable, still dabbing at a fresh nosebleed with his now-crimson handkerchief.
‘Better get that nose seen to.’
‘Yes, sir.’
The Constable moved to the door.
Jimmy watched him, wondering how long it would be before he met up with this guy again on the street.
No doubt he thought that there was a debt to be collected there.
It had happened to Jimmy before.
He was used to it.
Jimmy turned back to Cardiff.
‘Okay, I'm here like a good boy.
And I'm co-operating.
What do you want to know?’
‘July 13th, 1988.
Fernley Shopping Centre.’
‘Shit!’
Partly in anger, partly in contempt, Jimmy turned away from him again and stared at the outside door, attempting to control his emotions.
‘So that's…’
Jimmy dried up in anger again.
Then, calmly: ‘We went through  all of that when it happened, Cardiff.
There's nothing else to say.
It's all…what do you call it?…part of the official record.’
Cardiff opened a cardboard file on his desk.
‘Jimmy Devlin.
Andrew MacAndrews, known as Mac.
And Donald Flannery.
All three with criminal records.
On July 13th, 1988 at 11.32 p.m.
Devlin was apprehended in the course of robbing a jeweller's shop in Fernley Shopping Centre…’
‘Apprehended?’
‘That's what it says here.’
‘Bollocks.
You and Pearce were in charge that night.
And I telephoned your lot when…it happened.’
‘Telephoned in a panic.
Some kind of garbled nonsense over the phone about something that had happened while you were robbing the place.’
Jimmy paused, waiting for Cardiff to continue.
But Cardiff sat implacably, looking at him.
‘Okay,’ Jimmy continued.
‘So for no apparent reason, I ring the cops and tell them to get over to Fernley Shopping Centre because something bad has happened.
Because Mac and Flannery are dead…’
‘And while you're getting out of there, you run straight into a patrol car and they arrest you after a chase.
It's only then you say you were the person who telephoned.
It was an anonymous call.
Remember that part of the story?
You left all those parts out, Jimmy.’
‘You stitched me up, you bastard.
Stitched me up good and proper.’
‘My heart bleeds for you.’
‘You and your bloody mates fingered me for those three other burglaries.
And I didn't do them.
That's what got me the two years inside, pal.
Not the jewellery job.’
‘Poor Jimmy.
Victimised by the police.’
‘Look…what the hell do you want me here for, Cardiff?
I've done my time for that job, and the other jobs you laid on me.
So what the hell is all this about?’
‘MacAndrews and Flannery.’
‘What…you mean they've turned up again?
But they can't have done.
I saw what happened to them.
They must be dead after that…’
‘No, they're still missing, Jimmy.
I just want you to tell me what happened to them again.’
‘I've told you!
Told you all then and no one would believe me, so I changed my story.’
‘So tell me again.
The original story.’
‘Yeah, well…we went over that at the time, didn't we?’
‘Then you changed your story.’
‘No one believed me, Cardiff.
Least of all you.
Thought I was copping a plea on…diminished responsibility.
Trying to get out of a prosecution and into a cosy mental home.’
‘And your accomplices got away — never to be seen again.’
Jimmy gritted his teeth.
Cardiff could see that the knuckles on his right hand were white where he clenched the chair rest.
When he spoke again, his voice was bitter and guttural.
‘That's because they're dead.’
‘So you say.
But where are the bodies?
The way we see it, they both did a runner and they've been in hiding ever since.’
‘For two years?’
‘They both had form, Jimmy.
More form than you.
And there were other reasons why we wanted those two.
Other jobs they'd pulled off over the years that we can nail them for.’
‘Like the way you nailed me?
I did two years on account of you, Cardiff.’
‘An innocent man, eh?
So you're not a thief, then?’
‘Look, Cardiff.
We were robbing that jeweller's.
No use denying that.
Then that…that thing happened.
And they were both killed, whatever you say.
I telephoned you.
Me !
Now what the bloody hell would I have done something like that for unless something bad had happened?
We could  have just done the place over and that would have been that.
We'd got past the security and into the shop for the stuff.
Believe me, it was an easy job.
We were ready to do a bunk.
Doesn't make sense, does it?’
Jimmy was silent for a while, and Cardiff could see that he was reappraising the situation.
Finally, he spoke again: ‘Look, Cardiff.
It was dark.
There was a storm that night.
Just like tonight.
Lights and shadows.
I don't know.
Maybe I did see things.
Maybe what I thought I saw happen to them both didn't really happen at all.’
Jimmy's words seemed to stick and hold inside Cardiff's mind.
There was a storm that night.
Just like tonight .
‘So tell me again.
What happened to MacAndrews and Flannery?’
‘They…’
From somewhere outside came the sounds of some kind of commotion; raised voices and the clattering of a glass door.
The ‘interview room’ door opened again and Sergeant Lawrence poked his head around the corner.
‘Sir…?’
The sound of raised, angry voices was louder.
‘What the hell's going on?’ asked Cardiff.
‘I think you'd better come, sir.
We've got visitors.’
Cursing, Cardiff rose from his seat as PC Simpson entered the room again.
‘What about me?’ asked Jimmy in exasperation.
‘You just stay,’ said Cardiff.
‘Keep an eye on him, Simpson.’
The Police Constable with the bloodied nose blew into his handkerchief, glaring at Jimmy as Cardiff left the room with Lawrence.
Jimmy smiled at him, lounging back into his chair and crossing his hands on his belly.
‘You would have used that broken pint glass on me, wouldn't you?’ said Simpson.
‘No…’ replied Jimmy.
‘I'm just a big noise, that's all.
But I dare say you won't believe that.
So what the hell, eh?’
‘Not all police are bastards.’
Jimmy smiled.
‘So what's Santa bringing you this year, then?’ he asked.
Simpson grimaced, and blew his nose again.
THREE
Cardiff reached the corridor leading to the reception area and saw the source of the disturbance immediately.
A tall blond man wearing a greatcoat was standing by the glass reception doors, stroking rain and slush from his sleeves.
Pearce was standing in front of him, talking angrily and pointing to those doors as two other men began to push clumsily inside, admitting a gale of icy air that even Cardiff could feel from his position.
The men were carrying large metal cases of some kind, like metallic suitcases, and Cardiff heard Pearce exclaim…
‘Who the hell are these people?’
…as the blond man continued to brush the rain from his coat, seeming to ignore Pearce completely.
A yellow-jacketed police constable — one of the men at the security barrier — followed sheepishly behind the two men with the cases as they moved into the reception area.
Pearce rounded on him fiercely and the policeman held his arms wide in supplication.
Cardiff strode down the corridor towards them, followed by Lawrence.
The outside door banged open again and a fourth stranger, also wearing a greatcoat, pushed inside and squeezed past Pearce and the Constable.
‘And who the hell is that ?’ demanded Pearce of the Police Constable.
‘That thing outside…the thing you're supposed to be supervising, in case you didn't know…is a security cordon.
But for all the bloody good it's doing it might as well not be there!’
‘They had ID, sir,’ said the Police Constable weakly.
‘They're men from…’
‘I don't care if they're the Men from Uncle, you should be keeping everyone…’
‘It's okay, Pearce,’ said Cardiff as he strode to meet them.
The blond man looked up at last— and his eyes latched on to Cardiff.
Something seemed to happen then.
Something that Cardiff could not explain, but which had a peculiar clarity and depth which shook him.
Because he seemed to feel the question emanating from this tall blond stranger's icy-blue eyes.
Is it you?
Outside, lightning flickered and lit up the glass reception doors.
The crack and hollow booming of the thunder rattled the panes.
And Cardiff seemed to hear that unspoken question again:
Is it you?
Cardiff retained eye contact with the blond man as he drew level.
When the stranger spoke, it was in a perfectly modulated and even tone.
Cardiff was now somehow not surprised to find that the sound of the man's voice was familiar — even though they had never met before.
‘My name's Rohmer.’
He brushed more snow from his sleeve and gave a curious half-smile.
‘I'm from D21.
And these are my men.’
Rohmer brought out an ID card and showed it to Cardiff.
Cardiff had seen similar identification only four times in his professional life.
On each occasion, it had meant that the operation on which he was engaged would soon be taken out of his hands.
‘The man behind me here is Duvall.’
The other man in the greatcoat gave a perfunctory flip of his ID wallet.
He had short, black hair with a brutally regimented parting and a somewhat effete face that failed to conceal an undeniably hard and no-nonsense efficiency.
Pearce appeared on Cardiff's left.
‘Sorry, sir.
They should have been stopped at the block…’
‘Never mind.’
Cardiff looked over to where the other two strangers were laying their metal suitcases carefully down in the main reception area under the watchful eye of Pearce's men.
The yellow-jacketed policeman shuffled uneasily from foot to foot, uncertain of what they should be doing now.
‘And the other two?’ asked Cardiff.
‘Gilbert and Frye.
They're…scientists.’
Rohmer turned away from Cardiff and began to walk over to them.
There were too many questions.
It was too soon for the operation to be taken away from Cardiff before he found out just what was going on in this hellish office block.
‘Rohmer?’
The blond man turned back.
‘That's not enough.’
Rohmer smiled that half-smile again and returned.
‘You'll have been given a directive from D21?’
‘No.’
Rohmer paused again, as if weighing Cardiff up.
Thunder grumbled somewhere in the sky again and rain hissed at the windows.
‘Top security clearance from your Central HQ?
We have a code name for our operation.’
Cardiff shook his head, and this time the half-humour in Rohmer's eyes had gone.
When he spoke again, his voice was harsh and clipped.
‘Darkfall.’
‘Don't know what you're talking about,’ said Cardiff, seeing from the corner of his eye that Pearce was looking at him quizzically.
Darkfall .
The word on the computer screen just before the message broke up.
‘That's not possible,’ continued Rohmer.
‘You must have received instructions.’
‘This storm has knocked out the telephones.
Our radios are screwed up.’
From the reception area, the other two newcomers looked up sharply.
‘And your computer link?’
‘The messages are scrambled.
Like I said — the storm.’
Rohmer smiled again, and this time it was as if he'd just heard the best news of the evening.
One of the other newcomers was hurrying over.
‘Then I suggest you send one of your people back to HQ and receive your orders by hand.’
‘I've done that.
We're waiting.’
Cardiff watched the other newcomer's hurried approach.
The man was slight, with stooped shoulders, a pink face and thick spectacles that magnified his eyes, making the sockets look like deep pits in his skull.
He was plastering wet threads of hair over a balding pate, and there was a look of alarm in those magnified eyes.
‘Telephones and radio out?’ he asked.
‘Yes,’ said Rohmer, without taking his eyes from Cardiff.
‘And you…you said the computer messages were…’
‘Scrambled,’ finished Rohmer for him.
‘That's what the man said.’
‘Look, Rohmer.
We were advised…’
‘Check with Frye.’
‘If what he says is true, this can't be residual weather effects.’
‘We took readings beforehand, didn't we?’
‘Well, yes…’
‘And Frye is taking readings now, isn't he?’
‘They're negative,’ said the man from the reception area.
Cardiff looked back to see that the other man had opened one of the metallic cases and taken out what seemed to be earphones, which he was now wearing.
The metal case was a portable computer.
‘The readings are all negative.’
‘You see, Gilbert?
Nothing to worry about.’
‘Maybe you can start telling me what this is all about, Rohmer?’ said Cardiff.
‘We're in the middle of an investigation  and, quite frankly, we don't want anyone from Central HQ getting in the way.’
‘We're part of your investigation now.’
‘Explain.’
‘For the time being you're still in charge, Cardiff.
We'll be conducting a series of scientific tests — quite separately from your own forensic people.
When you do get your orders back from HQ, you'll see that you're to withdraw your people and leave everything to us.
For the time being you will retain hands-on responsibility for the operation but afford us any assistance we require.
No questions, no hindrance.
Just allow us to continue.’
‘No questions, no hindrance?’
‘That's right.
Your new orders will also confirm that I am to assume overall charge of the investigation.
We represent the preliminary research team.
Another unit of Central Government operatives and forensics are already on their way here to replace your people.’
‘Not good enough, Rohmer.’
‘For the time being, you're to carry on as normal.’
‘Still not good enough.’
Rohmer half-smiled again.
‘I've only your word,’ continued Cardiff.
‘That's not good enough.
If you do want assistance, and no hindrance, then you'll have to answer some questions.’
‘You could be in serious trouble, Cardiff.
These instructions…’
‘When they arrive.’
‘As you say, when these instructions arrive, you'll find that they come from the very top.
I don't believe that any obstruction on your behalf at this stage will be looked on kindly.’
‘Let me put it another way.
Answer some questions…or else I'll make my own arrangements.’
‘And what arrangements would they be?’ smiled Rohmer.
‘I'll have you thrown out into the fucking snow until my new orders arrive.’
‘Gilbert!’
The man with the headphones was beckoning urgently.
Gilbert turned and scurried back to him.
‘Then it seems we're at an impasse until…’ began Rohmer.
And then the screaming began.
Cardiff spun around in shock, seeing all of the others reacting in exactly the same way, as the hideous, agonised cacophony echoed and reverberated around them.
It was a deafening chorus of human agony; a shrieking cacophony of men and women's voices, dozens — perhaps hundreds of them — all wailing and shrieking in mortal torment.
But there was no one to be seen.
Cardiff whirled, searching the corridor and the surrounding area, as the screaming continued.
It seemed to be coming from everywhere — and nowhere — at once.
But the dreadfulness of the sounds was intensified by the horrifying nearness of those agonised voices.
Cardiff ran to the glass doors, wiped the moisture from the pane and looked out into the night at the blurred orange glow of the traffic cordon — but could see nothing else.
Pearce moved quickly behind the reception desk and flung open the door.
Beyond, the computer personnel were looking around in horror, some with hands over their ears as the screaming went on and on.
Cardiff swung back into the lobby.
Only Rohmer appeared to remain unmoved by the hideous cacophony as Cardiff strode hurriedly past him.
The Operations Room door banged open again and Simpson burst out into the reception area, with Jimmy Devlin close behind him.
‘What the hell…?’ said Simpson, gazing around in shock and horror.
They were the first words spoken since the horrifying, shrieking tumult had begun and the word registered strongly with Cardiff for those shrieking, howling, tormented voices indeed sounded like a horde of the damned from Hell.
Someone, somewhere had opened a door into Hades — and they were hearing the torment of the damned.
‘Where is it coming from?’ shouted Pearce over the cacophony.
Oh God help me.
GOD HELP ME , wailed one voice louder than the rest.
IT HURRRTTSS !
Thunder crashed in the sky, and Cardiff felt the vibrations in his feet.
And then he heard something else which utterly horrified him.
Another voice, another man's voice rose louder in agony from the dreadful screaming and echoed plainly in the reception area.
Help me!
Help me!
HELP ME, CARDIFF!
It was a voice that he recognised.
The shock was redoubled when Cardiff recognised yet another voice in that bedlam of torment.
Let me go!
LET ME OUT!
LET MEEEE…
And then thunder crashed again, its impact slamming shut that door into Hell.
The voices were abruptly cut off.
Everyone remained frozen in their positions, looking at each other, waiting for the hellish sounds to begin again.
Now, Cardiff could hear a hubbub coming from the Operations Room behind the reception area as people emerged from their shocked silence.
Through the open door he could see the computer personnel; some with hands still over their ears, others looking around at the walls and ceiling.
‘Everyone okay in there, Simpson?’
‘Yes…yes…’ replied the Constable.
‘I think so, but…’
‘My God, Jack,’ said Sergeant Lawrence.
‘What was it?
Everyone was coming out of it now.
Pearce moved quickly to join Cardiff.
‘Well?’ shouted Jimmy.
‘What the hell was that ?’ as he tried to push past Simpson and into the lobby.
Simpson tried his best to restrain him.
His nose was bleeding again.
‘Devlin!’ snapped Cardiff.
‘Behave yourself if you want to go home.’
Rohmer turned quickly and looked in Jimmy's direction.
‘Devlin,’ he said in wonder, under his breath.
Pearce took Cardiff by the sleeve.
There was a wildness in his eyes that hadn't been there before.
‘One of them called your name,’ he said.
‘I know…’
And now Rohmer and Gilbert were beside them.
‘You know who it was?’ asked Rohmer in that quiet, modulated voice.
Cardiff turned to see that Rohmer was the only one apparently unaffected by what they'd all just heard.
Unruffled, his face was now a mask of deep interest.
‘Yes,’ said Cardiff.
‘The one who called me by name was Evans, my driver — one of the police constables who went missing earlier.
The other was Farley Peters — a journalist.’
‘You mean you've had more disappearances?’ gasped Gilbert.
His face was wet with perspiration, and there was fear on that face.
Cardiff saw that he was wearing gloves and that he was pulling at them nervously, as if afraid that they might come off.
‘I mean…since the initial disappearance?’
And then it occurred to Cardiff: ‘Oh Christ.
The forensic people upstairs.
They're looking at the same place where…’
Pearce rushed to the elevator.
‘Someone's coming down.’
Cardiff pushed past Rohmer and Gilbert to join him, and they both watched as the elevator light above the main double-doors began to descend from fourteen.
…nine…eight…seven…
And behind him, Cardiff listened to Rohmer and Gilbert speaking sotto voce .
‘Frye had a reading,’ said Gilbert in his cracked voice.
‘'Just briefly, before those…noises…began.
It's stopped now.
But it could have been a strike.
Couldn't it, Rohmer?’
…six…five…four….
‘Rohmer,’ continued Gilbert.
‘Were you lying?
It's still happening, isn't it?’
‘No, it's not.
We're quite safe.’
…three…two…
‘But what if we get a Returner?’
‘That's what Duvall's for.’
Cardiff turned to see Duvall loosening his overcoat slowly as he moved to draw level behind them as they watched the elevator doors.
…one…
Ground…
‘Stand away from the elevators, please,’ said Duvall.
It was the first time that he had spoken.
His voice was cultured Oxbridge, and the grim intent in that voice made Cardiff and Pearce stand obediently aside.
Something like resentment was beginning to swell in Cardiff; a resentment that he was now doing as he was told by these newcomers — these newcomers who seemed to have more answers than he did for whatever in hell was going on here.
‘What the hell are you…?’ began Cardiff, and then he saw Duvall reaching into his overcoat pocket, sensing his tension as the elevator light pinged ! and the double-doors slid open.
‘Christ, look out!’ shouted Pearce as a figure blundered out of the elevator.
Cardiff elbowed Duvall aside when he recognised that figure immediately.
It was one of the laboratory people: Edgar.
‘Those noises!’ gasped Edgar as he reeled into the corridor.
Duvall untensed, standing aside as the three other members of the forensic team blundered out into the corridor.
Now, resentment exploded in Cardiff as he rounded on Rohmer.
‘What the hell is wrong with you people?
What were you expecting?’
Rohmer remained silent.
‘What in God's name made those noises?’ blurted Edgar, looking around, as if expecting to see some scene of carnage.
‘You heard them as well?’ asked Pearce.
‘Up there?’
‘Bloody horrible.
All around us.
Sounded like a bloody slaughter.
What's going on, Cardiff?’
Cardiff turned to Pearce as the elevator doors slid shut  again, pausing only briefly to see that Rohmer was standing almost nonchalantly with his back to the corridor wall and with that infuriating half-smile on his face again.
He struggled to contain his burgeoning resentment.
‘Alright, Pearce.
I want everyone out of here before there's a panic.
Get the computer people to clear out as quickly as possible.
Edgar, I don't know how far your people got upstairs…’
‘Nothing.
Just minor bloodstains on the carpet where you found the hand.
That was it.’
‘Okay.
Then you don't need a second telling.
I want you all out.’
Rohmer pushed himself away from the corridor wall, smiling.
‘Very sensible, Cardiff.
You second-guessed me.’
‘Don't patronise me,’ said Cardiff tightly.
‘I still want some answers.’
‘Maybe you will get them after all.’
Cardiff turned back to Pearce.
‘I want the whole building cleared.
These people are taking over.
But I want the roadblock maintained…’
Cardiff turned and looked squarely at Rohmer, ‘…and I'm staying.’
Pearce gestured to Simpson, still trying his best to restrain Jimmy Devlin.
‘Come on, you heard him.’
Simpson started forward, pulling Jimmy by the sleeve.
‘He's staying,’ said Rohmer calmly.
Cardiff turned back.
‘What?’
‘Jimmy Devlin.
Twenty-three years old.
Petty thief.
Robbed Hanson's Jewellers in 1988.’
‘Always wanted to be a celebrity,’ said Jimmy.
And then to Cardiff: ‘And who the hell is blondie, anyway?’
‘Maybe you do know more than I'm giving you credit for, Cardiff,’ said Rohmer.
‘He stays.’
‘Like hell I do,’ said Jimmy, pulling away from Simpson's grasp.
‘He's assisting with enquiries,’ said Cardiff.
‘He's not under arrest.’
‘So he can stay and assist me with my enquiries.’
‘Get fucked,’ said Jimmy.
‘In that case, Mr Devlin,’ said Rohmer, ‘you're under arrest.’
‘On what charge?’ asked Cardiff.
‘Bad language in a built-up area.’
Cardiff looked long and hard at Rohmer as Duvall drew level, reinforcing his authority.
‘Okay, Simpson,’ said Cardiff.
‘You join the others.
Looks like you and I are staying, Jimmy.’
Duvall moved to take charge of Jimmy while Simpson slipped resentfully away, dabbing at his nose.
Jimmy slouched back against the wall, and Cardiff was surprised to see a look of real concern on Rohmer's face as he moved forward and pulled Jimmy away from it.
The concern melted into humour again, when Rohmer saw that Cardiff was watching.
‘Bad posture,’ said the blond man.
‘Not good for the health.’
‘When the building's cleared,’ said Cardiff, ‘we talk.’
Rohmer smiled…and nodded.
FOUR
Cardiff watched as the three policemen on the cordon-barrier lifted the wooden pole and the last of the police cars slid past and vanished into the storm.
No matter how much he wiped at the condensation on the window, he could still barely see what was going on out there.
The storm was reaching a savage pitch.
The snow was driving down now but even through that whirling vortex of frozen city detritus, none of it seemed to be making any impression on those glistening black pavements or the tarmac.
Cardiff couldn't help but remember Beaton's words:Nothing white ever sticks here .
Visibility was severely restricted and the policemen still on duty at that cordon were dim blurs, as indeed was Pearce, who was out there now, supervising the departure of what had become, in essence, a rather ineffective investigation team.
Thunder rattled the windowpane through which Cardiff was looking and the strobe lights fizzled and flickered yet again.
The effect unsettled him, and he found the fact that he could still be unsettled somehow curious.
He recalled the incident in the boiler room when both Pearce and he had been assailed by the same noises that Beaton had heard.
A lightning strike?
Well, yes…it must have been.
That was the obvious answer.
But why did he feel that there was something more, and why wasn't he acting on that instinct, the way that he'd always acted?
Why did he want to hold his peace?
Why had he kept Pearce quiet about their experience?
And what the hell had happened when he'd first met Rohmer?
Is it you?
The depth of semi-recognition, even though they'd never met, was puzzling and disturbing.
The potency of that question and those three words had affected Cardiff profoundly.
Is it you?
What the hell did it mean?
And had Rohmer really felt the same thing?
‘Maybe not,’ Cardiff said to himself.
‘Maybe it's all part of the process of cracking up.’
Cardiff had supervised the clearance of the office block, noting wryly that it seemed easier to clear everyone out than it had been to get his original team established.
The noises…the screaming…had unnerved everyone.
Pearce had given the necessary instructions to a depressed, disillusioned and just plain pissed-off police cordon outside that the ‘block’ had to be maintained.
Two men would remain ‘on shift’, to be relieved by two others when all of the team had returned through this furious storm to Central Headquarters.
The two men already there had been on duty now for two hours.
Even their police greatcoats had been insufficient to keep out the chill and the wet of this storm.
The waiting outside in the wind and the snow had been too much for a majority of the newsmen who had shown up originally.
As the storm had increased in strength, so it seemed that the enthusiasm of the pressmen on the ‘public's right to know’, coupled with the fact that the pubs were still open in town, had served to weaken their resolve somewhat.
Only a smattering of perversely conscientious newsmen and women remained outside the cordon…and their resolve seemed to have paid off when the police began to leave the building, climbing hurriedly into their cars and vans.
The policemen on the cordon had lifted the barrier-pole to let the small convoy of police cars and vans past, ignoring with more than a little impatience the fusillade of questions thrown at them by the remaining newspeople.
‘Why are they leaving?’
‘Who are the new people?
Have they found out what's happened to everyone inside yet?’
‘There still seem to be others inside.
Can you tell us what's…?’
Anxious to get news of this latest development back to their own offices and realising that there was unlikely to be any more to be gleaned from this unpleasant vigil, the remaining newspeople departed as the small convoy of police traffic vanished into the maw of the blizzard.
They were to be the last to escape from the Teeth of the Storm.
Cardiff turned away from the rain-streaked window as the policemen on cordon-duty lifted the wooden pole and the last of the cars slid away into the night.
His attention was drawn away from the rain-streaked windows by the sound of Gilbert's voice, again nervously asking questions of Rohmer.
‘Are you sure, Rohmer?
You must be sure that it's over…?’
Cardiff turned back and when Gilbert saw that he was watching, he became instantly silent.
He returned to assist Frye, who was standing now with a frown of concentration on his face.
Cardiff could see that he had attached a microphone of some kind to the metal container which still rested on the chair and which had been giving the so-called mysterious ‘readings’.
Now, he was holding that microphone up to the nearest wall and scanning it, adjusting his headphones.
Cardiff watched him scan the wall, and then hold it up to the ceiling.
Instantly, the metal container began to emit a clicking sound.
A Geiger counter?
Is that what he's doing…registering radioactivity?
Rohmer seemed to be reading his mind.
He had been watching Cardiff, and now that infuriating secret smile registered again.
He shook his head.
‘No, Cardiff.
Not a Geiger counter…’
‘Look,’ said Jimmy.
‘How long do you intend to keep me here?’
Since Simpson had left the building with the others, Duvall seemed to have acquired the position of Jimmy Devlin's personal guard.
While Jimmy stood at the reception desk counter, both arms spread out on it backwards in the same pose that he had adopted at the bar counter earlier that evening, Duvall simply stood two feet by his side, watching him.
For all the world, he reminded Cardiff of some kind of Gestapo officer.
Well dressed, well groomed with that clipped, perfect accent…but enough about him to make anyone realise that Duvall, whoever in hell's interest he represented or whatever in hell he was doing here, was a dangerous man.
Jimmy seemed aware of that too, and kept a wary eye on him while he addressed Cardiff.
Rohmer turned his attention back to Jimmy as Gilbert and Frye continued taking their mysterious readings.
Cardiff noticed that they had turned the microphone towards the floor now, but the clicking from the metal container had stopped.
‘Those screams,’ said Rohmer.
‘You've heard something like that before.
Haven't you, Jimmy?’
Jimmy had been shaken by those sounds, more shaken than the others, for good reason, but Cardiff could see that he was unprepared to show it as he pushed himself away from the reception counter.
Cardiff remained silent.
It seemed that Cardiff's curious patchwork quilt of instinct and gut feeling was about to be sewn together by Rohmer.
‘Yeah,’ said Jimmy.
‘I've heard something like it before.
Same kind of…echo.
Same kind of bloody pain — like people being torn apart.
Except that time it was…my friends.’
‘MacAndrews and Flannery,’ said Cardiff simply.
‘Yeah.
Like I've been trying to tell everyone from the beginning.’
‘You heard those noises on the night you were robbing  the jeweller's,’ continued Rohmer.
‘On the night your friends…’
‘Look,’ said Cardiff impatiently.
Rohmer was spreading this game out too long.
‘Where are they, Rohmer?
There were eighty-four people in here two hours ago.
Apart from Saville and Mrs Parkins, who turn up bloody miles and miles away…the others have just vanished.
So where the hell have they gone?’
‘So you do know about those two?
I thought that information had been suppressed.’
‘Suppressed?
Suppressed ?
Just what the hell are you talking about?’
The reception doors banged open again.
Cardiff started, turning in alarm to see that it was Pearce, now pushing into the comparative warmth of the reception area from outside.
He was soaked.
Angry at the interruption, Cardiff turned back to Rohmer.
‘Answers, Rohmer.
Answers !
Where the hell have they all gone?’
‘You know, don't you, Jimmy?
You've told them all what happened to your friends in the jeweller's.
You've told Mr Cardiff and Mr Pearce before.
Tell them again.’
‘Bit of a bastard, aren't you, blondie?’ said Jimmy and Duvall moved forward threateningly.
Without moving or even looking at his new escort, Jimmy said: ‘If he wants to start a fight in here, I'm ready to oblige.’
‘Tell us again, Jimmy,’ said Rohmer in a gentle voice.
‘Want the truth?
Well, I'll tell you.’
Duvall settled back against the reception counter as Pearce continued to shake water from his greatcoat, but the others were silent.
Even Frye and Gilbert had stopped their ‘scanning’ to listen.
Somewhere in the sky, thunder groaned.
Jimmy looked up at the ceiling when he heard it.
‘There was a storm on that night, Just like this one.
I was working on the safe.
The others were leaning against the wall, just waiting for me to finish.
Then there was a sound, like an explosion.
The whole building seemed to shake.
It must have been a lightning strike.
They were  leaning against the wall when it started to happen…’
Thunder crashed again.
Black and white sizzled at the windows.
It sounded now as if the storm must be directly overhead.
‘They began to scream,’ continued Jimmy.
‘as if something was…killing them.
I was frozen there, I couldn't move — just watching them.
They were…sort of…writhing around…struggling…trying to push themselves away from the wall.
‘But they were stuck there.
They were stuck to the wall — like flies on a flypaper.’
Cardiff could see the sweat on Jimmy's brow.
‘Mac started to scream at me, yelling ‘Help me, Jimmy!
I'm stuck!’
But I couldn't move.
I could only watch as the lightning lit up the windows and they struggled to get off that wall.’
‘Bollocks,’ said Pearce at last.
Jimmy glowered at him in hate.
‘The wall swallowed them up .
I saw it happen, and I couldn't do a thing to help them.
It just sucked them in as if that wall was made of…mud or something.
They thrashed around, kicked and screamed and begged me to help…but I couldn't move.
Flannery was the first to go completely.
His face was stuck to the wall.
When it sucked in his head he couldn't scream anymore.
It took him quickly.
But Mac was fighting harder.
His arms had sunk in and he was twisting around, thrashing his head to keep it away from the wall — but it still sucked him in.’
‘Just like the tar baby, eh?’ said Pearce.
‘Shut up,’ said Cardiff, and Rohmer was smiling again when he saw Cardiff's grim expression.
‘Go on, Jimmy.
Then what happened?’
At last, Jimmy was telling the story that had first prompted Cardiff to seek him out and bring him here.
Pearce's words when the six policemen had vanished had reminded him about Jimmy Devlin and his bizarre story of what had happened two years ago.
They've just vanished into the woodwork , Pearce had said.
‘I ran,’ continued Jimmy.
‘I just broke and ran — with Mac screaming for help.
I burst out through that jeweller's door and back into the shopping mall.
Behind me, I could hear Mac's screaming turn…muffled …must have been when…when his face was sucked into the wall.
Then it sort of…gargled away…and I kept on running.’
‘But it started again, didn't it?’ said Rohmer.
Jimmy eyed Rohmer carefully.
‘Know all about me, don't you?’
‘Everything.’
‘Yes, it started again while I was running to get out of that place.
Mac and Flannery, screaming my name, screaming for help.
They were in agony — and the sounds…kind of…echoed .’
‘And where were the screams coming from, Jimmy?’
Jimmy paused, swallowing hard.
‘From the walls, from the floors…from the bloody ceiling.
Like the noises we've just heard.’
Jimmy stood back again.
‘That's it.
That's all there is.’
‘Bloody stupid,’ said Pearce.
‘No, it's not,’ said Cardiff quietly.
‘That's why I wanted Devlin here.
God knows why I should have thought of his crazy story again.
Maybe something about the way he told it, as if he believed it…maybe the disappearances…or the storm…’
‘Or maybe you're just a better policeman than you think you are,’ said Rohmer.
‘A man of instinct, eh, Cardiff?
And here's me thinking you knew more than you do.’
The Nightmare had taken further shape.
His gut instinct about Jimmy had been right — even if none of this made any real sense yet.
‘You see, Cardiff?’ said Rohmer, apparently pleased with himself.
He ran a hand through his blond hair, turning to look at Gilbert and Frye.
‘You see?
It's the same.’
‘Am I missing something?’ asked Pearce.
‘The people in this office block,’ continued Rohmer.
‘All eighty-four of them.
They never really disappeared, because they're still here.’
Rohmer spread his arms wide, turning to encompass the entire reception area with a kind of mad glee.
‘In the walls, the ceiling, the floor.
They've been absorbed…and we heard their screams — because they're still here!’
Gilbert now seemed even more agitated than before.
Plucking at his gloves again, he said: ‘What are you doing, Rohmer?
This is all classified information and I know that these people haven't clearance.’
‘Gilbert, Gilbert…’ said Rohmer, as if pacifying some nervous child.
‘You worry too much.’
‘But I don't understand why…’
‘Trust me, trust me.’
‘Explanations?’ said Cardiff tightly.
Rohmer looked over and smiled his infuriating smile again.
‘Very well.’
FIVE
‘Fernley House is not an isolated incident,’ said Rohmer.
He was sitting on the edge of the desk used to interrogate Jimmy Devlin earlier, having retired to that room for explanations.
Duvall, Gilbert and Frye had remained in the reception area on Rohmer's instructions.
Cardiff, Jimmy and Pearce sat on uncomfortable plastic chairs while Rohmer talked.
‘There have been disappearances like this before.’
‘I knew it,’ said Jimmy quietly.
‘I knew I wasn't going out of my head.’
‘Just recently,’ continued Rohmer.
‘A similar thing has happened at a school in Norfolk and a factory in Leeds.
But this has a history stretching as far back…well, to tell you the truth — to when records began.
There's been an acceleration of incidents in the last five years.
But prior to that…all the famous disappearances you've read about in the Sunday tabloids are all part of the same phenomenon.
The Marie Celeste in 1852, when an entire ship's crew vanished.
The disappearance of Flight 19 just off Bermuda…’
‘Come on,’ said Jimmy in disdain.
‘You're not saying this is Bermuda triangle stuff.’
‘It happens there, yes.
Frequently.
But the phenomenon is not restricted to that area.
It's been happening all over the world for quite some time.’
‘Who are you, Rohmer?’ asked Cardiff.
‘The Ministry of Defence and Central Government established a team ten years ago when the disappearances became too frequent and too alarming to be ignored.
That  team is split into three Divisions and I'm in charge of one of them.
Gilbert and Frye are scientists involved in analysis.
The rest of the team are on their way…’
‘And Duvall?’ asked Cardiff.
‘What does he do?’
Rohmer smiled, ignoring the question as he continued.
‘We know what's happening.
But not why it's happening.
And even though we've issued ‘D’ notices on these events, it's only a matter of time before we have a panic on our hands.’
‘D notice?’ said Jimmy.
‘It's a clampdown on press reports,’ said Cardiff.
‘A joint agreement by the media and the Government not to report on particular matters.’
‘Which is why none of the reporters clamouring around your office block earlier tonight will see their stories in print.’
‘You say you don't know why this is happening,’ said Cardiff.
‘How is it happening, then?’
‘You know that the code name for our operation is Darkfall.
Well, that's the name of our tri-partite investigation team: a team with statutory powers to override investigations such as yours, Cardiff.
It's also the term we've applied to the phenomenon which results in these disappearances.’
Thunder boomed in the sky overhead and Rohmer looked at the ceiling again.
He had a look of intense concentration for several seconds.
And when he spoke again, it was almost as if in reverence.
‘That's what a Darkfall sounds like.’
He paused, while the thunder died away — and this time his voice was clipped, precise and businesslike.
‘A Darkfall is a particular kind of storm.
Quite how the storm is generated is still something that we're investigating, although we have some idea of what causes its generation.
All storms contain a force which we take for granted.
A force that provides us with food and warmth and light…and upon which we've become very dependent, maybe to our cost.
Because although we've harnessed that force, know how to generate it and use it — it is still essentially a force about which little is known in terms of its effects on us .
‘I'm talking about electricity.
‘There's a positive side to that force.
The elements I've just mentioned.
But there's a dark side to that force, too.
And a Darkfall storm seems to embody those dark elements.’
‘A Darkfall is an electrical storm?’
‘Basically, yes.
But it has particular characteristics.
It builds and remains in a very localised position.
It is particularly fierce and is accompanied by a peculiar state of darkness.
By meteorological means we're now able to identify where such a storm will occur with greater efficiency and to take steps for keeping that area clear of people — or to arrange for controlled evacuation.
But there are still occasions — such as this — where the phenomenon eludes us.
The storm builds to a particular intensity.
Its central ‘core’ is where the phenomenon occurs.
And anything within the storm ‘funnel’, as we call it, can be subject to the phenomenon or anything which passes through it.
The electricity within that storm is released by lightning.
We believe that the phenomenon occurs when there is a lightning strike.’
‘Lightning struck this building?’
‘Yes, I believe so.
More than once.
On the first occasion, your partygoers disappeared.
On the second, your forensic team upstairs.’
‘What the hell happened to them?’ asked Jimmy.
‘The Darkfall strike generates what we can only call at this stage a chemical reaction.
It's a chemical reaction which affects inert compounds such as concrete, steel, plastic — and living tissue.
‘Skin contact is the means of absorption.
Anyone who is unprotected and is touching anything connected with the building would be absorbed.
The inert compounds react with living tissue and absorb the entire body.
Can you imagine what happened here?
The Darkfall storm had been  building for quite some time, generating itself, growing stronger.
Energy was released into the building by a lightning strike.
Anyone in direct flesh contact with a wall or a floor would have been affected — sucked into the fabric of the building in just the way that Mr Devlin described.’
‘But not everyone would be touching…’ began Cardiff.
‘There would have been a panic.
People would have grabbed door handles to get out and been sucked into the fabric of the door.
No one would have realised what was happening.’
‘It must have been like Hell in here,’ said Jimmy.
‘Flesh contact,’ said Cardiff.
‘But what about their clothes…?’
‘The chemical effect extends to what a person is wearing once the effect begins.
And once it begins, their clothes, bones, teeth — all of it will be absorbed.
But there would be no effect, say, on the shoes on your feet or the gloves on your hands if you weren't already in flesh contact with a door or a wall…or even a light switch…when the lightning strikes.
In fact, all a person would need to do in the middle of a Darkfall storm would be to remain calm, not touch anything — unless he or she is wearing gloves and wait for the effect to pass.
Gloves or shoes would effectively protect one from the effects.
But have only one centimetre of bare flesh in contact — and the building would absorb you.
You'd be sucked in, absorbed and fused with the steel and the plastic and the concrete — fused into the very fabric of the building itself.’
‘But those screams we heard?’ said Cardiff.
‘I heard one of my men calling my name.
They're still somehow alive after that, Rohmer.
How the hell can that be?’
‘Oh yes…they're alive.
Absorbed, bonded in the building in a way we've yet to establish.
But they're still alive.
Occasionally…very, very rarely in fact…there is a vocal effect such as the one we've heard, such as the one that Mr Devlin heard.
We don't understand it.
It happened in the Leeds factory…and we took a wall to pieces  after receiving positive readings of a ‘presence’ in the fabric of it.
(You saw Frye taking readings earlier, did you not?)
We took that wall to pieces with supreme care, with an almost surgical skill.
Brick by brick, plasterboard by plasterboard…until all we had left was a pile of rubble.
And no sign of anything living within it.
And yet…and yet…we still had a life-form reading from that pile of rubble.
Whoever had been absorbed into that wall, was still somehow there…was still somehow alive .’
‘Hellish,’ said Cardiff.
‘Yes, it is Hell.
Have you read Aldous Huxley's Heaven and Hell ?’
Rohmer smiled indulgently.
‘No, perhaps not.
Well, he points out that many of the punishments described in the various accounts of Hell are punishments of pressure and constriction.
Dante's sinners are buried in mud, shut up in the trunks of trees, frozen solid in blocks of ice, crushed beneath stones.
The ‘Inferno’ may be psychologically true — Darkfall, Cardiff, is a literal Hell.
But I believe this Darkfall effect can also explain a lot to us about our superstitious past.
I believe that the cases of hauntings recorded over the centuries are actually the results of a Darkfall.
Imagine it.
A Darkfall storm on or near some kind of human habitation; let's say…an old country house.
The owners disappear…sucked into the fabric of the building.
Fused into the brick and the stone for an eternity.
Over the years, that ‘vocal’ effect is heard.
Sounds of torment from the people imprisoned there.
The sounds of screams from an invisible source.
What is our average listener to believe?
What else but that the sound is being made by a ghost…by a haunting.’
‘Why is Gilbert so frightened?’ asked Cardiff at last.
‘He's always frightened on these investigations.’
‘The Darkfall's still active, isn't it?
That's what he's frightened about?’
Jimmy shuffled uneasily in his seat.
‘No, the Darkfall phenomenon has dissipated.
We would have picked up readings on arrival.
And if we had, we would certainly have cleared the building and got out of here until it dissipated.’
‘That storm still looks as if it's building up to me,’ said Jimmy.
‘It's just a storm now,’ replied Rohmer.
‘Not a Darkfall.’
‘Gilbert is keeping his gloves on,’ said Cardiff.
‘Like I said to you — he's always nervous.’
Jimmy was looking long and hard at Pearce, who had retained an expression of disdain and scorn throughout.
‘Who's the lunatic now, Pearce?’ he said.
Pearce returned a hard stare, pushed himself from his seat and held out a hand to Rohmer.
‘Let me see your ID again.’
Rohmer proffered it nonchalantly and Pearce sat again, scrutinising it as if examining the small print.
‘So anyone touching the wall…?’ said Cardiff.
‘Or any of the inert material within it,’ continued Rohmer.
‘…would be…just, sucked into…’
‘The wall, the floor, the furniture…whatever.
Yes.’
‘Living flesh, bone, tissue…even clothes, fused into the building fabric.
Sounds…bloody ridiculous.’
‘Plastic surgeons use titanium for accident reconstruction work.
The bone fuses with the metal.
That's a scientific fact.
So it's not so unbelievable as you think.’
‘But how are they still alive?’ asked Cardiff.
‘The process should kill them, surely.’
‘That's what we'd like to know.’
‘The hand,’ began Pearce, handing back Rohmer's identification.
‘What about the severed hand upstairs…?’
And then something exploded outside.
Something that was most definitely not thunder and lightning.
Something that exploded with a sound of rending metal and shattering glass.
‘It's another bloody lightning strike!’ exclaimed Pearce as they leapt from their chairs.
‘No,’ said Rohmer tightly, striding to the door.
‘Not a lightning strike.
This is something else.’
And then they were all in the corridor, heading for the reception area.
SIX
Gilbert and Frye were standing up against the glass panes of the reception area, staring out into the storm-ravaged night.
Duvall was already pulling open one of the main doors when Rohmer and the others rushed down the corridor towards them.
Wind whipped at Duvall's hair and the lapels of his greatcoat as he squinted out into the rain-slashed darkness, trying to see what in hell had happened.
‘Duvall?’ snapped Rohmer as they drew level.
‘Outside,’ replied Duvall.
‘Something's happened outside at the police cordon.’
Cardiff rushed to one of the reception windows, closely followed by Jimmy Devlin.
Pearce seized Jimmy by the cuff to haul him back.
Jimmy pulled sharply away.
‘I'm not going to make a break for it, Pearce.
You don't have to worry.’
‘Christ…’ said Cardiff in a hollow voice, when he saw what had happened out in the storm.
‘What is it?’ asked Pearce, in a tone of voice which suggested that he didn't really want to know.
‘Keep Jimmy here,’ said Cardiff.
Rohmer was already pushing out through the front door after Duvall.
‘Like hell,’ began Jimmy.
Pearce restrained him with a hand on his chest, and for an instant it looked as if long-awaited violence might flare up.
‘Be a good boy, Jimmy,’ said Cardiff — and vanished out into the storm.
Jimmy pulled away again and joined Gilbert and Frye at  the windows.
When he saw the devastation, his mouth dropped open.
‘Bloody hell…’
At first, as he battled across the outside pavement and through the raging wind, Cardiff was convinced that a bomb had been detonated on the forecourt outside the office block.
There was a ruined tangle of what seemed to be exploded machinery lying where the police cordon had been; a jumble of twisted wreckage wreathed in guttering blue-yellow flame which suggested petrol leakage.
A car ! thought Cardiff as he battled across the road, the blurred figures of Rohmer and Duvall just ahead.
It's a bloody car bomb .
There was no sign of the two policemen who had been on duty at the cordon.
The car seemed to have been driven directly at that cordon, where it had exploded.
Apart from the tangled wreck of the main body of the car, Cardiff could see twisted chunks of metal lying in the roadway and in the pavement.
The black and white wooden pole used as the cordon had been completely shattered; shreds of wood lay scattered in the rain.
Cardiff screened his eyes from the rain as he drew level at last with the other two men.
The guttering blue-yellow flame within the shattered shell of the car was snuffed out at last by the rain and the storm-wind.
Smoke and steam gushed and hissed from the shattered windscreen and side windows.
‘Who would want to drive a car bomb at the cordon?’ shouted Cardiff above the sound of the storm.
‘Not a car bomb…’ mouthed Duvall.
‘What?’
‘It–s not a car bomb.
Look…’
He pointed back to the office block, and Cardiff could see the indistinct blurs of the other faces in reception, looking out.
‘If it had been a car bomb, it would have blown in those windows.’
‘But it's a car , isn't it?’
‘Yes,’ shouted Rohmer.
‘It's a car.
But it didn't blow up.’
‘Then what…?’
‘It fell,’ shouted Rohmer.
‘It fell from a great height.’
Vincent Saville , thought Cardiff.
Injuries consistent with a fall from a great height .
‘And my men?’
‘Dead,’ said Duvall, moving closer to the wreck.
‘It fell directly on top of the cordon.’
He wafted smoke from the side window as he peered into the devastated car.
The smoke and steam was being sucked from the wreck by the storm wind anyway, and as it cleared Duvall suddenly shrank back from the shattered car window.
‘Rohmer…’
Cardiff could see for himself what Duvall had discovered.
There was a charred and blackened figure in the driving seat crouched behind the wheel.
‘God…’
The shape seemed too big for the seat; hunched, gnarled and blackened, it was still shrouded in hissing steam, but despite its swollen size the shape of a man or woman for all that.
Charcoaled fingers still gripped the wheel…and the stench of cooking flesh would have been unbearable, if not for the greedily sucking wind of the storm.
Once, Cardiff could have imagined himself throwing up at the sight of that horror behind the wheel.
Some secret part of him wished that he could, because in that recognisably human act of revulsion, his own humanity would be reaffirmed.
But the horror was only doing to him what it always did.
It registered the further damage being done to him.
But his initial feeling about this office-block incident was reaffirmed.
Death was here.
Madness and Death.
Perhaps soon, he would meet them both and ask that one question that he longed to ask:Why ?
Within one eye socket of the indeterminate monstrosity behind the wheel something that could have been an eye popped loudly and viscous yellow fluid streamed down the corpse's ravaged face.
‘Shit!’
Duvall recoiled further from the car in disgust; his cool, hard demeanour slipping for an instant.
Rohmer was looking up into the sky as the vortex of smoke and steam was greedily sucked skywards into the black roiling clouds of the storm.
‘It fell?’ shouted Cardiff angrily.
‘Yes.’
Rohmer still searched the ravaged sky.
‘How can…?’
And now Cardiff's anger really flared.
He grabbed Rohmer by the arm and swung him around so that he was forced to look him in the face.
‘Two of my men are dead!
Dead!
So how can a fucking car fall out of the fucking sky, Rohmer?
You mean it was blown off the motorway over there and into the forecourt.
Don't you?
Don't you ?’
‘It fell,’ said Rohmer simply.
Duvall broke Cardiff's grip on Rohmer.
‘People and cars don't fall out of the sky,’ said Cardiff.
‘In a Darkfall — they do,’ replied Rohmer — and now he was striding back through the biting wind towards the office block.
Duvall followed closely behind, coat flapping in the wind and the rain.
Cardiff turned back to the car.
The swollen monstrosity behind the wheel shrouded in the smoke and steam of its own cooling was surely much too large to have once been human.
Surely that hideously charcoaled horror should have shrunk as it cooked and disintegrated.
Vincent Saville , said the voice in Cardiff's head.
He just fell out of the sky .
Angry at his ineffectiveness and at the way Rohmer had made him a bystander in this nightmare, Cardiff followed them back through the savage whirlwinds towards the office block.
SEVEN
‘It wasn't Cardiff at all, was it?’ said Jimmy.
‘It was you.’
‘What?’
Pearce had shoved Devlin back into one of the upholstered reception seats; keeping one eye on him, the other on what was going on outside.
Gilbert and Frye were still glued to the rain-streaked glass.
‘You're the one who set me up.
Fingered me for those burglaries.
Cardiff might have been in charge, but you're the one who provided the evidence.’
Pearce walked over to him, looking down.
There was undisguised contempt on his face.
‘Don't get cocky with me, Devlin.
That Rohmer fella might have the proper ID and he might corroborate your funny story, but don't think I'm falling for any of this crap.’
‘All that time inside for something I didn't do.’
‘You were robbing that jeweller's, in case you'd forgotten.’
‘No use denying that.
But I didn't do the other jobs you accused me of, Pearce.
What was wrong?
Did you have a few unsolved crimes that needed tying up?’
‘You're a thief, Devlin.
Always were, always will be.
And it's my job to catch thieves and lock them away.’
‘Even if it means planting evidence?’
Pearce cast a look back at Gilbert and Frye, to make sure that they weren't listening.
When he looked back at Jimmy, he had a smile of disdain.
‘Even that.’
‘They're coming back,’ said Frye.
All attention turned to the main reception doors again.
Jimmy felt curiously detached from what was going on; detached from whatever in hell had happened outside.
This was just another jigsaw piece in the bizarre events of the night.
He had known all along of his innocence of the crimes for which he had been committed.
Now that Pearce had openly stated that the evidence had been planted, he wasn't reacting in the way that he'd ever have guessed.
Far from leaping from his chair and seizing Pearce by the throat, a curious fatigue seemed to have settled in his bones.
Perhaps it was also something to do with the fact that this tall, blond Government man had corroborated his story about what had happened in the jeweller's on that night.
The knowledge that someone, somewhere in Government circles, had known that what he'd seen and experienced had really happened, should have been enough in itself to send Jimmy into a righteous rage.
There had been times, after all, while he'd been serving his stretch in prison that he really had wondered whether he had hallucinated it all; wondered whether he was losing his mind.
Even now, he had never returned to the shopping mall.
The walls of his cell had given him nightmares.
The echoing sounds of Mac's voice coming from those walls in his dreams had shaken him awake, clutching at the sheets, sweat oozing from every pore.
But the rage would not come.
The rage that had eaten at his guts for so long, and had launched him at Sergeant Lawrence — who even Jimmy knew was a good man at heart — would not serve him now.
The reception doors juddered open again.
The storm breathed its ragged, ice-breath into the corridors.
Rohmer pushed through, followed by Duvall.
Rohmer zeroed in on Pearce straight away.
‘The caretaker's room in the basement.
Where is it?’
Gilbert stood between them.
From his viewpoint in his seat, enervated by this strange sapped feeling, Jimmy could see that Gilbert's previous nervousness had now reached a new pitch.
He clutched at Rohmer's lapels.
‘It's a Return, isn't it, Rohmer?
You've been lying to me all along.’
‘Get out of the way,’ snapped Rohmer, pushing him to one side as he moved towards Pearce.
‘The basement room?’
‘What the hell happened outside?’ asked Pearce.
‘The basement room.
Now !
Where is it?’
The reception doors opened again and Jimmy felt the ice-cold blast on his face with curious detachment as Cardiff pushed through.
‘Down the corridor.
First door on the right,’ said Pearce.
‘But you won't get me going into that basement again after those bloody noises we heard down there.
Thought my eardrums would burst.’
Rohmer turned quickly, striding away down the corridor with Duvall close behind.
But now Gilbert was fumbling at Pearce's lapels, eyes glittering with what Pearce could now see was naked fear.
‘Noises?
What noises?
You mean screaming voices like we heard before, don't you?
Don't you?’
‘No…look, get off me you crazy old bastard.’
‘What kind of noises?
Please, you must tell me.’
Pearce shoved Gilbert away from him.
‘Noises like…explosions.
Like thunderclaps, echoing over and over.
Cardiff heard them too.
Blew the bloody windows in downstairs.’
‘This caretaker's room…the basement…is downstairs?
Below ground?’
‘Yes, but…’
Gilbert backed away, face white, fumbling at his gloves again.
‘He was lying.
He's known all along.’
Somewhere in the corridor, the basement door slammed and Jimmy watched everything as if it was taking place on a stage, and he was a member of the audience.
He watched as Gilbert exchanged a look with an equally shell-shocked Frye…and then hurried quickly towards the reception door.
Cardiff seized him by both arms, preventing his escape.
‘Let me out of here, you bloody fool!’
‘Why?
What the hell is happening now ?’ snapped Cardiff directly in his face.
Gilbert tried to push past him, but Cardiff held firm.
‘You're not going anywhere until you tell me what…’
‘Look…look…’
Gilbert ceased struggling, realising that Cardiff would not let him go until he knew more.
Gilbert forced himself to become calm, drew a deep breath and then the words came out in a torrent.
‘Rohmer is lying.
He must have told you about a Darkfall back there.
Maybe not everything…but he's lying when he says the Darkfall has passed.
It hasn't passed.
It's still happening.’
‘Oh my Good Christ…’ said Frye.
‘Those noises,’ continued Gilbert.
‘The explosive noises you heard in the basement.
Well that's symptomatic of a Darkfall strike.’
‘We're in a Secondary Darkfall?’ said Frye in sudden realisation, and a voice that wavered.
‘A what?’ snapped Cardiff.
‘We've experience of two kinds of Darkfall,’ continued Gilbert, still looking to find a way around Cardiff, the words still spilling out of him.
‘A Primary Darkfall is where the storm builds to a pitch and there is one strike.
There may or may not be a disappearance depending on the circumstances.
But there is also a Secondary Darkfall.
We've only had experience of two — that's where the effect continues to build, continues to escalate, with continuous Darkfall strikes.
The effects can be horrendous.
On both of the previous occasions, the area was evacuated and isolated until the storm blew itself apart.
That's what's happening now…and why we have to get away from here.
The noises you heard — the explosive noises — were the acoustic effects of a second Darkfall strike.
That's when your second disappearance occurred.
And that second strike means that this is a Secondary Darkfall.
So let me past — the Darkfall's still active!’
‘Then why didn't we get sucked into the building like the others?’ said Cardiff, still holding on to him.
‘We were  here.
We touched things, were in flesh-contact down there in the basement.
But the Darkfall didn't affect us.’
Continually frustrated in his attempts to get past Cardiff, Gilbert exploded in rage.
‘Because you were below ground !
Look…we've seen the early report on this incident.
There was a caretaker here, in the basement, when the first strike occurred.
The man who raised the alarm…’
‘Beaton?’
‘Yes, yes, yes.
The reason he survived the first strike is the reason that you all escaped the second.
You were below ground when it happened.
And we do know that for some gravitational reason we've yet to fathom, the absorption effect is nullified below ground-level.
Those outside the building remained unaffected by the strike.
Now, let me past …’
‘We're here ,’ gasped Frye, still hardly daring to accept the fact.
‘In a Secondary Darkfall.
But why?
Why would Rohmer withhold that information from us.
It doesn't make any sense.
Why would he endanger himself?’
‘There is no danger,’ said Rohmer.
And they all turned to see that Rohmer and Duvall had returned.
They were standing listening in the corridor.
Duvall was carrying two plastic containers.
Cardiff could read the label on one of them: ‘Paraffin’.
‘You knew that there was still Darkfall activity when you sent us in?’
Gilbert whirled to face him.
‘Yes, there were readings.’
‘For God's sake, why?’ bleated Frye, returning to the window and looking out briefly into the night at the blurred wreck of the car in the forecourt.
‘That's a Returner out there, Rohmer.’
‘Duvall is here to handle it.’
‘But why?
We must get away from here.’
‘We're not going anywhere,’ Rohmer smiled.
‘We're going to ride out the storm.’
‘What's a Returner?’ asked Cardiff.
‘Sometimes,’ said Rohmer, ‘they come back.
We don't  know yet how it happens.
The inert structures, the buildings, whatever…can occasionally…’
He hunted for a word.
‘Can…cough out what they've absorbed.
Sometimes literally on the spot where the absorption occurred.
On other occasions, people are spewed out into the atmosphere and turn up hundreds of miles away.
Their molecular structure is changed.
That may account for their ability to survive such an ejection.
It's been happening for hundreds of years.
Maybe you've heard of Kasper Hauser in Germany?
Then again…maybe not.
It's already happened twice with your office-block incident.
Once with Eleanor Parkins, in London and twice with…’
‘Vincent Saville,’ finished Cardiff.
‘Coughed out again,’ said Rohmer.
‘Sometimes they're dead…sometimes they're alive, if you can call it that.
But when they return, they're…how shall I say it?…not themselves.’
‘Transmuted,’ said Gilbert.
‘Their molecular structure is transmuted with the inert material in which they were absorbed.’
‘And what the hell does all that mean?’ asked Pearce.
‘It means,’ said Duvall holding up one of the paraffin cans, ‘that we have to burn what we found in that car wreck outside.’
‘It may be still alive,’ said Rohmer matter-of-factly.
‘And if it is, things could become…fraught, shall we say.
Duvall moved forward with the two paraffin cans.
‘The car,’ said Pearce.
‘I hear what you're saying about bodies being sucked into walls…and sometimes spat out again.
But how does a car fit into all of this?
You trying to say a car was sucked into the building?
Human flesh, you said…’
‘I don't know,’ said Rohmer.
‘There's a lot we don't know.
That's why we're here.
Duvall — see to that business outside.’
‘I want to see,’ said Pearce, without taking his eyes off  Rohmer.
‘I hear these fairytales, but I can't swallow them.
I want to see what's outside in the car.’
‘Want to give it a parking ticket?’ said Jimmy from his chair.
‘Quiet, Jimmy,’ said Cardiff.
‘Okay, Pearce.
If that's what you want.
But you won't need to burn that thing, Rohmer.
It's already been burned.’
‘Humour me,’ said Rohmer and gestured to Duvall again.
The storm intruded once more as Pearce and Duvall exited.
Gilbert and Frye watched them leave and for an instant it seemed as if Gilbert wanted to dash out after them again.
Rohmer took him by the coat sleeve, leading him to one of the upholstered seats beside Jimmy.
‘Why, Rohmer?’ asked Gilbert.
‘Why didn't you tell us that this is a Secondary Darkfall?
What are we doing here?’
‘You're both here to assess and observe,’ said Rohmer.
‘But you're also weak and you frighten easily.
There have been two strikes here, that's true.
But you know that the accelerating effect on a Secondary Darkfall starts slowly and gains momentum.
There hasn't been any danger to us.
And there won't be any danger.’
‘Thanks for the warning, Rohmer,’ said Cardiff.
‘There may have been no danger to you.
But there certainly was to us, you bastard.
If any one of us had been touching a wall above ground we'd have been part of the bloody architecture by now.’
‘But you should have told me…’ continued Gilbert.
‘And me.’
Frye had moved back to the windows again, to watch Duvall and Pearce battling their way through the storm to the car wreck.
‘I needed you both,’ said Rohmer.
‘You're the best we have.
And I didn't have time to pussyfoot around.
As for you, Cardiff.
You were sent instructions to evacuate but your own computer equipment was unable to receive our instructions and advice, as you very well know.
The Secondary Darkfall effect escalates.
There has been no danger to you or your people since the second strike.
There won't  be another strike for a further forty minutes or so at least, which is why I want you and Pearce out of here now.
You're not part of this investigation.’
‘And me?’ asked Jimmy.
‘As I said before.
You stay.’
‘Like hell he does,’ said Cardiff.
‘He's a civilian — and he's in my jurisdiction, not yours.
He leaves with us — and you can stay in this bloody office block if you like.’
‘You've seen my identification papers.
You know I have the authority.’
‘Do I hell.
I want corroboration from central office.’
‘And how do we do that with radios and telephone knocked out by the storm?’
Exactly,’ replied Cardiff.
‘No corroboration, no overall authority.
You're not telling me what to do, and you're not keeping Devlin here.’
‘Never knew you cared so much,’ said Jimmy, emerging from his lethargy and rising from his chair at last to join Frye at the black, rain-blurred windows.
Gilbert was rubbing his face with both hands as if trying to wash away bad dreams.
‘Shut up, Jimmy.
When Pearce and I leave, so do you.’
‘I think not,’ said Rohmer.
Lightning jarred the heavens once more, briefly illuminating the reception windows as Rohmer and Cardiff faced each other .
Neither was going to back down.
‘Nice car,’ said Jimmy, wiping the condensation from his patch of window, but still giving himself only a blurred view.
‘Or at least it was a nice car.’
Pearce and Duvall were blurred figures beside the wreck, distinguishable only in that Duvall was carrying the paraffin containers, which he was setting down on the pavement.
Rain was hissing on the roof of the car wreck, fogging the scene still further.
The figures blurred completely out of view in that mist.
‘That's a Ford Zodiac,’ said Jimmy.
‘Or it was .
You can tell by the wings on the back.
About 1964 I'd say.
Not a lot of them about.
One less now, that's for sure.’
‘Are you sure that thing is dead?’ bleated Frye.
‘The thing in the car?’
‘No,’ said Rohmer, without taking his eyes off Cardiff.
‘That's why Duvall is going to soak it in paraffin and set fire to it if they're able to in this storm.’
‘Nice car,’ said Jimmy.
‘Bet it had whitewall tyres.
Two-tone, green and cream bodywork.’
‘I've got a job to do,’ said Cardiff, also staring out Rohmer.
‘If it's dangerous, we all should be out of here.
But you talk as if these…
Returners…were freaks, or movie monsters or something,’ said Cardiff.
‘They are,’ said Rohmer.
‘Eleanor Parkins.
One of your own Returners.
Her body had been fused with concrete, plastic, plaster and steel.
Our post mortem revealed a mutated amalgam of all of these inert materials within her own tissue.
By our definitions, she couldn't possibly have been alive.’
‘So she died?’
‘She was terminated.
We had no choice.’
‘You killed her?’
‘You had to be there, Cardiff.
Believe me, we had no choice.’
‘Some of them return with minimum or no mutation at all,’ Gilbert mumbled from his seat.
‘We have two in captivity.
They talk of having seen ‘The Other Side’.’
‘The Other Side?’ asked Cardiff, eyes still fixed on Rohmer.
‘Mental derangement,’ returned Rohmer.
‘Brain decomposition.
Hallucination caused by trauma.
We'll dispose of them eventually, just like the others.’
‘You kill people who return?’
‘We dispose of them, Cardiff.
That's all.’
‘Fog lamps,’ said Jimmy.
‘Spotlamps.
Leather upholstery.
Bench seats, front and rear.’
‘They talk of Heaven and Hell,’ mumbled Gilbert.
‘The ones who come back who aren't mutated to the point of monstrosity say that they've seen it.
In that netherworld state, while they've been in that state of absorption.’
‘A three-speed car with a column change.
Ocelot seat covers.
Top of the range.
A really tasty car.’
‘Do you believe in Heaven and Hell?’ mumbled Gilbert.
‘Will you all shut the hell up !’ shouted Jimmy, turning from the window.
The lethargy and enervation were gone.
‘How much longer do I have to listen to all of this crap?
It's like I've been dragged out of the pub and into a bloody video nasty.
Look!
If it's dangerous to be here, let's just get the hell out of it…!’
Thunder boomed in the sky.
The windowpanes of the reception rattled.
And then the strip lights overhead flickered…and went out.
The reception area was plunged into a blue-black relief.
Distant streetlamps blurred by rain cast eerie blue light into the lobby; great criss-cross squares of it.
The strip lights flickered again, providing the faintest luminescence.
Gilbert uttered a strangled cry and leapt to his feet with shadow reflections of crawling rain on his spectrally white face.
Frye recoiled from the window.
‘Shit!’
Cardiff fumbled to where he'd seen a light switch, began to reach for it…and then stopped.
‘Was that a strike?
A Darkfall strike?’
‘No,’ said Rohmer in the spectral gloom.
‘Too early.’
‘The hell with that,’ replied Cardiff.
‘Gimme a pair of gloves.’
‘There are Operative gloves in Frye's case.’
‘Give them to me.’
Frye moved in the darkness to his case, flipped it open and rummaged inside.
He flinched when Jimmy took hold of his arm.
‘Me, too.’
Frye fumbled again and came out with two pairs of skintight brown gloves of some man-made material.
While Jimmy pulled on a pair, Cardiff strode over, took a further pair from Frye and returned to the light switch.
‘Unnecessary,’ said Rohmer calmly.
‘The hell with you,’ replied Cardiff, pulling on the gloves.
He flicked the light switch.
It made no difference.
The strip lights were dead.
Reaching over the reception desk, he lifted the telephone receiver.
But there was no crackling static — there was nothing at all.
‘All the power is dead.’
‘Oh no…oh no…no, no, no.’
Cardiff looked back over to the reception windows at Frye's silhouette.
He was not reacting to this latest development, but to something that was going on outside.
Somewhere beyond, on the forecourt perhaps, orange flame seemed to splutter and flare in the darkness.
‘Something's happening out there,’ said Frye, pressing closer to the glass.
‘I can hardly see, but something is thrashing around by the car.
Something is burning and thrashing and…oh, no, no, no.’
Jimmy pushed Frye to one side to get a better view.
Rohmer was already moving to join them as Cardiff replaced the telephone receiver and pushed away from the reception desk.
Gilbert backed into Cardiff.
He pushed him out of the way.
Something out there was making a noise.
It was a sound of screaming, muffled by the storm.
But screaming nevertheless.
A sound of hideous pain and anger…and surely not a sound that could be made by anything human.
And now there was the loud crashing retort of what could only be a pistol shot, joined immediately by the rattling, roaring sound of thunder in the sky.
‘Duvall!’ said Rohmer.
‘So the bastard does have a gun,’ said Jimmy.
‘What the hell is going on out there?’
Cardiff shoved Frye aside to peer out into the darkness.
Something was burning out there, not in the car wreck…but beside it.
The storm, the wind, the rain and the continually fogged glass from Cardiff's breath was obscuring the view.
And then something hit the reception doors with tremendous force.
Gilbert screamed, a high-pitched squeal of fear, as the reception doors burst open and a dark flapping shape  hurtled through on to the floor.
Gusts of rain and snow flurried through the opened door as the shape scrabbled on the floor.
Jimmy and Cardiff both saw Rohmer reach into the inside of his overcoat.
In one fluid movement, he had drawn what both men could see, even in the darkness, was an automatic pistol.
He levelled it, straight and calm, at the shape that was thrashing on the tiles of the reception floor.
‘No, Rohmer!
It's me!’ said the shape, resolving itself into Duvall.
Scrabbling to his feet again, he hurled himself back through the throat of the storm, seized the reception door and savagely slammed it shut.
‘Duvall, what the hell…?’ began Rohmer, lowering his gun.
Gasping for breath, soaked and dishevelled, Duvall backed away from the doors.
He still held his own automatic in his left hand, and he was raising it towards the door as he backed off.
‘I've…never…never seen one like…’
‘What happened?’ shouted Cardiff.
‘Where's Pearce?’
‘We…we doused it with paraffin in the car…
Not easy in the storm…we…set it…alight…’
‘Where's Pearce?’
‘The bloody thing just came alive…tore out of the car at us…
Christ, it was…it was…it nearly got me, Rohmer.’
Cardiff turned back to the window and wiped the fog of his breath from the glass.
He leaned close to it and peered out into the night, trying to see what was out there…
Just as Pearce's wild and screaming face slammed against the glass on the other side, less than an inch from Cardiff ‘s own.
Cardiff recoiled in shock.
The others pulled away from the window into the centre of reception, watching in horror as Pearce continued to scream in panic at them.
He drummed on the window with  the flat of white, spectral hands — eyes turned to his left, in the direction of the glass doors, and filled with a fear and horror that paralysed Cardiff.
‘Let me in!
Let me in!
LET ME IN !’
Pearce was staring wildly at Cardiff now, hair plastered by rain to his head.
There was mud on his face.
He glanced back to the doors again in terror.
But whatever had been there must be gone, because now he was whirling in alarm, looking around him.
He turned frantically back to the window.
Behind him, lightning flared, turning him into a stark silhouette against the windows; flooding the reception with white light.
But no one, it seemed, was able to move.
Pearce began to move along the outside of those windows now, hand by hand on the glass, staring inside; as if he was walking on a ledge out there, fourteen storeys high, casting wild and terror-stricken looks from side to side.
‘Help me…for God's sake help me…it's out here…
God,Cardiff !’
And Cardiff remembered the screaming from the walls and the floor and the ceiling; remembered the familiar voice that had screamed his name.
At that instant, his paralysis vanished and he moved quickly towards the glass doors.
‘Get away from that door!’ snapped Rohmer, and Cardiff half-turned to see that the automatic was now levelled at him.
‘We've got to let him in!’
‘Another step towards that door…’
‘And what, you bastard?
You'll kill me?’
‘No…but a bullet in the leg won't be pleasant for you.’
‘You…’
And Pearce was screaming again, but this time not in fear.
Cardiff whirled back to see that Pearce's face was squashed up close to the glass, still thirty feet from the reception doors; face contorted, mouth wide and agonised.
There was an engulfing, indeterminate shadow behind and over him…something huge.
Steam or fog seemed to be wreathed around that massive shadow.
Rain hissed all around it…and now Pearce was screaming in agony and distress.
Frye was saying ‘My God, my God, my God…’ over and over again.
And Pearce was being somehow lifted from his feet, still squashed against the glass, hands and feet drumming in a frenzy against the windows.
The monstrous shadow was lifting him.
Then blood began to splatter on the glass from Pearce's open mouth.
‘Oh God, oh God, oh God …’
Frye clutched his hand to his mouth.
The splattering of blood became a dark and arterial gushing.
Duvall lunged forward and fired at the shadow.
The roaring detonation filled the reception area like a miniature lightning strike, stabbing pain into everyone's ears.
A fist-sized hole was punched in the glass two feet to the left of Pearce's screaming, crimson face.
Something inhuman screeched and bellowed in the storm, and Pearce was swept away from the glass by the shadow, out of sight and into the night — leaving a bloody smear.
Pearce's screams were borne away on the wind.
Duvall moved forward to fire again, but Rohmer held his arm — pulling him back.
Lightning flashed outside again.
There was no shadow, but the drifting tatters of smoke from something that had been burning were still swirling in the wind and rain.
‘Move back,’ said Rohmer.
‘Away from the windows.’
Thunder growled in the sky again, and they were all backing away slowly and carefully.
Another growling seemed to be coming from outside, and the sound of something breathing heavily.
Something large.
Or was it only the storm?
Prowling, scuffling, moving around out there somewhere…
There was another crash of thunder.
The darkened lobby was again lit up in stark, nightmarish black-and-white.
Jimmy scanned the dripping windows, waiting for something hideous to crash through those vulnerable glass panes in an explosive maelstrom of glass and storm-driven wind and rain.
Rain hissing on scabrous flesh that was not flesh, dousing the flame, runnelling in scarred troughs…
In dreadful anticipation, Cardiff waited, aware of Rohmer and Duvall scanning the windows with their weapons.
Blind, deaf, but able to smell; able to find them by the food smell, even in this raging, wind-swept, rain-driven night…
The wind lashed at the frontage, rattling those panes…and Gilbert was whimpering again.
Feeding angrily and briefly on what it had taken.
Discarding the remnants on the pavement, in the rain.
Feeling the strength returning, the hate returning…
They waited.
The thunder seemed to shake the foundations of the building.
Lightning flickered; jagged fractures in the sky — making shadows leap and leer, in stark black and white.
They waited.
Something scraped against one of the windows.
And then Frye began to scream, the sound of it paralysing everyone with fright again.
Frye was screaming over and over now in alarm and desperation.
‘'Frye!’ hissed Rohmer.
‘Snap out of it!’
‘For God's sake.’
Cardiff moved through the shadows to where Frye was crouched against the wall, next to the reception desk.
‘Don't snap!
That thing will hear…’
Cardiff reached out to grab Frye and shake him back to his senses.
Jimmy grabbed at Cardiff's arm and pulled him away.
‘What the hell…?’
Cardiff saw the look of glazed horror on Frye's face, heard him mumbling: ‘Oh no, no, no, no…’
And then he saw the same look of horror on Jimmy's face as he pulled him roughly back.
‘Don't touch him,’ said Jimmy in a voice almost too quiet to hear.
Frye was turning slowly in horror to look behind him, at the reception wall.
And now they could all see what was happening.
Frye's left hand had vanished into the wall to the wrist.
He looked at it as his forearm began to slide inwards after it; the wall perfectly seamless, with no sign of irruption, no disturbance to its surface.
Frye staggered — and then tugged backwards, trying to drag his hand out of the wall.
‘No, no, no…’
He flung out his other hand towards them in a desperate plea, and Cardiff moved to take it.
‘No,’ said Rohmer.
‘It's a Darkfall strike.
We can't do anything to help him.’
‘Oh Christ !’ screamed Frye, his upper arm sliding inexorably and impossibly into the wall.
He staggered again, his knee connecting with the wall — and sticking there.
The knee itself began to slide into the dark, smooth pastel paper on the wall; smoothly and neatly.
‘You said it was too early, Rohmer!’ screamed Frye again.
‘Too early…too…
I wasn't wearing…’
Frye's voice broke up into sobs and his other slashing arm connected with the wall and stuck there.
‘Please!
Someone HELP ME!’
‘For God's sake, Rohmer!’ pleaded Cardiff.
‘There must be something we can do.’
‘Please, Rohmer!
PLEASE!’
Frye's shoulder had vanished into the wall, as had his leg and his hip.
His other arm was in the wall to the elbow.
He strove to keep his face from that wall as it inexorably pulled him closer.
His screams broke into hysterical laughter.
‘I'm the tar baby…’ he gibbered.
And then Duvall-stood forward, placed the barrel of the  automatic on the back of Frye's head…and blew his brains out.
Jimmy and Cardiff recoiled, but Rohmer remained calmly where he was, as the impact flung Frye's sundered head forward, his shattered face smacking into the wall…and rapidly becoming absorbed there.
The bloodied stain on the darkened wall around that head vanished quickly, blood and tissue absorbed like ink into blotting paper; leaving no trace.
Frye's quivering body slumped and then, turning slightly as he was sucked into the wall as if into some vertical view of a bizarre quicksand, he was quickly absorbed — the wall closing around him; unmarked and to their eyes, as solid and impenetrable as ever.
Gilbert was still sobbing.
Only Frye's left calf and foot remained protruding from the bottom of the wall, shuddering slightly as it was drawn in.
Thunder resounded again — and they all felt a sudden change in pressure.
Cardiff's ears popped.
Only the foot protruded from the wall now.
It juddered again, twisted…and fell from the wall on to the tiled floor; severed clean at the ankle as if with a butcher's knife.
Mesmerised, they stared at it.
A ludicrous but hideous spectacle.
Rohmer was the first to break the shocked silence.
‘The effect of the strike has worn off.
Now you know how the severed hand got there, Cardiff.’
‘The poor bastard,’ said Jimmy.
‘The effect is escalating even more quickly here than ever before.
Keep your gloves on.
No skin contact.’
‘We must get out,’ said Cardiff.
‘Past that thing outside?’
‘Is it still there?’ burbled Gilbert.
Duvall crept nearer to the glass frontage.
There were no monstrous sounds out there in the storm.
The hideous blood smear on the window was a running crimson blur in the rain.
But there was no way of telling whether the thing was still outside.
‘Christ,’ muttered Duvall.
‘If you'd seen it.
I'm surprised it wasn't attracted by the screaming.’
Jimmy was still looking in horror at the wall where Frye had disappeared.
‘What the hell do we do now?’
‘Underground,’ said Cardiff.
‘Like Gilbert said earlier.
That's the only place we can be safe.
We can lock ourselves in the basement, away from that bloody thing outside and until this Darkfall storm blows over.’
‘Amazing how quickly you adapt, Cardiff,’ said Rohmer.
‘Might find a job for you after all.’
‘Go to Hell.
We could have saved Pearce.’
‘No, we couldn't,’ said Duvall.
‘That thing was behind me.
It was at the reception doors.
Its taking Pearce probably saved our lives.
Otherwise it would have been in here.’
‘You're the ones with the guns, pal.
Are you saying that thing can't be stopped with a bullet…?’
‘You irritate me, Cardiff,’ said Duvall.
‘Why don't you go outside and try to talk it to death?’
‘Underground,’ said Jimmy.
‘Like the man said.
Let's get the hell in the basement and bar the door.’
‘We'll need my equipment,’ said Gilbert weakly.
‘The acoustic effects of continued strikes could deafen us.
My equipment can be set at a frequency to emit sound waves that will obviate that effect.
We need…’
‘Get it,’ said Rohmer.
Gilbert retrieved the portable equipment which Frye had been using and led the way gingerly to the corridor, asking weakly: ‘Which door?
Where?’
Cardiff pushed past, and now they were all heading down that corridor past the two elevators on their left; still looking back to the reception doors lest that monstrous shadow should suddenly reappear.
‘We should warn people,’ said Cardiff as they moved.
‘How do we do that if the telephones are out?’ asked Rohmer.
Gilbert had reached the door marked ‘Basement’.
He began to reach for the handle with a gloved hand and then  pulled nervously back, remembering what had happened to Frye.
Thunder growled, and Gilbert looked around with nervous, pleading eyes.
‘No…’ said Cardiff.
‘I'm not going down there.
Take Devlin down with you, but I'm going back.’
‘Back out there ?’ said Jimmy.
‘Past that…thing?’
‘It's prowling around outside.
Anyone passing by on the road or the walkway is in danger.’
‘There'll be no one outside in this bloody storm,’ said Jimmy.
‘You're either brave or stupid,’ said Rohmer.
‘I can't work out which.’
‘I'm neither,’ replied Cardiff.
‘I'm a policeman, that's all.
It's my job.
The thing is…what the hell are you , Rohmer?’
They exchanged a long, hard look.
And then Cardiff turned, heading back for the reception.
The windows flared again in nightmarish black and white as lightning split the night once more; the explosion of thunder rattling those panes simultaneously.
What am I doing ? thought Cardiff as he walked.
Am I really just doing my job ?
‘You're cracked,’ said Jimmy behind him.
‘Come back and don't be a bloody idiot.’
No, you're not so altruistic , said a small voice inside Cardiff.
It's that thing outside, isn't it?
That thing that can't possibly exist.
You think it has the face of the man behind the wheel, don't you?
The face that was hidden from you.
You think that thing out there has the answers.
It's Death…and you want to ask it face to face.
Ask it …
Gilbert cried out; a hoarse, guttural grunt of fear and surprise.
The others were cursing in alarm.
And Cardiff turned back to look.
They were shrinking back from the basement door.
And something was happening to that door; something that he couldn't make out, because it was screened by their bodies.
No…not the basement door.
But the wall beside the door.
There was movement there; movement and light, as if someone was shining a torch beam on it, swinging it wildly from side to side.
There were somehow moving shadows on that wall; crawling, shifting shadows.
‘What is it?’
Cardiff called out.
Gilbert turned to stare in Cardiff's direction as if contemplating another mad dash for the reception doors and then remembered the thing that lay beyond them.
Rohmer, Duvall and Devlin were all pulling away from that wall, step by step.
Cardiff moved to join them…and at last he could see what the others were seeing.
There was a spreading stain of movement on the wall; a shifting undulating wave of shadow and light which made absolutely no sense at all.
Cardiff spun back to look at the windows to see if that bizarre shifting and swirling of shadows was somehow caused by a lightning flash through the glass panes.
But apart from the grumbling in the sky and the hissing of rain, there was no lightning; no reason why this peculiar shadow show should be taking place.
There was something else now; something that hadn't been immediately apparent to Cardiff, but had been seen by the others straightaway and which was causing them to back away from the wall.
There was other movement on that bare plaster wall; movement other than those strange, creeping, shifting shadows.
There was a sparkling, fizzling white light in there, too…and Cardiff walked forward to look as the others recoiled.
That streaked, spluttering light was also crawling on the wall, amidst the shadows.
It was mesmerising.
The wall looked like a dark and mysterious fresco over which black, swirling thunderclouds were roiling; and within the thunderclouds, the occasional jagged crackle of lightning; an arterial stab of fractured light, like a lightning strike.
And then the wall bulged outwards.
Cardiff froze in his tracks, and now the others were right beside him; all staring back at this impossible sight.
The bulge was taking place about midway in the plaster wall.
The dull grey plaster was now completely alive with the shadows and the crawling light, and that wall had somehow become like grey leather or rubber at its centre, where the bulge was taking place.
There was a noise now.
It was the noise of something stretching and straining under enormous, impossible pressure; as if the very fabric of that wall must suddenly explode inwards, enveloping them in a deadly blast of shattered brick and concrete.
Impossibly, there were no cracks in the wall, no tears or fractures.
The grinding, stretching sounds were rising to a pitch and behind it all, another low-register noise.
Almost inaudible at first, but rising in volume, making their eardrums vibrate.
‘Now what?’ said Jimmy in amazement.
‘What the hell is this ?’
Incredibly, Jimmy could see that Rohmer had something akin to a smile on his face.
‘Amazing,’ he said quietly.
‘Amazing.
I never thought I'd…’
‘The place is falling apart…’ began Cardiff, as Gilbert blundered into him again, not knowing where to go.
‘No, not falling apart,’ said Rohmer, raising his voice over the groaning, cracking, straining noise as it now became so loud that surely it must burst apart like a bomb, killing them all in the process.
‘Get back…’behind the reception desk , Cardiff started to say, to get some kind of cover before the thing blew apart.
But then the noise became so unbearable, he was forced, along with the others, to clap his hands over his ears.
The agony of that sound in his head was the same as he and Pearce had experienced in the basement.
Jimmy had dropped to his knees and was hugging his head, when the noise suddenly snapped out of existence.
Reeling, Cardiff saw Rohmer standing stock still, hands fastened to his ears in an almost business-like fashion, still staring straight ahead at the wall.
Duvall was leaning against one wall, bent double and gagging for breath.
Now realising that his gloved hand was touching a wall, he  snatched it quickly away in alarm.
Gilbert had joined Jimmy on his knees, clutching at his head and shaking it madly, even though the noise had ceased.
But Cardiff's attention was drawn back to the wall.
The crawling light and shadow had gone.
There was no incredible bulging at the centre; no cracks, no jagged patches where plaster might have fallen under the strain.
The wall was as it had always been…but at the centre was a black smear, like the blackened smear that might be left by some kind of fire; as if a blowlamp had been held there.
The stain was perhaps three feet in ragged circumference and Rohmer took a step towards it as the others began to recover.
‘Re…’ began Gilbert, and his voice dried.
He swallowed hard.
Cardiff could see that Rohmer was looking back at Gilbert, almost hopefully.
‘It's a…
Returner.’
And then something was coughed out of that blackened spot with a sound like liquid choking; coughed out from a hole where there was no hole, with such force that the jumbled shape landed with a slap on the corridor floor, five feet from the wall.
‘Jesus Christ…’ said Jimmy.
And then lightning flashed outside again, and now they could all see what it was that had been ejected, impossibly, from that plaster wall and into the corridor.
It was a girl.
She was about seventeen years old, with long dark hair in disarray around her face.
She was wearing a white blouse with frills at the cuffs, and a plain black miniskirt.
A jade-green pendant on a chain was hanging around her neck.
She was obviously in distress, raising herself on all fours, snatching the hair from her face as she looked back in terror at the plaster wall from which she had just come.
She began to crawl hastily away from that wall, head turned back over her shoulder to look at it, apparently unaware of their presence.
The blackened spot in the centre of the wall had vanished.
‘Stay where you are!’
The girl cried out in alarm at the sound of Rohmer's shout, swinging back to see them at last.
Her hands flew to her face and she stopped, huddled in the centre of the corridor.
She began to weep, burying her face in her hands.
‘Please…’ she sobbed.
‘Please help me.’
Rohmer stepped forward purposefully, reaching inside his coat again as he did so.
‘Please…please…’
‘Sometimes they come back,’ said Rohmer, and now he had drawn the automatic and raised it.
The girl could see what he was doing, but lowered her head again, sobbing.
‘It's just a girl!’ shouted Cardiff.
‘You can't!’
‘Stay out of it, Cardiff.
You saw that thing outside.
You saw what happened to Pearce.’
‘It's a Returner,’ mumbled Gilbert.
‘My God, it's…’
The girl's distress was doing something to Cardiff.
It was making him feel emotions that he didn't want to have again.
The sound of that distraught weeping brought that June afternoon back to him in a stabbing flash of inner pain.
In that split-second, he saw the car speeding towards him, heard Lisa's scream, saw Jamie leaving his arms in slow motion.
That weeping was his weeping; the grief that had overwhelmed him for so long.
The horrors of the night had somehow resulted in this bizarre inner focusing.
‘She's just a girl !’ he shouted again.
And saw Rohmer levelling the automatic directly at the girl's head.
Cardiff was not going to allow it.
Rohmer was not going to turn a gun on him again, and he was not going to allow this to happen.
He lunged forwards, hit Rohmer hard with his shoulder in a rugby charge and grabbed his gun arm.
Rohmer was surprisingly strong, but the impetus of Cardiff's lunge spun him away from the girl.
They collided with the corridor wall, Cardiff still hanging on to Rohmer's wrist.
The girl cried out, shrinking away from their struggling figures.
Rohmer tried to hit Cardiff in the face with his other free fist, but Cardiff was expecting it.
He kept his head down co that the knuckles grazed over his head.
He  slammed Rohmer back against the wall again hard, and felt the breath go out of him.
‘Cardiff!’
He looked back from their struggle to see that Duvall had stepped forward.
He had drawn his own weapon, and the automatic was levelled at him.
They stopped struggling.
‘Let him go and stand back.’
‘You can't do this!’ snapped Cardiff, feeling Rohmer trying to break his grip now with a hand that felt like a vice.
‘You can't!’
Cardiff heard Duvall chamber the gun with a ratcheting click !
‘So you're going to shoot me if I don't let go, right?
Where's the fair play in that, then, Duvall?
Learn this trick at Eton?’
‘Harrow, actually,’ said Duvall grimly.
‘Duvall…?’ said Jimmy in a quiet voice, sidling up to the man in a curious, almost apologetic way.
His head still down, fingers tracing on his brow as if still in pain from the noise they had just heard.
Duvall turned to look at him.
‘I think it's best…’
And then Jimmy straightened, stepped quickly forward and grabbed Duvall's arm…headbutting him with a loud smack !
Duvall's hands flew to his face as he collapsed to the tiled floor with a thick grunt.
Jimmy had the gun in his hands now, and levelled it with a cool and grim purpose at Rohmer.
Cardiff clung to Rohmer's gun hand.
‘Alright,’ said Jimmy.
‘Drop the gun on the floor, Rohmer.’
‘Put the bloody thing down, Devlin,’ hissed Rohmer.
‘You don't know how to use it.’
Jimmy adjusted the gun so that he was holding it with both hands.
‘It's easy.
Seen it done on the telly lots of times.
Now throw it down.’
They were all in a frozen tableau.
Jimmy with the gun on Rohmer, as Cardiff held him against the corridor wall.
Gilbert somewhere behind, keeping out of the way, trembling with fear.
Duvall, semi-conscious and moaning on  the floor.
And the girl, this distraught seventeen-year-old girl from nowhere, still sobbing and watching this insane drama playing out before her eyes.
And outside, the omnipresent hissing of the rain; like the very breath of the watchful storm.
‘Better drop it,’ said Cardiff at last as thunder boomed in the sky and the reception glass lit up again with the flash.
‘That could be another Darkfall strike, couldn't it?
Sure that there aren't any tears in your coat, Rohmer?
Sure you don't have any flesh contact with this wall?’
Hissing angrily through clenched teeth, Rohmer's fingers opened.
Cardiff quickly took the gun and stood away from him, towards Jimmy.
Rohmer staggered away from the wall, eyes blazing with fury, hand massaging his wrist.
‘Nice trick, Jimmy,’ said Cardiff as he drew level with him.
‘You learn that one at Eton?’
‘Local pub, actually,’ replied Jimmy.
‘After closing time.’
EIGHT
Outside, in the rain, it turned what had once been its head up to look at the storm.
Rain swilled and foamed in its open mouth as it looked at the churning black clouds and the eruptions of fractured lightning.
It knew somehow that it belonged there, not here, and when thunder boomed in the sky it heard that thunder in its newly transmogrified body.
It felt the thunder although its hearing faculties had been destroyed by the absorption process.
It cried out in response; a bellowing gargle of pain and hate and recognition.
Rainwater and petrol gushed from the corners of its mouth.
The wind whipped the rags of burned and sundered clothes on its greatly enlarged body.
It turned from the storm and from those inside the office block; its need focusing on the ruined corpse that lay on the pavement next to it.
The body was lying face up in the rain.
At first only crudely aware of what its new body needed to survive, it had taken the man crudely.
Now it knew what its transmogrified form could do; knew instinctively how its own powers of absorption and reconstitution could be used to feed that terrible need.
It scooped the corpse from its crimson resting place on the pavement.
A tide of rainwashed blood swept into the gutter.
With rain hissing all around it, flowing on its ravaged and transmogrified new flesh of steel and wire and windscreen and rubber, the thing embraced Pearce's bloody corpse; crushing the flesh tightly to its chest; feeling its own new flesh swarming around him, absorbing him, taking him into itself…and growing even larger.
Even when Pearce's innards had been completely absorbed and digested, the thing's need was still strong.
It strode through the black rain to the car wreck in the forecourt, sensing the presence of more food.
Stooping to fasten an encrusted claw under the bottom of the car beside the ruined driver's door, it straightened again and heaved with incredible strength.
The car rolled over on to its back with a grinding crash, exposing beneath it the bloodied meat of the two policemen who had been supervising the cordon.
It fed.
NINE
Duvall groaned and sat up, holding his forehead.
There was no blood since there had been no cut.
But his forehead was already swelling blue-white where Jimmy had butted him.
Rohmer took a step towards them, still massaging his hand and then looked back at the girl.
Her sobbing had stopped.
Hands still held to her mouth, tears glinted in her frightened eyes.
‘Look, Cardiff,’ said Rohmer, turning back to them.
‘Devlin…you don't know what you're doing.
She may look normal.
But none of those who come back are ever really human again.
That thing outside…that was human once, and look at it.’
‘Shut up, Rohmer,’ said Cardiff.
‘And get over there beside Duvall.’
Rohmer moved past them and stood beside his henchman.
Cardiff walked over to the girl.
Still keeping an eye on the two men, he glanced down at the girl.
‘Was he…’ she said in a trembling voice.
‘I mean…was that man going to shoot me?’
She seemed on the verge of weeping again, but regained control.
‘What's your name?’ asked Cardiff.
‘Barbara…’ said the girl.
‘My name's Barbara Harrison.
Can you tell me…where I am?
And who are you people?’
‘Can't you remember anything?
You were here…in this office block.
It's Christmas Eve.
You must have been at a party.’
‘A party…?
What are you talking about?
I wasn't at any party.
Who are you?
What's happening to me?’
She  began to weep again, struggling to rise.
Jimmy was beside her now, and took her arm, helping her to stand.
‘Don't…’ hissed Gilbert.
‘Don't touch…’
‘Why don't you shut up?’ replied Jimmy.
‘There's nothing wrong with her.’
She was shorter than Jimmy by a foot; perhaps five foot three, and her long dark hair was cut to fall around her face in an old-fashioned sixties manner.
There was plaster dust on her miniskirt and bruises on her legs; apart from that, her dizziness and obvious distress, she looked to be physically all right.
Jimmy looked back at the plaster wall incredulously.
‘Now listen, Barbara.
We need to know what happened to you…’
‘Ever the policeman, Cardiff,’ said Rohmer as he helped Duvall to his feet.
‘Won't you believe anything I tell you?’
‘We need to know what happened to you,’ continued Cardiff.
‘You were at an office Christmas party, here in this office block: Fernley House.
A storm came.
And everyone…’
‘Why do you keep saying that?’ said the girl, leaning against Jimmy now.
‘I told you, I wasn't at a party.
Oh, my head hurts so much…’
‘You weren't at a party?
Then tell me, come on…what can you remember?’
‘We…we were driving.’
‘Driving?’
‘John, my brother…he'd just got his new car.
And he took me out in it for a test drive.
Yes, that's it.
We were driving…driving, and…’
‘You mean you weren't here in the office block?’
‘I told you!
We were out driving!
The weather began to turn bad, and we drove…drove straight into this storm, or something.
And John turned to say something to me, something was happening…oh God, something was happening and John shouted to me, told me to cover my head or something because the road was full of light and a roaring thunder and lightning.
I couldn't see.
The windscreen was full of horrible light, and I knew we must be crashing  because I could see the wheel spinning in John's hand…’
The girl staggered against Jimmy's side, near to collapse.
‘Come on Cardiff!
Let's just get everyone safe, and then you can go out there and do your Lone Ranger impression if you still want to.
I won't stop you.’
‘Alright…but uncock that bloody gun before you hurt somebody.’
Jimmy carefully lowered it, just as the girl fainted.
He swept her up.
Cardiff gingerly touched the basement door handle with his gloved hands, still watching the others.
When nothing seemed to be happening, he yanked it open.
‘Alright, Jimmy.
But be careful.
We may be protected…but she isn't.
Watch her hands, face and legs when you pass through there.’
Jimmy carefully stepped into the threshold while Cardiff kept the door jammed open with his foot, reaching in to try the lights again.
They were still dead.
‘Christ, Cardiff.
I can't see a bloody thing.’
‘Gilbert, come here.’
The scientist shuffled uneasily, looking back and forth from Cardiff to Rohmer.
‘Come here , damn it!’
Gilbert shuffled to him.
‘There's a wooden plinth screwed into the wall, just on the inside of this door by the light switch.
There are torches hanging on it.
Go ahead of Devlin and the girl, take one of the torches and lead the way down the stairs into the basement.
We'll be safe there, remember?
Just like you said.’
‘Yes, yes,’ said Gilbert eagerly, stepping gingerly into the darkened doorway while Rohmer and Duvall watched, and Cardiff carefully watched them.
‘Now what?’ said Rohmer as Gilbert fumbled at the plinth and found a torch.
Spirals of light danced on the walls of the basement as he started down.
Jimmy followed and was gone.
‘Now we all go down there and wait out the storm?’
‘You must be joking,’ said Duvall.
Even in the darkness, Cardiff could see the swelling on his forehead.
‘Go down there?
With that thing ?’
‘Just a girl.’
‘You're a bloody fool,’ replied Duvall.
‘Some of them look normal enough, Cardiff.
But we've seen these things up close.
They can change.
I've seen a grown man torn to pieces.
‘Come on, let's go.’
‘So you're not leaving to warn the others?’ said Rohmer.
‘You're not going to play the policeman after all?’
‘So that you can overpower Jimmy, or talk him into giving you a gun back?
No, I don't think so.’
‘That's not a girl!’ snapped Rohmer.
‘It's a monster.’
‘I'll make a deal.
I'll stay with you and hold on to the guns.
If she sprouts a second head or grows fangs —I'll shoot her.
Okay?’
‘You're going to be sorry for this,’ said Rohmer in a quiet, tight voice.
Lightning flashed in the reception windows behind them, and it seemed to be a reflection of his own brimming anger.
‘Humour me,’ said Cardiff, waving the gun at them.
When Rohmer and Duvall had stepped down on to the top of the basement landing, Cardiff followed them, carefully letting the door close behind him.
Down below, he could see the single torch beam which illuminated Devlin, the girl and Gilbert.
Jimmy had laid the girl down on the rough floor.
Cardiff took another torch from the wooden plinth as they descended the stairs into the basement, shoving it into his jacket pocket; taking another and switching it on as they descended.
In the darkness, he could barely make out the wooden boards that had been nailed into place over the shattered window vents at street level, but even down here they could hear the hissing of rain on the pavements outside and the grumbling of thunder in the sky.
‘Gilbert,’ said Cardiff as they reached the ground level.
‘Get that machine of yours, or whatever it is, working  now.
I don't want to have to go through those hellish noises for a third time.’
‘But I can't see…’
Cardiff kept his distance from them, so that the torch beam had a wider angle to illuminate the scene.
He took the second torch out of his jacket pocket and tossed it to Jimmy.
‘Stick this against the wall over there and turn it on.
That'll give us more light to see by.
When you've done that, go get all the other torches up there, bring them back and do the same.’
Jimmy skipped away up the stairs towards the plinth, just as the girl began to sit up, with Duvall and Rohmer keeping as far away from her as possible.
Rohmer's face betrayed no further anger, but Duvall, with his swelling bruise, looked about ready to deal out some serious damage if Cardiff was to drop his guard.
The girl sat up again, and began taking in deep breaths.
She looked around the basement, and seemed to recognise Cardiff.
‘Oh God, it wasn't a dream, was it?
I'm still…still…’
‘Alright, Barbara.
Take it easy,’ said Cardiff.
‘You're safe.
We're all safe here, and no one is going to hurt you…least of all these gentlemen in the corner.’
‘Where are we?’
‘We're still in the office block.
In the basement.
It's safe here.’
Jimmy returned with arms full of torches, switching each on and positioning them in the brackets of the huge copper boilers, or on the floor so that surreal fans of light were cast against the dirty plaster walls.
‘What am I doing in an office block?’ asked Barbara.
‘I was…’
‘Driving, yes.
You told us.
Where do you live, Barbara?’
‘Number 10, Browning Place…in Fernley.’
‘Fernley, Newcastle?’ asked Cardiff.
‘Of course, Newcastle.
Where else?
Where am I ?’
‘You're in Newcastle, don't worry.’
‘Where's John?
What have you done with John?’
‘We haven't seen John, Barbara.
We don't know where he is.
You say you live in Browning Place?’
‘Yes, I told you.
Look, who are you people?
Please tell me what's going on.
I don't understand.’
‘You know you're not telling me the truth, Barbara,’ said Cardiff, shining the torch in her direction now that Jimmy Devlin's torches arrangement was lighting up the basement like the stage of some avant-garde theatre.
‘No one lives in Browning Place anymore.
The last few houses there are derelict and due for demolition.
The Council's rehoused everyone who lived in that street.’
‘I am not lying!
Who are you people?
What have you done with John?’
And then, purely on impulse, Cardiff heard himself ask a crazy question, but a question that was no crazier than the situation he'd found himself in of late, with people who vanished into and out of walls, the hideous death of four people, three of them his own men and a stalking monstrosity from the pages of a horror comic out there somewhere in the night…not to mention cars that just fell out of the sky.
‘Barbara, what day did you vanish?’
‘God…’
She rubbed her face in a kind of fury now; a fury which she controlled, and through gritted teeth, said: ‘Saturday.
It was Saturday 15th March.’
And now she could see the puzzlement on everyone's face.
‘March?’ asked Cardiff.
‘Why?
What's wrong with that?
What month is it now?’
‘It's Christmas Eve.’
‘But it can't be…’
‘You've been gone nine months.’
‘Longer than that, I think,’ said Jimmy Devlin.
He was kneeling beside her now, looking into tear-stained eyes that reflected ice-blue in the torch light.
‘What do you mean?’ asked Rohmer, now taking an interest in the proceedings.
‘The thing about nightmares,’ replied Jimmy, ‘is that you've got to go with the flow.
When everything around you is just plain bloody crazy, you've got to look for the crazy answers.’
‘What are you talking about, Jimmy?’ echoed Cardiff.
‘Are those new clothes you're wearing, Barbara?’
‘New?
Yes, they're brand new, but…’
‘They're fab, aren't they?
I like the green jade necklace.’
‘Please, what are you all talking like this for?
It all sounds mad, like…’
‘Like a nightmare,’ said Jimmy.
‘Yeah, I know.
You say you were out driving with your brother?’
‘Yes, yes, yes!
Why does everyone keep asking me these stupid questions?!’
‘Was it a brand-new Ford Zodiac?’
‘Yes.
So you do know where John is?’
‘What year is it, Barbara?’ asked Jimmy.
‘Tell me what you've done with John?
Where is he?’
‘What year , Barbara?’
‘What the hell is the matter with you all?’
Barbara's eyes were blazing with anger now, an ice-cold fire reflecting back.
‘I know what this is.
We crashed…and I've been ill, or I've lost my memory or something.
And you all think I'm mad, don't you?
You think I'm off my rocker!
So you're…you're bloody well testing me!’
Barbara gathered herself, climbing to her feet again, slapping away Jimmy's proffered hand.
Tears were brimming in her eyes again.
There were dark streaks down her cheeks.
Something about that look stabbed into Jimmy's heart, and he didn't know why.
Jimmy Devlin, professional cynic — stabbed in the heart by the honesty that flashed in this girl's rebellion against authority.
He saw that honesty and within it somehow, a total lack of the cynicism that had marred his own life.
He felt the power in that pure anger when she shouted at him:
‘Don't you know what year it is?’
And then, the nightmare seemed to take further bizarre shape again, when she swallowed down hard on the  choking hoarseness in her voice, and she forced herself to control that anger when she spoke again: ‘It's 1964.
Saturday, March 15th, 1964.’
The resulting silence disturbed her even more.
She looked from face to face in the darkness, faces that seemed to belong to hideous inquisitors, with the torch beams casting harsh angular shadows from below into their upturned faces.
In a quiet, gentle, but troubled voice, Cardiff said, ‘You've been gone for twenty-six years, Barbara.’
‘That thing outside…’ said Duvall.
‘It's her brother,’ said Rohmer.
‘I don't know how…but it's her brother.’
‘What do you mean…twenty-six years ?!’ shouted Barbara in that pure blaze of anger.
‘You see now,’ said Rohmer.
‘She can't be human, Cardiff.
Not after what she's been through.
We can't wait down here, wait for her to change into…something.
You've got to kill her.
Kill her now.’
‘Please,’ said Barbara, now sounding weary and in shock: ‘I don't know what's going on.
Please don't kill me.
Please don't…’
‘Shut up, Rohmer!’ snapped Jimmy.
‘No one 's going to hurt you, Barbara.
Don't worry, I won't let anything happen to you.’
‘Shoot her, Cardiff.
Shoot her.
I'll clear your actions with Central Office, if that's what you're worried about.’
‘Shut up!
She's as human as you and me.’
‘When this is over, Cardiff,’ said Rohmer in a low, threatening voice.
‘When we're relieved…even if she doesn't turn , she'll still be taken by our people.
They'll examine her…and dispose of her.
It's standard procedure.’
Gilbert finally stood back from the portable machine on the floor.
It was emitting a barely audible, low-frequency hum.
‘That's it,’ he said.
‘The effects will be nullified as long as it operates.
Do you think…
Rohmer, do you think the Main Team will relieve us, do you think they'll…?’
‘You know the answer to that better than I do,’ replied Rohmer.
‘This is a Secondary Darkfall.
They'll wait it out and they'll also be keeping Cardiff's people away.
So must we.
That's always been the intention, so make sure your equipment is blocking and recording efficiently.’
Rohmer squatted down on the floor, resting his arms over his thighs.
‘May as well get comfortable.
I believe you'll be using that gun sooner than you think.’
‘Maybe I'll just take it from you,’ said Duvall.
‘And maybe you'd like a bullet in the leg,’ replied Jimmy.
‘Self-defence, of course.’
‘Keep your eye on him, Jimmy,’ said Cardiff.
‘Hey, what do you know?
I'm on the side of Law and Order,’ Jimmy chipped.
‘You'll be doing time again for this, Devlin,’ said Duvall.
‘Just wait and see.’
‘Yeah,’ said Jimmy.
‘Let's.’
Cardiff turned back to the girl.
‘It's alright, Barbara.
It's okay.
Believe me…nobody's going to hurt you.
But you have to answer my questions.
Now, you were out driving with your brother and you drove into some kind of storm.
Remember?
Where was that?
Where were you?’
‘I'm not sure,’ she replied.
‘We were driving on the main road out of Fernley, I think…’
‘It's important, Barbara.
Try to remember.’
‘This can't be real.
It can't be happening to me.
It's 1964.
It must be, it can't be all that time later…’
‘Where, Barbara?
On the main road out of Fernley?’
‘Yes…yes…
I remember we passed the pub…’
‘The Jolly Miller?’
‘Yes, that's the pub.’
‘And you were travelling on that road in March 1964?’
‘Yes, yes, yes…’
‘That's it, then.
That's what happened.’
‘What?’ said Rohmer.
‘What happened?’
‘This girl and her brother were driving on a stretch of road that doesn't exist anymore.
I know my patch well  enough.
That section of the road, past the pub she's just mentioned, was rerouted fifteen years ago.’
‘So?’
‘So they were driving right through here!
That's where the road was.
The area has been developed since.
This office block we're in didn't exist then.
The road just came straight through.
They drove into a Darkfall storm.
Right on this spot.
Remember what you said, Rohmer?
Darkfalls occur regularly on or near the same locality.
This wasn't the first Darkfall.
There was another — on March 15th, 1964.
And this girl and her brother drove straight into it.’
‘Yes, I think I understand,’ said Gilbert.
‘The site of the office block is a blackspot, as Rohmer told you earlier.
There is a theory that certain spots…throughout the world…develop what is termed a ‘vile vortex’, where phenomena can occur.
The Darkfall storm…the vortex it creates…is a more localised variation of the same phenomenon.
This is not the first or perhaps even the second time a Darkfall may have occurred here.
It may have happened on several occasions over hundreds, perhaps thousands of years.’
‘But I can't ever remember a storm like this one ever having occurred in this area before,’ said Cardiff.
‘There has been an escalation of recorded Darkfalls in the past decade,’ continued Gilbert.
‘But it may be the case that…oh my God!’
Something was scraping against the boarded-up windows.
They turned to look up at the hastily nailed boards that had replaced the shattered windows.
The sound came again; a long, rasping, scratching sound, as if someone out there was dragging something sharp across the wood.
It stopped…and now there was only the sound of the rain hissing on those boards, and the almost inaudible hum of Gilbert's machine.
Jimmy pulled the girl away with him, moving back from the outside wall, and the boards; four feet above them at ground level.
‘It might just be…’ began Gilbert again.
And then something slammed hard against one of the boards.
Nails screeched and popped, and the board juddered away at the bottom as something outside slammed against the wood.
The basement was filled with the hoarse and ragged sound of monstrous breathing.
Rainwater began to gush into the basement from around the fractured board.
As one, they shrank away from the far wall, watching rainwater trickling through the cracks in the boards and spattering on the basement floor.
That rainwater began to splash over the lenses of two of the torches that Jimmy had placed on the floor, creating a dancing and hellish kaleidoscope of light in the basement.
‘What is it?’ asked the girl in a weary voice.
‘What's…?’
‘Quiet!’ hissed Cardiff.
The wind gusted outside and rattled the loosened boards.
Rainwater flurried and troughed through the cracks.
‘It's a dream,’ said Barbara.
‘That's what it is.
Just a bad dream…’
‘Will you be quiet !’
Jimmy pushed her further back, as they all continued to watch the boarded windows with breath held tight.
In the centre of the room, Gilbert's machine continued to emit its low, barely audible hum.
Thunder and lightning cracked and roared outside like some electric avalanche — and following immediately upon it came the enraged roaring of Something from Hell.
A hideously powerful blow on one of the boards sent it splintered and whirling into the basement.
Rain and wind gusted through the gap as the dimly glistening form of some horrifying, ravaged shape lashed out from the pavement above and beyond them.
Another board exploded screeching inwards.
The thing's bellowing was drowned by a further thunder crack as Rohmer yelled…
‘Get out!
Get out and don't touch the walls!’
…and he shoved a petrified Gilbert ahead of him towards the stairs.
The question of who had ownership of  guns was now forgotten as Gilbert blundered to the basement stairs, closely followed by Rohmer and Duvall.
Cardiff pushed Jimmy and the girl called Barbara after them, turning back to look at the ragged aperture through which the storm was venting its fury.
Lightning flashed again as the monstrous shape outside seemed to launch itself head first and downwards in a mad and frenzied lunge at the aperture.
Another board shattered apart and fell inwards in shards.
And in that flare and roar of lightning, Cardiff saw a hideous face straining to look directly at him as huge and ravaged claws that had once been hands thrashed inwards on the brick face of the basement, seeking purchase.
That face was not the blank face that Cardiff had expected.
It was much, much worse.
It was the same burned face that he had seen behind the wheel of that exploded car in the office-block forecourt.
It was the same hideously charred and blackened visage, with its one burst eye still cloying within its ravaged socket like an egg yolk.
But this face was bigger; swollen and bigger still than the horror in the car.
And this face was hideously alive.
Its one rolling, swollen eye was fixed on Cardiff even as the thing thrashed with blackened, elongated and monstrously deadly arms at the brickwork, trying to heave itself through the aperture and into the basement.
Rainwater gushed around that ‘face’ as it opened jaws that yawned with the ferocious, rasping hatred of some monstrous insect.
The dirty water surged with its spume of saliva, and when it roared again it roared with the fury of the storm.
Cardiff knew that it wanted them.
Faced with this monstrous apparition, Cardiff did not freeze in his tracks even as the others clattered up the basement stairs towards the ground floor.
Instead, he stepped towards the thing as the others retreated.
‘Cardiff!’ shouted Jimmy from somewhere behind him.
‘What the bloody hell are you doing?’
Cardiff stood his ground and saw in one split-second the faces of Lisa and Jamie — and the man without a face who had mown them down.
He saw the hideous face of the huge thrashing thing before him, superimposed on that blank mask, and knew that it was the face he had been looking for since the death of his wife and son.
He had been looking for the Face of Death.
Now, he had found it.
He could walk right up and ask it the question that burned within him.
Pace to face, he could ask it:Why ?
But this hellish, monstrous Face of Death was also the face of an Abominable Idiot.
And Cardiff knew at last that even if he could ask the question, it could never provide him with an answer.
‘Cardiff…
Come on!’ yelled Jimmy again.
‘You're nothing …’
Cardiff said to the thing.
He raised the Browning automatic as if he was at target practice, levelled the sight at the thing's one remaining monstrous yellow eye — and pulled the trigger.
The sound of the shot was drowned by the deafening screech and roar of the thing as its eye blew apart in a shattering viscous whirl of fluid and tissue.
Claws braced on the wall beneath it, the thing strained upwards, rolling its dripping head in agony — and something that had been lying tight beneath it on the pavement slid from under its ravaged body and into the basement.
Soaked and tattered, crimson and black, it flopped arm-over-leg to the floor like some discarded overcoat or the eviscerated pelt of some large animal, with only the head intact.
And when Cardiff looked at the upside-down dead eyes of that head as they reflected in the torchlight, when he saw the teeth set in a clenched and hideous grin…he recognised the face immediately.
It was Pearce.
He had been skinned.
The thing bellowed and lowered its head again, rain-water-spume-blood-oil running from its jaws.
And even though its last eye was gone, Cardiff knew instinctively  that it could still see him.
The horror of Pearce's fate and the appalling impossibility of this thing wedged in the windowframe stung Cardiff into action again.
He swung the gun up again, fired wildly at that thrashing form and turned back to the staircase.
All except Jimmy seemed to have reached the corridor above.
He was standing on the landing at the top, face white.
As Cardiff scrambled up the stairs he saw Jimmy raise and fire his own gun at the thing.
He had never held a gun before, had certainly never fired one.
The recoil was unexpected and he staggered backwards as Cardiff reached him, not knowing whether he had hit it or not.
The screeching and thrashing was behind him now as they bundled out into the corridor, and Cardiff turned to slam the door shut.
As he turned back to the eerie blue-blackness of the strip lights in the corridor, Cardiff heard a thick grunt and the slap of someone falling heavily to the tiled floor.
He whirled from the door, heart still pumping madly from his encounter in the basement.
Duvall had hit Jimmy in the stomach.
He was crouched on the floor, gagging.
Hugging his torso with one hand, his other gloved hand was braced on the floor in the knowledge of what had happened to Frye.
Duvall was holding the gun now as he looked down at him, breathing heavily.
There was an unmistakable smile of satisfaction on his face, even in the dark, as he fingered the swollen bruise on his forehead.
Now, Rohmer stepped towards Cardiff holding out his hands and smiling.
‘Give me back the gun,’ he said tightly.
Down in the basement, something roared.
But Cardiff could not tell whether it was the storm…or the thing jammed in the window aperture, free at last.
‘You stupid bastard,’ said Cardiff.
‘You don't give up, do you?’
‘Give me the gun or Duvall will shoot the girl.’
Duvall raised the gun slowly towards her.
‘He'll shoot her whether I give you it or not,’ replied  Cardiff.
‘So I think I'll just keep the gun.
When he shoots her, you get a bullet as well.’
Barbara was standing apart from them again, fists held tight at her lap.
She was biting her lip and looking at the ceiling, as if willing herself awake.
Gilbert was fidgeting with his gloves again, looking at the basement door as Jimmy rolled to his knees and tried to keep from retching.
‘That thing down there,’ said Gilbert urgently.
‘Look, Rohmer, it doesn't matter.
Let's get away from here now while we can.
While it's in the basement.’
Rohmer stared hard at Cardiff.
Duvall waited.
Lightning flashed at the reception windows, as if a power line had snapped and trailed its cables over the window.
Thunder detonated like an underground bomb.
‘The door isn't locked,’ said Cardiff.
‘And even if it was, my guess is that our Addams Family friend could just take it off its hinges without trying.’
‘Alright…alright…’
Rohmer grabbed Gilbert by the arm with a curiously disappointed look on his face, pushing the smaller man ahead of him.
Then, to Duvall: ‘We're leaving.’
‘The girl?’ said Duvall, perplexed.
‘Are you saying we leave the girl?’
‘Yes.’
‘Is that an order?’
‘We're leaving, damn it!’
Duvall lowered his aim.
‘There's a side entrance there,’ said Cardiff, pointing to the door opposite.
‘There's a corridor leading to a service exit and back staircase.’
Gilbert needed no prompting.
He moved quickly to the door as Cardiff hauled Jimmy to his feet, keeping his own gun discreetly aimed in Duvall's direction.
Jimmy was able to stand unassisted now as Cardiff turned back to the girl.
‘Barbara?’
She was still looking at the ceiling: ‘Things like that just don't exist,’ she said to herself.
‘This is a nightmare and I've got to wake up.’
‘Barbara, move it!’ snapped Cardiff.
‘We're getting out of this nightmare.’
With sick fear in his stomach, Cardiff took her arm and guided her towards the side door.
At any second, that monstrous thing could come bursting through into the corridor from behind.
Gilbert pulled open the side-entrance door, stepped inside…and then recoiled.
His face was white.
Furious with Gilbert's panic, Rohmer pushed past him and yanked the door wide.
Someone was in the corridor.
Rohmer was frozen in the doorframe now, staring into the darkness, and Cardiff could hear a familiar voice whispering in the shadows.
‘I came in here…
I know I came in here…
I'm sure this is the place…
I know I came in here…’
‘What…who is it?’
Still trying to keep an eye on Cardiff, Duvall joined Rohmer and looked into the corridor.
Thunder crashed…and the sound of it seemed to fill the whispered voice with dread.
‘God, God…
I'm sure I came in here!
I did!
I must have!
I can't get out.
I CAN'T GET OUT!’
‘Jesus Christ…’ said Duvall.
And now they could all see what was in the corridor.
Something was trying to pull itself out of the corridor wall.
A human figure was somehow trapped in the plasterwork of that wall at the waist, twisting and scrabbling and thrashing to be free.
Sensing their presence on the threshold of the door, it twisted its head up towards them with a atrocious snarl.
Even though the figure was wreathed in shadow, they could see that it was hideously deformed.
The eyes were yellow slits blazing in the darkness; the head swollen and contorted.
Saliva flew in a spray from hideously enlarged and slack lips.
But it was still, despite the deformation, a face that Cardiff recognised.
‘Farley Peters…’
Cardiff felt his stomach lurch again.
‘The stupid fool tried to sneak in here and got…’
‘CAN'T!
GET!
OUT!’ screeched the thing that Peter had become — and tried to lunge towards them.
It remained stuck fast and it screeched again, waving shredded arms as Duvall slammed the door shut and blocked out the hideous spectacle.
‘It's another Returner, Rohmer,’ stuttered Gilbert.
‘It's stuck, but we can't get past it…’
‘The main entrance,’ said Duvall tightly.
Rohmer and Duvall strode away down the corridor with Gilbert close behind.
Jimmy was recovered now and Cardiff followed, still holding Barbara, who continued to shake her head — wanting to awake.
And now what ? thought Cardiff desperately.
Into the cars, that's what.
You have the panda.
The keys are in your pocket.
They have their own car.
We all head off into the bloody storm, and then this whole horror comic gets sorted out when we're back in the real world.
But then that other manic voice was saying to him: But are you sure that the real world exists anymore?
Are you sure that there's anything left out there beyond the Darkfall?
Maybe this Storm to end all Storms has killed everyone else out there?
And even if it hasn't, maybe Rohmer can see to it that you'll spend the rest of your life behind bars along with Jimmy Devlin?
And maybe …?
Lightning whip-cracked across the reception windows again — and in the brief instant that the windows were illuminated by the flash, they all saw the monstrous shape beyond.
They froze on the spot at the sight of that hideous snapshot; at the sight of the grotesque, massive shape in the act of bearing down upon those windows; charging headlong in an insane frenzy towards them.
Darkness blotted out the shape again.
And in the next instant, the glass reception doors exploded inwards.
The storm erupted with all its force into the reception area in a whirling, roaring maelstrom of disintegrating glass shards and a wild, bellowing fury of nightmarish, mutated flesh and flailing claws.
Cardiff saw Rohmer, Duvall and Gilbert recoil towards him as the hideous black-glistening thing thrashed amidst the collapsing detritus of its entry.
Glass exploded and shattered all around it as the storm wind and rain blasted down the corridor at them.
At once, he could see that it was the same monstrous nightmare that had attacked them in the basement.
While they had been delayed by Duvall's attack on Devlin, the thing had withdrawn from the basement window and lurched through the storm to the front of the building.
In a nightmare-blur of frenzied activity, Cardiff saw Duvall lunging back through the storm in their direction, a shower of sparkling glass on his shoulders; saw Rohmer seize Gilbert by the collar of his jacket and whirl him away bodily from the monstrous, thrashing shape and drag him backwards, hair and coat whipping madly in the hellwind.
And in the instant of time available to him, he thought of the only place of possible escape from this nightmare.
Not the basement from which they'd come, with its shattered windows giving further access to this horror…not the service/access corridor with its hideous wall-bound parody of Farley Peters…but the door next to the basement door marked: ‘Stairs’.
Again, in a frenzied blur of storm-driven wind, ice-cold rain, glass and splintered wood, Cardiff was suddenly at that door now, tearing it open with one gloved hand while he pushed Jimmy and the girl through into the darkness.
Duvall collided with him in the rush, nearly flinging him to the corridor floor, but Cardiff clung to the door knob and swung himself back again as Rohmer and Gilbert hurtled past him.
And Cardiff looked back to see the thing standing there amidst the destruction.
No longer flailing with hideously encrusted, burnt and sinewed arms; no longer bellowing in fury with the steel trap jaws of some gigantic insect or machine.
But standing in the blast of the storm and looking at him even though its ravaged eye sockets contained no eyes.
The thing was hunched, but even so, Cardiff could  see that it was at least nine feet tall and somehow impossibly larger than the burnt corpse he had first seen behind the wheel of that car.
He thought of Pearce, swept away and eviscerated; lying down there in the basement like some horrifying animal-skin rug.
And then the thing stepped out of the ruins of broken glass, plaster and wood…and in his direction.
In the next instant, Cardiff was in the stairwell and had slammed the door shut behind him.
The sounds of the storm were muffled in the blue-blackness.
But the sounds of gasping breath rasped and echoed as Cardiff turned to see that Jimmy and Barbara were still standing in the stairwell.
Rohmer, Duvall and Gilbert had started up the stairs, and the sounds of their clattering flight echoed back.
‘What are you waiting for?’ hissed Cardiff, tearing the tie loose from his collar, realising that he still had the automatic in his other hand but had been unable to use it again.
‘Go on!
Get up those stairs!’
‘What is it?’ asked Barbara breathlessly.
In the darkness, Cardiff could not see her lips moving, and almost shouted back at her:It's your brother!
That's what the hell it is !
But instead he grabbed her arm and shoved her ahead.
Turning back to look at the door, he could see no manual locking mechanism — only a circular brass inset that seemed to need a special key.
Cursing, Cardiff fumbled at the mechanism but could find no locking-catch.
Something smashed hard against the door from the other side.
The entire frame shuddered, and Cardiff stumbled back.
The door was solid but unlocked.
Would that thing out there still know how to simply turn a handle?
The door cracked and shuddered again; the sound of the impact terrifying, loud and threatening in the stairwell.
Cardiff turned, heart pounding and grabbed the handrail, hauling himself up the stairs.
Above him, Jimmy had stopped on the first landing and was looking back.
Cardiff waved him on, too breathless to speak.
From below, there was the sound of a third impact.
And up ahead again, from the first-floor landing, Cardiff could hear a muffled and urgent exchange of dialogue.
The voices belonged to Rohmer and Jimmy Devlin, but he couldn't hear what they were arguing about as he hauled himself around the staircase rail, paused for gasping breath and looked back down into the stairwell.
A black and vicious claw burst through the woodwork of the door with an explosive crash that echoed up and down the staircase like thunder.
The voices above stopped arguing, as Cardiff slid down the rail, exhausted and gasping for breath.
He sat on the top step, raised the automatic with both hands and aimed it at the arm that was writhing in the aperture below.
‘It's coming…’ he said, without looking up.
He squeezed the trigger and the echo of the shot blasted all around the stairwell.
Duvall was suddenly standing on the step above him, pushing him out of the way and stepping down past him.
Bracing one hand on the stair-rail, he began to squeeze shot after shot down into the stairwell.
Amidst the crashing echoes and detonating white flashes Cardiff heard Jimmy shouting: ‘It does no good, Duvall.
Can't you see that?
Cardiff shot it in the face, and it didn't stop.’
Rohmer remained silent, watching as Duvall descended the stairs still firing.
Cardiff heard Jimmy curse; a wordless expression of anger and fear…then footsteps on the stairs again as Jimmy hurried off.
Was he running for it at last?
Still sucking in lungfuls of air and wincing at the detonating roar of Duvall's automatic pistol, Cardiff began to haul himself to his feet again by one arm, his gun hand hanging limp.
There was a presence at his side now and he saw in surprise that it was Barbara.
Cheeks smeared by tears and mascara, she was helping him to stand and all he could think was How can she still have mascara after where she's been ?
And then, from down below, an enraged roaring swelled up to fill the staircase.
The staircase walls seemed to vibrate with the sound of it.
And over the sounds of Duvall's pistol shots, a deafening  punctuation to the sounds of the beast and the storm, Cardiff could hear Duvall spitting out words between each shot as he descended.
Crazily, he was enraged.
‘Can't burn you!
Can't shoot you!
Can't…!’
The doors on the landing behind Cardiff juddered open with a loud clatter.
Gilbert had been standing next to them and almost fell down the stairs in his efforts to get away from those doors as something shouldered them open.
Panic subsided when he saw that it was Jimmy.
He was wrestling with something on the other side of that landing door, pushing open the door with one foot and shouting: ‘Come on, then!
Give me a hand!’
Now they could see that Jimmy was tugging a large metal filing cabinet with him, dragged from one of the side offices on the first floor.
They stood watching him as he tried to manoeuvre the five foot cabinet through on to the landing with them.
Its drawers kept sliding open and shut as he heaved at it; the juddering clatter joining with the other sounds of cacophony in the stairwell.
‘Well, don't just stand there and bloody watch me.
Help me!’
And then Rohmer grabbed at the door at last as Jimmy began to heave it through.
Below, the stairwell door split down its length under the frenzied and monstrous assault.
The top hinge flew apart and the door began to judder inwards.
Duvall cursed aloud, fired one last shot directly into the door and whatever lay beyond it, heard the resounding roar of anger and rage…and then retreated hastily back up the stairs towards them.
Rohmer had hold of the filing cabinet with Jimmy now, and Cardiff and Barbara moved quickly aside as Duvall reached the landing again, looking vacantly at the wrestling match with the cabinet.
‘Move!’ shouted Jimmy, and he and Rohmer pushed the filing cabinet to the top of the landing…just as the nightmarishly black and writhing shape of the thing below burst through the sundered door.
Rain and wind gusted in around it.
Cardiff saw its hideously burnt and decomposed head turn to look up the stairwell at them, just as Jimmy and Rohmer heaved the filing cabinet over.
Crashing and echoing, the filing cabinet toppled end-over-end down the stairs as the thing heaved itself through the door aperture.
The cabinet slammed full against the shape, pinning it down and jamming sideways at the bottom of the stairwell.
Cardiff saw its wildly thrashing and monstrous arms, beating and tearing at the dented grey metal of the cabinet.
‘Swallow that!’ shouted Jimmy.
‘A way out?’ snapped Duvall at Cardiff.
‘You know the building, there must be a way out…’
‘Back staircase,’ said Cardiff, breath returned at last.
‘Through the offices on the first floor.’
‘Then what are we waiting for?’ said Jimmy as thunder roared again, and the thing below gave an answering bellow of fury.
Cardiff led the way into the corridor on the first floor.
The main office door to their right was emblazoned with the logo: Stasis Computers, and it was open.
This, no doubt, was where Jimmy had found the filing cabinet.
Cardiff pushed through into the offices.
It was open plan, divided by hessian screens at chest-height.
A main thoroughfare had been created through the centre of that office with the screens.
On the left was what he imagined must be a typing pool, on the right more desks containing tidy ranks of computers for administrative personnel and computer operators.
There were plate-glass windows on three sides of the office…and what Cardiff saw through those windows brought him to a halt.
The others pushed on past him in the doorway, but they too stopped when they saw what was revealed on the other side of the windows.
The office block was in the middle of a hellish whirlwind.
From left to right, a spinning maelstrom of snow and rain was sweeping around the block like a tornado.
The effect was dizzying.
The voice of the storm was louder up there; a wailing lament of storm-wind against the buffeted glass.
Overhead, the strip lights gave out a ghastly flickering blue and the shadows of the storm on that huge expanse  of glass created a psychedelic swirl of speckled light in the office which added to the vertigo.
‘Darkfall,’ said Rohmer in a tone of voice approaching real awe, and Cardiff looked at him hard again.
He had changed somehow since this nightmare had really descended and impossible things had started to happen.
In spite of the immediacy of their terror and danger, he was somehow more self-absorbed.
‘What do you all take me for?’ shouted Jimmy.
‘A furniture remover?’
Cardiff turned to see that Jimmy was manhandling another cabinet from behind one of the hessian screens and towards the door.
Duvall joined him and began to shove hard, until the cabinet had juddered close up to the office door.
‘Don't get any skin contact with this, Duvall,’ said Jimmy through gritted teeth.
‘You don't want to end up filed in there forever, do you?’
Duvall gave him a flinty stare.
Jimmy was changed in Cardiff's eyes, too.
But he didn't have time to speculate now as he strode across the office with the others following, down the ‘corridor’ between the screens and towards the double-doors directly ahead which would give access to the secondary staircase.
‘How do we get down if the bottom door is locked?’ asked Gilbert as they moved.
‘We'll have to jump from the first floor,’ said Cardiff.
‘Jump?’
‘There's a raised embankment behind the office block.
The contractors have been clearing earth back there for landscaping.
It won't be far from the first-floor windows to the mound.
It's only ten feet or so down, if we pick the right window.’
From somewhere below came a great rending and echoing squeal of torn metal.
It sounded as if the thing downstairs had finally torn the cabinet out of its way.
And then another Darkfall bolt hit the building.
The thunderclap was deafening.
Their hands flew to their ears in unison and they staggered under the immensity of  the reverberating impact.
The floor beneath them vibrated, and they reeled.
Ahead of them, a great crack appeared from ceiling to floor in the wall where the double-doors were set.
Somewhere, party glasses slid from a table and shattered on the floor and one of the computer consoles fell from the end of its desk with splintering impact.
The glittering green Christmas decorations which had been Sellotaped to the ceiling and walls swayed crazily as if the whole office block was tilting.
Plaster dust puffed downwards from the ceiling.
Something was happening at the windows.
At first, it seemed as if the windows had all cracked under the impact of the strike.
There was a jagged network of white fractures in the glass of all of them.
But those cracks were somehow alive and moving with a pulsing and fractured blue-white light as they looked.
Those jagged fractures spread like hissing, living root-fibres on the juddering panes, filling the office with light.
‘Lightning!’ exclaimed Gilbert.
And they watched the living cloud of electricity which surrounded them flickering and dancing with fingers of thin white crepuscular power; they watched the spidery web of frosted white fire greedily dancing and exploring the windows.
The second impact came, like the slamming of a huge underground steel door…and just like the sound that Cardiff remembered from the basement.
Their hands flew to their ears again, pain stabbing into eardrums.
Oh Christ, not this !
Cardiff whirled to Gilbert.
‘The sound!
It'll kill us!’
‘No…no…’
Gilbert winced through gritted teeth ‘Not above ground.
The acoustic effect will transfer underground.’
The detonation faded away to a muted roar.
‘See?
See?’ said Gilbert as if eager to please.
Cardiff shook his head, rubbing at his ears.
He looked up to see that Barbara was leaning against one of the hessian  screens.
He lunged forward and plucked her hand away from the screen.
‘Don't touch anything.
Don't…’
And then he turned back to Gilbert.
‘That was a Darkfall strike, wasn't it?’
‘Yes, so we mustn't…’
‘Touch anything?’
Gilbert saw what he meant immediately.
Barbara had been in flesh contact with the screen, but had not been absorbed.
He shook his head.
‘She's immune.
She's a Returner.
So she's immune from that effect now.
She's been through that process once, and it seems that she'll stay immune to further absorption.
We've had experience of this before.’
Duvall was at the double-doors leading to the secondary staircase.
He pulled one of the doors open.
Somehow, lashing wind and rain was gusting through that opened door…and Duvall was slamming it shut hard again, turning back to Cardiff and snapping: ‘You stupid bastard!
You've got us trapped in here!’
‘What the hell are you talking about?’ snapped Cardiff in return, and pushed past him to the double-doors.
Jimmy was at his side now, and they both looked through the glazed front of the doors.
Immediately, they could see what had happened.
The Darkfall strike had destroyed the second staircase.
Somewhere above, lightning had impacted on the building and an upper section of the staircase had collapsed in upon itself.
A great avalanche of steel and concrete had crashed downwards into the shaft which had been the stairwell; gathering bulk, weight and destructive momentum from floor to floor as it collapsed.
Beyond the double-doors lay only a compacted cave-in of concrete slabs and twisted metal, with not enough space for even a small dog to squeeze through.
Storm water was running amidst the compacted mangle of that destruction.
‘We're trapped up here!’ snapped Duvall again.
Beyond the windows, the electrical web of lightning had  now vanished.
The swirling rain and snow whirled continually against the buffeted glass.
‘Alright…alright…’ said Duvall, complacently now, as if he could sort out their problems rationally.
‘It's time to stop pissing about.
And the first thing we do, is get rid of that !’
He raised his gun, pointed it directly at Barbara and, before they could react…pulled the trigger.
The hammer fell on an empty chamber.
Duvall had used his last shell on the thing downstairs without realising.
‘You dirty…’
And Jimmy had grabbed up a nearby typist's chair from behind the screen and raised it with both hands like some huge club, ready to smash it across Duvall's face.
Recovering from his surprise, Duvall was ready to throw himself at Jimmy.
‘Leave it!’ shouted Cardiff, raising his own gun in their direction.
‘Both of you!
We've more to worry about.’
‘Well, just keep an eye on it ,’ said Duvall, without taking his eyes off Jimmy, and meaning Barbara.
‘When it ‘turns’, you just be ready with that gun.’
Jimmy lowered the chair to the floor as Duvall fingered the dark bruise on his forehead.
‘And when we're out of this, Devlin, you and I have something to settle.’
Jimmy laughed, a sound without humour.
‘You sound just like a policeman.’
‘Quiet!’ hissed Gilbert.
His face was a mask of alarm and he was looking back to the office door and the cabinet which was pushed up against it.
‘I heard it.
I'm sure I heard it…’
The whirlwind raged at the window…but although they strained to listen, they could hear nothing from the corridor beyond.
‘More furniture against the door,’ whispered Gilbert.
‘We have to pile more against the door.
Stop it from getting in…’
‘No,’ said Cardiff, noting with rising anger that Rohmer was just standing and watching him with that  smile on his face again.
‘Don't make any noise that might attract it.’
Jimmy skipped back towards the door and the filing cabinet.
‘Jimmy…’ began Cardiff in alarm and warning.
Jimmy waved a hand back at him to be silent, and then he had reached the office door, crouching down low.
Carefully, he straightened and looked out through the fluted glass in the upper part of the door.
Crouching again, he moved to the other side of the cabinet and repeated the same manoeuvre, craning his head to look out.
Then, keeping low, he skipped back to them again.
‘No sign of it.
No sounds.
Maybe it didn't follow us up here.’
Thunder shuddered the building again, this time like the sounds of a faraway avalanche.
The rumbling resolved into the hissing of rain and the howling of the wind.
The hissing of the rain was beginning to sound like whispered voices now; like a multitude of whispering voices in the darkness.
‘Maybe it's dead,’ said Gilbert.
‘That's happened before, Rohmer.
Sometimes they just sicken and die.
Like the one you spent so much time talking to.
You remember that thing, don't you, Rohmer?’
‘Oh yes,’ said Rohmer, again with that mysterious look on his face.
‘I remember.’
The hissing of the rain was somehow louder, somehow more different in tone…and somehow much more like the whispering of a multitude of voices than before.
Cardiff turned back to Rohmer, and remembered again that feeling he was sure they'd shared when they'd first encountered each other.
He remembered that strong question-mark of recognition:Is it you ?
Perhaps now was the right time to ask Rohmer just what the hell he really was, just what the hell was really going on…?
And then the hissing, whispering of the rain seemed to fill the office…and from that whispering, came a voice.
‘Cardiffffff…’
It was a whispered voice that spoke his name.
‘Oh my God,’ said Gilbert, looking around.
‘Cardiff, for the love of God, get me out of here.
Pleasssse…’
Other whispered voices joined the plea.
But this time, the voices were not in the distress of agony that had been heard in the reception area.
This time the voices were mournful, rather than agonised.
They were afraid and they were lost.
Hundreds of voices whispered from the walls, the ceiling and the floors.
They were the voices of lost souls, all taking their lead from the one voice that had spoken Cardiff's name.
And that same voice continued to beg for his help.
‘Don't leave me here, Cardiff.
I don't know what's happening.
But I can't bear it.
Please, for God's sake…’
‘Evans,’ said Cardiff in an awed voice, as the whispering multitudes took up his name as a kind of saviour's anthem.
Those voices sounded like some dreadful surf breaking on a lost and faraway shore.
‘I remember them,’ said Barbara.
‘From another dream.
I think I was somehow with them once.
Oh, God.
Please help them if you can, Mr Cardiff.’
‘I can't help them,’ said Cardiff.
‘I wish to God I could.
But I can't.
All we can do now is help ourselves.’
Evans' lone voice drifted away, sinking beneath that whispering sea of voices.
Those voices merged with the hissing of the rain again…and were silent.
‘So what do we do?’ asked Jimmy, looking back at the cabinet where it was wedged tight at the office door.
‘We keep quiet and wait,’ said Cardiff.
‘Keep out of sight…and wait.’
THE DARKFALL
‘I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven’
St Luke, 10:18
ONE
A great weariness had suddenly settled upon it.
The great thunder which had propelled it towards their hiding-place below ground had somehow ebbed.
They had fought back, and it had felt the sting of their fight which had only served to make its hunger and hideous needs greater.
The small pain which had been inflicted upon it had only served somehow to make it stronger.
It had smelt their flight, trying to escape from their hiding-place and into the night.
Consumed by that monstrous need, it had entered their hiding-place at last.
Possessed by that hunger, it had still sensed that there was something different about the female.
It knew that she had not been there before, and that she had somehow appeared amongst them from nowhere.
It knew that she was different.
There was something of kinship about her that registered on a purely instinctive level, and in a way that the thing could not interpret.
It shook away these confusing feelings about the female.
They had escaped from it again, but not for long.
It had freed itself from the stairwell and could smell them, not far above it and within easy reach.
It had begun to ascend the stairs…and then the weariness had overcome it.
Even the power of the storm, with which it shared a kinship also, could not assuage the hunger.
A vital part of the thing seemed to be ebbing away.
And as it slumped to the stairs, it realised at last that the girl was also somehow connected with the storm.
The images in its head were confusing and seemed to hasten the dying feeling inside.
It gave in to the weariness.
Somewhere beyond, the thing that had been Farley Peters — still locked in the corridor wall — gibbered and scrabbled with monstrous hunger.
The thing turned wearily to listen, swamped by inertia and the need to sleep.
TWO
‘…sleep,’ said Barbara.
‘Maybe it's gone to sleep.’
They were crouching and sitting behind the hessian screens in the typing-pool.
Everyone was making sure that they were not in flesh contact with any of the furniture, walls or floor.
But Barbara was sitting on the carpeted floor, both hands braced before her.
‘What?’ asked Cardiff.
‘I don't know.
I just thought maybe that it…’
She ran a hand through her hair and then took the jade necklace in her hand and began to rub her fingers over it, as if it was a magic charm that could somehow protect her.
She shook her head.
‘It was nothing.
Nothing at all.’
‘Could she know what it's thinking?’ asked Rohmer.
‘We've had telepathic contacts before in sympathetic Returners.’
‘Perhaps,’ replied Gilbert.
‘They're brother and sister.
They've both been through the same transmogrification.’
‘Wait…’ said Barbara.
‘What are you saying?’
‘That thing downstairs,’ said Duvall tightly.
‘It's your brother.’
Barbara raised her hands to her temples and began to massage.
When she spoke again, it was in a quiet, sensible voice: ‘I know this is a dream.
I know I can come through it.
But just like dreams, some parts are crazy.
They don't make sense.
So I'll squeeze those parts out…squeeze them out until all of this is over.’
She looked up again when Jimmy put a hand on her shoulder.
‘That's the way to do it,’ he said.
‘Don't worry, it'll soon be over.’
‘I think I know what happened to the girl and her brother,’ said Gilbert.
‘I've been thinking about how the constituent parts of the two people and the car could be transmogrified and reassembled — if Cardiff's surmise is correct, that is.’
‘And?’ said Rohmer.
‘It's just a theory, of course.’
‘Spit it out.’
‘They drove into a Darkfall storm in the middle of a road.
I believe that there was a lightning strike on the car.
The Darkfall energy could have been attracted by the car battery.
As a result, the inert and living organisms were disassembled and scattered into the ether.
Those atoms were randomly distributed in the environment.
Now that another Darkfall has occurred, that energy has resulted in random reassembly.’
‘The car battery?’ said Jimmy.
‘Yes, it's the simplest form of a voltaic cell: a plate of copper and a plate of zinc immersed in a dilute solution of sulphuric acid.
A current flows from the copper to the zinc when wires are connected between the plates.
The difference in the electrical properties of the metals provides the force that drives such a current.’
‘Yeah,’ said Jimmy dryly, still looking at the office door.
‘Like I said…a car battery.’
‘The energy generated within a Darkfall would be attracted to that kind of interaction, no matter how small.
This must have happened.
Thunderclouds are already highly charged with electricity.
And an ordinary lightning flash is simply the breaking down of the insulating properties of air which discharges a momentary electric current to those clouds.
A Darkfall strike is…how shall I say it?…a much more powerful, more voracious kind of strike.
It affects the properties of animate and inanimate material, resulting in fusion.
Such a strike would be immediately attracted to the operation of the car battery.
The same thing would have happened in the Bermuda triangle disappearances, don't you see?
In those cases where  not only people, but the actual aeroplanes, boats or ships themselves actually disappeared from the face of the earth.
They were…disassembled.
And then disappeared in the ether.’
‘My head's hurting,’ said Jimmy.
‘Too many words, man.
Too many words.’
Thunder boomed again.
Pain stabbed into their ears, and this time they kept their hands there until the secondary cracking of thunder had come and gone.
The windowpanes rattled furiously, and spidery fingers of crepitating electricity twitched and danced over the glass once more; again creating the illusion that the entire office block was somehow enmeshed in some monstrous spider's web.
Swirling snowclouds and rain strengthened the illusion that there was no outside world anymore, and that they had all been transported to some frozen Hell.
In silence, they watched the office door and the cabinet.
The snow and the rain and the flickering of spidery lightning made bizarre, dancing shadows.
Rohmer, who had become so silent, looked at the storm-driven snow and the living electricity which buffeted the window nearest to him.
He looked out into the Darkfall.
And he remembered.
THREE
It was the first time that Rohmer's Unit had managed to keep a Returner in captivity for analysis and experimentation.
Rohmer did not count Eleanor Parkins from the Fernley House incident.
She had been destroyed before they could get her out of the police cell.
The other Units, he knew, had only had one apiece.
And even though the same scientists were involved in that experimentation, Rohmer could not resist a kind of immature pride in the fact that his unit had more than the others.
The first Returner had been non-vocal.
Not surprising in that it no longer possessed vocal cords.
X-ray analysis had revealed a complex throat-tract of asbestos fibre, a gullet composed mainly of industrial plastic and a stomach cavity with a basis of fibrillated copper.
And yet somehow the thing was still able to consume and digest the normal fats and proteins, converting them to energy, in a complex manner which they had never really been able to explain.
Examination had also revealed several hooded eyes in the head, torso and arms; all connected by a massive circuitry of unexplainable nerves and sinew which, although with no brain to relay messages still saw them, still swivelled and watched them move about the room as they examined it.
Those eyes were made of coloured glass.
And just how the hybrid could function without a discernible brain also remained a mystery.
The thing had died, and for its death they could also find no reason…no more than they could find a reason for how it was able to live in the first place.
The second Returner had killed two men, and had also  been destroyed in the process before full analysis could commence.
But the third had been different.
Because the third had been one of their own.
A Darkfall storm had descended on a factory in Leeds four years earlier.
It could have been worse; since the first strike had occurred at 9.30 p.m. after the main factory work-hours, and only a skeleton-crew shift had been in operation at that time.
Twenty-three people had vanished from the face of the earth.
And a team had been sent in as normal for initial investigation, only to retreat almost immediately when their equipment had registered the fact that this was a Secondary Darkfall.
But Charles Bissell did not return from the factory.
An associate of Gilbert, he had insisted on moving in with the team, even though his presence was not necessary, for first-hand examination.
And when the roster was called on evacuation, he was missing.
They had waited for the Darkfall to blow itself out, which it did in spectacular fashion.
One entire section of the factory had collapsed before the storm had finally dissipated.
The team had moved back in again, carefully sifting and analysing.
Bissell's body had been found lying on a pile of rubbish, face down.
But he had not survived the Darkfall.
He had been absorbed in some fashion…and then Returned.
And when the first person to find him had turned him over, presuming him dead, he had bitten a chunk out of that person's thigh.
The finder had almost died, and Bissell had been restrained and returned to the Unit for full examination.
The missing twenty-three persons had remained missing…so far.
But there were life readings in the walls, floors and turbine-generators within the factory itself.
Bissell's own molecular composition, including the clothes he had been wearing, had proved just as chaotic as expected.
They assumed that he had been absorbed by  machinery of some kind; since his own individual chromosomatic make-up was principally metallic.
Strait-jacketed to restrain his flailing and deadly limbs, Bissell had been returned to the Institute for examination and analysis.
Although still recognisably human in shape, and with a skin covering of normal human skin, X-ray analysis had revealed a new and scientifically impossible internal network of industrial steel and plastics.
A complex combination of aluminium, steel and copper had replaced his skeletal structure, making him too heavy to stand alone, lest his skin should rip open under the strain.
A specially constructed harness had been devised for him in one of the clinically white rooms where analysis was conducted.
Externally, Bissell appeared normal, with little sign of metamorphosis — except for his eyes.
They had no irises and were a glinting, ebony black.
Importantly for the Unit, Bissell was a ‘talker’.
Three tapes of recordings existed, supervised by Gilbert.
And Rohmer remembered those conversations almost by heart.
Bissell sat in his chair/harness, grinning.
He was pumped full of sedation, but none of it seemed to work and Gilbert had decided against more in case he died.
A bib had been tied around Bissell's neck to collect the raw, liquid plaster which oozed from his mouth where it congealed and hardened.
The assistant putting that bib on him had foolishly come too close.
Bissell had bitten him with teeth composed of white aluminium.
He had chewed, swallowed and licked his lips while the man was taken away, screaming.
Eventually Gilbert had switched on the tape and asked, ‘Do you feel like talking, Bissell?’
The thing that had once been Bissell laughed again, raw plaster splattering on the tiled floor.
‘Ever stood under an overhead power cable?
Ever felt the electrical field?
Listened to its hum?’
His voice had a hollow echo to it, as if there was nothing inside him.
‘Ever felt the hairs on your skin stand up?’
‘Yes.’
‘Aha…aha…’
And then, in agonised pain: ‘Christ, Gilbert!
Do something to help me…do something to…
Did you know that crops don't grow so well next to pylons and power cables?
Did you know that?
Farms crossed by electricity cables have more calves still-born or deformed than those which don't.
That's…that's because chromosomes are affected by electric and magnetic fields.
That's why…why…’
Bissell chuckled hideously, ‘…
I Yam What I Yam.’
He chuckled again, this time like the Popeye cartoon character.
Far from being funny or ludicrous, the sound was deeply chilling.
‘And what are you?’ asked Gilbert.
‘Can you tell me that, Bissell?’
Bissell looked hard at him with unblinking black hatred, then with pain.
The overhead strip lights glinted in the blackness of his eyes.
‘I've…opened up.
I can see behind the surface of matter.
Almost a different realm.
I don't see you, Gilbert.
I see…
I see your shape and your vibration.
I can sense your emotional state.
You're afraid of me.
And you have a good right to be…because…’
‘Because?’
‘You're not a person to me anymore.
There is no such thing as a ‘person’.
When I look at you I see…
I can only see…
‘What can you see?’
‘You're food, Gilbert.
Just…food.’
Bissell howled then, like some kind of demented animal.
When he spoke again, it was as if he was fighting with something within; fighting to retain control of his humanity.
‘The body has a defence mechanism to protect it from invasion by foreign substances.
Darkfall gives the inert material an ‘animate’ characteristic, it makes it react in the same way to a human absorption.
Because this time…this time…it's not a virus, or a pollen, or a transplanted organ…it's human material.
The inert material engulfs the foreign substance in contact with it.
Then its own ‘white cells’ surround it.
Try to eat it.
Remove it.
But they can't.
Do you see, Gilbert?
Do you see?
It's like the specific immune defence response in human bodies.
The invading substance is not eliminated…but altered.
By the building's defence mechanism, just like antibodies.’
Bissell began to laugh again, his voice choking on the liquid plaster.
‘I'm an antibody.
I'm full of antibodies.
Isn't that funny, Gilbert?
Antibody?
Do you get it?
Do you…
OH, MY GOD, HELP ME, GILBERT!’
Something inside Bissell seemed to crack and splinter, and even though there was no longer any recognisably human tissue, nerves or organs beneath that covering of skin, Gilbert knew that the scientist was in a mortal distress of agony.
He winced, waiting for that skin to split.
But it didn't happen and Bissell's cries choked away.
The scientist sagged in his ‘harness’.
‘Bissell?
Can you hear me?
Can you…’
‘Feed me, Gilbert.
Give me what I want.
Give me something to eat.’
‘We've tried that, Bissell.
We've tried to find the right combination of fluid proteins and…’
‘Fuck that!
Try something raw.
You know what I want.
Don't you?
Come over here and…and…oh God, Gilbert.
Don't come near me.
There are…’
Bissell fought against his own inner horror, biting down with aluminium teeth on a tongue of industrial rubber.
He still felt human pain, and it made him retch.
The purely animal function of retching brought him back again.
‘…there are four forces operating in the…in the universe, Gilbert.
You know that.
Gravity, the nuclear force inside the nuclei of atoms, strong and weak…and electromagnetism.
Can you tell me what an electric charge really is?
No, of course you can't.
None of us can.
Science can never deal with any questions about the essence of things.
Isn't…isn't that true?
Even though we believe we're so…so…bloody CLEVER!
God…
God…
Death isn't defined by the absence of a heartbeat.
It's defined by the absence of electrical activity in the brain.’
‘What are you trying to say?’
‘Did you know that life began on earth when lightning struck the sea?
Did you know that?’
‘What…?’
‘Electricity, Gilbert.
That's what this is all about.
The nature of electricity.
We think we've harnessed it.
We think we understand it.
But we haven't…and we don't.
It's a fundamental property of nature, and we've reaped the advantages of its light side…’
Bissell laughed again; an abominable liquid croaking.
‘But there is a dark side.
And the Darkfall is the manifestation of that dark side.
There's more to Darkfall than science can explain.
It's bad now.
But it's going to get worse.
Much worse.
Because…’
And then Bissell had looked directly at Rohmer with those hellish, black eyes…and he had smiled.
‘Mr Rohmer?
Why is your heart racing?
What is exciting you so much?’
God, can it read my mind?thought Rohmer .
Can it really see what I'm…?
‘Yes, of course I can,’ continued Bissell.
‘And I'm not going to talk to you anymore, Gilbert.
I have to eat.
And you won't let me.
So if I can't eat, I won't talk.’
Bissell's eyes never left Rohmer as he spoke, and Rohmer knew what the thing meant when it said it wouldn't talk to Gilbert anymore.
But Rohmer had to know the answer to the questions that had fascinated and intrigued him for so long; the questions that bore down on him with ever-increasing force during the drug-induced hallucinatory periods that were now so frequent in his life.
Now he knew that the Darkfall effect did have the answer to those questions and that Bissell could give him those answers.
So while Gilbert tried to entice Bissell to talk further, and Bissell kept silent, still watching him across the room, Rohmer saw the promise in those night-black eyes…and he began to lay his own plans .
FOUR
‘…sick,’ said Gilbert, in a hushed voice.
The wind and the rain, and the hollow reverberation of the storm brought Rohmer back from his reverie.
Gilbert was talking to the others in a quiet and urgent voice; his whispers like the quiet and urgent washing of the rain on those shuddering windows.
Rohmer focused on the present again.
Gilbert, with the edge of terror still in his voice, was talking to keep himself sane; and the others were listening to try and make sense of the nightmare in which they found themselves.
They were fools.
Only Rohmer knew the real truth.
‘What do you mean?’ whispered Cardiff, and Rohmer felt the cold chill of withdrawal gnawing at his soul.
He looked at them with contempt, fumbled in his pocket and found the pill.
Turning back to the storm-rinsed windows and the dangerous electrical crackle of Darkfall lightning on the glass, he popped the pill and watched the water running down the glass in ever-increasing and mysterious rivulets.
‘This building is sick,’ continued Gilbert.
‘Surely you've heard of sick building syndrome?’
He laughed.
It was a fragile and unconvincing sound.
‘But it's true.
There was a German doctor, back in the 1950s.
His name was Hubert Palm.
And he propounded evidence that a great many of the ailments we have in modern society have to do with the way we construct our buildings.
Buildings are our ‘third skin'.
Modern construction technology, synthetic compounds and materials we use in constructing the buildings we live in or work in…and the suffusion by those  structures of electricity…create electrostress, or ‘electrical diseases’.’
‘You talk as if this building was alive or something,’ said Cardiff.
‘It is,’ replied Gilbert.
‘But only in the sense that a tree is alive.
Not sentient…just living.
And the effects we've seen are caused when a Darkfall strike is absorbed by a building.
There is a massive intake of electricity.
And it's electricity and our real lack of understanding of what it actually is that…’
The pill took effect, and Rohmer tuned out again and into the storm.
As Gilbert's words faded, he was back at the Unit again, listening to the thing which had once been Dr Bissell as it said…
FIVE
‘I knew you would come.’
‘Yes…’
‘Did you bring me what I need?’
‘Yes, I have it here.’
‘And it's still alive?’
‘Yes.’
‘Then give it to me.’
‘Not before we talk.’
‘No!
Give it to me now…or…’
Bissell chuckled, and then whined, mimicking a spoiled child.
The sound was hideous.
‘…or I won't talk.’
Rohmer controlled the squirming of it in his hands, held it still, feeling its heart race in the presence of the thing.
Did it know?
‘Of course it knows,’ said Bissell, reading his mind again.
‘Now, give it to me.’
‘The strait-jacket stays on.’
More of that hideous laughter: ‘Ohhh…you don't trust me.’
‘That's right.’
Rohmer looked down at it, felt his gorge rise.
‘You want the real answers, don't you?’
‘Yes…’
‘Then do it!’
Much later, when it was finished and after Rohmer had left the cell to be sick, the thing's head had sagged forward on to its chest.
Was it dead?
No, it couldn't be dead!
Not after…
‘You're very clever,’ said Bissell, looking up at him again.
‘The way you contrived to be alone with me, despite the supervision and monitoring.’
Bissell seemed so much calmer, now that he had fed.
There were no spasms of grinding agony.
‘You think you're different, don't you, Rohmer?
You've always felt that way.
Ever since you raped and killed that cadet in military school…just to show yourself that you could do it.
Weren't sick then, were you?’
Rohmer broke out into an immediate, drenching sweat.
The thing felt his discomfort and laughed again.
‘Yes, I know you, Rohmer.
I see the real you.
And I see what you really want.
And what you want is…
‘To see as you do.
I want to…’
‘Be more than human.
You envy me, Rohmer.
Do you envy my agony?’
‘I fed you.’
‘You want me to be your mentor, Rohmer?
You want me to be your gateway to another world?
You want your perceptions heightened…and you want to shirk off all notions of human morality.
Isn't that right?’
‘When you were talking to Gilbert.
You said there was ‘more’ to the Darkfall than science could explain…’
The thing laughed once more.
‘Talk to me, damn you!’
‘Alright, alright…
I'll tell you what you really want to know…’
SIX
‘Come on, Rohmer?
Are you just going to sit there and stare out of the bloody window?’
Rohmer was back in the present again.
Duvall was shaking him by the sleeve, bringing him back.
‘So what do you want me to do?’
‘Well…are we just going to sit here waiting…or what?’
‘You're welcome to go downstairs and see if that thing's still about,’ said Jimmy.
‘It's dying,’ said Barbara.
It was clear that this knowledge was distressing her.
‘I can feel it.’
‘So we'll take Mister Cardiff's advice,’ said Rohmer.
‘We'll sit tight and wait for the storm to blow itself out.’
‘We could break one of those windows,’ continued Duvall.
‘It can only be about thirty feet or so to the ground.
Higher than from the back staircase like Cardiff said.
But as there's no bloody staircase left, it's still our best option.’
‘I'm not sure anymore,’ said Gilbert.
‘That Darkfall lightning out there on the windows, that electricity.’
‘Well?’ snapped Duvall, a little too loudly; and enough to make him look nervously back in the direction of the office door.
‘If we break the glass, we might draw the energy to ourselves.’
‘Great.
You mean we'll be struck by lightning?’
‘Not your day, is it, Duvall?’ said Jimmy, and Duvall glared hard at him again with a look that spoke again of reckonings to come after the nightmare was over.
Jimmy  returned the look, and then turned to Barbara.
She was shuddering.
‘Nineteen sixty-four was a great year for music,’ he said.
She looked up at him.
‘Seriously, I mean it.
Some of my favourite music came from 1964.’
Barbara swallowed hard, trying to shrug off the feelings which were so distressing her.
‘The Beatles are my favourite…’
‘Yeah, The Beatles.
Now there's a group.
Let's see, 1964.
They were just starting out.
Had their first hit in 1963 with…
‘I Wanna Hold Your Hand’.
Great stuff.
And just think, Barbara, you've got all of their other songs to catch up on.’
‘My friend Angela and I argue about John Lennon and Paul McCartney.
She likes Paul best.
I like John.
Is he still…still writing songs?’
‘Well, John was…he was…
Yeah.
Yeah, that's right.
Still writing songs.
Still as good as ever.
Let's see, 1964.
Cilla Black.
What about her?’
‘'You're My World’.
That's a lovely song.’
‘Still going strong, Cilla.
Wife and mother now.
Does game shows and things.
Just think, all that music to catch up on…’
‘I wonder if my folks are still…’
‘Look, Barbara.
Everything's going to be fine.
I promise you.
Once we get out of here.
I'll help you to find them.’
‘It's going to be okay,’ said Cardiff.
Thunder cracked again, stabbing at their ears.
The spider-web lightning twitched and surged at the windows, as if hunting for some small crack in the glass through which it could get to them.
Duvall turned back to Rohmer in disgust.
‘So we wait?’
Rohmer did not answer.
He was watching the storm again…and remembering.
‘Electricity,’ said Gilbert again, and all except Rohmer turned to listen to him again, because there was nothing else any of them could do.
‘Invisible, silent.
We generate  it at will, turn it on or off by flicking a switch.
If we didn't have it, we couldn't live.
Everything would stop.
Our society would be plunged into darkness.
Offices, factories, industry, communications, transport…all of it grinding to a halt.
We depend upon it completely…and our dependence makes us so vulnerable to its dark side.
We really know so very little about it.’
‘Shut up, Gilbert!’ hissed Duvall.
‘Let him talk,’ said Cardiff.
Gilbert continued, as if he hadn't even heard the interruption.
‘The earth is a massively complicated network of patterns of electrical energy with that magnetic field made even more complex by the minerals, water, rocks…and mankind's own addition of man-made structures.
And that electrical energy also affects human beings.
It affects us physically, emotionally, mentally…’
And spiritually , thought Rohmer, again tuning back in to Gilbert's words.
‘Inside of us all,’ continued Gilbert, ‘there are extraordinarily complex and subtle electric fields, permeating every tissue, every bone, every muscle, every cell.
And our own electrical fields interact with the electrical fields in the environment…’
Gilbert's eyes seemed glazed, and Jimmy looked at Cardiff in a way that seemed to say:We've got to shut him up, Cardiff.
He's cracking up or something.
He thinks he's back at college, giving a lecture .
Cardiff quietened Jimmy with a gesture that meant:Let him talk.
We might learn something .
‘…
These fields in humans were discovered back in the 1940s and 1950s.
Not only humans, of course, but also plants, animals, trees…even raw protoplasm.
They're called L-Fields: bioelectric and electrodynamic fields of life.
And it's the interaction of these electrical fields with the Darkfall electricity that causes these…things to happen.’
You're a fool, Gilbert , thought Rohmer, still listening, but watching the storm.
All of this knowledge, and you still haven't discovered the real truth behind it at all .
‘The Darkfall electricity…that Dark Energy…is drawn to electrical fields.
Somehow there is a fusion of new, raw Dark Energy.
We're none of us safe.
Think about it!
Everywhere you look cables, wires, pylons.
It's all around us.
Radio, television, radar all manner of electromagnetic transmissions in the air.
How long before Darkfall starts to spread further afield?
At present, we've identified the recurrence of ‘vile vortices’ where Darkfall happens with a certain regularity.
Like here!
But how long before it starts to…’
Gilbert stopped, shuddering.
He wiped a trembling hand across his face, and took several deep breaths to calm himself down.
So near, Gilbert.
And so far.
Perhaps I will have the chance to be your Teacher.
Perhaps I'll be able to show you the Real Truth.
‘It's dead,’ said Barbara.
‘I can feel it.’
‘Can she know that, Gilbert?’ asked Duvall urgently.
‘Yes, it's possible.
If she does have that telepathic link.
We've known something like it before.’
‘Are you sure?’
Duvall asked the girl.
‘I could feel…
I could feel it before.
Now I can't feel anything at all.
It just died away…now it's gone.’
‘Rohmer?’
Rohmer turned back from the window to look at Duvall.
‘Come on, Rohmer.
If that thing really is dead, I think we should take the chance.’
‘That Darkfall lightning on the windows…’ began Gilbert.
‘We don't know for sure that it'll strike,’ said Duvall.
‘If that thing's dead, isn't it worth taking the risk to get away from here?’
‘It was always the intention that we stay through the Darkfall and monitor the activity,’ said Rohmer.
‘To hell with that!’ snapped Duvall.
‘After everything that's happened, we can't stay here.’
‘Rohmer,’ said Cardiff quietly.
‘You don't want to leave, do you?’
Rohmer smiled his infuriating smile.
‘I bet you don't have official clearances,’ continued Cardiff.
‘Something about this entire operation never rang true for me from the start.
Bringing your own people in here, your own scientists…and not telling them, not briefing them.
There was something else going on in your mind, wasn't there?
Something that has nothing to do with your Darkfall Units.
Isn't that right?’
‘We can't leave,’ replied Rohmer.
‘You heard Gilbert.
The lightning…’
‘I think he's right,’ said Duvall, standing.
‘You've been acting bloody peculiar for months now.’
‘We're staying,’ said Rohmer.
‘That's an order.’
‘What do you say?’ said Duvall, turning to Cardiff, looking for a new leader.
Cardiff looked at Jimmy and Barbara.
‘Whatever you say,’ said Jimmy in response to Cardiff's unspoken question.
‘I suppose we're with you.’
‘We'll risk it,’ said Cardiff.
‘It's better than staying here, making a mistake, and getting sucked into the wall.
But you have to decide for yourself, Duvall.
I have no jurisdiction over you.’
But Duvall was already on his feet and heading for the office door.
All except Rohmer and Gilbert climbed carefully to their feet.
Another thunderclap exploded above, ringing their ears.
The secondary blast was louder still.
Gilbert reacted to the shock of it; reacted to the shuddering he felt in the floor, and to the fact that the others were moving away now, towards Duvall and the blocked office door.
He looked back to Rohmer, still looking out of the window.
‘Rohmer.
What's wrong with you?
Why don't you…?’
‘You're a scientist, Gilbert,’ replied Rohmer.
‘But you're blind.’
‘What is the point in staying here?
My equipment is in the basement, people are dead and…’
‘There are so many things you don't know.
Things you need to learn.
Things I could teach you.’
‘I'm going with them.’
Gilbert waited for some response  from Rohmer.
There was none.
Lightning seemed to reflect from the windows in his eyes, and to Gilbert it seemed as if Rohmer was possessed of some inner, terrifying power.
He scrambled to his feet to join the others.
Duvall was carefully pulling the cabinet aside from the door when Jimmy reached him and began to help.
Duvall stopped momentarily when Barbara and Cardiff drew level.
‘You're sure it's dead,’ he said flatly.
‘I told you.
I could feel its presence, and now I can't.
It was dying.’
‘Come on,’ said Jimmy, and began to tug at the cabinet again.
Duvall rejoined his efforts and the edge of the cabinet caught against one of the floor tiles making a long, keening screech.
They paused.
Thunder rolled and grumbled beyond, and the eerie blue glow from the overhead strip lights flickered momentarily.
And now the cabinet was pushed aside.
Duvall licked his lips, looked at Cardiff…and pulled open the door.
There was nothing in the corridor beyond.
Duvall could see the two elevator doors, and directly opposite to him, the door marked: ‘Stairs’, through which they had dashed.
It had swung back on its spring-loading, and was closed again.
Duvall looked back at Cardiff.
‘Give me the gun.’
Gilbert joined them now.
Cardiff looked at him, nodded, and then turned back to Duvall.
‘No offence,’ he said.
‘But I don't trust you around guns.’
He slipped past Duvall and into the corridor.
Cardiff paused at the stairwell door.
They couldn't see his face, so he raised his eyes heavenward, gritted his teeth, and gave a small prayer.
Then he slowly began to open the staircase door.
SEVEN
Cardiff slowly pushed at the door, widening the thin jet-black wedge.
Lightning flickered, and that blackness beyond the door was momentarily lit up.
Shadows danced and jumped.
Cardiff licked his lips, heart hammering.
He could feel the storm wind and rain gusting down the ground-floor corridor and into the stairwell.
Was that thing behind the door somewhere, waiting?
Gigantic, monstrous and powerful; waiting on the stairs for him to open the door wide, so that it could seize him, drag him away and do to him what it had done to Pearce?
Something inhuman bellowed and roared in the stairwell.
Cardiff froze in fear.
But the stabbing pain in his eardrums was almost welcome, as the roaring subsided to a grumbling, faraway avalanche and he realised that it was only the sound of the storm.
Body slick with sweat, despite the chill that had descended on the office block, Cardiff pushed the door open further, keeping the gun well in front of him.
‘I can see it…’ he whispered to the others.
It was down below, lying on the stairs.
And Cardiff could see what had happened.
The filing cabinet was dented and torn, shoved to one side at the foot of the stairs, and the thing had crawled out from beneath it, trying to crawl up the stairs after them.
Its monstrous supine silhouette was clearly visible on the stairs.
And in death, the thing had shrunk to the size that Cardiff remembered from when it was first discovered in the wrecked car.
Cardiff moved out on to the landing, still keeping the gun well in front of him, and ready to use it if the thing should show any signs of stirring.
He paused, turning back to Barbara and the others as they moved tentatively out on to the landing to join him.
‘Barbara, are you sure about this?’
‘Honestly, Mr Cardiff.
I could feel it before.
But now there's nothing.
I can't hear it inside anymore.’
Cardiff looked back down the stairs again.
‘We've got to be sure.’
He began a slow and careful descent, stopping only once to turn back and whisper over the grumbling of the Darkfall: ‘Keep that door open…in case I have to come back quickly.
And stay well back.’
Another careful step.
Jesus Christ, let it be dead.
Another step.
Thunder rumbled and echoed in the stairwell.
I don't want to…die?
Is that what you were thinking?
After all this time, when you didn't care whether you lived or died?
Are you saying you want to live, Cardiff?
Another step.
Lightning flickered in the ragged aperture where the ground-floor staircase door had been.
The shadows around the thing undulated, giving it the appearance of life.
Cardiff hesitated.
There was no more movement.
Now he could see that it was lying face down.
Are you saying this bloody nightmare has changed you?
Given you a taste for life?
Well, Cardiff…
I'll go to hell.
‘Probably,’ Cardiff mouthed, naked fear making him tremble as he reached the step above the thing.
It had shrunk, back to something that approximated the size of a human being.
But he recognised the abominably shredded and mutated head, and the bloodstained and distorted arms that ended in claws which could never have been human.
The thing was wearing clothing still; shreds of fabric still clung to it and were somehow interwoven with the grey and leprous flesh.
Cardiff nudged at that swollen head with his shoe.
With  horror, he felt it give .
But the thing did not move.
He braced his hand on the staircase rail at his left and looked around him into the shadows.
The stairwell itself was twenty feet or so below.
He took a deep breath, wedged his shoe under that head and began to heave the thing over on to its front, bracing his hand against the railing.
It was a difficult job.
The thing seemed glued to the staircase.
Cardiff braced his gloved gun-hand against the wall on his right.
Now, with both hands braced, he slid his foot further under the thing's head and upper shoulder…and heaved again.
It slid messily over and Cardiff stood quickly back, gun at the ready.
But the thing was dead.
He waited…and then stepped down to look closer.
The monstrously distorted face was somehow different, and Cardiff edged around to look still closer at it.
Two yellow and glazed eyes flickered open.
Cardiff shrank back against the staircase.
But now he could see that the thing was hardly a threat.
It had been split open from neck to crotch.
Indeterminate grey and fibrous innards pulsated in the darkness.
Those hellish cataract-eyes blinked and Cardiff thought:Eyes?
How can it have eyes?
I shot out its only eye …
And then the thing spoke.
‘For God's sake, Cardiff ,’ it croaked.
‘Help me …’
It weakly raised one ravaged and shredded arm towards him.
And, at last, Cardiff could see that the mutated horror on the stairs was not the thing from the wrecked car, not the thing that had been Barbara's brother from 1964.
It was Farley Peters, the journalist.
Moreover, it was the thing that Farley Peters had become.
The thing which had been imprisoned in the corridor walls and which had gibbered and clutched at them with insane and monstrous hunger.
Farley Peters — no longer imprisoned.
No longer in that wall.
And with his body gutted and ready for…
‘For Christ's sake, get away from there, Cardiff !’ shouted Jimmy from the landing, the voices of Duvall and Barbara joining in frantic chorus.
Cardiff spun from Peters to look at them.
They were waving frantically, and Cardiff was now aware with sudden terror of the massively looming shadow from the stairwell, on the other side of the stair-rail.
And all he could do now was to turn in horror as that bellowing, roaring shape lunged with an encrusted claw through the metal stair-rails, which bent and squealed.
Talons closed through the lapels of his jacket, his shirt and his flesh.
A roaring, dripping maw yawned with monstrous hunger.
It dragged Cardiff to it, through the bending metal of the stair-rail.
EIGHT
‘You bitch!’ yelled Duvall.
He lashed out hard at Barbara with the back of his hand.
The blow caught her on the cheek and she fell against Gilbert.
They both staggered back out into the corridor.
Before Jimmy could react, Duvall had brought his hand around again and hit him squarely on the jaw.
Jimmy went down, grabbing at the stair-rail for support.
The staircase was filled with the sounds of bellowing, screaming and thrashing shadows as Duvall burst back through the door after Barbara.
She was leaning against the corridor wall, stunned.
Gilbert looked on helplessly.
The door snapped shut behind Duvall as he came, muffling the hideous sounds from below.
‘You knew!
Didn't you?’
Duvall seized her by the hair, dragging her away from the wall.
‘No, don't…’ said Gilbert ineffectually.
‘You knew that thing wasn't dead,’ continued Duvall.
‘You wanted to trick us into believing that it was !’
And Duvall emphasised his rage in that last word with another blow to Barbara's face.
The shock and force of it sent her reeling back against the wall once more.
Panicking again, Gilbert yanked open the door to the office from which they'd just come and slipped inside.
Barbara tried to follow, but Duvall slammed the door against her and she cried out in pain as he pulled it open again, grabbed her arm and threw her into the office.
Barbara's foot skidded and she fell to the floor in the ‘corridor’ between the hessian screens.
‘I knew it all along.
Knew it!’ snapped Duvall …and leaned down to take the monster by the throat and throttle the life out of it.
In the next instant, Jimmy had shoulder-charged him from behind.
Both men hurtled on over the top of Barbara in a tangle of limbs, crashing to the office floor.
Jimmy was still on top, still conscious of not wanting any flesh contact with the floor.
He aimed a blow at the back of Duvall's head.
Duvall felt it coming and twisted.
Jimmy's fist skimmed his cheek.
Duvall lashed backwards, but Jimmy had leapt to his feet, colliding with one of the hessian screens.
It toppled over to the floor with a flat whap ! and Jimmy backed off into the centre of the office as Duvall scrambled to his feet at last.
Gilbert had scurried back to Rohmer and Jimmy could see that Rohmer was still sitting on the desk near the back double-doors where they had left him.
Whether he was still staring out of the window at the storm or watching them made no difference.
Because Duvall had risen to his feet and was looking hard at Jimmy, nodding his head.
‘Right,’ he said, almost too quietly to be heard.
‘Right, Devlin.
You've been lucky, very lucky.
That's twice.
But let s just see what your streetwise, closing-time training can do.’
And Jimmy knew that this time he was in serious trouble.
Lightning was flickering at the windows, casting those crazy shadows beneath the dim electric-blue of the strip lights as Duvall advanced towards him.
Behind Duvall, Jimmy could see that Barbara was pulling herself to her feet.
He looked around him for some sort of weapon, backing off as Duvall walked slowly towards him.
Now that slow stroll was picking up speed and grim purpose as Jimmy grabbed at a wire ‘In’ tray full of papers.
He scooped it up from the desk and threw it into Duvall's face.
But Duvall smacked it dismissively aside and jabbed two steel-hard fingers at the base of Jimmy's throat with a cold and precise disdain.
The pain was excruciating, and choking.
Instantly, it seemed, he couldn't breathe and as his hands flew to his throat, Duvall swung up his right arm  so that the point of his elbow hit Jimmy squarely in the face.
Blood jetted from his nostrils and Jimmy went backwards over a desk, taking a computer console with him.
Its glass screen shattered on the floor, and Jimmy struggled to rise.
But now Duvall had the time, the training, the balance and the strength to deliver a kick to Jimmy's midriff; a controlled kick that had all of Duvall's force behind it, from the hip.
Air whooshed from Jimmy's lungs and he somersaulted again, slamming hard against another desk and sliding to the floor.
There was a grim smile on Duvall's face as he advanced.
Jimmy saw him coming through blurred vision and wished that he could get to his feet, but he couldn't move.
There was a curious connection now in his mind between the time that Sergeant Barry Lawrence had knocked him silly in the pub and this new blurring of his mind.
It's all a dream , Barbara had said to him.
And now he knew what this was all about.
He was in a dream.
It was his dream.
His nightmare.
When he woke up, he'd be lying on the floor of the boozer, and Sergeant Lawrence would be lifting him to his feet, dragging him outside to the panda car.
None of this nightmare stuff had happened.
How could it have happened?
As this dream-man called Duvall advanced towards him in slow motion, Jimmy's dream-brain raced, providing answers with utter certainty.
Cardiff was still one of the bastards who had put him away, not someone who had been duped by a fellow officer with false evidence, certainly not someone he had come to respect.
And the dream-woman called Barbara from 1964?
She wasn't real either.
How could she be?
Just a fantasy based around Pamela, based around her old songs.
And representing someone he had wanted Pamela to be.
The dream-man called Duvall seized Jimmy around the neck in a way which was surely too painful to be a dream and yanked him to his feet, throwing him on to a desk.
When the pain lanced into his back, the shock of it made him cry out loud…and he knew that he hadn't been dreaming.
Duvall was still holding him by the throat.
‘A lesson to be learned here, Devlin,’ he said through gritted teeth as he raised his other hand in front of Jimmy's face.
Those two steel-hard fingers would blind him.
‘Just call it the advantages of a public school education…’
Jimmy could not fight back.
He resorted to his only hopeless defence…and screwed his eyes shut.
Something cracked and shuddered.
I'm blind!
Am I blind ? he screamed in his mind.
But no…he was able to open his eyes.
And he could see.
He could see that Duvall's eyes were screwed shut in pain as he loomed over him.
He could feel Duvall's grip on his throat relaxing, could see Duvall's poised hand lowering.
And he watched as Duvall staggered away from him, his weight gone.
Behind him, as he staggered from view, Jimmy saw Barbara standing with the neck of a broken whisky bottle in her hand, seized from one of the Christmas party tables.
She had smashed it over Duvall's head from behind.
And now Jimmy had taken her hand as she hauled him back from the desk and…
…and she pulled Jimmy to his feet.
Her face was hurting badly where Duvall had hit her, and she could hardly believe that a dream could be so realistic.
Except that now, she realised, this could not possibly be a dream.
But also not reality.
Certainly not reality as she knew it.
Now she knew what was right .
She knew who to trust and who not to trust.
And she had dragged herself to her feet again and watched as the man called Duvall had sadistically begun to kill the boy who had protected her.
The other man had also tried to protect her.
But the other man — Mr Cardiff — was dead.
The nightmare thing, the thing they had said was her brother (but she knew that this was impossible) had killed him on the staircase.
The monster called Duvall wanted her dead.
And when the only remaining one within this living real-nightmare-dream who felt real to her was threatened, she had to act.
She had taken that whisky bottle from a nearby table and brought it down with as much strength as she could  muster on Duvall's head.
He had staggered away, head soaked in whisky and shoulders glittering with a new dandruff of broken glass as Barbara pulled Jimmy Devlin back from the desk and…
…
Duvall lunged back again, in an utter and consuming rage.
Uncontrolled and dazed, he seized the rim of the desk and heaved with a burst of anger.
Barbara screamed and dragged Jimmy away as the desk flipped over to the floor with a crash.
Jimmy was a heavy weight in her hands.
He slumped to the floor and she tried to drag him clear.
But that burst of uncontrolled anger had assuaged the pain in Duvall's head and neck, had given him back that cool and grim purpose.
Barbara looked up as she dragged Jimmy to one side, and saw Duvall stoop to pick up the broken neck of the whisky bottle that she had dropped.
The Darkfall lightning scratched and flickered with its spider legs at the nearby window…and Duvall kicked savagely at Barbara's head, spinning her away from Jimmy.
That new and unfair pain gave her a new savage thirst for proper revenge.
Stunned but ineffectual, she yelled in righteous rage and tried to pull herself to her feet, wanting nothing else but to throw herself at Duvall as…
…
Duvall took Jimmy by the throat again, and drew back his other hand with the broken bottle.
Darkfall thunder exploded in the office block.
Duvall was jerked away from Jimmy, spinning on his heels so that he was facing the office door again.
There was a look of stupid surprise on his face, and Barbara followed his gaze, uncomprehending.
Cardiff was standing at the office door, gun raised in Duvall's direction.
And Barbara looked back at Duvall to see the slowly spreading dark stain between his shoulder blades.
Sobbing, she seized Jimmy roughly again and began to drag him away, towards the office door.
Duvall watched her, still with that stupid expression on his face.
He staggered, as if drunk, and watched as Cardiff stepped forwards, still holding the gun before him.
Cardiff was clutching at his  shirtfront with the other hand.
There was blood on his hand and shredded shirt.
And then it seemed that Duvall understood at last that he had been shot.
Screaming like an animal, he raised the broken glass in his hand and charged drunkenly towards Cardiff.
Cardiff pulled the trigger again, and there was another thunderclap in the office.
The impact of the bullet hurled Duvall backwards, passing clean through his chest and puncturing the window behind him.
He reeled, but kept his feet.
The broken whisky-bottle neck fell to the carpet and he clutched at his chest, as if in imitation of Cardiff.
His face screwed up in agony, and from behind him there was a hiss of escaping air through the bullet hole in the window.
Cracks spread from the bullet hole across the window, like frozen lightning.
And then the window exploded outwards behind Duvall into the Darkfall.
Screaming, Duvall was sucked backwards out of the window in a cloud of broken glass and was instantly gone.
Hell erupted into the office block.
The storm wind of the Darkfall blasted through the shattered window with a howling roar; rain and snow gushed into the office.
Thin, blue-white tentacles of fire stabbed from ceiling to floor, from desk to hessian screen.
The living, crackling lightning stabbed at the overhead strip lights and the office was suddenly filled with a hail of exploding, flying glass.
A glass partition in the typing-pool imploded with a shattering roar.
Spider legs of electricity hissed and danced over the computer terminals.
One by one, the glass screens exploded.
‘Come on!’ yelled Cardiff, and seized one of Jimmy's arms, dragging him to his feet.
Barbara dragged at the other arm, and they staggered to the office door as the Darkfall lightning continued to destroy the interior of the office.
They literally fell against the door.
It swung open  and they staggered into the corridor, away from that scene of Hell in the office.
But for Barbara, the nightmare was not over.
Because now Cardiff was hauling them through the staircase door and back on to the first-floor landing.
And the sounds of Hell were still there.
From somewhere below, in the stairwell where Barbara knew that Cardiff must have died, were the nightmare sounds of bellowing and screeching and thrashing shadows.
‘Come on!’ yelled Cardiff again, dragging them both up the next flight of stairs.
‘What's happening?’ shouted Barbara, still clinging to a dazed Jimmy.
‘You're dead.
You must be dead.
What's…?’
From below came the agonised and hideous sounds of someone being torn apart.
‘No time,’ snapped Cardiff grimly.
He clutched at his chest again, and now Barbara could see that the shirt was shredded and that blood was running freely from deep gashes in Cardiff's chest.
‘If we want to live…we climb!’
They began to ascend the staircase, holding Jimmy between them.
NINE
Gilbert had watched the violence in the office, frozen in fear and unable to prevent any of it.
When Cardiff had come back from the dead, he had shrunk away back down the hessian-screen corridor towards Rohmer.
And when Cardiff had shot Duvall, he had turned in helpless horror to where Rohmer sat, hands spread wide in appeal.
But Rohmer just sat and watched, his face a blank mask.
And then Cardiff had shot Duvall again, the window had blown out taking Duvall with it…and the nightmare of Darkfall had been admitted to the office.
Crying out in terror, Gilbert had watched the snaking electric-blue lightning as it invaded the office, spreading destruction.
He had covered his face from flying glass and watched the two men and the Returner escape through the office doors.
And when the lightning had forked inwards through the window and shattered the typing-pool window, Gilbert had turned back to Rohmer in helpless appeal.
Rohmer was still sitting on the edge of the desk, his hair and coat whipping in the hellish stormwinds which had been admitted.
Only now he was smiling as he looked around him at the chaos.
Furious now in his terror and at Rohmer's unconcern, Gilbert had struck out at him.
Rohmer seized his wrist and with apparent ease, twisted.
Gilbert sank to his knees in pain, beating at Rohmer's vice-clamp grip.
Now on his knees on the office floor, with Rohmer sitting above him smiling into the storm, Gilbert had begun to weep.
Glass exploded all around them.
Lightning jabbed and sparked against the walls.
And when  Gilbert looked up at him again through blurred vision, he could see that Rohmer was talking, although he could hear no words.
‘Don't worry,’ Rohmer was saying.
‘Don't worry.
We're in the presence.
We won't be harmed.’
Gilbert shrieked when the strip light directly above them exploded, and sparks rained down on their heads.
TEN
Jimmy had pulled himself together again when they reached the third landing.
He pulled away from them both long enough to wipe blood from his face and to lean on the stair-rail, sucking in deep breaths.
His throat still felt constricted after Duvall's blow.
Down below, in the darkness of the stairwell, the bellowing and thrashing had ceased.
But something down there was breathing, and the susurrant echoes of that breathing drifted up to them.
‘Come on, Jimmy,’ hissed Cardiff.
‘We can't wait.
We've got to climb.’
At last, it was registering with Jimmy that Cardiff was not dead, not torn to pieces by the thing down there.
‘What…?’ he began, and Cardiff impatiently shook his head.
‘Never mind that now.
Just climb !’
Down below, they could hear the sounds of the thing shambling on the staircase.
It was coming up after them again.
‘Climb !’ hissed Cardiff again, and they started up the stairs once more.
And as they climbed, Cardiff replayed the nightmare down below.
The thing had him.
It was dragging him towards it through the stair-rails, its claws fastened in his flesh.
And Cardiff knew, truly, that he didn't want to die after all.
He had twisted in that grip, tried to bring the gun round to bear on that monstrous maw.
But his arm was twisted, and now he could feel the thing's putrid breath in his face.
Down below on the  staircase, the thing that had been Farley Peters was trying to crawl up the steps towards him.
It was making a mewling sound.
And Cardiff knew, as the thing pulled him sharply back against the metal stair-rails with an echoing clatter, that the thing had double-backed to the sounds from the service corridor, had torn the still-imprisoned Farley Peters from the wall.
It had dragged him back to the stairwell, had gutted and fed from him to regain its strength.
Bellowing, the thing was trying to reach over the stair-rail with its other encrusted, decomposing claw.
It snatched at Cardiff and he tried to twist away from it, pain like fire stabbing into his chest where the thing had him gripped with the other claw.
Peters was at his legs now, holding in his own transformed innards with one hand, and clutching at Cardiff's leg with the other.
Cardiff could feel hot breath on his leg, and knew that the Peters thing wanted to bite him.
The thing beyond the stair-rail slashed downwards at Cardiff again and caught his sleeve.
It began to lift him over the stair-rail.
And then Peters sank his own hideously transformed jaws into the thing's arm as it lifted Cardiff.
The Shape bellowed and twisted, with Peters' mouth still firmly clamped on its monstrous arm.
Something with the consistency of cement began to splatter from Peters' ripped torso, but still he clung on to it in the renewed savagery of his hunger.
The thing dropped Cardiff back on to the steps, and now the grip was gone from his chest.
Cardiff threw himself backwards against the staircase wall, as the thing from the stairwell lunged backwards into the darkness, taking the flapping and gutted body of Peters with it, still fastened to its arm.
Cardiff fired blindly into the roaring, shrieking mass as he began to scramble back up the stairs.
Breath sobbing in his throat, hand clutched to the deep slashes in his bleeding chest, Cardiff saw the monstrous shadow of the thing smashing Peters' rapidly liquefying  body against the stairwell wall, as if it was beating a carpet.
He had turned then, and scrabbled upwards to the door.
And now they were climbing fast, and Barbara was saying: ‘Oh God, I can feel it again!
It tricked me!
It knew that I could sense it, just as it can sense me.’
They reached the next landing and swung themselves around it, clambering up the next set of stairs.
‘It laid a trap for us, Mr Cardiff.
It deliberately switched off its mind to me, to make me think that it had died.’
Cardiff looked over the stair-rail, and saw a monstrous shadow reach the first-floor landing.
The shadow was turning on that landing, moving up the next set of stairs after them.
Down below, whatever was left of Farley Peters was smeared on the wall.
‘How many floors?’ gasped Jimmy.
‘Fourteen,’ said Cardiff through gritted teeth as they continued to climb.
‘Christ.
And then what?’
‘Just climb, Jimmy.
It's coming.’
ELEVEN
Gilbert screwed his eyes shut, waiting for the other windows to explode out into the Darkfall, dragging both Rohmer and himself into those hellish, spinning whirlwinds.
Rohmer was still talking to himself, still keeping that vice-clamp grip on Gilbert's wrist.
But that pain was the least of his worries.
Another strip light exploded in the roaring maelstrom, showering them with glass.
But Rohmer continued talking, undisturbed.
Gales of snow and rainwater drenched them, but still Rohmer laughed softly to himself.
Gilbert waited for the lightning strike that would finally find them, and began to babble a hopeless prayer.
And then the crackling explosions and shattering of glass ceased.
The wind and the rain and the snow still howled and blasted through the ragged aperture where the window had blown out, but the electricity and lightning seemed to have gone.
Gilbert kept his eyes screwed shut, waiting for it to return.
When it did not, he opened his eyes again, looking up through squinted vision at Rohmer, sitting above him and silent at last.
And with a smile on his face to show how enormously pleased he was.
Gilbert looked around, the rain and the wind freezing his face, whipping at his hair.
The lightning had vanished, even though the storm still continued to ravage the office interior.
He tried to pull free of Rohmer's grasp, but could not.
Rohmer looked down at him, smiled, and began to talk  again; continuing the one-sided conversation that Gilbert had been unable to hear so far.
’‘All the unmeasured ether flames with light.’
Alexander Pope's words, Gilbert.
Extending from the moon to the ends of the universe, the fabric of the stars.
And the key to interweaving realms and planes of being: will, spirit, the soul…the divine.’
Rohmer looked to the storm blasting through the blown-out window.
‘Fire, air, water and earth.
And electricity in the ether, Rohmer.
The energiser that interpenetrates the physical world and shows us the higher aspects of reality…’
‘Rohmer!’
Gilbert cried into the storm wind.
‘What the hell is the matter with you?
We can't stay here and…’
‘He wouldn't speak to you, Gilbert,’ continued Rohmer, still staring at the shattered window as if willing the lightning to return.
‘But Bissell spoke to me.
He gave me the answers.’
‘Bissell?
But what…?’
‘You were too blinkered to see.
Too narrow-minded not to suspect.’
‘For God's sake, Rohmer!’
‘The Darkfall is more than a physical manifestation,’ continued Rohmer.
There was somehow a smell of sulphur in the air now and Rohmer's eyes seemed to be glittering in triumph.
He took a pill from his pocket, and popped it into his mouth.
He smiled.
‘It's a spiritual manifestation!’
The smile was gone again, and Rohmer glowered down at Gilbert.
Now the scientist had final confirmation that Rohmer — the hard, forceful, determined and organised Rohmer — had lost his mind.
‘Listen to me, Gilbert.
As a scientist, you and your kind have been completely unaware of what your tampering with the physical world, with electricity, has done.
It's always been a Dark Force, and you've only succeeded in harnessing a minuscule aspect of it.
Without realising it, your nuclear scientists are black alchemists.
Once, it was  the quest to transmute lead into gold.
Now, it's transmitting uranium into even denser matter — lead and plutonium.
Substances not found in nature.
Transmogrified substance!’
‘Rohmer.
Please.
You're not making any sense.
We've got to…’
‘I've got to make you understand.
The first atomic bomb.
Where was it exploded?’
‘Rohmer, please…’
Rohmer twisted Gilbert's wrist hard, making him cry out in pain.
‘God, Rohmer!’
‘Where?’
‘Alamagordo!’
‘That's right.
And do you know what happened then?
No?
Let me enlighten you.
The planet Saturn crossed the heavens at exactly the point that Pluto had been discovered.
Did you know that?
Pluto…the God of Hades.
Did you know that the planet Saturn is associated with lead?
And the hydrogen bomb.
Where was…?’
‘Rohmer, let me go!’
‘Where?’
‘Bikini!’
‘That's right.
And on the instant that it happened, Uranus — the electrical disruptor — crossed the same point in the sky.
A new force was created and released on earth, just when those planets, when those vast disruptors were aligned.
The real force that is electricity has a name, Gilbert.
What we think of in simple terms as electricity is related to the creative forces in the universe in ways that we cannot imagine.
The Chinese think it's ‘Chi’.
But its real name…is Ahriman.
The ancients called it the God of the Underworld.
Intelligent, objective, calculating, cold.
The polar opposite of the Devil…but nevertheless, the Devil.’
Lightning flickered outside in the storm once more, drawing Rohmer's attention.
‘Don't get me wrong, Gilbert.
Not the Devil we know.
Not an entity.
But a force.
And a force that isn't remotely interested in us as people…as individuals.
It's one of the principal forces at the core of the universe, perhaps not the main force, but something that can give us immediate enlightenment if we…’
Rohmer laughed with wild enthusiasm.
‘…flick the right switch!’
His laughter died away, and he continued: ‘I've been privileged to learn, Gilbert.
I knew that Bissell had the answers that I really wanted.
And when I gave him what he wanted, he gave me what I wanted.
Gilbert, Gilbert.
You and your kind have got it all wrong.
All wrong!
The universe is a spiritual construction, not solely a physical construction.
And do you know why the Darkfall effect is truly happening?
Truly?’
Rohmer twisted hard again at Gilbert's wrist, eliciting another cry of pain.
‘It's the pettiness, the frustrations, the greed, the evils that men do — big and small.
It's cruelty, murder and rape.
It's child abuse, paedophilia.
Genocide.
Torture.
War.
All of it eating away at the spiritual fabric of existence for thousands upon thousands of years.
Now that fabric of our existence is coming apart under the psychic emissions of a billion, billion spiritual ‘cancers’.
Now, the force that is truly Ahriman — the Darkfall — can break through with increasing frequency until everything —everything — ceases to exist as we know it.’
Gilbert was silent now, staring hard at Rohmer.
The man was mad — but there was finally a bizarre logic to what he was saying.
Beyond the windows, the night exploded.
For an instant, the plate glass all around them flared blue-white, the building shook as the pain of a Darkfall strike stabbed into their ears again.
For Gilbert, it was agony…but for Rohmer, the sound produced ecstasy.
He jumped to his feet, still holding on to Gilbert's wrist, as a second strike hit the building.
Cracks zig-zagged from floor to ceiling, chunks of plaster fell in spattering clouds from the walls and three more windows exploded inwards.
Minute shards of glass slashed across Rohmer's ecstatic face.
Thin threads of blood glittered on his forehead and cheeks.
‘Vitalism!’ shouted Rohmer into the storm, taking a step towards one of the exploded windows, still holding Gilbert's wrist and dragging him off balance as he moved.
‘The Great Chain of Being!
Even Plato was closer to the truth than you and yours, Gilbert.
Don't you see?
The earth itself is alive .
Everything lives!
Even the inert, if it's infused with Darkfall.
But we're special, Gilbert.
Very, very special.
Because as humans, only we are instinctively aware of the spiritual essence of the universe.
Only we look for self-transcendence.’
Lightning flared and flickered beyond the shattered windows and Rohmer took another step forwards, as if he wanted to join it.
Gilbert was dragged with him, and twisted to rise as Rohmer wiped streaks of blood from his face.
Rohmer turned and looked down at him.
‘Self-transcendence, Gilbert.
Transmogrification.
All those Returners.
They were all more like animals than human, weren't they?
All except Bissell.
He was a real scientist, questing after truth.
The Darkfall absorption in that Leeds factory didn't turn him completely insane like the others.
That's because he wasn't as terrified, wasn't as ignorant as the others.
The absorption destroyed their minds, but not Bissell.
He gave the clue, Gilbert.
The clue!’
Rohmer swung downwards, seized Gilbert and dragged him to his feet, holding him as close as a lovers' embrace.
Gilbert struggled, but could not break free.
‘I killed somebody once, Gilbert.
I killed him for no more reason than I wanted to do it.
What comes from me is as much to do with the Darkfall erosion as anything.
But that doesn't mean to say that I can't be absolved of that.
It doesn't mean that I can't be transmogrified beyond the human to another plane to find the Real Me !’
Gilbert twisted again, taking Rohmer off balance.
They fell against the desk that he had been previously sitting on.
It scraped to one side as they slid to the carpeted floor.
Rohmer still held Gilbert tight as he thrashed to be free.
Rohmer began to make shushing noises as if Gilbert was a child who needed to be restrained for sleep.
‘Bissell told me what he should have done when his hands began to be absorbed in the floor.
He should have stayed calm, he shouldn't have panicked.
He was sure that the fear and the terror of the absorption was the reason for loss of mind and humanity.
Can you imagine, Gilbert?
What if someone could undergo that absorption with a cool…dare I say it?…scientific rationale.
Wouldn't that truly be self-transcendence on Return?
Isn't that More than Human?
Being able to see other planes, other realities.
And to Return, free of the shackles of human physical embodiment.
Free of human morality.
Able to be the Real You !’
‘Rohmer!
Let me up…’
Gilbert thrashed on the floor beneath Rohmer's weight.
Rohmer seized him by the throat to restrain him, as if Gilbert's physical resistance was also some kind of intellectual resistance to what he was saying; as if that grip could force Gilbert to see sense.
‘All it needs is a lack of fear.
When it happens, accept it with cool scientific appraisal.
Don't fight it, embrace it.
Allow the Darkfall to absorb you, allow it to transmogrify you.
When you Return, you'll be…you'll be…’
Rohmer was bursting with the ecstasy of the prospect, ‘…be…’
Darkfall exploded in the skies.
The building cracked and shuddered again.
Pain stabbed in their ears, plaster dust swirled and was swallowed by the gusting storm winds and blasting rain.
‘See!
See!’ shouted Rohmer into the storm, rain and blood running from his face and dripping from his chin.
‘It's beckoning.’
He gripped Gilbert's chin and forced it up so that he could see the blue-white flickering of Darkfall lightning beyond the broken windows.
‘Remember what Bissell said, even to you!’
‘Let me up,’ sobbed Gilbert.
‘For the love of God, let me up!’
‘Go first,’ said Rohmer, staring intently into Gilbert's eyes.
‘Now that I've told you the truth, you don't need to fear.
You're a good man of science.
You must want what I want.
To know.’
‘You said that this was a Primary Darkfall, not a Secondary…’
Rohmer released his grip around Gilbert's neck, grasping his face instead so that his jaw clamped shut and further speech was impossible.
‘Go first,’ said Rohmer.
‘Without fear.’
He began to push Gilbert's face towards the carpeted floor.
Gilbert tried to scream, but his mouth was clamped shut by Rohmer's grip and only a ululating, muffled howl vibrated from his throat.
‘Without fear, you idiot!’ screamed Rohmer.
‘You're a scientist!’
Gilbert sobbed with a horrifying and muffled terror.
‘Without fear!’ screamed Rohmer again…and pressed Gilbert's face down hard on to the carpet.
Gilbert's forehead sank into the pile with a crimping sound like a footstep in fresh snow.
He began to sob uncontrollably.
Rohmer snatched his hand quickly away from Gilbert's mouth, staggering back to his feet and watching in awe as Gilbert was able to scream at last: a naked shriek of terror.
He began to beat at his head with his gloved hands as his face began to sink into the floor.
‘Stop it, you bloody fool!’ shouted Rohmer.
‘Don't fight it!’
Gilbert tried to squirm away, pulling his mouth into a distorted rictus.
Spittle sprayed from his mouth…and now, with one last deeply horrible squawk, his face was dragged completely into the floor.
His body began to thrash wildly.
Rohmer stood back, screaming obscenities at him.
One of Gilbert's gloves flew off, and the next time his hand hit the floor it stuck and began to sink into the carpet pile.
Thunder crashed and boomed outside.
Darkfall electricity  crackled and danced on the rims of the shattered windows.
Gilbert's squirming body vanished into the carpet like quicksand.
Screaming in fury, Rohmer lunged to the spot where he had vanished, stamping his feet as if dancing on Gilbert's grave.
‘Without fear, you bloody weakling!
I said without fear!
Don't you want to be…’
The Darkfall exploded in the skies beyond the windows.
Jagged blue lightning stabbed through one of the ragged gaps and found the only thing in the office block that was moving.
A piercing bolt of blue fire hit Rohmer between the shoulder blades, flinging him across the office in a shower of sparks.
He collided with a hessian screen, and sprawled on the carpet.
‘…changed?’ he gasped.
His back was hideously burned and smouldering, the long black coat split up its length to the collar.
Rohmer rose to his knees, lifting first one hand and then the other in front of his face to see if the material of his gloves was broken.
‘Not yet, not yet.
I'm not ready.’
The gloves were unbroken.
He rose unsteadily and turned back to the shattered windows, breath coming in sobs.
His teeth were blackened, his hair singed.
Smoke rose around him.
He smiled.
‘Thank you…thank you…’
He turned and tottered towards the office doors.
TWELVE
They reached Floor 9 on the staircase when the Darkfall strike shook the building.
A massive crack zig-zagged like lightning through the plaster of the opposite wall as the sounds of thunder roared in the stairwell.
Great chunks of plaster fell from that wall, crashing and exploding in clouds of dust to the ground floor, nine storeys below.
That dust was billowing and choking them as they struggled to ascend.
The second strike was even more fierce.
The stairs juddered beneath their feet, the stair-rail vibrating visibly and emitting an echoing whanng !
Jimmy tottered back two steps, reached for the wall to steady himself, and then saw the blood on his gloved hand.
He snatched it back hastily and then looked up to where Cardiff and Barbara were hanging on to each other under the storm's onslaught, coughing and choking in the shower of plaster.
Jimmy looked at his bloodied hand and then back to Cardiff, and to Cardiff's bloodied shirt front.
‘Come on!’ choked Cardiff.
‘It's coming…’
‘The blood, Cardiff!
The blood!’
From somewhere below came an enraged crashing and bellowing.
‘What the hell's the matter with you, Jimmy?
We've got to…’
‘No, wait,’ snapped Jimmy.
‘Flesh contact with the wall — that's what they said.
That's why we're wearing these gloves.
But what about the blood?’
‘What…?’
‘There's blood on my hands, blood on your clothes.
Is that ‘tissue’?
Is that flesh contact?
Shit, Cardiff…what  happens if we touch anything when we have blood on our hands and clothes?’
‘Christ,’ said Cardiff through gritted teeth.
A monstrous shadow lurched on the stairs two floors below.
Cardiff looked at the blood on his hand, where he had been clutching his chest.
The shadow below screamed and howled.
‘Come on,’ said Cardiff.
‘Move!’
The thing staggered on the stairs as a slab of plaster from above exploded on its shoulders, shrouding it in a cloud of dust.
It lashed out at its non-existent attacker, groping through the plaster-dust with encrusted, mutated talons.
Finding nothing, it lashed at the walls and screamed in fury.
The Food Smell was still above it, and those pangs which had been temporarily assuaged by what it had found in the wall below, were now growing ever-sharper once more.
Above the roaring and cracking of the storm, it could still hear their voices, still smell their presence.
It lunged to the stair-rail in the blue-blackness, straining to ‘see’ where they were.
More plaster chunks exploded in the thing's face and it staggered back again, lashing out.
Barbara!
Baaaarbaaraaa!
I need you…need…
It lunged up the stairs again, after them.
Barbara stepped down to Jimmy, her white face frozen in fear, and seized his arm.
‘Oh God, let's go!
I can hear it.
It's calling to me in my mind, and it's horrible !’
And now they were climbing again as the building grumbled and shook.
Below, something exploded with an echoing crash.
It seemed as if the entire structure of the office block must surely collapse in a grinding, tearing, disintegrating avalanche of rubble.
Cardiff staggered and almost fell back against Barbara.
Jimmy grabbed him and shoved, and they were climbing hard; breath catching tight in the choking dust-air.
Above them, something gave way with a long, rending metallic screech.
An indeterminate mass of  concrete and steel plunged down the centre of the stairwell, exploding like a bomb on the ground floor below.
Another piercing roar, and the stabbing pain of a Darkfall strike.
Jimmy fell headlong forwards, throwing out his hands instinctively to check his fall.
‘Jimmy!
No!’ shouted Cardiff, whirling to see what was happening.
But he was too late.
Jimmy sprawled, his hands now braced solidly on the steps in front of him.
He looked up directly into Cardiff's eyes, gritted his teeth, and waited for his hands to sink into the concrete.
‘I know it wasn't you that set me up, Cardiff.
It was Pearce.’
The Secondary strike stabbed pain again, the detonation reverberating long and loud.
‘Look after Barbara…’
‘Jimmy!’ shouted Barbara.
‘Look…look.
It's alright.’
Jimmy's hands were not sinking into the concrete.
With a sob of relief, he pushed himself away from the step and back to his feet again.
Cardiff seized him with a bizarre feeling of savage relief as Jimmy gazed at his bloodied hands.
‘Thought I was going into the concrete, Cardiff.
I really did.’
‘Really would be a hardened criminal then, wouldn't you?’
Barbara was shaking her head now, the jade pendant dancing around her neck.
The thing was speaking to her again, and the sensation was deeply horrifying.
‘Please, please.
Let's just get away from here.’
They climbed.
THIRTEEN
Rohmer staggered like a sleepwalker through the second-floor door leading out into the stairwell.
He waved weakly at the plaster dust which billowed at him, did not flinch when a tangle of wire, metal and concrete shattered to pieces against the far wall and dropped into the tangled wreckage on the ground floor below.
The landing shook beneath his feet as he tottered to the staircase and looked up.
He could see nothing above him, but knew that they were up there.
‘Brother…’ he said, and then the dust caught in his throat and he retched.
Coughing blood and phlegm, he raised his voice and shouted up the staircase into the sounds of the storm and the destruction.
‘Brother!
Wait for me, brother!’
Smouldering, he began slowly to climb.
