7 The Philosophical Naturalists
Like geology, botany and zoology expanded their territory throughout the nineteenth century.
Knowledge of distant lands was consolidated and an ever-widening stream of newly discovered species was brought to the notice of European scientists.
The exploration of the fossil record also forced naturalists to become more aware of the time dimension.
However diverse the animals and plants of the modern world, they were but the last in a long sequence of populations that have replaced one another throughout the earth's history.
Historians have treated the emergence of the theory of evolution as the culmination of scientists' efforts to explain this diversity in space and time.
The ‘Darwinian revolution’ is seen as a watershed dividing the era of description and classification from the modern desire to explain everything as the product of natural processes.
This scientific revolution provoked a dramatic shift in the values of western civilization, as belief in the existence of a benevolent Creator was replaced by a more ruthless attitude reflected by the use of phrases such as‘the survival of the fittest’.
Major changes in the way we conceptualize Nature certainly took place at this time, but historians now suspect that the emergence of Darwin's theory should not be treated as the only watershed dividing the old way of thinking from the new.
The emergence of the theory of evolution has turned out to be a complex process.
Earlier ideas such as those of Lamarck formed a bone of contention throughout the pre-Darwinian decades, and the aspects of Darwin's thinking that are seen as most innovative by modern  biologists were not necessarily those which interested his contemporaries.
Concentration on evolutionism has led historians to ignore a wide range of parallel developments affecting the way western culture visualized the natural world.
The desire to study and control Nature was an integral part of the ideology of the newly industrialized nations of Europe and the United States.
In a host of ways not directly connected with Darwin's theory, naturalists sought to reduce the world to a comprehensible order.
Darwin's theory linked living things to their physical environment in a new way.
Adaptation was conceived as a process, not a fixed state designed by God.
But some nineteenth-century naturalists tried to minimize the significance of adaptation.
Their search for the order of Nature still reflected a ‘modernized’ version of the traditional belief that Nature expresses harmonious relationships transcending the everyday problem of coping with the environment.
The idealist view that Nature is the expression of a rational creative force upheld many pre-Darwinian efforts to trace the relationships between living things, and the patterns of distribution in space and time.
These ‘philosophical naturalists’ searched for the order of Nature not in natural laws of the kind familiar to the physicist, but in universal patterns linking the diverse forms of living structure, patterns that were seen as a direct product of the Creator's rational thought.
Darwin challenged this approach with his revival of the materialistic alternative.
Natural selection adapts populations to their environment through a combination of observable processes that shows no sign of divine forethought.
But despite Darwin's efforts, evolutionism was at first absorbed into the search for a universal order.
Only in the later decades of the century was there a growing realization that to understand life one would have to take account of the complex interactions between all the living things occupying a particular territory.
There were still many different approaches to the study  of the natural world.
Field naturalists collected in the local countryside or explored distant parts of the world and sent specimens back home.
Some devoted themselves solely to classification, although others became interested in geographical problems and in the relationship between species and their environments.
But many new species, especially the higher animals, had to be described by comparative anatomists who worked in museums and dissecting rooms and who never ventured into the field.
At this level, there was a strong link between natural history and medical anatomy — and some of the most active pre-Darwinian debates on evolutionism took place in the medical schools.
To the anatomists, the search for order involved the detection of underlying relationships between the structures of different species.
Their approach offered little chance of understanding complex ecological relationships.
The reconstruction of extinct species from fossil bones was often undertaken by museum workers, who were thus disposed to see development through time as the unfolding of purely formal relationships between successive species.
The term ‘biology’ did not come into use until the end of the century, and even then it did not have its modern meaning.
There was an increased level of specialization in the life sciences linked — as in geology — with the emergence of a body of professional scientists.
The nineteenth century has been seen as a period of transition from a largely amateur ‘natural history’ to a professionalized science of ‘biology’.
This neat division does not, however, take into account a host of associated factors.
Natural history certainly had a strong amateur component, but this continued throughout the century.
There were a significant number of specialists even in the early decades of the century, including both the exponents of the Linnaean tradition of classification and the philosophical naturalists, who hoped to achieve something more than mere cataloguing.
As the number of these specialists increased, they tried to use the idea of evolution as a means of giving their disciplines a vague  unity, thus creating the first science of ‘biology’.
Their efforts were largely in vain, however, since the separate disciplines tended to continue on their way unaffected by the rhetoric of unity.
Professional interests often shaped scientists' attitudes towards new theories, but political rivalries were also reflected in different images of natural order.
The well-known debates over the religious implications of evolutionism were symptomatic of the social tensions that built up within an increasingly industrialized society.
As middle- and even working-class interests challenged the established social order, science was often employed as a symbolic arena in which to fight ideological battles.
Darwinian evolutionism is an example of a theory that was adopted by middle-class thinkers because it portrayed Nature in terms that paralleled their preferred framework of society.
Conservative interests sought their own way of picturing the order of Nature, preferring images that admitted change only within the framework of a divinely preordained plan of creation.
KNOWLEDGE AND POWER
The Romantic enthusiasm for the wilderness co-existed with a more practical attitude in which Nature was seen as something to be explored and catalogued.
The nineteenth-century approach to Nature study was influenced by the middle classes' growing commitment to hard work as the key to achievement.
Naturalists took on enormous workloads, driving themselves to the limit both physically and mentally.
The urge to number and name things was an integral part of the Victorians' desire to dominate Nature.
They wanted to use Latin names for species as a symbol of science's ability to impose order on Nature's apparent variety.
They also liked cabinets of specimens, neatly labelled and arranged.
On a larger scale, museums and exhibitions became popular as public manifestations both of world-wide power and of the passion for order.
The search  for knowledge was also of practical benefit to humankind.
Just as geology helped the mining industry, so the study of animals and plants would help farmers, fishermen and hunters.
Professionals and Amateurs
The Museum d'Histoire Naturelle in Paris provided a model for teaching and research that was the envy of the civilized world.
Here we see the origins of the professional body of zoologists and botanists that would eventually flourish throughout Europe, America and the colonies.
But at the level of field studies there was a much less rigid distinction between professional and amateur.
Outsiders could not hope to participate in the learned debates on comparative anatomy at the great museums, but field naturalists relied on local amateurs for specimens and surveys, thus ensuring a much greater degree of interaction.
There was a passion for information among the general public, creating a vast demand for books and a framework of local organization in the form of natural-history societies and national bodies devoted to particular areas such as ornithology.
The introduction of the steam press after 1810 reduced the price of books, allowing experts to earn a living by writing for the ever-expanding market.
Cheaper ways of printing illustrations were also developed, although colour plates remained the preserve of the wealthy.
Animals and plants were increasingly represented in realistic poses, and works such as J. J. Audubon's Birds of America (1827–38) remain classics even today.
Other technical developments helped to change the pattern of interest in Nature.
Entomology became more fashionable once better killing bottles provided the squeamish with a less offensive method of collecting specimens.
The railways allowed ordinary people to visit the seaside and the country, so that natural-history excursions became social events.
Access to the seashore created a passion for  collecting seaweeds and shells.
Better dredging techniques allowed even amateurs to collect bottom-dwelling species.
For botanists, Nathaniel Ward invented the ‘Wardian case’ in which plants could grow sealed under glass.
When introduced in the 1840s this created new possibilities for shipping exotic species around the world, protected from changes in the environment.
Since ferns grew best in the Wardian case, there was a fern craze in which every middle-class house displayed a collection of greenery.
The vivarium and aquarium soon followed, with parallel changes in fashion.
Changing fashions in popular natural history did not affect those who were doing research in botany and zoology directly, except through the demand for books.
But indirectly the growing public awareness of science and its potential shaped the professionals' world by exposing it to the rough and tumble of political life.
‘Big science’ on the model provided by Paris required funds that were only likely to be provided by governments, and some governments were more willing than others to get involved.
Where there was reluctance — as in Britain — middle-class pressure had to be brought to bear in order to convince the politicians that something ought to be done.
The societies that organized research and publication could also become arenas for political debate.
The challenge to the traditional social order manifested itself in a struggle for the control of science, and historians have begun to recognize how this struggle shaped the development of scientific institutions.
More importantly, we have also begun to appreciate that the ideological struggle influenced people in their choice of which theories were seen as acceptable.
Theories acquired ideological labels, and social interests thus determined what a particular group would admit as a legitimate contribution to scientific knowledge.
The Paris museum (colloquially known as the Jardin des Plantes) was much more than a museum for the display of exotic specimens.
It had been formed from Buffon's old Jardin du Roi (the royal zoological and botanical garden) by the revolutionary government, and had been turned into a major institution for promoting the study of all the non-physical sciences.
It still incorporated both a zoological and a botanical garden, but now had an extensive research and teaching function.
There were twelve professorships, each with a staff of highly trained assistants.
Several of the professors were internationally known figures who lectured to large audiences and engaged in public debates over controversial issues.
Lamarck had been put in charge of the invertebrates, while Geoffroy Saint Hilaire (1772–1844), another transformist, dealt with the vertebrates.
Most influential of all was the professor of anatomy, Georges Cuvier, who gained considerable political power through his role in the reorganization of French scientific education.
Cuvier wanted to turn natural history into a science that would rank with physics and chemistry, and to establish the empirical foundation for this new science he was determined to build a collection of specimens second to none.
The expanding power of Napoleonic France gave him access to the whole range of material available in Europe.
In the middle decades of the century, it was increasingly the German-speaking biologists who led the way.
Scientific research and teaching were important at many German universities, although the system was rigidly structured and gave the professor a great deal of power.
When able men occupied the professorial chairs, there was scope for immense development.
The Germans were particularly strong in morphology and embryology, using the increasingly more sophisticated microscopes to explore and describe the structure of a wide variety of living forms.
When studying this period, English-speaking historians have concentrated on the work of Darwin and the early careers of the biologists who supported and opposed the theory of evolution.
But we now realize the extent to which these scientists looked to France and later to Germany for a lead.
Professional biology flourished in continental Europe at a level that it would not achieve in Britain or America until the  last decades of the century.
The small number of influential British biologists, men such as Richard Owen and T. H. Huxley, often modelled themselves self-consciously on the Germans.
Darwin's originality lay in the fact that, as a wealthy amateur, he could study in the field as well as in the dissecting room and could thus synthesize the information from biogeography and morphology.
Science and Politics
Cuvier was influential, but he did not have everything his own way, and rival groups such as the transmutationists were able to make their case with a fluency that historians have ignored until recently.
New ideas such as the transmutation of species acquired political overtones because they symbolized a challenge to the existing power structure both within science and within society at large.
The Paris museum was a centre of both research and passionate debate over the principles upon which the new science should be built.
It is small wonder that Paris became a Mecca upon which naturalists converged in droves once the disruptions of the Napoleonic wars had ended in 1815.
Conservative and radical scientific ideas were disseminated from Paris by naturalists and anatomists returning home inspired by what they had heard.
If the intellectual lead in the area of biology gradually switched to Germany in the course of the mid-century, Paris had already established the ideal framework through which to promote scientific research into animals and plants.
In Britain, the French model became a focus of political debate between conservatives who wished to keep science under the control of the aristocracy and radicals who pressed for increasing public involvement.
The British Museum had natural-history collections, but these were poorly housed and were considered less important than the museum's artistic holdings.
The governors saw the museum as a storehouse for the nation's treasures, not  as a research institution, and even public access to the museum was restricted.
The space problem was relieved to some extent when the museum moved to its modern site in the late I820s, but natural history still rubbed shoulders with art and archaeology.
A public enquiry in 1835 aired the radicals' demands for a Paris-style research museum, but traditional forces ensured that the scientists were kept subordinate to public figures who were more concerned with the arts.
The research function did increase, with the anatomist Richard Owen (1804–92) being appointed superintendent of natural history in 1856.
Owen had an international reputation and close connections with political figures, but even he was subordinate to the principal librarian.
Owen campaigned long and hard for a new building with more space and supervised the move to the present Natural History Museum in the 1880s (chapter 8).
A Zoological Society was founded in London in 1826 to act as a showcase for Britain's colonial possessions.
It appealed directly to aristocratic sporting interests, and the Zoological Gardens in Regent's Park were at first restricted to members and their guests.
Hunting was an aristocratic pursuit at home, and the hunting of big game symbolized the white man's superior status in colonized territories.
The display of exotic animals in zoos was a public manifestation of the industrialized nations' ability to dominate the world.
But working naturalists were interested in the whole range of exotic species, not just big game, while the radicals pushed for more research and public access to the zoo.
The supply of exotic animals for dissection was of great importance to anatomists hoping to make their name through exciting discoveries or looking for ammunition to use in theoretical debates.
Richard Owen gained part of his reputation through the description of new species shipped home from Britain's colony in Australia.
He was able to checkmate the French evolutionists' efforts to use the duck-billed platypus as a link between reptiles and  mammals because he alone had access to a good supply of specimens.
The debates between radicals and conservatives were not concerned merely with the quality of science and access to the necessary resources.
Opinions on a whole range of theoretical issues were polarized in ways that can be related to positions taken up in the struggle for control of the social framework of science.
Middle-class reformers and those with more radical opinions used the newest ideas to discredit the ‘old-fashioned’ science favoured by the traditional sources of power and influence.
Conservatives sought to update their theoretical perspective without giving way to ideas that would threaten the notion of a divinely structured natural hierarchy.
To them, the new theories smacked of materialism, and during the early decades of the century they were quite successful in blocking the spread of radical ideas.
Control of the existing social machinery counted for quite a lot in this battle; the reformers forced some concessions but failed to topple the existing hierarchy.
Recent historical research has shown that the battle that would be won by the Darwinians of the 1860s and 1870s had been fought and lost by an earlier generation of reformers.
Far from being a new threat, evolutionism was something that the conservative forces had been battling with for several decades.
In botany the theoretical debate was less acute, although the prospect for the practical application of scientific knowledge was greater.
Sir Joseph Banks had pioneered the effort to transplant useful species from one area to another, and hoped to use his position at the royal botanical gardens at Kew to further the interests of Britain's overseas colonies.
Yet after Banks' death the British government did nothing to help establish the gardens as a national centre for botanical research until a public outcry in 1839–40 led to the appointment of William Hooker (1785–1865) as the first official director of Kew.
Under William and his son — and successor — Joseph Dalton Hooker (1817–1911), Kew began to acquire facilities for studying exotic plants and soon became a centre of international importance.
J. D. Hooker collected plants on expeditions to the southern polar regions and to the Himalayas, and soon plants (in Wardian cases) were flooding in from all parts of the world.
A museum of economic botany was opened in 1847, and in later decades Kew played a vital role in the spread of useful plants around the British empire.
In the United States a national botanical garden was founded to exploit the seeds and plants brought back by a Pacific exploration expedition under Charles Wilkes in the years 1838–42.
At the same time the US Patent Office became interested in the possibility of using tropical plants to revive the agriculture of the southern states.
The Patent Office also promoted the use of chemistry in soil analysis, seeing this as a means of preventing the exhaustion of nutrients.
The German chemist J. von Leibig's Chemistry in its Applications to Agriculture and Physiology was translated in 1841 and inspired a generation of chemists to apply their skills to agriculture.
Entomology was also taking on an economic role as its application to pest control became evident.
The State Agricultural Society of New York hired an entomologist, Asa Fitch, in 1854 to study the life history of insects in the hope that this would suggest new methods of control.
Fitch also experimented with chemical insecticides.
The foundations were thus being laid for the massive expansion of government involvement in the environmental sciences in the later decades of the century.
THE PATTERN OF NATURE
The classification of species was still of vital importance to both field and museum naturalists.
Linnaeus' artificial system of working out the relationships between species was now replaced with a natural system in which as many characters as possible were taken into account.
From this  point onwards historians have tended to lose interest in the debates over classification, assuming that they were increasingly concerned not with the principle of how to determine relationships, but with disagreements over practical applications of the technique.
In fact, though, a vast amount of ink continued to be spilled in arguments over taxonomy, and disagreements over how to classify particular groups still reflected differing philosophical positions on the significance of natural relationships.
The assumption that evolution solved the problem by showing that ‘relationship’ should be interpreted in a genetic sense oversimplifies the situation.
Darwin argued that classification is an expression of genealogy: closely related species show a basic similarity because they share a recent common ancestor.
But this still left certain questions unanswered, and many naturalists did not accept the Darwinian approach to the question.
Far from welcoming the concept of the evolutionary ‘tree’, zoologists and botanists resisted the idea that relationships were the product of an open-ended process of divergence under adaptive pressure.
This assertion conflicts with Michel Foucault's interpretation of the history of taxonomy (chapter 5).
Foucault argued that the period around 1800 saw the breakdown of the ‘classical’ view of natural relationships in which species were slotted into a conceptual grid whose structure was determined by the human mind.
The most obvious indication of this transition was the replacement of the chain of being (the simplest possible grid in which all the pigeon-holes are arranged in linear pattern) by an open-ended branching system of relationships.
Foucault associates this development with the work of Georges Cuvier, who rejected the chain of being and pioneered a tree-like model of relationships.
In this sense Cuvier anticipated the modern, Darwinian view of Nature even though he rejected the idea of transmutation.
Unfortunately, Foucault did not realize the extent to which nineteenth-century naturalists rejected both the Cuverian and the Darwinian perspectives.
In fact, there were numerous efforts to resist the idea that natural relationships were unpredictable.
The concept of the chain of being was translated into a more flexible notion of a hierarchy of organization, while other naturalists replaced the linear chain with an equally closed system based on a circular pattern.
Even the transition from an artificial to a natural system was not completed in a uniform manner throughout the scientific community.
British botanists still resisted the natural technique of de Jussieu into the early decades of the new century.
But the natural system was not without its own problems.
Some naturalists argued that all characters should be taken into account when determining relationships, but others claimed that some characters were more fundamental than others and should thus be given more weight.
This question came to a head in the classification of the animal kingdom, where fundamental debates took place in the early decades of the new century.
Foucault is correct to identify Cuvier as a central figure in these debates, even if he exaggerates how successful Cuvier's arguments were at the time.
Cuvier pioneered the role of comparative anatomy as a guide to classification, thereby boosting the role of the museum naturalist at the expense of the collector in the field.
From his position at the Paris museum, he promulgated a new approach in which animals would be classified not by their external appearance but by internal resemblances that could only be revealed by dissection.
The significance of internal structures had already been accepted in some cases (otherwise whales and dolphins would be classified as fish rather than as mammals), but Cuvier made this central to the classification of the whole animal kingdom.
He insisted on the principle of the –subordination of characters' — some characters were more fundamental than others and should be given pride of place in assessing degrees of relationship.
In theory Cuvier saw the nervous system as the most important structure, although in the  case of the vertebrates he concentrated in practice on the skeleton.
Chains, Trees and Circles
In 1812 Cuvier used this technique to break up the chain of being.
The animal kingdom does not display a linear pattern of species linking the lowest forms to humankind.
Instead, there are four completely unrelated ‘embranchments’ or basic types of organization.
Each of these can be recognized by a common pattern of internal structure, all the individual species within a type being but variations on the same basic pattern.
The four types were the vertebrates (animals with backbones), the molluscs (snails, octopus, etc.), the articulates (segmented animals including insects, worms and crustaceans) and the radiates (animals with a circular body plan such as sea-urchins).
Each type was divided into classes, orders, families, genera and species as in the Linnaean system, the types constituting the most fundamental divisions in the taxonomic hierarchy.
Cuvier insisted that the four types were simply different and equally successful body plans — they should not be ranked with the vertebrates at the top, since this would smack too much of the old chain of being.
The species within each type represented different modifications of the basic pattern, each adapted to a particular way of life.
Because the range of possible adaptations was unlimited, the relationships could be represented as a branching tree-like pattern, with new branches being added whenever some totally new (and unpredictable) form of animal life was discovered.
The four types are the foundations of the modern phyla, the most basic subdivisions of the animal kingdom, although the articulates and radiates have been broken up as the true range of diversity has become apparent.
Cuvier thus anticipated the kind of branching relationship implicit in the Darwinian version of evolution, in which species diverge from a common ancestor under different adaptive pressures.
But although Cuvier won immense prestige for his work as a comparative anatomist, he was unable to convince many naturalists that they should give up all hope of being able to predict the overall pattern of natural relationships and hence the ‘missing’ species still waiting to be discovered.
The concept of a single chain of being was abandoned — even Lamarck had two parallel hierarchies for the plant and animal kingdoms.
But Lamarck's followers were far more numerous than historians once believed, and they continued to argue that a serial relationship was apparent in the animal kingdom, at least in the arrangement of the main classes.
Even if the arrangement within each class was a branching tree, the classes themselves could be set one above the other to form a continuous sequence.
This position was argued in France by J. B. Bory de Saint-Vincent (1778–1846) and in Britain by Robert E. Grant (1793–1874).
Those who defended the idea were supporters of the evolutionary hypothesis who saw the linear arrangement as the ladder by which life had ascended to the highest form, humankind.
Cuvier's rigid distinction between the four types was intended to discredit this interpretation, as was his theory of catastrophic extinction (chapter 6).
But the radicals kept the spirit of Lamarck's theory alive through into the 1830s by searching for ways of preserving the linear hierarchy.
They looked for intermediate forms to bridge the gaps that Cuvier insisted lay between the known classes and types.
The debate over the classification of the duck-billed platypus — which lays eggs but also gives milk — arose out of this issue, with the serialists trying to use it as a link between the reptiles and the mammals.
Owen was a staunch supporter of Cuvier's views on discontinuity, and he successfully emphasized the milk glands at the expense of the egg-laying in order to keep the platypus firmly within the mammals.
An important addition to the concept of a linear scale was the ‘law of parallelism’ advocated by J. F. Meckel (1781–1833) and Etienne Serres (1786–1868).
The early  nineteenth century saw major developments in embryology, which challenged the mechanical concept of generation and overthrew the preformation theory.
The law of parallelism was a means of linking comparative embryology into the search for a unifying pattern in the organic world.
Meckel and Serres believed that the scale of organic complexity used to rank the major classes of living organisms corresponded to the pattern of individual development.
The human embryo, for instance, passes through stages in which its structure approximates to that of an adult fish and then an adult reptile, before acquiring its final mammalian form.
On this model of organic relationships, the lower animals are merely immature versions of humankind: they develop along the same scale but mature at an earlier point in the process.
The Lamarckians used the idea of a progressive scale to define the relationships between the main groups.
Adaptation might distort this scale (as Lamarck himself supposed) but it was a secondary factor, not the sole determinant of relationships.
The linear scale was not, however, the only possibility now under consideration.
If the chain of being had been taken over by the materialists, those naturalists who believed that the order of Nature revealed the existence of a rational plan of creation preferred to invoke more complex patterns.
The most striking expression of this approach is the circular or quinary system proposed by the entomologist William Sharpe MacLeay (1792–1865) in 1819.
MacLeay was influenced by the idealist movement now flourishing in Germany, and he was determined to show that a rationally ordered pattern underlay the apparent diversity of species.
He argued that all the higher taxonomic categories can be divided into five subordinate units that fall naturally into a circular pattern.
The animal kingdom was divided into five (not four) types, each consisting of five classes.
Each class is divided into five orders, each order into five families, each family into five genera, and finally each genus into  five species.
Here was an immensely complex yet rigidly structured model for the plan of Nature, which — like the chain of being — was closed rather than open-ended.
Since the relationships were all in fives, one could tell if a particular category was missing from our present knowledge and predict roughly what kind of new organism would eventually be discovered to fill the gap.
MacLeay's view of natural relationships presupposed that the living world is constructed according to a rational plan.
His system achieved some degree of popularity within entomology, which was in a flourishing state at the time.
It was applied to the birds by the ornithologist William Swainson (1789–1855), who wrote extensively and produced a number of well illustrated works.
Although the quinary system was not widely taken up, especially outside Britain, it was not dismissed out of hand as a figment of MacLeay's and Swainson's imaginations.
Most naturalists thought that there was some sort of underlying pattern in Nature, even if they found the circles a little too artificial a representation of the pattern.
By the 1840s naturalists were depicting relationships in two dimensions but without the orderly pattern of circles, producing images of relationships similar to geographical maps.
This technique was compatible with a more open-ended view of natural relationships, although most naturalists were as yet unwilling to concede that life could have developed solely in response to adaptive pressures.
Form and Function
Cuvier's system was open-ended because he considered each species to be a variation of the underlying type adapted to a particular way of life.
The form or structure of the species was determined by its function, this in turn being determined by its environment and way of life.
It was impossible to predict what new variations on the theme might be discovered, because there were endless  conceivable ways of gaining a living that animal species might adopt.
Any system in which adaptation becomes the sole determinant of structure will be incompatible with the idea that Nature has been created in accordance with a harmonious or regularly structured grid of relationships.
Cuvier's commitment to this adaptationist or utilitarian approach was complete.
Although he distinguished four basic types of organization, he rejected any suggestion that the underlying unity within each type had any mystical significance.
The types existed because certain basic patterns of animal organization were more efficient than any other conceivable forms, so all species were necessarily based upon one or another of these patterns.
Although Cuvier himself made no use of the theological implications of this approach, it was taken up with enthusiasm by British exponents of the argument from design.
A century earlier, John Ray had used the adaptation of form to function to proclaim the existence of a benevolent God who designed His creatures to enjoy life.
The threat of the French Revolution led conservative forces to close ranks against the godless atheism of the Enlightenment materialists.
Intellectual arguments to demonstrate the existence of a Creator were once again in demand among those who wished to preserve the existing social hierarchy.
In this emotional environment the argument from design gained a new lease of life.
Its most eloquent exponent was an Anglican clergyman, William Paley (1743–1805), whose Natural Theology appeared in 1802.
Although there was little originality in Paley's argument and little new in his approach to natural history, his emphasis on the usefulness of organic structures struck a renewed chord in the minds of a social elite whose wealth was increasingly based on trade and commerce.
Since many English naturalists were also clergymen, they were only too willing to describe the species of animals and plants they studied as examples of divine craftsmanship.
Like exponents of the argument from design in earlier  generations, Paley had to confront the fact that some species possessed structures that were useful for the killing of prey.
He was convinced that, in a world governed by natural law, life must inevitably be accompanied by reproduction and death.
In these circumstances, the predators actually reduced the suffering of their prey:
A brute, in his wild and natural state, does every thing for himself.
When his strength, therefore, or his speed, or his limbs, or his senses fail him, he is delivered over, either to absolute famine, or to the protracted wretchedness of a life slowly wasted by the scarcity of food.
Is it then to see the world filled with drooping, superannuated, half-starved, helpless and unhelped animals, that you would alter the present system of pursuit and prey?
In this way Paley excused the violence of Nature and linked the species together not in some abstract formal pattern but in terms of how they interacted in the food chain.
Cuvier's emphasis on adaptation added a veneer of scientific authority to Paley's utilitarian argument from design.
Serious naturalists could sprinkle their descriptions of the internal organization of new species with references to the skill of the Creator who had designed such complex living structures.
This approach flourished through into the 1830s, when a series of illustrations of the argument from design was commissioned in the will of the Earl of Bridgewater.
The eight Bridgewater Treatises were each written by an expert who could speak with authority on the evidence of design to be seen in his particular area.
Unfortunately, the Treatises tended to bore their readers through the sheer number of examples cited.
Some of the authors were also aware of new approaches to the study of organic relationships that were being discussed in France and which were leading radical anatomists to challenge Cuvier's authority.
This new approach centred on the ‘transcendental anatomy’ of Etienne Geoffroy Saint Hilaire.
Although sympathetic to Lamarck, Geoffroy attacked Cuvier from a very different position.
He abandoned the concept of a linear scale in favour of a more flexible method of seeking an underlying unity that would rationalize the apparent diversity of living forms.
In his Philosophie anatomique of 1818–22, Geoffroy argued that the basic similarity that allowed all the vertebrates to be assigned to a single type of organization reflected something more than mere engineering efficiency.
The unity of type suggested that all the vertebrates were merely superficial modifications of a single ground plan — the same basic animal form has been modified in a host of superficial ways.
For Geoffroy, the superficial adaptations were less significant than the underlying unity of structure — the laws governing the modification of form were more important than the function that the resulting structures would serve in allowing the animals to live within their environment.
Eventually Geoffroy challenged Cuvier head-on by asserting that the four types could themselves be linked by appealing to yet more fundamental unities of form.
The resulting debate over the relative priority of form and function polarized anatomists throughout Europe.
Geoffroy's challenge had a significance beyond the purely intellectual level.
By the 1820s Cuvier was associated with a conservative political attitude that favoured a static image of Nature in order to uphold a static model of the social order.
Lamarck's theory of the gradual transformation of species had threatened this image, much to Cuvier's annoyance, and Geoffroy's very different approach to the significance of structural resemblances reopened the same debate.
By the late 1820s Geoffroy was arguing that one animal form could be transformed into another by natural processes — not by the accumulation of slight modifications, but by a sudden switching of the growth process so that the development of the individual proceeded in a new direction to mature as a new modification of the basic pattern.
He suggested  that extinct crocodiles found in the fossil record could have been transformed into their modern relatives when a modification of the environment triggered off the transition to a new growth pattern.
He also hinted that the transformation of reptiles into birds was produced by the same mechanism.
Transcendental anatomy thus revived the case for materialism by suggesting that the ‘relationship’ between similar species reflected a real genetic link resulting from natural processes of transformation.
Geoffroy had popularized a new concept of evolution by ‘saltations’ or sudden transitions from one structure to another.
The debate between the supporters of Cuvier and Geoffroy raged throughout the 1830s and 1840s.
Transcendental anatomy was seized upon by radicals who were determined to show that the scientific thinking of the conservatives was outdated.
In Britain, Geoffroy's position was supported by Robert Grant and by another Scottish anatomist, Robert Knox (1793–1862), who was later discredited by his role in the Burke and Hare scandal, in which the corpses of murder victims were sold for dissection.
The arguments over the significance of organic relationships that we normally associate with the debate over Darwin's Origin of Species were being fought out in the natural-history museums and anatomy schools just when Darwin himself was first beginning to develop his evolutionary theory in the late 1830s.
Although the conceptual foundations of the challenge to the old order were different, transcendental anatomy raised issues that would be associated with the theory of evolution through into the era of Darwinism.
The rival anatomists debated the implications of transitional forms such as the newly discovered platypus and the degree to which the structure of the human body indicated a link to the apes.
In Britain the new anatomy was seen as especially threatening because the traditional sources of power and influence had committed themselves to Paley's argument from design.
This added a religious dimension to the debate, with the radicals being branded as atheists who wished  to subvert the traditional foundations of morality.
Yet the new approach attracted too many adherents for it to be dismissed out of hand.
Conservative forces in science and medicine looked for ways of modernizing their own approach so that the intellectual foundations of their authority could be preserved.
In 1836 the Royal College of Surgeons, one of the bastions of traditional power within the medical establishment, appointed a young and ambitious anatomist, Richard Owen, to a professorial chair.
Owen was also put in charge of the College's museum, an important source of specimens for comparative anatomy.
It was Owen who took up the challenge of modernizing the argument from design in a way that would allow it to incorporate the innovative aspects of transcendental anatomy.
Owen's task was made easier by the fact that the idealist strand in German thought promoted an alternative view of natural unity.
While the Romantic artists challenged materialism at the emotional level, the exponents of Naturphilosophie argued that the material world was merely a projection of a deeper, spiritual reality.
Naturphilosophie was already being applied to the unity of type in the organic world by Lorenz Oken (1779–1851) and others.
Owen soon began to appreciate the potential value of this rival continental influence as a means of checkmating the materialists.
To the idealist, the whole world is a manifestation of a rational pattern in the mind of its Creator, and thus it is to be expected that natural forms should reveal a harmony and an underlying unity.
Where MacLeay saw this unity as a circular system of relationships, Owen began to argue that the unity of type within each group displayed the rational activity of the Creator.
The relationships were not physical ones produced by transmutation, but ideal ones existing in the mind of God.
In his book On the Archetype and Homologies of the Vertebrate Skeleton of 1846 Owen postulated a basic vertebrate pattern or archetype that the Creator had modified in different  directions to create the various species.
Paley was quite right to insist that the adaptation of each individual species to its environment was an indication of divine forethought, but it was equally important to demonstrate the existence of an underlying pattern that showed that all species could be seen as elements within a rational plan.
In another book,On the Nature of Limbs , Owen made clear the origins of his position in German idealism:
I have used therefore the word ‘Nature’ in the sense of the German ‘Bedeutung’, as signifying that essential character of a part which belongs to it in its relation to a predetermined pattern, answering to the ‘idea’of the Archetypical World in the Platonic cosmogony, which archetypical or primal pattern is the basis supporting all the modifications of such part for specific powers and actions in all animals possessing it…
Owen introduced the term ‘homology’ to denote cases in which the same structure had been adapted to a range of different purposes.
Thus the wing of a bat and the paddle of a porpoise are homologous because they show the same underlying pattern of bones typical of a mammalian forelimb.
Form was more important than function because in some cases the efficiency of the adaptation was impaired because the Creator wished to maintain the consistency of the basic pattern.
Owen could take over the transcendentalists' search for underlying patterns, but, since the relationships were ideal rather than physical, he could follow Cuvier's refutation of transmutation by emphasizing the gaps between the different forms of vertebrate life.
Humankind and the apes shared the vertebrate form because both were created by God, but Owen could stress the anatomical differences in order to make it clear that the one could never have evolved from the other.
The world is unified at the ideal level, but the physical manifestations of the vertebrate archetype are each a distinct product of the Creator's will.
As with  Cuvier's system, this approach to the unity of Nature is open-ended — there is always room for another newly discovered variant of the basic pattern to be fitted in.
The best model for organic relationships was a branching tree, not a linear scale.
In the 1850s Owen drew upon the challenge to the law of parallelism developed by the German embryologist K. E. von Baer (1792–1876) to illustrate this point.
In 1828 von Baer showed that the human embryo never passes through a stage equivalent to an adult fish or reptile.
The development of every organism starts from a very generalized structure, with the more specialized features that distinguish the particular species being added on in the course of growth.
At a very early stage of growth, the embryos of a fish, a reptile and a mammal may be virtually indistinguishable, but their development proceeds in different directions and the class to which they will belong is defined as soon as they start to acquire more specialized features.
The early embryo is a physical manifestation of the basic archetype, while the addition of specialized features represents a gradual adaptive modification.
Since there are many possible adaptive forms, the patterns of development can be represented as a tree in which many lines branch out in different directions from the same starting point, not as a linear scale.
The model of branching relationships would eventually lead Owen towards a limited kind of evolutionism (see below), but he carefully suppressed this implication in the pre-Darwinian era.
He never wavered from the view that the whole sequence of vertebrate life on earth was an expression of a divine plan, unified into a coherent whole by the rational power of the Creator's mind, but divided into distinct sections that could never be linked by natural processes.
In the highly charged atmosphere of the 1840s, Owen served his conservative masters well by steadfastly blocking the radicals' attempts to postulate relationships close enough to justify the theory of transmutation.
THE GEOGRAPHY OF PLANTS
The anatomists who described and classified species were only peripherally interested in how the organisms functioned within their environment.
Work in a museum did not encourage the study of what we should now call ecological relationships.
Concern for the role of the environment came from those naturalists who followed Humboldt in searching for the interactions between the physical and the organic realms.
Some taxonomists wanted to go beyond mere classification and investigate the geographical distribution of the various species.
Humboldt showed them how to tabulate data to reveal the effect of the environment in determining what kind of species could live in a particular area.
As part of the drive to impose an appearance of order on the world, nineteenth-century science created a vast body of numerical information all carefully arranged so that geographical variations could be ascertained at a glance.
Yet this approach to the question was merely descriptive.
A few naturalists, inspired by developments in geology, used information on recent changes in the environment to explain a number of apparently anomalous facts revealed by the numerical data.
Here at last was the starting point for a science that would attempt to explain the present state of the earth and its inhabitants in terms of natural processes acting over long periods of time.
Botanical Provinces
Although some efforts had been made to study the world-wide distribution of plants in the eighteenth century (chapter 5), the real founder of botanical geography was Alexander von Humboldt.
Drawing upon the vast fund of information gathered on his trip to South America (1799–1804), Humboldt began to study how the physical environment determined the geographical distribution of plants.
In his Essai sur la géographie des plantes of 1807, Humboldt noted that  there was an equivalence between the belts of vegetation found at different heights ascending a mountain and the geographical zones that girdled the earth.
The plants in high altitudes were the equivalent of an arctic flora, both adapted to cold conditions.
The zones of vegetation around the earth were determined by temperature and rainfall, and within each zone the plants all possessed similar adaptations to the conditions.
They were not, however, the same: different continents were inhabited by different species adapted to the same sets of conditions.
The existence of distinct geographical provinces thus could not be explained in terms of climate.
The concept of geographical provinces may have gained some currency because it could be understood as a biological equivalent of the nations of humanity — and the early nineteenth century was a period of strong nationalist feelings.
Humboldt himself had shown an interest in the native inhabitants of the regions he visited, and his views on how the environment affects plants and animals may have been influenced by his studies of the ways in which human societies adapted to local conditions.
Social thinkers were now deeply involved with the collection of information about the human population, with censuses and various kinds of statistical studies gaining in popularity as efforts were made to reduce economic and social forces to a semblance of rational order.
Humboldt introduced similar techniques to display the characteristics of the flora to be found in different regions.
He used tables that allowed the reader to see at a glance what proportion of the population in any zone was made up of grasses or any other major type of plant.
Such tables required the collection of masses of information on the numbers of plants to be found in any area.
During the first half of the century efforts were made to extend the same technique to the various kinds of animals as well as plants, so that naturalists had access to a vast body of information about the geographical distribution of living things.
In botany this technique was extended by the Swiss naturalist Augustin de Candolle (1778–1841) and his son Alphonse (1806–93).
Augustin de Candolle's Essai élémentaire de géographie botanique of 1820 emphasized the distinction between a species' ‘station’ or habitat and its ‘habitation’or range.
The concept of habitat focused attention on the forces confining a species to areas with a certain environment, and would become particularly important in later ecological studies.
But the range of each species was also limited by factors that did not depend upon its habitat, and which were related to the existence of distinct geographical provinces.
De Candolle realized that to explain the existence of these provinces would require naturalists to tackle the question of the actual origin of species, although at this point he thought the matter was beyond the scope of scientific investigation.
He studied geographical variations in the number of species belonging to a genus, showing that in France, for instance, there was an average of 7.2 species per genus, while in Britain the corresponding figure was 2.3.
The question of why islands were deficient in this way (but not necessarily in the number of genera themselves) would later be explained in terms of the limited opportunities for migration across ocean barriers.
Alphonse de Candolle's Géographie botanique raisonée of 1855 provided masses of tabulated information on all aspects of the geographical distribution of plants.
In Britain, Hewett C. Watson (1804–81) worked on the variation of the flora with altitude in the Highlands of Scotland and pioneered a national census of plants, which allowed the country to be divided into a number of botanical provinces.
He eventually fell out with another pioneering figure in the study of distribution, the Manx naturalist Edward Forbes (1815–54), who appropriated Watson's provinces for his own very different study.
Forbes was one of the bright stars of early-nineteenth-century British biology, whose death at the age of thirty-nine  was regarded as a tragedy for science.
He was deeply influenced by German idealism and sought the kind of patterns in Nature that were typical of that school of thought.
Following an 1841 expedition to the Aegean Sea, Forbes proposed that the fauna of the oceans could be divided into zones by depth, exactly equivalent to the zones of vegetation ascending a mountainside.
Forbes proposed that no life could be found below a depth of 300 fathoms (about 600 metres), a view not conclusively disproved until the Challenger expedition in the 1870s.
He also proposed global zones for marine life defined by ocean temperatures.
In 1846 he turned his attention to the botany and zoology of the British Isles, using a modified version of Watson's geographical provinces in an effort to explain the present distribution in historical terms.
The argument between Watson and Forbes was more than a mere priority dispute — it reflected a basic disagreement over the purpose of gathering geographical information.
Although Watson wanted to go beyond mere taxonomy, he adopted an essentially descriptive approach to geographical studies and saw no point in advancing speculative explanations of how things came to be in their present state until much more data were available:
The ingenious minds that take their delight in inventing causal hypotheses to account for these present seeming relations, through reference to supposed conditions of the past, will work more easily, and perhaps with more truthful results, if supplied with properly arranged data truly illustrating the present.
They may then find out, instead of only feign, phyto-geographical and phyto-geological histories.
This was an implicit critique of Forbes, but Forbes saw no reason to be apologetic because he had used the concept of botanical provinces in an entirely new way.
For him, the provinces made sense not as descriptive units but  as products of a historical process that explained their existence in purely natural terms.
Historical Biogeography
Forbes was inspired in this direction by the work of Charles Lyell, whose uniformitarian approach to geology stressed the use of observable processes to explain the present state of the earth (chapter 6).
In the second volume of his Principles of Geology , Lyell had addressed the question of geographical distribution as a means of challenging the catastrophists' notion of mass extinctions.
He believed that the surface of the earth changed gradually over long periods of time, and saw that such changes would have an effect not only upon the physical environment to which living things were exposed, but upon the possibility of migration to new locations.
If a geographical barrier such as a mountain range were gradually destroyed, there would come a point at which plant and animal species would be able to move into territory from which they had hitherto been excluded.
The inhabitants of the two originally separated regions would have the chance to invade new areas — and might themselves face a challenge from immigrants on their home territory.
Lyell was able to draw upon the work of the elder de Candolle, who had recognized that the old idea of a stable ‘balance of Nature’ was no longer tenable.
The ability of some species to undergo explosive increases in population had been largely ignored by exponents of the balance theory, but the significance of such phenomena had now been recognized owing to the writings of Thomas Malthus.
In his Essay on the Principle of Population of 1797, Malthus had argued that the human race always had the potential to breed faster than the food supply could be increased.
This claim was widely debated because Malthus used it to suggest that poverty and starvation were inevitable.
For naturalists, his insight threatened the assumption that Nature was a  divinely contrived harmony.
De Candolle realized that all species have the potential to increase their numbers at the expense of rivals occupying the same territory.
Each species' range is determined by the area within which it can outbreed potential rivals because it is better adapted to that set of conditions:
All the plants of a given country are at war with one another.
The first which establish themselves by chance in a particular spot, tend, by the mere occupancy of space, to exclude other species — the greater choke the smaller, the longest livers replace those which last for a shorter period, he more prolific gradually make themselves masters of the ground, which species multiplying more slowly would otherwise fill.
Lyell saw that this more competitive model of relationships had implications for his historical model of biogeography.
The breakdown of a barrier would allow species from both sides to compete with one another, and the winners would spread out to occupy any territory to which they were better adapted than the natives.
Lyell was no evolutionist, but he was convinced that each species was only created once.
When the same species was found occupying two separate territories, it made more sense to work out how it could have migrated from one to the other than to assume that it had been created independently in each area.
Lyell saw each biogeographical province as a ‘centre of creation’ where new species typical of that province were created from time to time, spreading out from the centre to occupy as much territory as they could.
Major oceans would form the most long-lasting boundaries defining the provinces, but even these were not permanent, and migrations may have been possible in early geological periods when the distribution of land and sea was different.
Forbes drew upon this approach to explain the distribution of plants and animals in the British Isles.
He distinguished five botanical zones, but went beyond Watson by  suggesting that each had been established by a separate episode of migration from a different continental source.
The migrations had been made possible by geological changes temporarily removing barriers such as the English Channel, or opening up new routes through the creation of land-bridges.
He postulated that at one time there had been an area of land in what is now the Atlantic Ocean allowing plants to move from Spain to Ireland.
Perhaps his most powerful hypothesis was intended to explain the fact that many British mountains had plants identical to those found in the Arctic regions of Scandinavia.
Forbes assumed that much of northern Europe had been submerged by a shallow ocean during a period in which the climate was significantly colder than the present (Lyell's alternative to the ice age theory).
Arctic plants would have been transported southwards on icebergs, and would have established themselves on the islands corresponding to the modern mountains.
When the land was elevated, and the climate improved, the arctic plants retreated up the mountainsides in order to remain in an environment similar to that from which they had been derived.
There were many examples of species occupying territories separated by wide expanses of ocean, and in the 1850s it became fashionable to invoke prehistoric land-bridges to explain the migrations.
The botanist J. D. Hooker postulated a massive extension of land in the Antarctic to account for the similarity of plants between New Zealand, South America and the islands of the remote south.
Alphonse de Candolle followed Forbes in supposing that Europe had once extended into what is now the Atlantic Ocean.
Others extended the land all the way across the Atlantic to explain how some species came to be resident in both North America and Europe, openly appealing to the legend of Atlantis to support this hypothesis, despite the fact that the land-bridge would have been submerged long before the human race appeared.
The American botanist Asa Gray (1810–88) adopted a less extravagant view, preferring to  believe that the migration had taken place across Asia.
Sunken continents remained popular until better soundings of the ocean floor in the 1870s revealed the sheer extent of the elevation that would be needed to create dry land across the Atlantic and other major oceans.
The publication of Forbes' theory to explain the spread of arctic plants was a great disappointment to Lyell's better-known disciple, Charles Darwin (1809–82).
Darwin shared Lyell's antipathy to the idea that the same species could appear independently in different areas, because his theory of evolution implied that the appearance of each species was a unique historical event.
Independently of Forbes, he proposed an extension of the arctic flora to explain the species found on European mountains.
In the geographical section of the unpublished Essay of 1844 outlining his theory of evolution, he assumed that, at a time of generally colder climate, the arctic plants would spread southwards, driving out the temperate species that were no longer adapted to the conditions.
When the climate improved, the situation would be reversed:
What then would be the natural and almost inevitable effects of the gradual change into the present more temperate climate?
The ice and snow would disappear from the mountains, and as the new plants from the more temperate regions of the south migrated northwards, replacing the arctic plants, these latter would crawl up the now uncovered mountains, and likewise be driven northward to the present arctic shores.
Darwin's theory was a better extension of Lyell's principles because it presented the species as engaged in an active struggle with an ever-changing environment.
Instead of simply being rafted by icebergs, they expanded to occupy as much territory as possible, retreating only when changed conditions began to favour their rivals.
Nevertheless, the appearance of Forbes' paper led Darwin to abandon any idea of a separate publication on the topic.
Although Darwin made no use of icebergs in this case, he was passionately interested in the possibility that animals and plants might be transported across oceans by various accidental means.
He studied how seeds could be carried in the mud clinging to the feet of birds, and also experimented on how long seeds could remain immersed in salt water and still be fertile.
He collected information on the natural rafts of timber that are sometimes swept out to sea from great rivers, often bearing plants and even animals with them.
Darwin saw no need to postulate major elevations of the sea bed to explain migration.
He was convinced that, in most cases, oceanic islands have been stocked by the accidental transportation of seeds and small animals from the nearest mainland.
The same processes could explain how related species appeared on widely separated land masses.
Through the 1840s and 1850s Darwin engaged in a debate with Hooker on this question, eventually winning Hooker around to his own way of thinking.
There was, however, another crucial difference between Darwin's position and that of his contemporaries: he believed that, when members of a species were transported to a new location, they might sometimes establish themselves even if the conditions were not identical to those of the homeland, in which case the isolated population would adapt to the new environment and eventually be transformed into a distinct species.
THE HISTORY OF LIFE
Biogeography was the principal source of Darwin's theory of evolution, but to most of his contemporaries it seemed obvious that the starting point for any investigation of the history of life on earth must be the fossil record.
This distinction highlights the originality of Darwin's ideas.
The basic idea of evolution was not unknown because it had been actively supported by some radicals during the 1830s and 1840s.
But the early debates were conducted almost entirely in terms of comparative anatomy and paleontology.
If there were general laws governing the history of life, it was assumed that they would be revealed by the fossil record.
Darwin was one of a small group of naturalists who took the opposite route, following Lyell in the search for natural processes at work in the present and the recent past that would throw light on the distribution of life around the globe today.
To understand the conceptual framework of his contemporaries, we must look first at the efforts being made to uncover a pattern of development among the fossils.
Although geologists made use mainly of invertebrate fossils in dating the rocks, it was the discovery of fossil bones that attracted most attention.
In an age that was becoming increasingly fascinated with history, the prospect of extending the antiquity of life itself by uncovering the remains of bizarre and often gigantic animals had a romantic appeal outside the realms of science.
But it was the scientist alone who could make sense of the discoveries, and late eighteenth-century naturalists had already begun to puzzle over the bones of gigantic elephant-like creatures found both in America and in Europe.
Vertebrate paleontology finally became an organized science in the early years of the nineteenth century, owing to the anatomical skills of Georges Cuvier.
As a comparative anatomist used to studying the skeletal structures of a wide range of living species, Cuvier had the experience necessary to reconstruct the often fragmentary and disjointed bones found in geological deposits.
It was said that he could estimate the structure of the whole creature from just a single bone.
This was something of an exaggeration, and paleontologists made serious mistakes when reconstructing the more bizarre species from the older rocks, but only the anatomist could hope to make sense out of the discoveries.
Cuvier was determined to found a new science of the past by displaying the changes in the earth's inhabitants revealed by the fossil record.
In the heyday of Napoleon's conquests he had access to fossils from all over Europe and was thus in a position to make  the first comprehensive study.
His papers on the topic, subsequently collected as the Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles of 1812, provided a starting point for the science of vertebrate paleontology.
The Extinction of Species
One of the most disturbing consequences of Cuvier's work was proof that some species have indeed become extinct.
The possibility that some fossils corresponded to species no longer alive today had been noted even in the late seventeenth century, but had been put on one side until now.
Cuvier investigated the bones of the ancient elephants and showed that they were not the same as the living African and Indian elephants.
The mammoth was related to but distinct from the modern elephants, and therefore it must be an extinct species of the same genus.
The mastodon was even more distinct, since its teeth were unlike those of the modern elephants.
Such gigantic creatures could hardly be living in some remote spot unknown to European science, so they had either changed into something else or had become extinct.
Lamarck proposed that transmutation was responsible for the changes, thus putting off the need to confront the possibility that Nature may allow some of its products to disappear.
But Cuvier insisted that the transition from the ancient to the modern species was too abrupt, and that the intermediates would not have been viable in any case.
Having eliminated transmutation, extinction became inescapable.
Cuvier tried to evade one disturbing implication of extinction by linking the phenomenon to his theory of catastrophic geological changes.
He believed that abrupt changes on the earth's surface were responsible for killing off all the species over a wide area.
The catastrophists' notion of mass extinction allowed them to believe that the disappearance of species was not a part of Nature's regular operations, but occurred only in those exceptional interludes when the  earth's normal stability was interrupted by some gigantic convulsion.
There were no causes operating in the world today that could have such devastating results.
This situation would only begin to break down when Lyell introduced his uniformitarian geology in the 1830s.
Since there were no catastrophes in Lyell's system, extinction had to become part of the normal operations of Nature.
If species were indeed fixed, then their state of adaptation to the environment would gradually break down as the conditions were changed by geological forces.
They might sometimes be able to migrate to new areas, but in so doing they would merely threaten the existence of the original inhabitants.
In Lyell's system, extinction was taking place even now, as the population of species no longer adapted to modern conditions is gradually whittled down.
Instead of trying to explain the extinction and replacement of species in terms of observable causes, Lyell's opponents looked to the patterns revealed in the fossil record to explain the history of life on earth.
Cuvier's work with Alexandre Brongniart on the stratigraphy of the Paris basin showed him that there was a whole sequence of geological deposits, each of a different age.
The vertebrate fossils could thus be arranged in a historical sequence running through from the most ancient to the most recent geological periods.
Evidently there had been a series of mass extinctions followed each time by the appearance of an entirely new set of species that formed the population of the next stable period.
Cuvier did not adopt the most obvious non-evolutionary explanation of where the new species came from.
He said nothing of miraculous creation and instead proposed that the ‘new’ populations simply migrated in from areas not affected by the catastrophe.
This made nonsense out of the geologists' expectation of a world-wide sequence of characteristic fossils, and was never taken up.
Most catastrophists preferred to believe that some form of supernatural agency was involved in the appearance of each new population.
Cuvier noticed that the most recently extinct creatures  such as the mammoth were closely related to living species.
The hyena remains that William Buckland took as evidence of the deluge belonged to the same recent period, as did the giant deer sometimes called the ‘Irish elk’.
As Cuvier began to study the more ancient fossils, he found that they were increasingly unlike anything known in the world today.
The oldest Tertiary rocks contained archaic mammals that bore no resemblance to the living families within the class.
Cuvier called one of them Palaeotherium (ancient beast).
In the older Secondary rocks there seemed to be no mammals at all, only bizarre reptiles.
It was Cuvier's English followers who did much to open up what soon became known as the ‘age of reptiles’.
The aquatic plesiosaur was first described in 1821 and soon afterwards an almost complete skeleton was unearthed from the rich fossil-bearing rocks of Lyme Regis in Dorset.
A local woman, Mary Anning, made a living selling fossils from these rocks to collectors, and was immortalized in the tongue-twister ‘She sells sea-shells on the seashore’.
The fossils that have most effectively captured the public's attention as symbols of the outlandish character of prehistoric life are the dinosaurs.
The first of these to be discovered was a gigantic carnivore from the Jurassic rocks of Stonesfield, Oxfordshire, which Buckland described in 1824 under the name Megalosaurus (great lizard).
In the following year a Sussex doctor Gideon Mantell (1790–1852) found some large fossilized teeth in a pile of rocks intended for road-mending and noted that they resembled the teeth of the modern iguana.
He named this enormous herbivorous reptile Iguanodon and went on to coin the term ‘geological age of reptiles’ in an article published in 1831.
The general term ‘Dinosauria’(fearful reptile) was introduced by Richard Owen in a survey of British fossil reptiles in 1841.
Some years later Owen helped to design a collection of life-sized replicas of dinosaurs and other denizens of the age of reptiles erected at the Crystal Palace site in south London.
They are still there today, providing a dramatic  illustration of the Victorians' perception of the past.
In fact, Owen misinterpreted the remains of Megalosaurus and Iguanodon, presenting them as gigantic lizards standing on four legs.
Later discoveries would show that in fact both are bipedal, with massive hind legs and diminutive forelimbs.
Beneath the age of reptiles lay a series of formations containing the fossils only of aquatic creatures.
The Old Red Sandstone of Scotland was particularly rich in the remains of strange fish, many of them covered with a kind of bony armour-plating.
These were collected by a stonemason, Hugh Miller (1802–56), who became accepted as an authority on the subject and went on to become an outspoken critic of evolutionism.
Louis Agassiz, then the world authority on fossil fish, studied Miller's specimens and helped to describe some of them.
Beneath the Old Red Sandstone (Devonian) lay the Silurian and Cambrian systems that were being described by Murchison and Sedgwick.
Here, no vertebrates at all could be found, the fossils consisting only of invertebrates such as the trilobites.
Progressive Development
By the 1840s there seemed to be clear evidence for a sequence of development in the history of life on earth.
Animal life began with the invertebrates and then ascended through the sequence of vertebrate classes in the order: fish, reptiles and mammals.
Only Charles Lyell resisted this interpretation, arguing that the apparent sequence might be the result of imperfect evidence.
Lyell wished to deny any historical trend in the history of life since it would violate the steady-state principles of his uniformitarian system (chapter 6).
A few controversial mammalian fossils were known from the age of reptiles, and Lyell appealed to these as evidence that the whole sequence was unsound.
He argued that fluctuations in the earth's climate due to geological changes might alter the proportion of reptiles and mammals in the population.
The so-called ‘age of  reptiles’ was merely a period when there were more reptiles than mammals because the earth had enjoyed uniformly hot conditions.
As the conditions changed to the more temperate climate we know today, so the proportion of reptiles had decreased — but there was no overall trend of the kind that would be implied if the mammals had only come into existence in the later geological periods.
Most geologists saw Lyell's steady-state alternative as completely unrealistic.
They could not believe that large numbers of mammals would eventually be found in some of the earliest rocks.
The basic sequence was clear enough, and to most nineteenth-century naturalists and geologists it was self-evidently a progressive development from lower or simpler forms of life to higher or more complex ones.
Despite Cuvier's warnings, it was still widely assumed that the vertebrates are collectively more advanced than any invertebrate type.
And within the vertebrates, the fish were the ‘lowest’ class and the mammals the ‘highest’— since we ourselves are mammals and the Victorians were convinced that the human race was the pinnacle of creation.
It was widely believed that there were no human fossils, so the recent appearance of humankind seemed to represent the last step in the ascent of life.
The critical question was: Why has life undergone this progressive development in the course of time?
Lamarckians such as Robert Grant had no doubts about the significance of the fossil progression — it proved that animal life had advanced through the scale of development as the result of purely natural processes.
Opponents of this interpretation had to stress the discontinuity of the development in order to undermine the plausibility of evolutionism.
They wanted progress, but preferred to believe that the advances had taken place by a series of discrete steps, each too large to be compatible with any form of natural development.
But if the advance was not the result of evolutionary laws, why had it taken place?
Those naturalists who wanted to preserve a role for the  supernatural in the creation of life were forced to try out a number of alternatives in an attempt to provide an explanatory framework that would serve as an alternative to evolutionism.
One possibility extended Paley's version of the argument from design to include a whole sequence of creations, each adapted to the prevailing conditions of the time.
If geology suggested that the earth's climate had changed through time, it would make sense to accept that the Creator would design different species for each of the successive geological periods.
Catastrophes would serve a useful function in killing off the old species just as the conditions were changing, leaving the world clear for the Creator to step in and design a whole new population adapted to the environment that would stabilize after the upheaval.
The cooling-earth theory provided the perfect framework for such a model of successive adaptive stages.
The supposed decline in the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere would explain why the air-breathing animals had only been created in the later stages of the earth's history.
Paleontologists such as William Buckland took up this interpretation with enthusiasm, thus combining a continued belief in the argument from design with opposition to transmutation via the concept of successive creations.
Idealist philosophers saw the human body as the most perfect expression of the vertebrate form.
They visualized the human race as the goal of a developmental pattern imprinted onto history by God.
Embryologists such as J. F. Meckel had tried to establish a parallel between the hierarchy of vertebrate classes and the stages of development of the human embryo.
Now it seemed as if this ‘law of parallelism’ could be extended to the whole history of life on earth.
The growth of the human embryo recapitulated the history of animal life as revealed by the fossil record.
Throughout the earth's history, life had been steadily maturing, advancing through a predestined  sequence of developmental stages towards the perfection of the human form.
Louis Agassiz was one of the most eloquent spokesmen for this view of development as a divinely constructed pattern:
The history of the earth proclaims its Creator.
It tells us that the object and term of creation is man.
He is announced in nature from the first appearance of organized beings; and each important modification in the whole series of these beings is a step toward the definitive term of the development of organic life.
The apparent parallel between the development of the human individual and the history of life on earth is thus God's symbol telling us that we are the goal of His creation.
To stress the difference between his position and that of the transmutationists, Agassiz insisted that the development revealed by the fossil record was discontinuous.
Whatever the overall trend, the steps from one class to the next were so abrupt that they could not be explained by gradual transmutation.
God's plan unfolded by distinct stages corresponding to the sudden introduction of entirely new forms, not by a gradual ascent of the organic scale.
As part of his campaign against the transmutationists, Richard Owen used his 1841 survey of British fossil reptiles to argue against the idea of continuous development.
The dinosaurs were the highest form of reptile, but in Owen's time they were the earliest known members of the class — exactly the reverse of what would have been predicted by a theory of continuous development.
The Scottish paleontologist Hugh Miller drew the same lesson from his study of the most ancient fossil fish.
They were not the lowest fish, as the transmutationist predicted, but among the highest.
The history of each new class could be seen as a sudden explosion of development followed by a gradual decline, just like the rise and fall of human empires:
The general advance in creation has been incalculably great.
The lower divisions of the vertebrata precede the higher;— the fish preceded the reptile, the reptile preceded the bird, and the bird preceded the mammiferous quadruped.
And yet, is there one of these great divisions in which, in at least some prominent feature, the present, through this mysterious element of degradation, is not inferior to the past?
The cyclic model of development was intended to thwart the transmutationists, but was not a mere product of Owen's and Miller's imaginations.
The fossil record seemed to indicate sudden steps rather than continuous development, although new discoveries over the next few decades would help the evolutionists' case.
The most important lesson to be learnt from the fossil discoveries of the 1840s and 1850s was that the history of life was far more complex than anyone had at first realized.
As long as transmutationism was linked to the old idea of a simple ascent of a linear scale, it was doomed to failure.
There was indeed an overall progression, but the ascent from fish to reptiles and then to birds and mammals was superimposed on an intricate sequence of developments that seemed to take place independently of the overall trend.
There were major changes within the various invertebrate types, although these seldom caught the headlines.
It did not make sense to see all the lower animals as merely immature versions of humankind, nor was it possible to assume that every extinct population had been perfectly adapted to the conditions of its own time.
Any theory seeking to explain the history of life on earth would have to take into account a whole range of geographical and adaptational factors in addition to the ascent of life towards humankind.
In the early decades of the century it had been widely assumed that the distinct geographical provinces of the modern world had only come into existence quite recently  in geological terms.
For most of its history, the earth had enjoyed warm, uniform conditions over its whole surface.
This interpretation was already being undermined in the 1830s as new evidence showed that the geographical provinces did indeed extend some way back into the past.
Darwin himself contributed to this trend by bringing back fossils from the voyage of the Beagle showing that the past inhabitants of South America were closely related to the modern ones.
The giant ground sloths and armadillos of the past were clearly South American in character, showing that this continent had been populated by unique families of animals over a vast period of time.
Darwin and Owen formulated a ‘law of succession of types’ to indicate this geographical continuity in the fossil record.
For the opponents of transmutation, this meant only that the ‘centres of creation’ had been active throughout the earth's history.
Darwin was one of the few to speculate that the law of succession of types was best explained in terms of the constraints placed upon evolution by the major geographical barriers defining the continents.
In the 1850s the fossil record began to yield evidence for a new kind of trend within the development of each class.
K. E. von Baer's attack on the linear model of embryological development inspired Owen and the physiologist W. B. Carpenter (181385) to look for non-linear relationships in the fossil record.
They showed that each class normally appeared first in a very generalized form, from which radiated out a number of lines of development each leading towards a specialized modification of the class for a particular way of life.
Branching and specialization were the key to the history of each class, not the ascent of a linear scale towards the next highest form.
The German paleontologist H. G. Bronn (1800–62) also began to draw diagrams of the history of life representing the overall process as a branching tree.
Owen and Bronn continued to believe, however, that the pattern of development represented the unfolding of a  divine plan, the expansion of predetermined variations on a theme.
THE PROCESS OF CHANGE
With hindsight we can see how the paleontology of the 1840s and 1850s paved the way for the reception of Darwin's theory when the Origin of Species was published late in 1859.
But to many of the naturalists actually involved, the new discoveries required only a revision of traditional ideas rather than a revolution.
For all their efforts to uncover trends that would serve to unify the history of life on earth, the vast majority were unwilling to explain the trends as the result of natural processes that could be seen operating in the world today.
They were still interested in patterns rather than processes, although the patterns they were now discussing were of a kind that Darwin would be able to explain.
This preference for patterns must be taken into account in any survey of early transmutationism.
To the anatomists who worked in the museum or the dissecting room, processes that could only be observed in the field were of little interest.
They looked for abstract relationships between the different structures, but they had little incentive to ask what kind of circumstance might lead a species to change when exposed to a new environment.
The earliest accounts of transmutation fell into this trap, projecting the process as the gradual unfolding of trends that could not be explained in terms of a response to the environment.
Darwin introduced a new element into the equation because he started not from the fossil record but from field studies, which forced him to consider the real-life pressures acting upon species in the course of geological time.
Transmutation before Darwin
Lamarck's theory had included the mechanism of the inheritance of acquired characteristics as a means of adapting organisms to changes in their environment.
But in the Philosophie zoologique Lamarck had subordinated this to his belief in a progressive force that pushed living things steadily up the scale of organization.
His followers tended to concentrate on the progressionist element, looking for a serial relationship between the classes of animal life and minimizing the gaps between the known forms.
Little effort was made to investigate how a species might actually respond when placed in a new environment, and the Lamarckians paid little attention to biogeography.
Geoffroy Saint Hilaire uncoupled transmutationism from the idea of a linear scale, but again failed to see the importance of geographical factors.
For Geoffroy, a change in the environment might trigger off a new pattern of growth in the organism — but the result was determined more by the laws of growth than by the adaptive needs of the organism.
To test his theory he looked at the processes responsible for producing monstrosities, because these provided the closest observable parallel to the saltative transmutations demanded by his theory.
Earlier sections of this chapter have outlined the clash between radical transmutationists such as R. E. Grant and conservatives such as Owen.
The conservative forces were successful at first.
By the 1840s the transmutationist challenge was ebbing, Grant was losing influence and the whole movement had been labelled as irreligious and potentially subversive.
To understand the climate of opinion within which Darwin developed his own theory of transmutation during the late 1830s, we must bear in mind that Lamarckism had been branded as an atheistical theory appealing only to political revolutionaries.
It is small wonder that Darwin thought twice about threatening his own privileged position by identifying himself with a new twist on this old theme.
The first attempt to break through the deadlock created by the blacklisting of Lamarckism was made not by Darwin, but by the Edinburgh publisher and amateur naturalist, Robert Chambers (1802–71).
In the 1830s and 1840s Chambers issued his own periodical to reflect the interests of the middle classes.
He argued that social progress towards a free-enterprise society was inevitable and saw progressive evolution as a useful foundation upon which to build a philosophy of cosmic development that would include the human race.
Chambers realized that, to popularize such a philosophy in the more conservative political climate south of the border, it would be necessary to uncouple the idea of transmutation from the materialist image acquired by Lamarckism.
In his book,Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation , published anonymously in 1844, Chambers presented transmutation as the expression of a divine plan.
The progressive appearance of ever-higher forms of life was not the result of blindly operating natural laws, but the step-by-step unfolding of a preordained pattern that the Creator had built into the universe.
Chambers hoped to reconcile those readers with religious qualms to the general idea of transmutation.
The human race could be accepted as a product of Nature's development because that development was instituted by the Creator as an indirect means of achieving His goal.
Chambers discussed the fossil record in the hope of providing evidence for a generally progressive trend in the history of life, but his strategy depended upon distancing his theory from Lamarckism.
He had no interest in the adaptation of species to their environment, nor indeed in the provision of any naturalistic mechanism of transmutation.
The progress of life unfolded in the way it did because God had imposed a preordained sequence of developmental stages through which organisms must ascend towards the human form.
Chambers drew upon the law of parallelism to suggest that the actual process of transmutation from one species  to the next highest in the scale took place by means of an extension to the growth of the individual.
Once again the lower animals were treated as immature versions of the human race, with the growth of the human embryo recapitulating all the stages through which life had passed in order to reach the highest level of development.
But now Chambers insisted that the extensions to growth took place without supernatural interference, so that one species naturally transmuted itself into a higher one at a certain point in time.
The linear pattern of development was an indication that God had programmed the whole history of life to move in a purposeful direction towards higher levels of intelligence.
Somewhat paradoxically, Chambers also included a chapter on MacLeay's circular or quinary system of classification, since this indicated that the whole animal kingdom was the product of a coherent, rational plan.
Vestiges was the centre of a violent controversy.
Chambers had made no secret of his intention to treat the human race as the last and highest product of the ascent through the animal hierarchy.
He appealed to the pseudo-science of ‘phrenology’, which had been built around the assumption that the shape of the brain determined a person's character.
This essentially materialist approach to the mind allowed Chambers to claim that, as the brain increased in size in the course of evolution, so had intelligence expanded towards the human level.
Such claims were anathema to conservative thinkers, and a host of writers led by Adam Sedgwick and Hugh Miller fulminated against Vestiges and its influence.
It was one thing to suggest that God might have instituted a ‘law of progress’ to achieve His goals in Nature, quite another to suggest that human beings were merely highly developed animals.
Chambers' book nevertheless had a positive effect in encouraging people to think in terms of continuous trends in the development of life.
In 1849 even Richard Owen  hinted briefly that the modifications of the vertebrate archetype might have been unfolded by non-miraculous causes:
The archetypical idea was manifested in the flesh, under divers such modifications, upon this planet, long prior to the existence of those animals species that actually exemplify it.
To what natural laws or secondary causes the orderly succession and progression of such organic phenomena may have been committed we are as yet ignorant.
But if, without derogation of the Divine power, we may conceive the existence of such ministers, and personify them by the term ‘Nature’, we learn from the past history of our globe that she has advanced with slow and stately steps, guided by the archetypical light, amidst the wreck of worlds, from the first embodiment of the Vertebrate idea under its Ichthyic [fish-like]vestment, until it became arrayed in the glorious garb of the human form.
Owen never repeated this claim in the pre-Darwinian era, but liberal theologians such as the Oxford mathematician and philosopher Baden Powell began to come around to the idea of ‘designed evolution’ during the 1850s.
A compromise was being hammered out in which the once-opposed concepts of design and transmutation would be synthesized so that the trends in the fossil record could be accepted as the gradual unfolding of a divine plan.
Chambers' book thus played an important role in creating the framework of opinion into which Darwin's theory would be received.
Evolution was acceptable as long as it was presented as a purposeful process in which the human race played a central role as the goal towards which natural progress was aimed.
Radicals wanted to see progress towards humankind as the central theme, but conservatives like Owen, worried about the status of the human soul, preferred more complex patterns of development that allowed  for entirely new levels of organization to be introduced from time to time.
Chambers' theory offered no natural explanation of why changes took place in the way they did.
The only driving force was the power of God, which somehow transcended the ordinary laws of Nature to impose a purposeful direction on the ascent of life.
Far from being an anticipation of Darwin's theory, Chambers' whole approach ignored the possibility of explaining transmutation in terms of the natural laws observable in the everyday world of how organisms relate to their environment.
Those who were content with this approach would never turn the basic concept of transmutation into a scientifically testable theory.
Lamarckism was the only available theory of natural evolution, and, although this was being promoted by the liberal social philosopher Herbert Spencer, biologists were too well aware of its dangerous reputation to take it seriously.
A small number of naturalists, including the young Thomas Henry Huxley (1825–95), were on the lookout for a new initiative in this area.
If Lamarckism was discredited, then some entirely new mechanism would have to be suggested if evolution was to be seen as a truly natural process.
But Huxley condemned Vestiges as meaningless verbiage and was unwilling to support the basic idea of evolution unless someone could show him a natural mechanism to explain how the process could work.
It was exactly this kind of initiative that Darwin would bring forward in the Origin of Species .
The Origins of Darwin's Theory
The circumstances leading to Darwin's discovery of the theory of natural selection form one of the most intensively studied areas of the history of science.
So many books and articles have been published on the topic that we often speak of a ‘Darwin industry’.
Historians have been attracted by the wealth of available material: Darwin's private notebooks have survived, along with much of his  correspondence, and this material is now being published so that scholars everywhere can have access to what must stand as a unique record of creative thought.
But the motivation that leads so many historians to work on this material also derives from the status that the theory of natural selection has achieved within modern biology.
The vast majority of working biologists now accept natural selection as the key to our understanding of how populations of animals and plants adjust to changes in their environment.
Darwin is thus treated as a major figure in the history of science because he both popularized the general theory of evolution and discovered the mechanism that seems to offer the best prospect of explaining how the process works.
There is a real danger that the sheer scope of the Darwin industry will encourage us to forget that other people were thinking about organic origins at the time, but were exploring very different ways of trying to understand the development of life on earth.
Darwin is important in any history of the environmental sciences because his theory focused attention onto the problem of how species become adapted to their environment.
But to many of his contemporaries, adaptation was not the central problem, and natural selection thus failed to answer the questions that were uppermost in their minds.
When we survey the reception of Darwinism (chapter 8), we shall have to beware of the temptation to assume that the success of the selection theory in the twentieth century was built upon foundations established in Darwin's own time.
In fact, Darwin converted the scientific world to evolutionism despite an almost universal refusal to accept that his theory of natural selection offered an adequate explanation of how the process works.
Darwin's thinking both drew upon and transcended the conventional ideas of his time.
Darwin met Robert Grant during a brief and unsuccessful spell as a medical student at Edinburgh.
Although most biographers (encouraged by Darwin's own recollections) have played down the Edinburgh episode, the most recent studies  have noted that he developed an interest in invertebrate zoology here that was to form a mainstay of his scientific work through into the time of the Beagle voyage.
After abandoning the idea of taking up medicine, Darwin moved to Cambridge in order to obtain the BA degree needed if he was to become an Anglican clergyman.
At Cambridge he came under the influence of both Adam Sedgwick, the professor of geology, and John Stevens Henslow, the professor of botany.
Henslow was particularly important in developing the young Darwin's interest in natural history.
Although Henslow's teaching was not part of the undergraduate curriculum, interested students were taken on field trips and given a good grounding in the science of the time.
At Cambridge Darwin was absorbed into the Anglican way of thinking about Nature and read Paley's Natural Theology .
At this point he accepted the argument from design, and his interest would remained focused on the question of adaptation even when his faith in divine creation began to wane.
After reading Humboldt's Personal Narrative , Darwin was determined to visit the tropics himself.
He was also inspired by Humboldt's vision of an all-embracing theory that would explain the geographical diversity of life on earth.
This resonated with his reading of Romantic poets such as Wordsworth, who also expressed a concern that science should not degenerate into a search for mere details.
Although many aspects of Darwin's work reflect practical concerns, his overall vision is very much a product of the Romantic era, with its emphasis on the unity of Nature and the power of natural forces to reshape the world.
Darwin was soon offered the position of naturalist aboard HMS Beagle , which was being sent to chart the waters of South America under Captain Robert Fitzroy.
He spent the years 1831–6 on the voyage, although much of his time was spent away from the ship exploring in the interior of the continent.
While on the voyage he read Lyell's Principles of Geology and was soon making observations on the gradual elevation of the Andes, which converted  him to uniformitarianism.
Lyell's second volume raised the question of the geographical distribution of species at a time when Darwin was well placed to study this phenomenon.
Edward Forbes and Darwin were inspired by Lyell to look for geological changes that would explain the present distribution of species in Europe.
But Forbes was unable to shake off the belief that new species were produced by the exertion of a supernatural agent — he proposed a strange theory of ‘polarity’ in which the creative power was supposed to have been exerted most strongly at the beginning and at the end of the history of life on earth.
Darwin's discoveries on the Beagle voyage had the effect of gradually breaking down his faith in the fixity of species and converting him to a dynamic view of the relationship between living things and their environment.
By the time he returned home, he had already passed beyond the position of Lyell and Forbes and had begun to investigate the possibility that species might actually be modified when exposed to a new environment.
While travelling on the mainland of South America, Darwin was brought face to face with the conflict that was under way between the European settlers and the native Indians.
Perhaps by analogy with this he began to see that animal species too are in a state of dynamic equilibrium with one another and with the environment, an equilibrium that can easily be disturbed by geological changes or by the immigration of new species into the area.
Darwin discovered a new species of the rhea, the flightless bird of the pampas, and realized that the existence of two closely related species in the same area made nonsense out of the old idea of perfect adaptation.
Even if one species was adapted to one extreme of the pampas and the other to the opposite extreme, the intermediate territory was inhabited by both and the two species must be competing to occupy as much of this territory as possible.
Here de Candolle's concept of species being at war with one another, discussed at length by Lyell, must have allowed Darwin to see that the population of any species is always tending to expand into  the surrounding territory, if necessary at the expense of the existing inhabitants.
Given a slight change in the conditions favouring one species at the expense of its rivals, the balance of power would be shifted and the disadvantaged species might be driven to extinction.
This more dynamic model of natural relationships would become an integral part of Darwin's thinking, but it was not by itself enough to convert him to evolutionism.
Here the critical developments were to take place during the Beagle's visit to the Galapagos islands, a small group of volcanic islands several hundred miles out into the Pacific from the South American mainland.
The unique fauna of the Galapagos islands includes marine iguanas and giant tortoises, but it is the birds — especially ‘Darwin's finches’— that allow the naturalist an unrivalled opportunity to study the effects of geographical isolation in the production of new species.
We now know that Darwin very nearly missed this opportunity.
The Beagle was on the point of leaving when he found out that the natives could tell which island a tortoise came from merely by looking at the shape of its shell.
Far from studying the distribution of the finches in the light of this information, Darwin had to sort through his collection trying to remember where each specimen had been captured.
The mocking-birds were probably his best clue, since here he found that he had clear evidence showing that the populations of different islands were quite distinct.
After the Beagle returned to England, the ornithologist John Gould confirmed that there were several different species of finches and mocking-birds on the islands.
To Darwin, this information reduced the theory of divine creation to an absurdity.
He simply could not believe that the Creator had done separate miracles in order to provide each of these insignificant islands with its own species of finch or mocking-bird.
It was far easier to assume that the islands had been stocked by the accidental transportation of small numbers of individuals from the mainland, after which each  population had simply adapted to its new environment in a different way.
The production of a group of related species on the different islands of an archipelago provided a model for divergent evolution, suggesting that, when a species was divided into separate breeding populations, each of those populations had the ability to change as it adapted to its new environment.
The separate populations would first constitute mere varieties of the original species, but as the modifications accumulated they would eventually become distinct species in their own right, unable to interbreed with the parent form even if they were brought back into contact with it.
Extended over vast periods of time, the same process could account for the production of all the various species of animals and plants.
Natural Selection
Darwin settled down in London for a few years and became an active member of the Geological Society.
But unknown to most of his colleagues he was busily collecting information that might bear on the question of how a species might change when exposed to a new environment.
He knew about Lamarck's theory of the inheritance of acquired characteristics, but dismissed this as a secondary process that could not account for the whole range of adaptations (he must also have been aware of the strong opposition to Lamarckism from Owen and the conservative forces in science).
In search of clues he began to study the one area where species can actually be seen to change, the production of new varieties of pigeons, dogs, etc., through the activity of human breeders.
Darwin's later descriptions of his theory use artificial selection as a means of introducing the reader to the possibility of a natural equivalent, and he always implied that this was how he himself discovered his theory.
His notebooks tell a rather more complex story, however, and it was only after several years of work that he eventually put together the idea of natural selection.
An important clue was his reading of Malthus on population, which allowed him to see that the ‘struggle for existence’ caused by population pressure would act within the species, killing off any individuals who were not well adapted to the conditions and allowing only the ‘fittest’(i.e. best-adapted) individuals to survive and breed.
From the random individual variation existing within any population, the ‘survival of the fittest’ would pick out those with useful characters and thus intensify the adaptive feature in each generation.
In the first detailed account of his theory, Darwin gave the following imaginary example to show how natural selection would work:
…let the organization of a canine animal become slightly plastic, which animal preyed chiefly on rabbits, but sometimes on hares; let these same changes cause the number of rabbits very slowly to decrease and the number of hares to increase; the effect of this would be that the fox or dog would be driven to try to catch more hares, and his numbers would tend to decrease; his organization, however, being slightly plastic, those individuals with the lightest forms, longest limbs, and best eyesight (though perhaps with less cunning or scent) would be slightly favoured, let the difference be ever so small, and would tend to live longer and to survive during that time of the year when food was shortest; they would also rear more young, which young would tend to inherit these slight peculiarities.
The less fleet ones would be rigidly destroyed.
I can see no more reason to doubt but that these causes in a thousand generations would produce a marked effect, and adapt the form of the fox to catching hares instead of rabbits, than that greyhounds can be improved by selection and careful breeding.
Owing to the impact of Malthus' principle, many historians have argued that Darwin's theory of gradual transmutation through individual competition reflects the competitive  ethos of Victorian capitalist society.
Natural selection gives the responsibility for progress to the individuals who make up the population; in seeking to do the best for themselves, they help to guarantee the future of their species.
If the population as a whole fails to adapt under pressure, the species will be wiped out by a rival.
The most original aspects of Darwin's theory were inspired by his reading of Lyell and his study of biogeography.
But historians now recognize that for Darwin himself the idea of natural selection arose from a dialogue between his geographical studies and his interest in the process of reproduction by which the species is maintained.
Darwin's views on reproduction or ‘generation’ have often been ignored because they bear no resemblance to the modern theory of Mendelian genetics.
It is easy to assume that there was a gap in Darwin's theory that would later be filled in by modern knowledge of heredity.
But such an application of hindsight ignores the fact that Darwin's pre-genetical ideas were an integral part of the conceptual scheme within which his theory of evolution was formulated.
Darwin's theory provides a classic example of how difficult it is to draw a sharp distinction between ‘natural history’ and ‘biology’: the process of evolution must of necessity mediate between the reproductive process that maintains the population and the environment to which the population must adapt.
Darwin had formulated the outline of his theory of natural selection in the late 1830s.
In 1842 he wrote out a short sketch of his theory, and in 1844 a substantial essay that was intended for publication only if (as he now feared) he should die prematurely.
Darwin's reluctance to publish in the 1840s can easily be understood in terms of the still active controversy over Lamarckism and Chambers' Vestiges .
As a member of the wealthy middle class, Darwin had a social position that he might well forfeit if he became identified with the supposedly atheistical concept of transmutation.
Apprehension about the social consequences was not the only factor holding Darwin back from publication.
He soon  became aware that his theory was not capable of explaining some of the most exciting new developments in science.
The model provided by the Galapagos islands showed how a group of physically isolated populations produced by migration might adapt to their new environments.
But once adaptation to the new conditions had been achieved, Darwin assumed that evolution would come to a halt.
The latest studies of the fossil record, however, suggested that many families had been subject to a constant trend towards increasing levels of specialization.
Darwin saw that his theory must explain the pressure towards divergence and specialization, and it was not until the mid 1850s that he solved the problem.
He now realized that specialization for a particular way of life was an advantage even in a stable environment, because it allowed a species to escape from the pressure of rivals seeking to exploit the same resource.
Just as the ‘division of labour’ in a manufacturing process allows greater productivity, Nature can support more living organisms per square metre if they are divided into a diverse collection of specialists, each exploiting the environment in a particular way.
By the late 1850s Darwin had begun to prepare a multi-volumed account of his theory for publication.
He was interrupted in this task by the appearance in 1858 of a paper outlining a similar concept of selection developed independently by Alfred Russel Wallace (1823–1913).
Wallace came from a poor background, and the only way he could finance his interest in natural history was as a professional collector of rare specimens.
He had worked in South America and was now exploring the Malay archipelago (modern Indonesia).
He too had been influenced by Lyell, and as early as 1855 had published a paper commenting on the fact that new species always seemed to appear in the same neighbourhood as a closely related existing species.
Like Darwin, Wallace had been led by a study of biogeography to see how new species might be produced when existing ones migrated into areas with different environments.
In 1858 Wallace (who had also read Malthus) hit upon the idea of natural selection and wrote up an account, which he sent to Darwin, who was widely known to be interested in the species question.
There are significant differences between Darwin's and Wallace's formulations of the theory.
Wallace had no interest in animal breeding and did not model his proposed mechanism on the process of artificial selection.
It seems that his original conception was of natural selection operating upon varieties or subspecies, not upon individual variations within the same population.
But the two ideas were similar enough for Darwin to feel very apprehensive when Wallace's paper arrived.
After all, he had been working on the theory for twenty years, and did not want to see himself scooped by an outsider.
On the advice of Lyell and Hooker he arranged for an account of his own theory to be published alongside Wallace's paper by the Linnean Society of London.
At the same time he began writing the book-length account of his theory that was published as On the Origin of Species at the end of 1859.
The age of evolution was about to dawn.
8 The Age of Evolution
The Origin of Species was not the first book to suggest a natural explanation of how life has developed, but its publication in 1859 precipitated the debate that converted most people to evolutionism.
Darwin's theory was controversial because it challenged the conventional view that the Creator designed each species, and implied that the human race was just another animal.
But the metaphor of a ‘war’ between Victorian science and religion has now been rejected by most historians.
Evolution was accepted because it could be accommodated into a world view that implied that the development of Nature has a moral purpose.
Human life was not necessarily robbed of its meaning by being incorporated into the natural system.
Liberal thinkers welcomed the view that evolution came about through the accumulation of animals' efforts to conquer their environment, since this implied that the social progress resulting from commercial activity was a direct continuation of Nature's development.
Even conservatives could accept evolution, provided it was seen as the unfolding of a divine plan through forces built into Nature by its Creator.
Far from being perceived as the harbinger of an amoral ‘social Darwinism’ based on the worship of brute force, Darwin's theory became a foundation stone of the nineteenth century's faith in the inevitability of progress.
The assertion that Darwinism was a characteristic product of the time must be qualified in several important respects, however.
Evolutionism became popular, and Darwin's name was frequently used as a symbol for the whole evolutionary movement.
But nineteenth-century ‘Darwinism’ was not  an expression of those aspects of Darwin's thought which appeal to modern scientists.
In the twentieth century, natural selection has emerged as the dominant theory by which biologists explain the evolutionary mechanism.
But in Darwin's own time, natural selection remained controversial and was supplemented by a range of alternative theories including Lamarck's ‘inheritance of acquired characteristics’ and an appeal to saltations or sudden evolutionary leaps.
Even the emphasis on the interaction between a population and its environment, so typical of Darwin's approach to the question, was ignored by many late-nineteenth-century evolutionists.
Darwin stimulated the study of biogeography and other areas dealing with how organisms adapt to their environment.
But these studies had to be ranged alongside a number of other disciplines that offered a very different perspective on the development of life.
Paleontologists reconstructed the history of life from the fossil record, while morphologists studied the variety of animal forms in order to work out their evolutionary relationships.
Neither found Darwin's detailed theory of adaptive evolution very useful.
Those scientists who worked in museums and dissecting rooms could not exploit insights gained from field studies in different natural environments.
The search for ‘relationships’ between species could be reconstituted along evolutionary lines, with the links being seen as natural genealogies rather than abstract patterns in the mind of the Creator.
But those scientists who sought to reconstruct these links could do so without worrying very much about how populations of individual animals adapted to the challenges posed by an ever-changing environment.
Darwinism did not constitute a unified research programme, and by the end of the century the fragile unity imposed upon several diverse fields by the appeal to Darwin's name as a figurehead had broken down.
New initiatives in the life sciences led to the establishment of disciplines such as genetics and ecology.
But these new  sciences were not the products of developments within either the morphological or the environmentalist study of evolution.
They were reactions against what was now regarded as an old-fashioned evolutionism.
A wave of enthusiasm for the experimental approach to biology meant that the field studies of the biogeographers and the descriptive genealogies of the morphologists and paleontologists were dismissed as unscientific.
The experimental study of heredity led to the emergence of genetics, while ecology was presented as an extension of physiology into the study of the organism's reaction to its environment.
Disciplines that we now accept as having thrown much light on the evolutionary process were thus introduced originally as alternatives to nineteenth-century ‘Darwinism’.
Outside science, evolutionism replaced natural theology as the chief foundation for the attempt to understand the meaning and nature of the material universe.
This was achieved by linking Darwinism to the idea of progress.
Twentieth-century evolutionists such as George Gaylord Simpson have argued that Darwin's theory of adaptive evolution is incompatible with a belief in the necessity of progress, but in the late nineteenth century a philosophy of universal change could only be accepted if the changes were assumed to have a purposeful goal.
The idea of progress was crucially important in an age when the west's growing technological power was allowing it to conquer and colonize most of the world.
The sweeping aside of the ‘primitive’ inhabitants of these conquered territories could be justified by arguing that the process was necessary for progress.
Darwinism was characteristic of an age of exploitation, and the idea of progress through struggle caught everyone's attention.
Industrialists exploited their workers, and western nations exploited the rest of the world — but those who succeeded in the struggle were only too willing to see their success as the driving force of progress.
Natural selection was not the only scientific manifestation of this spirit, but Darwinism supplied useful catch-phrases such as‘the survival of the fittest’, which could be used by those seeking a scientific justification for their indifference to the losers in Nature's great race.
EXPLOIT OR CONSERVE?
Darwin's theory emphasized the interaction between organisms and their environment and made it clear that species could be driven to extinction when the conditions to which they were exposed changed too rapidly for them to cope.
But far from alerting people to the danger of environmental degradation, the theory was used to justify the kind of progress that increased the level of exploitation.
A small number of late-nineteenth-century thinkers did begin to warn against the dangers of pollution and environmental exhaustion, but they were as yet in a minority.
The majority was still not ready to abandon the belief that humankind was intended to dominate the earth.
If Nature had replaced God as the power that had created the human race, the message derived from the new world view was still the same as far as most people were concerned.
Caution is also necessary when evaluating the emergence of ecology at the turn of the century.
In modern times we have come to associate the very word ‘ecology’ with a concern for the environment — yet ‘ecology’is properly the name of the science that deals with the ways in which living things interact with one another and with their environment.
Like evolution theory, this science had complex relationships with the society within which it emerged, and there was no immediate link with the environmentalist movement.
Some biologists saw ecology as a science that would help to support the exploitation of the environment by showing how to minimize the damage caused.
The preservation movement itself had mixed origins; the protection of endangered species in reservations or  natural parks was urged by writers who wished to preserve stocks for hunting as well as by those who wished to stop the killing altogether.
Like our own time, the late nineteenth century saw a constant tension between the desire to exploit and the desire to conserve, and we should beware of identifying either of these attitudes with any particular development in the scientific study of life and its environment.
Science and Empire
The idea of progressive evolution formed a natural foundation for the belief that European civilization was the high point of human achievement, destined to spread its values around the world by conversion or conquest.
The last decades of the century saw the emergence of a self-conscious imperialism, in which the old system of colonial exploitation by commercial interests was replaced by an ideology of military conquest and strong control from the mother nation.
The East India Company had extended British control over the Indian subcontinent in a haphazard fashion as opportunity dictated.
This commercial imperialism was reflected in the liberal social evolutionism of the philosopher Herbert Spencer (1820–1903), which assumed that laissez-faire individualism would spread around the world by simply demonstrating its efficiency as an economic system.
The proclamation of Queen Victoria as Empress of India in 1877 heralded the emergence of the new imperialism in which European governments set out to conquer and control territory by exploiting the latest technology.
The telegraph now allowed instantaneous communication with the farthest reaches o the empire, while the steamship brought everywhere in the world within a few weeks' sail of home.
The conquest of tropical diseases opened up new areas to European penetration.
The scramble to partition Africa into colonies — made possible once the wide  availability of quinine solved the problem of fever — typified this more militaristic phase of imperialism.
It also enhanced the national rivalries that would eventually touch off the First World War.
Whether the expansionist interests were commercial or military, however, science was seen as an indispensable tool for world domination.
The success of the animal and plant breeders (which Darwin exploited in his analogy between artificial and natural selection) confirmed the human race's ability to manipulate organic Nature for its own ends.
The transportation of useful plants from one part of the world to another had begun in the eighteenth century, and we saw in the previous chapter how Kew Gardens became the hub of the British empire's efforts to replace indigenous species with imported ones of greater commercial value.
This activity continued into the later decades of the nineteenth century under successive directors: J. D. Hooker (one of Darwin's chief sources of information on the geographical distribution of plants) and his son-in-law William Thiselton-Dyer (1843–1928).
Botanical stations were established throughout the empire to study native plants and identify those o potential value.
Similar stations were established by other colonizing powers, and, along with colonial geological surveys, provided an important source of professional employment for the growing number of trained European scientists.
The British also established an Imperial Bureau of Entomology to look into ways of dealing with insect pests in their various colonies.
The system of deliberate transplantation centred on Kew resulted in major changes in the crops grown in many countries.
The availability of cheap quinine, which opened up many tropical areas to European penetration, came about when Clements Markham successfully transplanted the cinchona plant from South America to India via Kew in 1859–62.
The Indian plantations that were soon established produced a vast increase in the supply of quinine, replacing the declining supply from naturally grown South American cinchona bark.
Rubber trees were smuggled out of Brazil despite a government ban on export and used to create new sources of supply in Ceylon and the Malay peninsula.
Tobacco, cacao plants (for chocolate) and tea were other plants that were established as cash crops in new parts of the world as a result of this programme.
Botanists also influenced people's lives in other ways.
The Canadian naturalist John Macoun explored the prairies in the 1850s and described them as ideal agricultural country.
But Macoun was there during an unusually wet season, and when the first white settlers arrived they faced immense hardship until they developed techniques for coping with this semi-arid environment.
There was less interest in transferring exotic animal species around the world.
Europeans tended to export their own familiar animals, sometimes deliberately as in the case of cattle and horses, but often accidentally and with disastrous consequences.
The introduction of the rabbit into Australia offered a classic illustration of how a species could take over a new environment in which there were no natural predators.
But samples of the new species discovered in colonized territories were routinely brought back to be described, classified and perhaps displayed in the great European museums and zoological gardens.
These institutions played a role as imperial symbols, allowing Europeans to visualize the extent of their world-wide conquests through the display of exotic species.
Considerable excitement was generated when spectacular new species were brought home from newly explored parts of the world, as when Paul du Chaillu displayed stuffed gorillas shot during his explorations of central Africa (1855–9).
The anatomist Richard Owen, now director of the Natural History Museum in London, lectured on the gorilla to large audiences.
He soon came into conflict with Thomas Henry Huxley (182595)— known as ‘Darwin's bulldog’— over the question of humankind's relationship  to the great apes.
Du Chaillu's discoveries did much to focus public attention on the implications of Darwin's theory, and may have helped to generate alarm over the prospect that the human race could be related to a creature whose ferocious nature had been deliberately exaggerated by its discoverer.
Museums also helped to focus attention on the time dimension in natural history by displaying spectacular collections of fossils.
Once such displays were interpreted in terms of evolution, the general public could hardly fail to accept the message of the new science.
The late nineteenth century saw a major expansion of paleontology as new areas were opened up for exploration.
The new discoveries not only provided more detailed evidence for the development of life on earth, but also highlighted the exotic nature of the earth's earlier inhabitants.
Great dinosaurs were excavated from the American west while it was still ‘wild’— early fossil-hunters had to contend with hostile Indians and sometimes came to blows over possession of the richest sites.
When displayed in the great cities of the east, and in the capitals of Europe, the larger dinosaurs seemed to confirm the superiority of modern industrial society by showing how the world had been conquered both in space and time.
As symbols of dominance, these displays demanded a spectacular setting, and soon every great city of the industrialized world possessed a museum whose cathedral-like setting helped to confirm the role that science had usurped as the source of moral authority in the modern world.
The Natural History Museum in London moved into its present building in the 1880s, and a statue of Owen still greets visitors as they enter its main hall containing the great dinosaur skeletons.
Many of the American museums were founded by capitalists seeking to proclaim both their own success and the power of industrial society.
If the London museum was a product of imperial self-confidence, the American Museum of Natural History in New York  celebrated the growing influence of the captains of industry in a similarly grandiose fashion.
The Professionalization of Biology
The modern scientific profession was very much a product of the late nineteenth century.
Now at last governments and industries were persuaded (reluctantly, in some cases) that investment in science was a vital part of a nation's economy.
France and Germany already had museums and universities with a substantial research function.
Men such as Huxley and Hooker now played a significant role in the creation of the British scientific establishment by building up a system of government support for research and education.
The process did not always run smoothly.
As late as 1871 Hooker's position at Kew was threatened by an unsympathetic government official who wished to dismantle the garden's scientific function, and the decision was reversed only when pressure was applied by Huxley, Darwin and other eminent scientists.
On the other hand, Huxley at first opposed the plans for a new Natural History Museum because of his personal hostility to Owen.
On the whole, however, this period saw a steady expansion in support for science, and the emergence of the modern system of scientific education in the English-speaking world.
The concept of a unified science of ‘biology’ was part of Huxley's campaign to convince the government of the need for more support for modern science.
Along with a number of younger protégés, Huxley established a course for high-school teachers at the Royal School of Mines (later the Normal School of Science, now incorporated into the Imperial College of Science and Technology).
The older universities of Oxford and Cambridge were also persuaded to modernize their science teaching in the 1870s.
The last decades of the century also saw a vast development in America's capacity for science education.
Laboratory studies in zoology had been established at the Museum  of Comparative Zoology at Harvard under Louis Agassiz in the mid century.
Now scientific education and research were to become a major feature of America's drive to supplant Europe as the centre of western culture.
In 1876 Johns Hopkins University created a graduate school in science based on the model pioneered decades before in Germany.
Other private universities including Harvard and the University of Chicago created a framework for elite scientific research freed from the immediate demands of industry.
At the same time many states established land grant colleges providing instruction in the practical sciences and promoting research in areas of economic value.
Agricultural institutions also began to play a major role in applying biological theory to the problems of agriculture.
But what exactly was the new science of biology that Huxley and others wanted to establish as the basis for a modern education?
In order to evade the rather amateurish image associated with the kind of fieldwork done by Darwin, the new generation of scientists needed to stress the role of laboratory work and sophisticated instrumentation.
Physiology was the model of an experimental science, providing a source of materialist theories coupled with the prestige of a high-technology, interventionist study of life.
Evolutionism provided a parallel source of materialist concepts, but needed to be turned into a laboratory-based subject if it was to fit the new model.
Huxley's answer was to stress the role of evolutionary morphology, the detailed study of organic structures aimed at the reconstruction of the links between the major living groups.
Morphology was a descriptive rather than an experimental science, but it was conducted in the laboratory rather than the field and could thus be presented as a symbol of modernization.
Under its banner, biologists such as E. Ray Lankester (1847–1929) and Francis Balfour (1851–82) reformed the teaching of science at London, Oxford and Cambridge.
Although only an updated version of a traditional discipline, evolutionary morphology became one of  the great success stories of the late nineteenth century, providing a framework for visualizing evolution that seems quite at odds with our modern approach to Darwinism.
The problem was that evolutionary morphology ignored the central insights upon which Darwin's theory had been based.
The morphologist scorned the field naturalist's study of geographical distribution, migration and adaptation — studies that were the very foundation upon which the theory of natural selection had been built.
Field studies were also important for early efforts to monitor the environment, an area with which governments were increasingly concerned.
There was thus a source of tension built into the very heart of the new biology, a tension that was never resolved and would ultimately divide the life sciences into a chaos of competing disciplines.
This tension can be seen in the growing interest in marine science.
There were many voyages designed to survey the ocean depths in the nineteenth century, of which the most famous was that of HMS Challenger in 1872–6 (see chapter 6).
Although the reports of this and the other expeditions provided new information on the distribution of life in the sea, much of the space was devoted to the minute description of the newly discovered species, i.e. to pure morphology.
There was considerable interest in the creation of marine zoological laboratories, the first of which was established at Naples in 1872 by the German zoologist Anton Dohrn (1840–1909).
E. Ray Lankester played a prominent role in the establishment of a similar laboratory at Plymouth in 1888, and in the same year the Marine Biological Laboratory was formed at Woods Hole in the United States.
Some of these marine stations were little more than dissecting rooms by the sea, but there was increased pressure from governments for scientists to study practical problems such as the effects of over-fishing.
Thus while the new generation of ‘modern’ biologists was stressing the importance of pure morphology, governments were becoming  interested in field studies because these offered the only way of monitoring the increasingly obvious changes in natural populations.
The US government had established a Fish Commission under Spencer F. Baird (1823–87) as early as 1871 to enquire into the depletion of fish stocks.
A decade later Baird had the sea-going vessel Albatross especially equipped for survey work, and he played an important role in the creation of the Woods Hole laboratory later in the decade, although this was established independently of the government.
On land, many areas of field natural history could draw upon the enthusiasm of bird-watchers and other amateurs prepared to spend significant amounts of time and money on the study of Nature.
The professor of zoology at Cambridge was Alfred Newton (1829–1907), an ornithologist committed to fieldwork.
Although Newton did not hinder the setting up of a programme in animal morphology under Balfour, he was suspicious of the laboratory-based discipline and played an important role in galvanizing the country's amateur bird-watchers to form a network that could provide information of real scientific value.
Local observers were encouraged to report on distribution and migration patterns, thus paving the way for an interest in environmental concerns.
So much information was gathered that the professionals could hardly find time to analyse it.
By the early twentieth century German ornithologists took over the leading role, pioneering the use of ringing as a technique for tracing bird movements.
American ornithologists had more practical concerns that soon attracted government funding.
They were worried about the spread of imported species such as the English sparrow at the expense of native birds.
The American Ornithologists' Union became active in 1883, generating so much information that the government established a Division of Economic Ornithology and Mammology in 1886 under C. Hart Merriam (1855–1942).
In 1896 this became  the Division of the Biological Survey, which provided extensive information on the distribution of various native species of birds and animals.
Early Conservationism
The harmful effects of clearing forests had already become apparent in Europe in the early part of the century.
Studies in France and other countries had revealed the extent to which forests were being cut down and showed that deforestation had a range of harmful consequences.
Massive soil erosion and disruption of the natural drainage pattern destroyed the land's productivity.
Drawing upon this European research and his own observations in the United States, the American diplomat George Perkins Marsh (1801–82) wrote his Man and Nature of 1864 to warn of the dangers.
Marsh had little interest in geological changes or in evolution.
He presented the earth as an essentially static, harmonious system that was being torn apart by human greed.
Where an earlier generation of natural theologians had assumed that Nature would heal itself, Marsh emphasized that some acts of destruction exceeded the earth's recuperative powers:
The ravages committed by man subvert the relations and destroy the balance which nature had established between her organized and her inorganic creations; and she avenges herself upon the intruder, by letting loose upon her defaced provinces destructive energies hitherto kept in check by organic forces destined to be his best auxiliaries, but which he has unwisely dispersed and driven from the field of action.
When the forest is gone, the great reservoir of moisture stored up in its vegetable mould is evaporated, and returns only in deluges of rain to wash away the parched dust into which that mould has been converted.
He continued:
The earth is fast becoming an unfit home for its noblest inhabitant, and another era of equal human crime and human improvidence…would reduce it to such a condition of impoverished productiveness, of shattered surface, of climatic excess, as to threaten the depravation, barbarism, and perhaps even extinction of the species.
Strong and prescient words, yet Marsh was not calling for a halt to all human interference.
He believed that sensible policies for extracting timber would allow a balance to be maintained, permitting humankind to harvest a permanently renewable resource.
Scientific management, not rejection of all exploitative activity, was the answer.
Marsh's book had considerable influence and played a role in stimulating the US government to set up a Forestry Commission to manage the nation's resources.
This had little practical effect, however, until the 1890s, when public pressure forced the government to set aside areas of forest that could not be sold off to logging companies.
An 1896 commission by the Department of the Interior joined the National Academy of Sciences in calling for a doubling of these reserves, a proposal vigorously resisted by the timber industry.
During his term of office (1901–9) President Theodore Roosevelt stressed the need for scientific management of the nation's resources and created an active Forest Service under Gifford Pinchot.
Later presidents did not share the same enthusiasm, however, and the slackening of government control led to increased demands from the public that forests be protected.
Roosevelt was an outdoorsman who wanted to preserve the wilderness — but his motivation was to maintain the stock of bear, deer and other animals sought by hunters.
Legend has it that the first ‘teddy bear’ was created for him after an unsuccessful hunting trip.
Public concern was fuelled by aesthetic rather than economic considerations.
In the 1850s Henry Thoreau expressed a new sense of delight in the experience of Nature in its original state.
There was a widespread feeling that areas of outstanding natural beauty should be protected from the greed of miners and loggers and thereby preserved for the benefit of future generations.
The exploration of the American west revealed many such areas, and efforts to preserve them had begun at an early stage.
In 1864 the Yosemite valley was ceded to the State of California as a public park, while Yellowstone in Wyoming was established as a national park in 1872.
Frederick Law Olmsted (1822–1903) played an important role in saving Yosemite, emphasizing that private selfishness would lead to destruction unless the land was controlled by the state.
During the later decades of the century, scientists were active in organizations such as the Sierra Club, founded by John Muir in 1892 to help preserve Yosemite and other natural wonders in California.
Yellowstone was threatened in 1883–4 by a plan to allow mining, but the park was saved after an intense debate.
Olmsted was also active in stressing the need for open spaces in the overcrowded cities, and had been instrumental in setting aside New York's Central Park in 1853.
In Britain, the biologist and reformer Patrick Geddes (1854–1932) played a similar role, calling for conservation of the countryside and a better environment in the cities.
From the 1860s onwards the Commons, Open Spaces and Footpaths Preservation Society campaigned to save Britain's rural heritage so that city-dwellers could be revitalized through contact with Nature (a campaign that only became realistic in the era of rapid transportation by rail).
The establishment of reserves to protect wildlife was accepted by hunters when it became clear that some species would soon be wiped out altogether.
The near extinction of the North American buffalo or bison offered a chilling example of the destructive power of modern firearms.
The tension between the desire to offer absolute protection, and  the desire to preserve stocks for continued exploitation, was apparent in many countries throughout the late nineteenth century.
America was not the only country where white men confronted a land that had originally teemed with big game.
Throughout the empires established by Britain and other European countries, adventurers and colonial administrators hunted both for profit and to symbolize the power conferred by their modern technology.
Famous hunters such as F. C. Selous returned home to lecture on the value of big-game hunting as a means of training the next generation of empire-builders.
The novels of H. Rider Haggard offer a clear illustration of the white man's behaviour during the penetration into Africa.
During the middle decades of the century, vast numbers of animals were slaughtered in both India and Africa.
It was often assumed that the ‘natives’ were unable to protect themselves from dangerous animals, thus justifying the intervention of the white man with his rifle.
By the later decades of the century it was becoming obvious that the numbers of many species were being rapidly diminished, and it was now regarded as ‘unsporting’ to amass the vast collections of trophies favoured by earlier hunters.
Colonial administrators began to restrict the natives' access to species that could be killed for food by establishing reserves where hunting was only permitted under licence.
These efforts began in India during the 1870s, while the hunting of some species was prohibited in the Cape Colony (modern South Africa) in 1886.
The Society for the Preservation of the Fauna of the Empire was founded in 1903 to co-ordinate efforts to save the big-game species in British-held territory through the promotion of reserves.
Here, as in America, it was the hunters themselves who realized the need to protect stocks by establishing reserves.
White settlers often objected to the reserves because they were thereby denied access to farming land, and in some areas the size of the reserves was scaled down to meet their demands.
Those who opposed hunting on moral grounds were more effective in reducing the scale upon which exotic birds were slaughtered for their feathers.
Evangelical opponents of cruelty to animals campaigned against the trade in feathers, along with other forms of cruelty closer to home including cock-fighting and scientific vivisection experiments.
In 1885 a Plumage League was founded in Britain to protest against the trade, while the Audubon Society played a similar role in the United States.
Women pledged not to use feathers for decoration, and when the Society for the Protection of Birds was first founded in Britain, men were excluded — just as women had been excluded from the ranks of many scientific societies.
At home, the SPB (it became the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds only in 1904) began to set up Nature reserves during the 1880s, as the decline in some native species became apparent.
Their activities thus linked up with more general efforts to protect the rural environment.
The state of the earth's physical resources was also giving cause for concern.
Marsh's Man and Nature warned that deforestation upset the natural distribution of water and led to soil erosion.
Yet opponents of the conservation movement claimed that the arid lands of the American west would attract a higher rainfall if they were ploughed and would thus be turned into valuable farmland.
The geologist J. W. Powell argued against this view and sought to control all the west's water in the name of scientific management.
Water must be under public control, he declared, since private exploitation would ruin these fragile lands for all time.
Powell began an irrigation survey in 1888 under the auspices of the US Geological Survey and was for a while successful in convincing the government that state control was necessary.
Inevitably he came into conflict with the developers, who lobbied successfully to destroy his project.
Concepts of scientific management were discredited until the Dust-Bowl of the 1930s once again focused public attention onto the problem of unrestricted exploitation of land and water.
economists were also becoming worried about the rapid expansion in the use of the nineteenth-century's greatest non-renewable resource: coal.
Geologists had been active in surveying the land to reveal new mineral deposits, but had occasionally warned that the supply was not infinite and would eventually become exhausted.
In Britain, W. S. Jevons drew attention to this problem in his The Coal Question of 1865.
Drawing upon the conclusions of the geologists, he pointed out that ‘there is no reasonable prospect of any relief from a future want of the main agent of industry.
We must lose that which constitutes our peculiar energy.’
Jevons used exaggerated estimates of the rate at which consumption would increase in the future, and Royal Commissions in 1866 and 1901 dismissed his arguments as alarmist.
The supply of coal seemed so vast that no one was willing to concede the possibility of exhaustion in the near future, and in the twentieth century oil began to offer a new source of energy that the scientists and engineers of Jevons' time had not anticipated.
As yet, no one was prepared to worry about what might happen in the distant future.
For all the warnings of the conservationists, the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries were a period of unparalleled expansion in the consumption of resources.
THE DARWINIAN REVOLUTION
One of the main pillars of support for this optimistic progressionism was the theory of evolution.
At first resisted by conservatives who feared its materialistic implications, evolutionism eventually became a central theme of late nineteenth-century thought, the foundation for a unified philosophy of biological and social progress.
The conversion of public opinion on this question was triggered off by the scientists' response to a major theoretical initiative in the field: Darwin's Origin of Species , published in 1859.
Darwin's theory played a major catalytic role in converting the world to evolutionism, but historians have begun to realize that  our conventional image of the ‘Darwinian revolution’ is an oversimplification inspired by modern biologists' enthusiasm for the concept of natural selection.
It has become apparent that the success of evolution theory in the late nineteenth century was not based on acceptance of what we now regard as the most important components of Darwin's thinking.
Interpretations of Darwinism
Darwin's investigation of biogeography on the voyage of the Beagle led him to adopt an evolutionary view of how species adapt to changes in their environment (chapter 7).
The Origin of Species was published in 1859, precipitating a debate that led most scientists to adopt an evolutionary perspective within a decade or so.
The theory of natural selection conveys an image of Nature in which complex and unpredictable interactions determine the life and death of both individuals and species.
Darwin stressed that pressure on one species might have unexpected consequences for others through a complex chain of interactions.
From this it might have been possible to develop a philosophy in which humankind had a responsibility towards the other species with which we share the earth.
But this would be a very modern reading of Darwin, a reading that extracts a message that has become popular only in the age of environmental awareness.
In his own time, the ecological dimension in Darwin's thought was largely subordinated to the confident progressionism that characterized the Victorian era.
At one time it was fashionable to argue that Darwinism destroyed the traditional belief that Nature had been created by a wise and benevolent God, thereby ushering in an age of rampant materialism.
The universe was reduced to a system of chaos and confusion in which all things must struggle to survive.
Humankind became a product of material Nature, but had no responsibility towards the rest of the world because the process that had created humans allowed no  room for compassion and encouraged everyone to seek his or her own self-interest.
The age of ‘social Darwinism’ left no room for a sense of stewardship and encouraged no sympathy for the animal and plant species that might be threatened by humankind's dominant position.
Historians now suspect that this harsh image of Darwinism is a misinterpretation arising from the application of modern values to a past situation.
Darwinism was certainly incorporated into the philosophy of progress through struggle, but the Victorians did not turn to that philosophy because they had abandoned all hope that the universe has a moral purpose.
On the contrary, progress was essential to their optimistic vision of history because it seemed to guarantee that the world was moving in a purposeful direction towards a morally significant goal.
The moral values of the Protestant religion that had fuelled Bacon's belief that science would enable humankind to dominate Nature were reformulated, not abandoned.
It could now be argued that, throughout the history of the earth, Nature had rewarded those who were able and energetic, and punished those who could not keep up with the race towards higher things.
Human progress through the conquest of the environment was merely a continuation of the evolutionary process that had encouraged the traditional virtues of industry and enterprise throughout the ascent towards humankind.
While recognizing the extent to which Darwinism was absorbed into the philosophy of progress, historians have become more aware of the variety of late-nineteenth-century reactions to evolution theory.
Darwin converted the whole world to evolutionism — but this was possible only because the general idea of evolution could be exploited in so many different ways.
There were many conflicting interests within nineteenth-century society, and each developed its own interpretation of evolutionism.
To confuse matters for the historian, the exponents of widely differing interpretations called themselves ‘Darwinians’ because they acknowledged Darwin's lead even if they did not accept  all the details of his theory.
Less well known are the various groups of explicitly anti-Darwinian evolutionists who developed alternative theories in the later part of the century.
There was no monolithic Victorian evolutionism, only a confusing mixture of different and sometimes hostile interpretations, which changed significantly as the century progressed towards its close.
The complexity of what is often misleadingly called the ‘Darwinian revolution’ can be judged by surveying the mixed fortunes of the theory of natural selection.
Modern biologists accept that the synthesis of natural selection with Mendelian genetics has created a powerful explanation of the evolutionary process.
Historians who have looked at the impact of the Origin of Species have thus been encouraged to assume that Darwin's introduction of the selection mechanism represented the decisive factor in the conversion of the scientific community to evolutionism.
Darwin succeeded where earlier evolutionists had failed because he had the right solution to the problem of explaining how populations actually change in response to environmental pressure.
The success of ‘Darwinism’ shows that the majority of biologists recognized this point, and the only significant area of debate remaining centred on the problem of heredity.
Once Darwin's rather primitive views on this topic were replaced by Mendelian genetics in the early twentieth century, the last missing piece in the jigsaw puzzle had been inserted and the complete picture became visible to all.
Recent research has shown that Darwin converted the world to evolutionism despite the fact that his theory of natural selection was largely rejected as an adequate explanation of the evolutionary process.
Even supporters such as Huxley treated it as only a secondary mechanism and looked for alternatives to supplement it.
Opponents rejected natural selection outright and revived pre-Darwinian theories such as Lamarckism and saltationism as the basis for their claim that evolution could not be the totally haphazard process depicted by Darwin's theory.
Many anti-Darwinians  denied the significance of adaptation, preferring to believe that evolution was driven by forces arising from within the organism, independent of any changes in the environment.
The late nineteenth century saw an ‘eclipse of Darwinism’ in which the supporters of natural selection were marginalized even within scientific biology.
Recognition of these facts forces us to ask a new set of questions about the impact of Darwinism.
We need to know why the Origin of Species had so much influence despite the relative failure of its chief explanatory tool.
We also need to know why some biologists who were suspicious of natural selection called themselves ‘Darwinians’— and why others were so determined to develop alternative theories.
The transition to evolutionism must be seen as a social event occurring within the scientific community.
Darwin introduced new lines of evidence, but these were not enough to convince everyone of the superiority of his particular explanation, and the general idea of evolution succeeded because it could be exploited by powerful interest groups acting within science.
Because of this social dimension, Darwinism was not a monolithic theory.
The practitioners of different disciplines within the life sciences exploited the general idea of evolution in different ways, some of which bore little resemblance to Darwin's own approach.
To the extent that the evolutionists from these different camps co-operated, they did so for social reasons rather than because there were real interactions between their areas of research.
More striking still is the variety of responses to evolutionism in different countries.
In Britain, the ‘Darwinians’ led by Huxley succeeded in dominating the scientific community of the late 1860s and 1870s, although opposition grew in later decades.
In America, an explicitly anti-Darwinian school of neo-Lamarckism emerged at a much earlier date, despite the initial success of Darwin's supporters.
In Germany, Darwinism was absorbed into the developmental philosophy of Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919), who was strongly  influenced by the analogy between evolution and the purposeful development of the embryo towards maturity.
French biologists ignored Darwin and only turned to a Lamarckian version of evolutionism in the 1880s.
These widely differing national responses suggest that we should be wary of any attempt to explain the popularity of evolutionism in terms of the self-evident superiority of Darwin's explanatory programme.
The Darwinians
The biogeographers were in the best position to appreciate the value of Darwin's new evidence for adaptive evolution, and thus to adopt a genuine ‘Darwinism’.
J. D. Hooker was one of the first scientists to be informed of Darwin's new theory back in the 1840s, and he now came out in public support of the Origin of Species .
The Harvard botanist Asa Gray (1810–88), who studied the distribution of American plants, led the defence of the theory in the United States.
A. R. Wallace — whose 1858 paper had prompted Darwin to publish — also made notable contributions to biogeography within an evolutionary framework.
He also studied the problem of how a single original population becomes divided up into varieties (subspecies) and eventually a range of distinct ‘daughter’ species.
By the very nature of their discipline, biogeographers could see that evolution must be an unpredictable process depending on the hazards of migration and the possibilities of dispersed populations adapting to areas with unfamiliar environments.
Other supporters had less interest in biogeography and adaptation.
Thomas Henry Huxley was a young morphologist and paleontologist who was anxious to challenge the traditional role played by natural theology and establish the life sciences as independent disciplines.
Huxley had been suspicious of evolutionism because he could see no plausible explanation of how species might change, and he welcomed Darwin's theory with open arms because it offered a new  hypothesis that confirmed the scientist's right to treat the origin of species as a problem susceptible to natural explanation.
Histories of the Darwinian revolution often cite his confrontation with Bishop Samuel Wilberforce at the 1860 meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science as a classic illustration of how evolutionary science overcame religious bigotry.
Huxley's Man's Place in Nature of 1863 also confirmed the anatomical similarities between humans and great apes, undermining Owen's efforts to establish an unbridgeable gulf between them.
Recent studies show that Huxley's support for Darwin was by no means straightforward.
Contemporary accounts do not support the evolutionists' claim that Huxley demolished Wilberforce's arguments at the British Association meeting.
More important is Huxley's own attitude to the theory of natural selection.
Although he saw selection as a plausible hypothesis that confirmed the scientist's right to investigate the question, he had major reservations about the mechanism and preferred to believe that evolution occurred through saltations or leaps produced by some mechanism internal to the organism.
As a morphologist, Huxley was interested only in establishing the relationships between the variety of animal forms; he had major reservations about the role of adaptation in evolution.
His support for Darwin was not based on his ability to take up a research programme suggested by the theory proposed in the Origin .
He was slow to use even the basic idea of evolution in his paleontological work, and did so only in the mid 1860s after reading the work of the German evolutionist Ernst Haeckel.
Huxley joined the evolutionists because he could use their theory to make a general point about the need for a naturalistic methodology in the life sciences as an essential prelude to modernization.
Like most of the early Darwinians, Huxley was also a liberal in his politics, determined to show that society could enjoy steady progress if only traditional restrictions on individual freedom were dismantled.
Here he was able  to make common cause with the philosopher who provided the moral underpinnings for the evolutionary movement, Herbert Spencer.
Spencer insisted that free enterprise was the key to social progress, and used biological evolutionism to argue that Nature itself exhibited a universal tendency towards progress.
It was important for this connection that the model of biological evolution used should be one that saw change as the cumulative product of the actions of individual organisms over many generations.
Progress, for Spencer, was a kind of long-range but inevitable by-product of the constant struggle of organisms — including human beings — to respond to the challenge of the environment.
Since the characters that helped the individual to succeed in the battle were the traditional Protestant virtues of enterprise, initiative and thrift, Spencer could project his philosophy as a new foundation for traditional morality, despite its tendency to encourage indifference to the suffering of those who still needed to be taught a lesson by a wise but harsh Nature.
Darwin himself had stressed the long-term progressionism of natural selection, and his was certainly a mechanism that highlighted the role of the individual.
Spencer coined the term ‘survival of the fittest’ and has been seen by some historians as the first of the ‘social Darwinists’.
But he saw natural selection as less important than the Lamarckian mechanism in which self-improvements resulting from the individual's response to environmental challenge are inherited and thus accumulate to change the species.
The weeding out of the congenitally unfit was only a secondary process, less important than the pressure encouraging most individuals to become fitter.
Spencer's emphasis on the struggle against the environment as the driving force of progress thus helped to create the popular image of ‘Darwinism’.
What modern biologists see as the theory's most important contributions were subordinated to a contemporary philosophy encouraging struggle and exploitation.
Hooker, Huxley and the other scientists supported Spencer's evolutionary liberalism and  thus united around the figurehead of Darwin despite their quite different interests at the level of scientific research.
Anti-Darwinism
The Huxley — Wilberforce debate symbolized the opposition of some conservative thinkers to the new evolutionism.
But most religious thinkers accommodated themselves fairly rapidly to the basic concept of evolution.
Some could even accept Spencer's philosophy of progress through struggle, because it seemed to offer an updated version of the Protestant work ethic in which thrift and industry were rewarded in this world as well as the next.
In general, though, conservative thinkers chose to accept a non-Darwinian version of evolutionism.
They sought alternative explanations of how the process might work, which allowed them to believe that Nature was driven by something higher than mere selfishness.
Anti-Darwinian versions of evolutionism flourished in the later decades of the century because they upheld the view that natural development is a more orderly and more purposeful process than natural selection would allow.
Even the inheritance of acquired characters was taken up as the centrepiece for a self-consciously anti-Darwinian movement known as ‘neo-Lamarckism’.
In the 1870s some of the American disciples of the idealist zoologist Louis Agassiz accepted evolutionism, but rejected natural selection as the expression of a materialist view of life.
Paleontologists such as Edward Drinker Cope (1840–97) and Alpheus Hyatt (1838–1902) argued that evolution was a more purposeful process than Darwin imagined and suggested that Lamarckism would allow living things to play an active role in determining their species' evolution.
If variation were random, as Darwin supposed, then living things had no control over their own destiny — each individual's fate was sealed by the characters it inherited.
But if the characters acquired as a result of purposeful changes in behaviour could be inherited, then animals could transcend their  inheritance and create new avenues of evolution.
When the first giraffes began to stretch their necks to reach the leaves of trees, they were choosing a new habit that would guide the future development of their species over a vast period of time.
Cope argued for a new theology in which the Creator has delegated His power to living things by giving them the ability to shape the future through their purposeful response to the environment.
Lamarckism drew much of its inspiration from a moral distaste for the ‘trial-and-error’ process of natural selection.
The opponents of Darwinism saw the implications of the selection mechanism more clearly than the ‘Darwinians’ who linked the theory to Spencer's progressionism.
The same moral revulsion was expressed by the novelist Samuel Butler (1835–1902), who wrote a series of books and articles attacking Darwin, beginning with his Evolution Old and New of 1879.
Of natural selection Butler later wrote: ‘To state this doctrine is to arouse instinctive loathing; it is my fortunate task to maintain that such a nightmare of waste and death is as baseless as it is repulsive.’
Lamarckism was the only morally acceptable theory of evolution, and Darwin was all the more to blame because he had concealed the fact that better mechanisms of evolution than his own had been proposed long before the Origin of Species was published.
When Butler first began his campaign he was ignored by the British Darwinians, but by the 1890s Lamarckism was being taken seriously even in Darwin's home country.
It has been suggested that the growth of environmentalism was stimulated by the anti-materialistic philosophy that found its expression in neo-Lamarckism.
Darwinism was portrayed as a philosophy that reduced living things to automata struggling mindlessly against the physical environment.
It exposed the moral dangers of the mechanistic philosophy that had begun with Bacon and had fuelled humankind's drive for dominance over Nature.
Lamarckism was part of a rival world view, which stressed the ability of  living things to transcend material limitations and which saw Nature as a harmonious whole rather than a scene of constant struggle.
In a series of articles later collected in his book Mutual Aid of 1902, the Russian anarchist writer Peter Kropotkin argued that animals naturally co-operate with one another.
The ‘struggle for existence’ was an illusion, and the driving force of evolution was Lamarckism.
The German evolutionist Ernst Haeckel developed a philosophy of ‘monism’ that did much to promote this view of Nature.
He argued that matter and spirit were manifestations of a single underlying substance — which meant that even the most primitive form of life had some spiritual qualities.
Monism thus generated a respect for life as a whole and helped to emphasize the unity of Nature.
The advocates of such a holistic viewpoint would have been far more willing to accept the need for preserving the complex web of natural relationships, and would thus have gravitated towards the environmentalist movement.
If this interpretation is correct, then evolutionism may have played a role in promoting a greater awareness of environmental fragility mainly through its Lamarckian rather than its Darwinian version.
Lamarckism still assumed that evolution was driven by the interaction between the organism and its environment, but some opponents of Darwinism insisted that the process must be controlled by forces arising from within the organism.
These internal forces would produce new characters whatever the constraints imposed by the environment.
The problem with Darwin's theory was that it reduced evolution to a chapter of accidents.
Variation was entirely random, and each population evolved in response to purely local environmental pressures, which could be altered in an unpredictable way by migration or geological changes.
The course of life's history was thus an open-ended, haphazard series of developments best represented by the image of an irregularly branching tree.
Many naturalists were unwilling to see the living world  as the product of such a haphazard process.
They could only accept evolution if it were a process that gave rise to regular, predictable developments in accordance with some preordained plan that could be seen as originating in the mind of God.
The solution was to argue that variation was not random, but was directed along a predetermined path by forces somehow built into the very nature of the species.
Such a view of evolution was often favoured by conservative thinkers who rejected the liberal philosophy of Spencer's cosmic evolutionism.
If evolution were the unfolding of a divine plan, then there was no need to assume that human progress would come about through the summing up of individual acts of selfishness.
This line of opposition to Darwin was apparent almost as soon as the Origin of Species was published.
The astronomer Sir John Herschel (1792–1871) called natural selection ‘the law of higgledy-piggledy’ and in his Physical Geography of 1861 wrote:
An intelligence, guided by a purpose, must be continually in action to bias the direction of the steps of change — to regulate their amount — to limit their divergence — and to continue them in a definite course…
On the other hand, we do not mean to deny that such intelligence may act according to law (that is to say on a preconceived and definite plan).
In biology, Richard Owen — who had led the conservative assault on Lamarckism in the 1830s — now accepted evolution, but insisted that it worked by a preordained process of ‘derivation’.
In 1868 he wrote:
Derivation holds that every species changes in time, by virtue of inherent tendencies thereto.
‘Natural selection’ holds that no such change can take place without the influence of altered external circumstances.
‘Derivation’ sees among the effects of the  innate tendency to change irrespective of altered circumstances, a manifestation of creative power in the variety and beauty of the results.
Although often dismissed as an opponent of evolutionism, Owen can thus be seen as an opponent of Darwinism who was quite happy to accept a theory of evolution based on preordained trends.
St George Jackson Mivart's Genesis of Species of 1871 offered a cornucopia of anti-Darwinian arguments based on the claim that evolution must be something more than a haphazard process of adaptation.
A preordained trend could drive several forms in parallel towards the same goal, thus making nonsense of Darwin's claim that similar species must share a recent common ancestor.
In Britain the anti-Darwinians were unable to prevent the takeover of the scientific community by Huxley and the liberal Darwinians, but elsewhere the opposition was better organized.
Many of the American neo-Lamarckians argued that evolution exhibited both adaptive and non-adaptive trends, the latter being explained as the unfolding of trends built into the very constitution of each group at its origin.
Alpheus Hyatt used an analogy with the life-cycle of the individual organism to suggest that each group eventually underwent degenerative evolution into a senile phase as the prelude to extinction.
By the end of the century it was no longer fashionable to explain such non-adaptive trends as the unfolding of a divine plan, but the theory of ‘orthogenesis’ still postulated the existence of rigid trends built into the constitution of each group.
These trends were supposed to be so powerful that many groups were driven to extinction as once-useful organs became overdeveloped to the extent that they interfered with the animals' ability to cope with the environment.
The popularity of theories of non-adaptive evolution forces us to reassess the impact of Darwinism.
Where  modern biologists see Darwin's theory as the expression of a new awareness of the fragility of natural relationships, his contemporaries extracted a very different message from it.
Darwinism was associated with a philosophy of progress and domination over Nature, while some Lamarckians showed a greater awareness of natural interactions.
But other versions of evolutionism encouraged the belief that living things are governed by forces that transcend the everyday world of the environment.
Far from dying away as the century progressed, this anti-Darwinian and anti-adaptationist view of evolution became more powerful.
By 1900 Darwin was acknowledged as the founder of evolutionism, but his theory of natural selection was accepted by only a minority of biologists.
THE TREE OF LIFE
Once the Origin of Species had converted the scientific world to a basic acceptance of evolutionism, biologists' attention was drawn to the problem of reconstructing the history of life on earth.
Darwin himself had warned that this might be an impossible task, given the enormous gaps in the fossil record, which left little or no evidence for the exact course of many transitions.
But many biologists took it for granted that the main purpose of evolutionism was to elucidate the precise course of life's development from its earliest origins.
In the 1860s and 1870s, the evolutionists turned to morphology, the detailed study of animal structure, as a means of working out relationships that could not be traced in the fossil record.
Only in the last decades of the century was morphology replaced by paleontology as the chief focus of attention in the reconstruction of what the German morphologist Ernst Haeckel called ‘phylogeny’(evolutionary history).
The great expansion of fossil discoveries now meant that paleontologists were increasingly confident in their ability to plot the course of each group's development.
They were also able to incorporate  a geographical dimension into the study of how life had developed.
Evolutionary Morphology
Darwin himself had done extensive morphological work in a detailed study of barnacles during the 1850s.
He realized that the structure of each species — and especially the development of the embryo — would throw light on the relationship of one form to another.
Classification had always been based on the recognition of structural resemblances, and the advent of evolutionism merely transposed this enterprise into a search for real (i.e. historical) rather than purely formal relationships.
Darwin believed that very similar species, such as those grouped into a single genus, would have evolved from a fairly recent common ancestor.
More distant relationships would correspond to a more distant common ancestry.
Evolution was thus to be portrayed as an ever-branching tree, and a good classification system would be based on a correct identification of the crucial points at which the branchings took place.
Darwin argued that the study of embryonic stages was important for working out these relationships because the embryo would be less affected than the adult form by the adaptive modifications upon which evolution was based.
In some cases (as with the barnacles) forms whose adult structure seemed quite unrelated could be shown to have shared a common ancestry because their embryos were very similar at an early stage.
The evolutionary morphologists of the 1860s were determined to use comparative anatomy and embryology to work out all the crucial relationships needed to reconstruct the tree of life.
Morphology was already a well established discipline, which required only a change of emphasis to become the basis for the reconstruction of phylogenetic (evolutionary) relationships.
The German biologist Ernst Haeckel's Generelle Morphologie of 1866 pioneered the new  approach.
Haeckel also wrote more popular works, which were translated into English as The History of Creation and The Evolution of Man .
Although counting himself an enthusiastic Darwinian, he favoured a Lamarckian view of the evolutionary mechanism and was strongly influenced by the idealist trend in pre-Darwinian biology.
He saw the universe as a unified system whose development could be reconstructed by the evolutionist through the study of its modern products.
Haeckel's holistic philosophy would inspire a later generation of environmentalists, but he had been trained as a morphologist and sought other ways of displaying the unity of Nature.
He believed that all living forms can be related into a single developmental sequence.
The growth of the embryo towards maturity provided a model for the whole evolutionary process.
Where Darwin saw resemblances between embryos as evidence of common descent, Haeckel assumed that ‘lower’ forms can be equated with earlier stages in the individual development of more advanced species.
It was he who popularized the recapitulation theory, the claim that ontogeny (the growth of the embryo) recapitulates phylogeny (the evolutionary history of the species).
Since the human race was the highest product of evolution, the development of the human embryo exhibited all of the major stages in the ascent of life.
The lower animals still alive in the world today could be identified with particular stages in the overall development of life — a process that was replayed like a speeded-up movie film in the life of every human being.
This model promoted the assumption that evolution is based on a progressive trend with the human race as its goal.
Darwin's ‘tree’ of evolutionary relationships had a radiating pattern of divergent branches so that no single branch could be said to represent the goal towards which all the others were moving.
Each branch was developing its own way of coping with the environment, and progress in one direction could not be evaluated by comparison with  any other.
Haeckel reconstructed the tree of life to give it a main trunk or stem with the human race at the top: all developments in other directions were merely side branches of little real importance.
Except for minor modifications after they branched off the main line, all living species could be treated as steps on the way towards the human form.
Haeckel revived the old belief that the ‘lower’ species are merely immature versions of humankind.
Instead of portraying evolution as an open-ended process driven by a multitude of local responses to environmental pressure, he focused on progress as the key to understanding the relationships between modern species.
Evolution became a ladder rather than a tree, a linear sequence of stages through which life had advanced towards the human form.
The recapitulation theory was seductive because it seemed to offer a powerful guide to the reconstruction of those steps in the history of life hidden by gaps in the fossil record.
There was a massive concentration of scientific effort in this area in the decades immediately following the general acceptance of evolutionism.
Large numbers of scientists tackled some of the most basic problems, including the question of the origin of the vertebrates.
It was obvious that the fish — the ‘lowest’ class within the vertebrate phylum — must have evolved from a pre-existing invertebrate form, yet this had occurred before fossils became plentiful in the rocks.
Various hypotheses based on different kinds of anatomical evidence were offered to identify which invertebrate type had been the ancestor from which the ‘main line’ of vertebrate evolution had taken off.
In Britain the work of E. Ray Lankester illustrates the strength of evolutionary morphology in the 1870s and 1880s.
Lankester made numerous contributions to the elucidation of evolutionary relationships and, like Haeckel, projected a model of evolution based on progress.
In principle, Lankester realized that no living form can be seen as a stage in the ancestry of another.
It was wrong, for instance, to treat the great apes as the ancestral form from  which humankind had sprung, since the apes would have undergone changes of their own since their ancestors and ours had diverged from a single root.
Yet Lankester often ignored this warning in his own work, and suggested that all forms of life can be ranked into grades defined by the point at which they branched off from the main line of progress towards humankind.
Morphology was a laboratory-based subject that did not encourage detailed study of how animals adapted to their local environment.
The morphologists' interpretation of evolution invoked adaptation only in the most abstract way.
Lankester suggested that the driving force of progress was the struggle of organisms to cope with environmental challenge, and warned that degeneration threatened any species that took up a less stimulating environment.
This fitted in neatly with Spencer's philosophy of self-help as the driving force of evolution, and Lankester drew the obvious implication from his theory by warning that the human race might degenerate if it made life too easy for itself.
This approach was carried to its furthest extreme by the embryologist E.W. MacBride, who argued that all the different invertebrate types were degenerate offshoots from various points in the main line of vertebrate progress: ‘It is therefore broadly speaking true’, he wrote, ‘that the Invertebrates collectively represent those branches of the Vertebrate stock which, at various times, have deserted their high vocation and fallen into lowlier habits of life.’
The challenge of the environment was the key to progress — yet neither Lankester nor MacBride was interested in the details of local adaptation.
All that mattered was the retention of an active way of life that would maintain the stimulus to individual self-development.
Fossils and Ancestors
MacBride was an active Lamarckian and one of the last great exponents of the recapitulation theory.
By the time  he wrote the survey quoted above, evolutionary morphology was beginning to fall into the background as new sciences such as genetics took over the forefront of scientific research.
But the same kind of eclipse did not affect that other great area devoted to reconstructing the history of life: paleontology.
Fossils were now being collected in ever-greater numbers and from an ever-wider area of the earth's surface, and it was inevitable that paleontology would be used to throw light on the course of evolution.
As its influence expanded, it began to promote a model of evolution that took far greater account of geographical factors.
The fossils showed that new groups originated in particular parts of the world, and focused attention on the process by which they expand around the globe, often exterminating more primitive forms as they go.
The continuous model of development was thus replaced by a more complex theory that highlighted certain crucial episodes in the history of life on earth.
Opponents of evolutionism claimed — then as now — that the fossil record revealed no sign of intermediates between the major groups of animals and plants.
Fortunately for the evolutionists, there were important discoveries during the 1860s and 1870s that helped to confirm their prediction that such ‘missing links’ were merely hidden by the imperfection of the fossil record.
Most important was the reptile-bird intermediate Archaeopteryx from the Jurassic rocks of Germany.
Here was a form with reptilian characters and a mouth with teeth (not a beak)— yet the imprint of feathers was clearly preserved in the rocks surrounding the fossilized skeleton.
Many of the other major transitions were not filled in, however, and paleontologists thus concentrated on developments within well defined groups.
In America O.C. Marsh discovered a sequence of fossils illustrating the evolution of the modern horse from a more generalized four-toed ancestor.
As the number of fossils increased, more and more examples of fairly continuous fossil sequences were discovered, allowing paleontologists to analyse the  historical development of some groups with a fair degree of confidence.
Although supporting evolution, these discoveries did not always seem to confirm the Darwinian interpretation of how the process worked.
In Britain, Owen and Mivart argued that many cases of evolution consisted of parallel lines of development within the same group, all driven in the same direction as though by an internally programmed force.
Darwin's image of an irregularly branching tree thus did not fit the evidence.
The American neo-Lamarckians made the same point, arguing that the fossils seemed to support a theory of directed evolution, not one based on the selection of random variation by the local environment.
The inheritance of acquired characters explained these trends as a consequence of the animals specializing for a particular way of life chosen by their ancestors.
The Lamarckians also insisted that some of the trends had no adaptive purpose.
Hyatt in particular argued that the fossil invertebrates he studied showed patterns of progressive, Lamarckian evolution followed by an inexorable decline into racial senility and extinction.
Whole groups of organisms developed increasingly bizarre non-adaptive characters until they eventually disappeared altogether.
By the end of the century many paleontologists supported the theory of orthogenesis, in which variation was supposed to be pushed in some preordained direction by forces built into the constitution of the organisms.
Modern paleontologists argue that these supposedly linear trends were actually a product of the imagination seeking to impose order upon a relatively small number of fossils.
But at the time it was thought that the record had yielded up its secrets in sufficient quantities to allow confident assertions to be made about the character of the evolutionary mechanism.
By emphasizing the continuity of development within groups, paleontologists were forced to recognize that the actual origin of new groups represented a different kind of phenomenon.
Evolution was not an absolutely continuous  process because the crucial episodes in which life had advanced to an entirely new level of development could not be represented as extensions of the more predictable kind of evolution taking place within established groups.
The origin of a new group often involved the development of new characters by an undistinguished member of an earlier class.
Once the pioneers of a new level of development were given the chance to flourish, they radiated out into a whole range of orders and families to take advantage of all the various possible means of gaining a livelihood.
But once established, these lines underwent predictable developments towards increasing specialization — and eventually to overspecialization and extinction.
Paleontologists became aware of the need to explain the radiation of the mammals at the beginning of the Cainozoic era in terms of the apparently sudden disappearance of the dinosaurs and other great reptiles at the end of the preceding era.
Primitive mammals were known to have existed throughout the ‘age of reptiles’, but only after the dinosaurs had gone did they diversify into a wide range of specialized forms.
Some paleontologists suggested that the reptiles had died out through racial senility in order to leave room for their successors, the mammals, who were waiting in the wings ready to seize control of the world.
By the early twentieth century, paleontologists were promoting a coherent model of evolution that differed significantly from that proposed by the early Darwinians.
In a host of well illustrated books and in the displays erected in the great museums, the fossil record was used to support a theory in which evolution worked through a series of progressive episodes, each sending out waves of new and more highly organized creatures to displace their now-stagnant predecessors.
Henry Fairfield Osborn, the influential Curator of Vertebrate Paleontology at the American Museum of Natural History, coined the term ‘adaptive radiation’ to denote the episodes of expansion, and insisted on the orthogenetic character of evolution within each specialized group when once established.
Although the new experimental science of genetics was now turning its back on Lamarckism and the idea of directed variation, the paleontologists could still influence popular understanding of evolution.
During the early years of the new century, Osborn and his colleagues at the American Museum of Natural History created striking displays of the great dinosaurs whose remains had been unearthed in the west, solving the complex technical problems involved in reconstructing the skeletons of such exotic beasts.
Casts of these dinosaurs were sent to other museums around the world; the industrialist Andrew Carnegie presented a cast of the gigantic Diplodocus to the Natural History Museum in London, where it was erected with great ceremony in 1905.
E. Ray Lankester had become the director of the museum in 1898.
Although trained as a morphologist, he had a long-standing interest in the fossil record and published a well illustrated book on Extinct Animals in 1905, which provided the information on prehistoric animals for Arthur Conan Doyle's popular novel The Lost World of 1912.
Paleontology had always had a geographical dimension, and this was exploited more thoroughly as the exploration of the fossil record became possible on a world-wide scale.
On the Beagle voyage, Darwin had discovered evidence for the ‘law of succession of types’ by unearthing South American fossils related to the unique modern inhabitants of that continent.
Some mammalian families must have migrated to that continent and evolved there in isolation from the rest of the world.
By the late nineteenth century, paleontologists were becoming increasingly aware of this phenomenon and (in the absence of a theory of continental drift) were postulating temporary ‘land-bridges’ between the continents, which were raised and lowered by geological forces, providing migration routes in some epochs and not in others.
The preservation of the marsupials in Australia was explained in terms of the breaking of a land-bridge  connecting that continent to the rest of the world before the appearance of the placental mammals.
Drawing upon contemporary geological theories, the Canadian-born paleontologist William Diller Matthew (18711930) created a synthesis that integrated the temporal and geographical dimensions.
Some geologists believed that the earth's climate alternated between periods of warm, moist conditions and intervals in which the northern regions had been subject to a much harsher climate.
In his Climate and Evolution of 1914 Matthew argued that, since the last cold spell began in the Eocene, northern Asia had become the main centre for mammalian evolution.
Unlike Osborn, Matthew was prepared to accept that evolution occurred primarily in response to environmental change, and — unusually for the time — he accepted the theory of natural selection.
He argued against the view that the discovery of primitive members of a group in a certain location meant that this was the point of origin from which the group had spread out.
On the contrary, the point of origin was where the highest members of the group were found.
As soon as more advanced types evolved in response to a stimulating environment, they spread out around the world, driving earlier, more primitive forms into marginal locations where they were able to survive for some time before extinction.
Matthew drew upon a long-standing belief that the flora and fauna of Eurasia were dominant over those of the rest of the world and combined this with the paleontologist's theory of the periodic explosion of new types at certain points in the fossil record.
Although his support for Darwinism was unusual, his concept of successive waves of migration radiating outwards from a centre of progressive evolution seems to have struck a chord in the minds of his contemporaries.
The introduction of a geographical dimension at this level could be taken up even by those who saw evolution as something more than the selection of random variation.
In the age of imperialism, an older  model of history based on the rise and fall of empires could be projected back onto the fossil record to justify the world-wide expansion of modern Europeans.
Human Origins
We can illustrate this ideological dimension by comparing Matthew's theory with contemporary developments in ideas about human evolution.
The late nineteenth century saw the emergence of a model of human origins based very much on Haeckel's linear progressionism, but this was replaced in the early years of the twentieth century by a theory more in tune with the new paleontology.
The question of humankind's origin from the apes was one of the most controversial aspects of Darwin's theory.
Even some of his closest supporters found the prospect of a natural origin for humankind unacceptable.
Both Lyell and Wallace opted for a theory in which a supernatural force had affected the later stages of human development.
Clearly, if humans were not to be excluded from the theory, our ancestry must be linked to that of our closest relatives, the great apes.
Huxley's Man's Place in Nature of 1863 had stressed the physical resemblances between humans and apes.
But Huxley said nothing about the process that might have led one branch of the primate order to develop the upright posture and the enlarged brain that are the hallmarks of the human race.
The objections voiced by Lyell and Wallace were eventually overcome, allowing the majority of late-nineteenth-century thinkers to accept an ape ancestry.
But this was only made possible by treating the emergence of the human race as the last phase of the general progress of life towards higher levels of organization and consciousness.
Darwin's Descent of Man of 1871 addressed this issue directly.
Unlike most of his contemporaries, Darwin realized that the human race was not the predictable end-product of a universal progressive trend.
His theory required him to  specify a reason why the human branch of the evolutionary tree had advanced so much further than those which led to the living apes.
He postulated that the first step in the differentiation was our ancestors' adoption of an upright posture in order to move about on open plains instead of in trees.
The brain had enlarged later in order to exploit the tool-making capacities of hands that were now freed from the task of locomotion.
But hardly anyone took this seriously, and much of Darwin's own book was devoted to a discussion of the factors that would have led to mental progress.
As far as most nineteenth-century thinkers were concerned, it was obvious that the driving force of human evolution must have been a steady expansion of the brain, which merely continued the progressive thread that ran through the whole evolution of life.
The possibility that the human race might have been an unplanned accident resulting from an adaptive modification was simply not acceptable.
The most complete expression of this preconception was a linear model of human origins in which the white race was the last and highest rung in the ladder of progress.
This had the advantage that ‘lower’ races could be dismissed as earlier steps in the advance that had survived into the present in parts of the world where there had been less stimulus for mental development.
Women, too, were dismissed as less highly evolved than men, thus fitting the prejudices of the male scientists who constructed the theories.
The second half of Darwin's Descent of Man was devoted to sexual selection, because Darwin thought that this was the only process that could explain some of humankind's unique features such as our loss of body hair.
If males compete for access to the females, selection will develop any character that encourages successful breeding — even if this character is of no benefit in terms of adaptation to the environment.
In species where the males compete to gather ‘harems’ of females, sexual selection will develop the weapons used in male combat.
The horns of  male deer, for instance, have increased in size because over many generations those stags with large antlers have mated most successfully.
In bird species where the males display to attract the females (the peacock is a classic example), extravagant plumage has developed because the best-endowed males have always mated more frequently.
Wallace objected to this aspect of Darwin's theory on the grounds that ‘female choice’ attributed human characteristics to animals.
Applied to the human race, sexual selection allowed Darwin to account for the loss of body hair by assuming that this character had become sexually desirable among our distant ancestors.
The mechanism also allowed him to ‘explain' the different intellectual and emotional qualities of men and women.
Men were naturally more active and intelligent, while women had evolved characters that fitted them for life in a world dominated by aggressive males.
They were less intelligent, but more sympathetic, providing the glue that held the family together.
The vast majority of evolutionists shared both the racist and the sexist assumptions that Darwin built into his theory.
To fill in the details of this ladder of progressive steps leading from ape to white man, it was necessary to define the intermediate stages.
Black males and white women could be used to represent the next highest rungs of the ladder, but lower ones would have to be found in the fossil record.
In his Man's Place in Nature Huxley had discussed an ancient human skull found at Neanderthal in Germany in 1857.
He noted that its heavy brow-ridges gave it an ape-like appearance, but rejected it as a ‘missing link’ because of its large capacity.
In the 1880s more Neanderthal-like remains were found, and many paleoanthropologists began to argue that they comprised a distinct species intermediate between apes and humans.
Haeckel endorsed this view and regarded it as being confirmed by Eugene Dubois' discovery of the yet more ape-like Pithecanthropus (now known as Homo erectus)in Java during the 1890s.
Haeckel's disciple Gustav  Schwalbe created a linear progressive sequence from the great apes to Pithecanthropus to the Neanderthals and finally to modern humans.
All the known forms were fitted into a single sequence so that the Neanderthals became our own immediate ancestors.
In the early twentieth century this linear model of human evolution was rejected in favour of a theory in which there were several parallel lines of human development, only one of which has survived through into the present.
Instead of being treated as our own ancestors, the Neanderthals of Europe and the more primitive ‘Java man’ were dismissed as distinct forms of pseudo-humanity, driven into marginal locations by the expansion of true humans with a more advanced level of intelligence.
Central Asia was now regarded as the cradle of humanity, a view endorsed through into the 1930s by H. F. Osborn and other eminent paleontologists.
From this source, a series of distinct radiations had emanated, each representing a new line of human evolution destined ultimately to displace the others.
The parallel between this theory and Matthew's more general model of mammalian evolution is obvious enough — but it is also significant that throughout the previous century Asia had been regarded as the source from which successive waves of higher races had invaded Europe.
The myth of a dominant ‘Aryan’ race had its origins in this approach, the original Aryans being pictured as invaders from the east who founded the main European cultures: Greece, Rome and the Teutons.
Darwin had favoured Africa as the cradle of humankind, a view that was consistent with the link to the modern great apes.
Now Africa was dismissed in order to revive the more traditional view that Asia was the centre of all human progress.
Far from extending Darwinian gradualism, the scientists who tried to reconstruct the past had returned to a theory of history that assumed that progress took place through a series of distinct episodes, representing the rise and fall of  groups that evolved in parallel rather than in sequence.
Each distinct form of humanity had its origin at a particular point in space and time, from which it expanded throughout the world before collapsing in the face of pressure from a more highly evolved type.
The ideological dimensions of this model are evident from the racist implications drawn from it by the Oxford geologist W. J. Sollas in his influential book Ancient Hunters of 1911.
Sollas made it clear that the ‘primitive’ races of today are the remnants of earlier human types marginalized in remote areas such as Australia or the Arctic.
Their fate was a necessary consequence of progress:
What perhaps is most impressive in each of the cases we have discussed is this, that the dispossession by a new-comer of a race already in occupation of the soil has marked an upward step in the intellectual progress of mankind.
It is not priority of occupation, but the power to utilise, which established a claim to the land.
Hence it is a duty which every race owes to itself, and to the human family as well, to cultivate by every possible means its own strength; directly it falls behind in the regard it pays to this duty…it incurs a penalty which Natural Selection, the stern but beneficent tyrant of the organic world, will assuredly exact, and that speedily, to the full.
Although Sollas referred to natural selection, he elsewhere ridiculed Darwin's theory as incapable of explaining how the higher types were actually produced.
Natural selection merely justified the marginalization of primitive races by the later forms of humanity developed by some inherently progressive force.
This form of ‘social Darwinism’ emphasized the destructive capacity of struggle, but drew even more heavily upon pre-Darwinian models of historical development, which had now become fashionable in the age of imperialism.
EVOLUTION AND THE ENVIRONMENT
For Darwin and his closest followers it was evident that the driving force of evolution was the process that adapted populations to their ever-changing environments.
There were two areas in which this assumption could be explored.
One was in the field of biogeography, where the migration of small populations to new areas could be seen as the chief cause of the branchings in the tree of life.
But it was also possible to make direct studies of how a single population adapted to changes taking place in its local environment.
Paths of Migration
Matthew's theory drew upon a long tradition of applying evolutionism to the problems of biogeography begun by the first Darwinians.
Even the evolutionists who accepted that species change in response to adaptive pressures realized that something more than simple adaptation was involved.
The actual course of evolution was often determined by the factors that limited a species' access to new areas of the world.
It was also necessary to explain how divergence occurs — how a single original species can be divided into a group of distinct but related forms, each of which can then undergo a unique process of further evolution.
Geography was important because it would help the evolutionist to explain how populations were able to migrate and adapt to new locations.
For the Darwinians, biogeography became a historical science.
By looking at the present distribution of animals and plants, and by comparing this with what was known about geological changes in the past, the evolutionist could seek to explain how the populations of the earth's various regions had been built up through successive migrations.
Darwin had to think carefully about what is now called the problem of speciation: how a single species splits up into a number of ‘daughter’ species.
Natural selection was  a process taking place within the whole breeding population making up the species, and if a division were to occur, the single original population must somehow be split into several distinct subpopulations that did not interbreed.
Darwin regarded the local varieties that exist within many species as incipient new species, on the assumption that further change would increase the separation between the varieties to such an extent that they would eventually be unable to breed together.
For this to happen, it was essential that the local variations did not interbreed and thus blend their characters back together again.
Since natural selection produced only slow, almost imperceptible changes, Darwin could not rely on the sudden appearance of a new form that did not interbreed with its parents.
To begin with Darwin had solved this problem by invoking geographical isolation.
The Galapagos islands had given him the clue by showing that small populations derived from the same original species could evolve in different directions when separated by a geographical barrier such as the ocean.
But by the time he wrote the Origin of Species he had begun to doubt that the physical separation of the original populations was essential.
He now thought that speciation could take place across a continuous territory if the conditions at the extremes of a species' range were different enough to promote distinct ecological specializations.
Varieties and eventually species would be formed despite any tendency for interbreeding with the main body of the population in the centre.
He was opposed on this point by the German naturalist Moritz Wagner, whose book The Darwinian Theory and the Law of the Migration of Organisms of 1868 insisted on the need for a period of geographical isolation.
Modern biologists tend to agree with Wagner.
Varieties can develop behavioural ‘isolating mechanisms’, such as differences in courtship, which prevent interbreeding even when it is genetically possible — but a brief period of physical isolation is needed to allow the populations to develop the differences that will  prevent them blending back together again if they come into contact.
Darwin's rejection of geographical isolation encouraged his opponents to postulate sudden transformations or saltations to explain how distinct new species were formed.
At the broader level of explaining the world-wide distribution of animals and plants, the Darwinians challenged the traditional system in which the earth's surface was divided into a number of distinct zoological and botanical provinces based on ‘centres of creation’.
They accepted that some regions had distinctive populations resulting from local evolution.
But the notion of distinct provinces seemed to smack too strongly of the old pre-evolutionary approach.
Darwin and his followers set out to explain the global distribution of animals and plants by postulating a complex sequence of migrations limited by geographical barriers.
Since those barriers could be temporarily removed by geological agents (e.g. a lowering of the sea level during the ice age), or could occasionally be overcome by accidental means (e.g. birds blown across the ocean by storms), it would be possible to reconstruct the process by which the unique mix of species occupying any given territory had been built up through the periodic influx of newcomers.
In botany, J. D. Hooker interacted extensively with Darwin on this topic and defended the idea of land-bridges.
A. R. Wallace became one of the leading authorities on zoological distribution.
Wallace's Geographical Distribution of Animals of 1876 provided the model for the next generation of naturalists studying biogeography.
Darwin himself had explained the strange inhabitants of isolated oceanic islands such as the Galapagos in terms of accidental migrations from the nearest mainland.
But Wallace's main concern was the distribution of animals on large continental land masses.
He accepted the ornithologist P. L. Sclater's view that there were six main zoological provinces.
These could not be entirely distinct centres of evolution, but the existence of provinces implied that migrations were controlled by something more  than accidental factors.
Wallace shared Darwin's view that the continents were essentially permanent but realized that other geological changes might have affected the possibility of overland migrations.
Although the basic position of the continents had remained unchanged since the Mesozoic, variations in the sea level might have opened up land passages between areas now separated by shallow seas.
In the absence of a theory of continental drift, the Darwinians were forced to postulate migration to explain similarities in the populations of widely separated continents — they could not envisage an original population being split up by the physical separation of the land mass it occupied.
Wallace saw the great northern continents of Eurasia and North America as the chief focus of progressive evolution from which higher types had radiated out from time to time.
Occasional crossings between the two chief areas were possible during periods when the Bering Strait became passable to land animals.
Earlier, less advanced forms were driven south by the expansion of superior types in Asia, Africa and America, but occasionally a barrier appeared that held back the advance and allowed the earlier forms to take refuge in an isolated southern area.
Ocean barriers opening up during the early phases of mammalian evolution had protected the marsupials in Australia and the lemurs and other unique animals of Madagascar.
During his explorations in the 1850s Wallace had traced the line dividing the Asian and Australian faunas in South East Asia, still known as ‘Wallace's line’.
He appealed to Croll's theory of the ice ages to explain how, at certain points in time, the amount of water locked up as ice had caused a lowering of the sea level and hence the opening up of land connections.
Wallace's line existed because there was one particular strait, between the islands of Bali and Lombok, that was so deep that it could never have been exposed as dry land in recent geological times.
Similar processes would explain anomalies such as the existence of closely related species in widely separated  locations.
Wallace argued against those naturalists who postulated temporary ‘land-bridges’ across even the deepest and most extensive oceans to explain these cases.
Such bridges were both geologically implausible and unnecessary.
The occurrence of tapirs in South America and South East Asia, for instance, could be explained quite easily without recourse to anything more than minor changes in the earth's conditions:
During Miocene and Pliocene times tapirs abounded over the whole of Europe and Asia, their remains having been found in the tertiary deposits of France, India, Burmah, and China.
In both North and South America, fossil remains of tapirs only occur in caves and deposits of Post-Pliocene age, showing that they are comparatively recent immigrants into that continent.
They perhaps entered by the route of Kamchatka and Alaska, where the climate, even now so much milder and more equitable than on the north-east coast of America, might have been warm enough in late Pliocene times to have allowed the migration of these animals.
In Asia, they were driven southwards by the competition of numerous higher and more powerful forms, but have found a last resting-place in the swampy forests of the Malay region.
Here Wallace combined paleontological and modern evidence to throw light on the problem of migration, thus pioneering the technique later expanded by Matthew throughout the fossil record.
In botany too, Hooker, Thiselton-Dyer and others favoured the view that Eurasia was the principal centre from which more advanced types had radiated.
It was known that many European plants and animals flourished when introduced into areas such as Australia, thus fuelling the imperialist assumption that the products of Europe — including the human products — were destined to rule the world.
In the case of plants, however, the means of dispersal were  so prolific that theorizing became impossibly vague.
The fact that seeds could be carried for hundreds of miles by strong winds allowed the supporters of dispersal to explain any case of anomalous distribution by invoking such an accidental circumstance.
By the turn of the century, some botanists were protesting against the excessive speculations of the dispersal theorists, arguing that in many cases those species with the highest dispersal power were not the most widely distributed.
In the 1890s the British botanist H. B. Guppy, who specialized in the study of oceanic islands, began to argue that dispersal was merely a function of time: the oldest genera were the most widespread, whatever their powers of dispersal.
Guppy postulated major saltations to explain the origin of the main groups and limited adaptive evolution to minor modifications within these groups following their dispersal.
Evolution and Adaptation
Whatever the means by which they were transported to their present location, many evolutionists agreed that species must undergo changes adapting them to the local environment.
A great deal of effort was expended on studying the degree of adaptation and the processes by which adaptive change was brought about.
Darwin himself investigated the means by which insectivorous plants catch and digest insects, which he interpreted as an adaptation to soils with low nitrogen content.
He also studied climbing plants, suggesting that their ability was merely an extension of the power of movement possessed to some slight degree by all plants.
Darwin was anxious to show that even quite complex adaptations could have been built up gradually by natural selection from rudimentary origins that were common to all animals and plants.
Every stage in the process had to offer an advantage to the organism in the struggle for existence: natural selection cannot plan ahead and can only promote those characters that are useful in the  short term.
Complex adaptations have developed because in certain circumstances the same selection pressure has been maintained over a long period of time.
The study of animal coloration was a particularly active area.
It had long been recognized that many species are protected from predators by colouring that provides camouflage.
The Darwinians assumed that this kind of coloration had been developed by natural selection.
Since in most species the individual animals cannot control their own colour, Lamarckism could not be invoked to explain the phenomenon; selection was the only alternative to divine creation.
The Darwinians were also impressed with the discovery by Henry Walter Bates (1825–92) of a new kind of mimicry in South American insects, where an edible species copies the warning colours that have been developed by another species that is distasteful to birds.
In the later decades of the century the professor of entomology at Oxford, E. B. Poulton (1856–1943), made extensive studies of animal coloration, which he explained in Darwinian terms.
As far as Poulton was concerned, the fact that many animals possessed protective coloration proved the effectiveness of natural selection.
More direct efforts to measure the effects of selection upon a population were undertaken by the biometrical school of Darwinism.
Inspired by Darwin's cousin, Francis Galton (1822–1911), the biometricians sought to provide hard evidence that a population subjected to selection pressure exhibited a measurable difference after a few generations.
Galton had become convinced that Lamarckism was ineffective because the character of each individual is rigidly determined by inheritance.
He developed statistical techniques to study the variability of wild populations and to measure changes in the range of variability over time.
His disciple, Karl Pearson (1857–1936), built upon these techniques to provide detailed arguments defending the selection mechanism against its critics.
Drawing upon detailed field studies by W. F. R. Weldon (1860–1906), the biometrical school was able to show that selection did indeed have a measurable effect even on the short term.
Weldon studied crabs in Plymouth harbour that were being forced to live in water that was muddied by human activity.
He also studied the coloration of snails' shells in different local environments.
In each case it seemed clear that local adaptation was taking place, showing — as far as Pearson and Weldon were concerned — that natural selection was an effective evolutionary mechanism.
The biometrical defence of Darwinism was paralleled by the work of the German biologist August Weismann (1834–1914) on the cellular basis of heredity.
After doing some early work inspired by the recapitulation theory, Weismann began to study the behaviour of the reproductive cells under the microscope.
When the cell nucleus was stained to bring out its internal structure, minute rodlike bodies were observed and were called ‘chromosomes’ because they absorbed the colouring so well.
By the 1880s Weismann was convinced that these chromosomes were the bearers of heredity.
He argued that they consisted of a material substance, the ‘germ plasm’, which transmitted characters from parents to offspring via the nucleus of the egg and sperm cells.
He proposed a theory in which the germ plasm was totally isolated from the adult body that transmits it to future generations.
This meant that characters acquired by the adult body could not be incorporated into the germ plasm and could not be inherited.
The Lamarckian effect did not work, and the only conceivable mechanism of evolution was the natural selection of variations arising spontaneously in the germ plasm.
Not everyone was convinced, however, and there were many efforts by anti-Darwinians to provide evidence in favour of alternative evolutionary mechanisms.
In America the neo-Lamarckian zoologist Alpheus Packard (1839–1905) studied the blind animals that inhabit many caves.
Everyone agreed that the loss of eyesight was a consequence of the animals taking up residence in an environment with  no light, but the Lamarckians argued that the inherited effects of disuse provided a better explanation of the process than natural selection.
The Darwinians had to assume that a useless organ was gradually reduced to a rudimentary state because natural selection would favour those individuals who did not waste their energy growing a useless structure.
But to the Lamarckians it seemed much more natural to assume that the wasting away of an individual's eyes when there was no light would be passed on to the next generation, resulting in a rapid loss of eyesight in the whole population.
Such indirect arguments are scorned by modern biologists, but at the turn of the century they were the mainstay of support for an active Lamarckian movement.
At the same time, there were some naturalists — and even more experimental biologists — who had doubts about the role of any adaptive process in evolution.
The German zoologist Theodor Eimer (1843–98) attacked Poulton's approach to animal coloration.
He scorned the claim that camouflage might be the product of adaptive evolution.
Those who invoked this factor to explain the colour on the outside of a snail's shell had no way of explaining differences on the inside.
In the case of insects apparently mimicking other species' warning coloration, Eimer argued that the similarities were due to an entirely different cause.
He believed that evolution worked by orthogenesis, in which rigidly predetermined trends drove variation in a particular direction whatever the needs of the organism.
If two different species showed the same coloration, this merely confirmed that they were both subject to the same orthogenetic trend.
The early supporters of Mendelian genetics also objected to the emphasis placed on adaptation by both the Darwinians and the Lamarckians.
Even before he became one of the pioneering geneticists, William Bateson (1861–1926) had abandoned Darwinism and had begun to insist that evolution is driven by discontinuous variations or saltations.
Unlike Eimer's orthogenetic trend, the saltation was an  instantaneous reorganization of the reproductive process generating an entirely new character — but in both cases the end-product had no adaptive value.
Bateson had been trained as an evolutionary morphologist and had published a theory to explain the origin of the vertebrates.
In the 1890s he turned against this whole programme in disgust, realizing that there was no likelihood of fossil evidence coming to light.
His Materials for the Study of Variation of 1895 argued strongly against adaptive evolution and in favour of saltations produced by forces internal to the organism.
He dismissed the adaptive scenarios postulated by the Darwinians as ‘just so stories’ that had no scientific value.
They were no more testable than the claims of Paley and the other advocates of natural theology.
Bateson now argued that the direct study of variation was the only way of trying to understand how evolution actually works.
Like many others, he turned to an experimental approach as a means of transcending the limitations of traditional ‘Darwinism’.
Neither field studies nor the purely descriptive work of the morphologist satisfied the demands of a new generation of biologists seeking to put biology on a new, more scientific footing.
The experimental study of heredity led Bateson to breeding studies and soon to the newly rediscovered laws of Mendelian heredity.
The sudden outburst of interest in the laws of heredity proposed in 1865 by Gregor Mendel was a by-product of the demand for an experimental science of life.
By hybridizing different varieties of peas, Mendel had shown that some characters are inherited as units on an ‘all or nothing’ basis — they did not blend together as Darwin and almost everyone else assumed.
This insight was ignored until the new generation of experimentalists began to see heredity as a process transmitting characters through the line of reproductive cells, independently of the adult body.
In 1900 the new theory based on the inheritance of unit characters was announced by Hugo De Vries and Carl Correns — it was Bateson who coined the name ‘genetics’ a few years later.
Bateson resisted the claim that the gene was a material entity, but soon the more materialistic geneticists were arguing for a modified version of Weismann's germ plasm theory in which the gene was a segment of the chromosome responsible for transmitting a particular character from one generation to the next.
De Vries soon lost interest and began to promote his ‘mutation theory’, which stressed the role of saltations backed up by evidence that significant new characters were being produced in cultivated populations of the evening primrose.
De Vries' ‘mutations’ were subsequently shown to be the result of hybridization, not the production of new genetic characters.
At first, however, most geneticists joined De Vries and Bateson in assuming that new genetic characters appear suddenly by saltation.
They also insisted that selection by the environment had no effect on the characters that appeared in this way.
De Vries at least believed that there might be a struggle for existence between the mutated forms, but most geneticists refused to accept this compromise.
Shortly before he took up the study of genetics, the American biologist Thomas Hunt Morgan wrote a book,Evolution and Adaptation (1903), arguing that evolution was governed solely by the production of saltations, and had nothing to do with adapting the species to its environment.
The geneticist R. C. Punnett countered Poulton's arguments by trying to show that single mutations could produce the colours attributed to mimicry.
It would be well into the 1920s before the majority of geneticists began to concede that natural selection might have a role to play by regulating the spread of mutated characters within the population.
THE ORIGINS OF ECOLOGY
As the geneticists of the early twentieth century turned their backs on field studies and the role of adaptation, a very different group of biologists were striking out in the opposite  direction.
They too were determined to ‘modernize’ biology, but they could not abandon fieldwork because the phenomena they wished to study could only be observed in the wild.
The modern science of ecology emerged when naturalists trying to understand how a species' distribution is limited by environmental factors sought to develop more precise ways of studying relationships that had been largely taken for granted by previous generations.
The extent to which the history of science has been shaped by modern concerns is evident from the fact that only in recent years has the origin of ecology begun to attract much attention.
As concern for the environment grows, this area may eventually come to rival the Darwinian revolution as a subject for scholarly analysis.
There is little direct connection, because many early ecologists were not interested in evolution.
The outsider might be tempted to assume that scientific ecology was inspired by the growth of environmentalism in the late nineteenth century.
The Green movement has appropriated the term ‘ecology’ for its own purposes by pretending that anyone aware of the complexity of the interactions between species must be concerned to preserve the natural balance.
Yet serious studies of the interactions between animals, plants and their physical environment were often initiated by scientists who hoped to modify the natural balance in order to allow sustainable exploitation.
Whatever the modern relationships between scientific ecology and environmentalism, we must beware of assuming that similar relationships governed the attitudes of the biologists who first began the systematic study of ecology in the 1890s.
Darwin's theory threw the relationship between the organism and its environment into a new light by stressing the pressures that were exerted on any population by limitations of resources.
The ‘balance of Nature’ was a shifting affair at the mercy of geographical factors that might change the physical environment or allow the invasion of rival species.
The complex adaptation of the organism to its  physical and organic environment was built up over time through the constant application of pressures that are never stable.
It would be wrong to claim that Darwinism had no impact on the study of what would now be called ecological relationships, but the impact was indirect.
There was little effort at first to study how the ecological balance could shift through time as the result of evolution.
Most early ecologists simply assumed that the physical environment was stable and that existing species would establish natural relationships with one another in each area.
The problem of working out how adaptations arose through evolution was too complex to be combined with detailed study of how those adaptations worked in the present.
Were the naturalists who studied adaptation doing real ecology before the modern name for the science was coined — or did something recognizably like modern ecology only come into existence when the term ‘ecology’ became popular in the 1890s?
It was certainly possible to study what would now be called ecological relationships before the founding of scientific ecology.
But the natural theologians' assumption that God had designed a harmonious order of Nature was hardly a suitable basis upon which to build a modern science.
Some historians argue that modern ecology only became possible in the post-Darwinian age in which all natural relationships were seen to be fragile.
Against this claim must be set the fact that many of the early ecologists were not, in any significant sense, evolutionists; for all practical purposes they were still dealing with an essentially static world view.
Recent historical studies stress the importance of scientific disciplines and research programmes.
The emergence of a science of ecology depended not so much on changing assumptions about Nature as upon the creation of a community (or communities) of researchers who saw the study of natural relationships as their primary goal.
The plural ‘communities’ is necessary because from the beginning there were a number of different schools of ecological  thought.
Animal and plant ecology long remained separate disciplines, and plant ecology itself existed in several different forms.
We may look for generalizations linking all these groups, but we should also be aware of the different routes by which biologists came to realize that it was possible to specialize in what soon became known as ‘ecology’.
The New Biology
Huxley's effort to create a scientific ‘biology’ based on morphology and physiology had broken down, partly because it was obvious that field studies were necessary to solve certain kinds of biological questions.
In some areas it was necessary to assume that adaptation of the organism to its environment is crucial both for survival and for long-term evolution.
Ecology was a second-generation response to the problem of creating a scientific biology.
In the last decade of the nineteenth century there were a number of quite different moves to create new disciplines that would transcend the limitations of the old approach to the study of Nature.
The experimental approach to the study of heredity led to the creation of the new science of genetics.
Ecology was a parallel move designed not to transcend field studies, but to transform them in a way that would make them genuinely scientific.
Evolutionism played only a minor role because it was associated with the old, rather amateurish techniques that led to unlimited speculation.
Field studies would become scientific by adopting the techniques of measurement and quantification that had proved so effective in the ‘hard sciences’.
Ecology emerged not from Darwinism, but from an extension of physiology into the realm of the organism's relationship to its surroundings.
There was no single discipline of ecology created in response to a theoretical initiative, or to a particular philosophical position.
Instead, several different groups of biologists tried, each in their own way, to modernize field studies in a manner that would allow them to compete  for the ever-increasing supply of research funding being made available by governments and private institutions.
Since these groups came from different backgrounds and worked in different institutional settings, they chose to explore different aspects of the environment and adopted different theoretical models.
The term ‘ecology’ could be used as an umbrella to cover a wide range of research traditions that did not interact at the detailed level, but which could be seen to deal with one aspect or another of the relationship between living things and their environment.
Many scientists could do ‘ecology’ while retaining their primary disciplinary loyalty elsewhere, in oceanography or forestry for instance.
Ecology could exist at the research level even though it was at first difficult to introduce it into the universities and schools as an academic discipline.
Far from being a coherent response to the growing problem of environmental degradation, ecology was a product of the new age of specialization ushered in by the rapid expansion of the scientific profession.
The term Oecologie was actually coined in Ernst Haeckel's Generelle Morphologie of 1866 to denote the study of the interactions between organisms and the external world.
The term was derived from the Greek oikos , referring to the operations of the family household, and it seems that Haeckel intended his readers to visualize a kind of global organic economy in which all species played a part.
His monistic philosophy promoted a sense of the unity of Nature among later generations of environmentalists, but it was several decades before serious work on what would now be called ecological topics began.
By the 1890s self-conscious research schools were starting to emerge in several areas.
In 1893 the eminent physiologist J. S. Burdon-Sanderson (1828–1905) told the British Association for the Advancement of Science that ‘oecology’ was one of the three great divisions of biology, along with physiology and morphology, and was in some ways the most attractive of the three because it came closest to the spirit of what had once been  called the ‘philosophy of living nature’.
The modern spelling ‘ecology’ was established at the International Botanical Congress in the same year.
One foundation upon which the new studies could be built was the Humboldtian search for the geographical factors that limited the distribution of particular species.
Detailed studies of the distribution of animals and plants were made throughout the nineteenth century, often employing amateurs to do the actual surveying under the leadership of a few professionals.
These surveys tended to assume that certain species were typical of a particular habitat, although there were also studies of the changing proportions of species in differing locations.
By the end of the century C. Hart Merriam, director of the Bureau of the Biological Survey of the US Department of Agriculture, was providing extensive maps depicting the ‘life zones’ or habitats of various animals and birds running east-west across the North American continent.
These zones were identified by the observers' fairly casual assessment of the dominant species in each locality.
There was no quantitative work and later ecologists dismissed this whole technique as an example of exactly what they were trying to avoid.
If this kind of field study was to have any value at all in the modern world, it would have to be transformed by the introduction of more rigorous techniques.
The new ecologists were particularly inclined to stress the interactions between the different species making up the population of each area.
The old ‘balance of Nature’ theory had accepted the existence of such interactions, and Darwin had certainly stressed their importance as factors determining the selection pressures that caused evolution.
In the course of his career, Darwin had in fact turned away from the idea that the physical environment is the crucial factor to which species must adapt.
He became more concerned with specialization within a given environment, a process that he saw as a consequence of the struggle between the different inhabitants of that environment.
While continuing  to have some interest in biogeography, Darwin nevertheless deflected attention towards inter-species competition as the main driving force of natural selection — a force that continued to operate and produce change even in a perfectly stable environment.
In the Origin of Species Darwin gave an illustration of the unexpected complexity of the interactions between the organisms inhabiting a particular area.
He suggested that ‘it is quite credible that the presence of a feline animal in large numbers in a district might determine through the intervention first of mice and then of bees, the frequency of certain flowers in that district!’
The cats caught the mice, which otherwise would destroy the nests of the bees, which were crucial to the fertilization of certain plants.
This example was meant to illustrate the unexpected links that might make up a chain of natural interactions, but it is significant that no experimental work was done to test the idea.
Darwin worked extensively on the relationship between insects and the flowers they fertilize; his book On the Various Contrivances by which British and Foreign Orchids are Fertilized by Insects appeared in 1862, and the subject was generalized in Herman Müller's The Fertilization of Flowers (translated 1883).
But these studies looked at the interactions between species only to explore the process by which evolution produced complex adaptive structures.
They were a product of Darwin's particular view of evolution, not a true anticipation of ecology.
The switch to a more deliberate emphasis on the way in which all the inhabitants of an area depend upon one another came about at least in part because of developments in social evolutionism.
Herbert Spencer, the philosopher of the evolutionary movement, argued that a society could be seen as a kind of biological organism in which the whole was more than the sum of the parts.
Each specialized trade was like an organ within an animal's body, providing a function that benefited the whole and depending on the continued existence of the whole for its own survival.
The  possibility that natural communities could be visualized in similar terms occurred to many biologists in the later decades of the century, thus providing an incentive to study the interactions upon which the whole network depended.
An explicit statement of what is now called the concept of a biotic community was made in Karl Möbius' study of oyster beds (1877).
The Illinois naturalist Stephen A. Forbes gave an address on ‘The Lake as a Microcosm’ in 1887, emphasizing that all the species within a lake were linked into a functioning community maintained by the balance between predators and prey.
Karl Semper's Animal Life as Affected by the Natural Conditions of Existence of 1881 developed the concept that would later be known as the food-chain and noted that the total numbers of predators must be much lower than the numbers of the prey organisms to maintain a stable system.
Semper's book was a pioneering study of animal ecology, but it was a forerunner rather than a true foundation-stone upon which others were to build.
Terrestrial animals move around too much for the naturalist to think easily in terms of a stable community, and the main development of animal ecology did not take place until the twentieth century.
Notable exceptions were in marine biology and limnology (the study of lakes), where serious efforts were made to study how communities functioned.
The work of Möbius and Forbes falls into these traditions, while the pressure to study fish resources provided a direct incentive to investigate how populations could be affected by external disturbances such as human activity.
The German marine scientist Victor Hensen (1835–1924) led an expedition to Greenland and the tropics in 1889, which showed that — contrary to everyone's expectations — the colder waters supported the greater quantity of life.
Ernst Haeckel (who described some of the Challenger specimens) argued that Hensen's sampling techniques must have been faulty, but further studies gradually confirmed his results.
Hensen believed that the plankton represented the life-blood of the ocean and set out to study its growth in different areas by applying the methods of physiology.
Variation in the nutrient content of the water was clearly the major factor involved.
Here, as in other areas, we see ecology emerging from a deliberate revolt against the evolutionary morphology of earlier decades.
Hensen established an important research school at Kiel in Germany, aided by state support provided for the study of fisheries stocks.
The foundation of the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea in 1902 also acted as a stimulus.
The most significant product of this school was the work of Karl Brandt (1854–1931), which applied the methods of agricultural chemistry to the study of plankton growth.
Brandt switched the emphasis from geographical variation to the study of the annual cycle of plankton growth found in the northern oceans.
By stressing the changing supply of chemical nutrients he and his followers were led to discover the plankton ‘bloom’ that occurs in the seas every spring.
Brandt's emphasis on the annual variation of light and nutrients was modified by Alexander Nathansohn (1878–1940), who pointed out that the vertical circulation of water played a vital role in bringing nutrients to the surface.
By the early decades of the twentieth century, the Kiel school's theory of plankton growth had been widely accepted, but German oceanography collapsed after the First World War and the impetus passed to British and American scientists.
Throughout this period, marine ecology remained isolated from other branches of the science.
The separate funding provided for the study of fisheries allowed oceanographers to develop their own institutions and professional networks, which were not closely linked to those of the universities or agricultural research stations.
These professional barriers ensured that there would be little interaction even when the disciplines were working on parallel problems.
Plant Ecology
The botanists pushed ahead to develop a number of rival schools of ecology at the turn of the century.
Historians have been most active in studying the emergence of plant ecology in the United States, but it is agreed that much of the initial inspiration for the American work came from Europe, especially from Germany and Denmark.
In part, these European studies came from an extension of Humboldt's approach to distribution.
Oscar Drude (1852–1933) of the Dresden botanical gardens published a plant geography of Germany in 1896, which sought to illustrate how local factors such as hills and rivers combined with the overall climate of a region to determine the actual distribution of plants.
Drude attempted to depict the relative abundance of each species in an area according to a ranking system with categories ranging from ‘social’(where a single species formed an overall mass) down to ‘scarce’.
Other plant ecologists saw physiology as their starting point, because it was the interaction between the plant as a living organism and its environment that determined whether or not a particular species could live in a certain area.
Only by studying how each species coped with different levels of moisture, heat, light, etc., was it possible to explain why the species flourished in one area but not in another.
There was already a substantial body of information on plant physiology, but in the 1890s a number of botanists realized that the discipline could be extended to include how the plant coped with different environmental factors.
Some of the inspiration for this move came from botanists who had travelled to the tropics and other exotic locations.
The establishment of a botanical laboratory at Buitenzorg in Java was particularly influential.
As Andreas Schimper (1856–1901) wrote:
The greater prominence of physiology in geographical botany dates from the time when physiologists, who formerly worked in European laboratories only, began  to study the vegetation of foreign countries in its native land.
Europe, with its temperate climate and its vegetation greatly modified by cultivation, is less calculated to stimulate such observations; in moist tropical forests, in the Sahara, and in the tundras, the close connexion between the character of the vegetation and the conditions of extreme climates is revealed by the most evident adaptations.
Many of the botanists who studied the adaptation of species to extreme environments became convinced that the effect of the climate upon an individual plant could be transmitted to its offspring, thus building up the species' level of adaptation through a Lamarckian process.
Perhaps the most influential of the European ecological botanists was the Dane, Eugenius Warming (1841–1924), whose Plantesamfund of 1895 was translated into German the following year and into English as Oecology of Plants in 1909.
Warming was trained as a plant physiologist, spent some time in Brazil as a student, and finally developed his ecological approach as an alternative to both pure physiology and the sterile emphasis on classification of many field naturalists.
He argued that the physical capabilities of the plant determined where it could or could not live, and studied the effects of various environmental factors, especially water, in determining the prevailing vegetation.
But Warming also realized that the plants of a particular area formed a ‘community’ united by a variety of interactions including parasitism and symbiosis (the mutual interdependence of two distinct species):
The term ‘community’ implies a diversity but at the same time a certain organized uniformity in the units.
The units are the many individual plants that occur in every community, whether this be a beech-forest, a meadow, or a heath.
Uniformity is established when certain atmospheric, terrestrial, and any other factors discussed [above]are co-operating, and appears either  because a certain, defined economy makes its impress on the community as a whole, or because a number of different growth-forms are combined to form a single aggregate which has a definite and constant guise.
The relationships that created a particular kind of community were real enough, but Warming resisted the temptation to regard the community as a kind of super-organism with a life of its own.
These relationships were a natural consequence of evolution working to produce mutual interactions from which all the species involved would benefit.
Warming was influenced by a movement within German science reacting against the idealists of previous generations who had sought mystical unities in Nature.
He was a reductionist who believed that all the relationships he investigated could be explained in materialistic terms.
Perhaps the clearest indication of this is his reluctance to postulate a single kind of community that was the ‘natural’ occupant of any particular territory.
He knew that wherever an unoccupied land surface was formed, by fire, landslip, the filling in of a bog, or human activity, plants moved in to colonize the area.
There might be a succession of different communities, as when a bog is gradually converted to a meadow.
But it would be wrong to suppose that the final community in such a sequence had some kind of privileged status that guaranteed its stability.
Nature was a scene of constant struggle in which species were trying to extend their territory — a message emphasized by Darwin, but also by earlier writers such as de Candolle.
As Warming put it:
This struggle is caused by endeavour on the part of species to extend their area of distribution by the aid of such means of migration as they possess.
‘Situation wanted’ is the cry in all communities, whether these be human or vegetable.
Millions upon millions of seeds, spores, and similar reproductive bodies are annually scattered abroad in order that species may settle in new stations; yet millions upon millions  perish because they are sown in places where physical conditions or nature of the soil check their development or where other species are stronger.
The consequence of this pressure was that in some circumstances, at least, a community that was destroyed might never be re-established, because other species would invade the territory and prevent the original inhabitants reclaiming it.
When humans cut down the forest, it might be replaced by a permanent grassland because the soil itself had been modified in a way that prevented the trees from reseeding themselves.
Warming's materialism influenced one of the pioneering American plant ecologists, Henry C. Cowles (1869–1939) of the University of Chicago.
Cowles developed an ecological approach within an academic framework that stressed rigorous pure research.
He studied the changing vegetation around the shores of Lake Michigan, arguing that local factors such as the lake interfered with the natural plant covering characteristic of the region.
As one moved away from the edge of the water, the plants changed systematically until eventually the natural woodland of the surrounding region was encountered.
Cowles postulated that the sequence thus observed in space was equivalent to that observed in time when a section of lake was filled in and converted to dry land.
The fact that the ‘natural’ climax community for the region could be held at bay by geographical factors such as the presence of a lake showed that there was no super-organism designed to flourish in a particular region.
The concept of the community as a super-organism was promoted most effectively by another school of ecological botany based on the study of the grasslands of the midwestern United States.
This school had a different institutional framework based on applied research supported by agricultural stations, and had its roots in the European tradition of plant geography.
Charles Edwin  Bessey (18451915) came to Lincoln, Nebraska, in 1884 as professor of botany at the state university and state botanist.
He was a plant physiologist who had great success in promoting the study of botany as a science, but he was also concerned with conservation and wanted to study the grasslands of the prairie before they were completely destroyed by the plough.
His most important student was Frederic E. Clements (1874–1926), who joined with Roscoe Pound (1870–1964) to begin the study of grassland ecology in the area.
They read Drude's plant geography and decided to do a similar study, but soon found that the European techniques did not work on the almost featureless prairie.
Bessey was sceptical of the whole approach as little more than revived natural history, and, in order to convince him that scientific ecology was possible, Clements and Pound looked for a method of quantifying their studies.
They realized that the old technique of depending upon the trained observer's overall impression to characterize the natural vegetation of an area was unreliable.
The only way to get precision was to mark off an area and count every individual plant within it.
Thus was born the technique of intense study of typical ‘quadrats’ or squares marked off to define a sample of the vegetation for the surrounding area.
Quadrats of a large scale had been used before to determine the precise range of various species, but Clements and Pound marked off small areas, often only a metre square, so that every plant of every species could be identified.
In this way a precise sampling of the vegetation could be obtained, and, by setting up quadrats over a wide area, a systematic assessment of distribution could be worked out.
By clearing a quadrat of all plants and then checking it periodically, the succession of plants leading to a mature sustainable ‘climax’ vegetation could be observed.
Pound and Clements' Phytogeography of Nebraska of 1898 became a standard text for American botany, and Clements' Research Methods in Ecology of 1905 was the first textbook to describe the new methodology.
Pound eventually abandoned botany for law, but Clements became professor first at Nebraska and then at Minnesota, before moving to the Carnegie Institution of Washington.
Although originating in the universities, the new grassland ecology did not become a formal academic discipline, and flourished best among botanists with a practical concern for the problems experienced by the farmers who were interfering with the natural vegetation of the area.
Clements was an influential writer who developed a philosophy of ecology that differed fundamentally from the reductionism of Warming and Cowles.
Following the model of the social organism proposed by Spencer he adopted the view that the plant community was a genuine super-organism with a life of its own.
The community was something more than a collection of species working together for mutual advantage — it obeyed laws that could only be understood at a level transcending that of the individual organisms.
This is most apparent in his views on the development of a community through time.
Clements was convinced that there was a single type of climax vegetation that formed the mature covering for any particular area, depending on the physical conditions.
If anything disturbed that natural covering, the vegetation would follow a pattern of development that led through a series of recognizable stages to the mature climax once again:
Succession must then be regarded as the development or life-history of the climax formation.
It is the basic organic process of vegetation, which results in the adult or final form of this complex organism.
All the stages which precede the climax are stages of growth.
They have the same essential relation to the final stable structure of the organism that seedling and growing plant have to the adult individual.
Clements had little interest in evolution.
He thought that the prairie grassland climax had been stable since the last ice age and could be restored at any time even after interference  by humankind.
Yet his language when discussing the development of the community is strongly reminiscent of the developmentalism typical of Haeckel and the progressionist evolutionists of the Darwinian era.
Here the old belief that Nature tended to develop inevitably towards a predictable goal resurfaced in one of the newest branches of science, which had been designed to replace the old approach to natural history.
Clements' holistic, almost vitalistic viewpoint was not linked to any romantic ‘back to Nature’ environmentalism.
On the contrary, it flourished within a discipline that had emerged to help the farmers who were struggling to exploit the prairies in a way that destroyed the traditional climax.
Unlike the continental European ecologists, Clements was working within a system that emphasized practical rather than pure research and saw science as a way of controlling the economy as a whole.
His appeal to the concept of a super-organism allowed him to present ecology as a science that would show us how to manage the natural productivity of an entire region.
The grassland ecologists studied the development leading towards the natural climax as a way of helping farmers to understand the tensions created by their interference with the system.
They offered the essentially optimistic message that nature was strong enough to resist destruction by human agencies — the climax could easily be restored if humankind chose to set aside areas for conservation.
This optimism would be undermined by the Dust-Bowl of the 1930s, which showed that the destruction of the soil made possible by farming would have a permanent effect on the land, just as a follower of Warming's more materialistic approach might have predicted.
Nevertheless, Clements' philosophy represents a notable extension of nineteenth-century developmental attitudes into the early decades of the new century.
It suggests that ‘old-fashioned’ vitalistic metaphors were quite capable of flourishing in an age that demanded that science have practical applications.
In Britain there was a tradition of plant geography supported by amateur activity.
In the 1890s the brothers William and Robert Smith (1866–1928 and 1873–1900), influenced by the sociological approach of Patrick Geddes and by reading Warming's work, instituted botanical surveys of Scotland and of Yorkshire.
But it was Arthur G. Tansley (1871–1955) who took over the leadership of the new approach, proclaiming ecology as the guide to future work in botany in a 1904 paper given to the British Association.
Tansley had experience in the tropics, having travelled to Ceylon (Sri Lanka), the Malay peninsula and Egypt in the years 1900–1.
Over the next few decades he developed the study of plant communities in Britain, using methods similar to those of Clements.
Although impressed with Clements' views, Tansley eventually challenged the super-organism interpretation of the community (see chapter 11).
Lacking the sources of funding available in the United States, he had to arouse public support in order to establish ecology as an independent discipline.
In 1904 Tansley and William Smith set up the Committee for the Survey and Study of British Vegetation, later known as the British Vegetation Committee.
In 1911 Tansley organized an International Phytogeographical Excursion around the British Isles, attended by Clements, Cowles, Drude and others.
Tansley's pioneering Types of British Vegetation of 1912 was a product of this expedition.
In 1913 the British Ecological Society was founded, the first society in the world devoted to the field.
The emergence of ecology as a science had no clear-cut links to the environmental movement that was advocating a reduction in the destructive activities required by modern civilization.
Ecologists studied the natural environment, but often saw this only as a means of helping the human race to manage its interference more effectively.
The relationship between the new science and earlier developments in biology also turns out to be remarkably complex.
At one level, ecology was a reaction against the old natural history, a determined effort to put field studies on a new, more scientific footing.
Various groups exploited the rhetoric of modernization in their efforts to create new research programmes that could exploit the opportunities now being offered by the flood of government and private money available for scientific research.
Yet there was no unity within ecology, just as there was no unity in the life sciences generally.
Many schools of thought flourished, each within its own professional environment, while others withered away, unable to find a niche within which they could develop.
In these circumstances, the tensions apparent within the philosophies of life available in the nineteenth century were able to perpetuate themselves into the twentieth.
There was no dramatic switch to a materialist paradigm in science; materialistic and holistic/vitalistic philosophies both survived the transition to a more experimental approach to the study of life, at least temporarily.
Although some biologists had become aware that Nature was not a system designed to progress inevitably towards higher levels of development, others retained the kind of progressionism that had been used to make the general idea of evolution palatable in the wake of Darwin's Origin of Species .
Those who ignored the role of adaptation were able to flourish at the same time as those for whom adaptation was the primary consideration, because the range of problems that could attract research funding allowed both approaches to find suitable niches for themselves.
A new institutional framework for science was emerging, but far from imposing a conceptual unity, the network of academic, government and industrial research allowed a massive fragmentation of theoretical perspective.
Each research school developed ideas that seemed consistent with its own set of problems and techniques.
In these circumstances, many of the different philosophical perspectives that had flourished in the nineteenth century were able to update themselves and remain viable in the new age of professional specialization.
