Chapter Four
WE DID well enough,’ said Master James of Betton, in the abbot's panelled parlour an hour later, until we came into the forest there, beyond Eaton.
It's thick woodland there south of Leicester, but well managed, as the roads go these days.
And we had five good lads aboard, we never thought to run into any trouble we couldn't handle.
A couple of wretches on the run, skulking in the bushes on the lookout for prey, would never have dared break cover and try their luck with us.
No, these were very different gentry.
Eleven or twelve of them, with daggers and bludgeons, and two wore swords.
They must have been moving alongside us in cover, taking our measure, and they had two archers ahead, one either side the track.
Someone whistled them out when we came to the narrowest place, bows strung and shafts fitted, shouting to us to halt.
Roger from Ramsey was driving, and a good enough hand with horses and wagons, but what chance did he have with the pair of them drawing on him?
He says he did think of whipping up and running them down, but it would have been useless, they could shoot far faster than we could  drive at them.
And then they came at us from both sides.’
‘I thank God,’ said Abbot Radulfus fervently, ‘that you live to tell it.
And all, you say, all your fellows are well alive?
The loss is reparable, but your lives are greater worth.’
‘Father,’ said Master James, ‘there's none of us but bears the marks of it.
We did not let them put us down easily.
There's Martin here was clubbed senseless and slung into the bushes.
And Roger laid about him with his whip, and left the print of it on two of the rogues before they downed him and used the thong to bind him.
But we were five against double as many, and armed villains very willing to kill.
They wanted the horses most, we saw but three they already had with them, the rest forced to go afoot, and the wagon was welcome, too, they had one, I think, already wounded.
They beat and drove us aside, and off with team and wagon at high speed into the forest by a track that turned southwards.
All the load, clean gone.
And when I ran after, and young Payne on my heels, they loosed a shaft at us that clipped my shoulder — you see the tear.
We had no choice but to draw off, and go and pick up Martin and Roger.
Nicol gave as good an account of himself as any of us, elder though he may be, and kept the key of the coffer safe, but they threw him off the cart, and coffer and all are gone, for it was there among the coppice wood.
What more could we have done?
We never looked to encounter an armed company in the forest, and so close to Leicester.’
‘You did all that could be expected of any man,’ said the abbot firmly.
‘I am only sorry you ever were put to  it, and glad out of all measure that you came out of it without worse harm.
Rest here a day or two and let your hurts be tended before you return to your homes.
I marvel who these wretches could be, moving in such numbers, and so heavily armed.
Of what appearance were they — beggarly and mean, or savage with less excuse for savagery?’
‘Father,’ said Master James earnestly, ‘I never before saw poor devils living wild wearing good leather jerkins and solid boots, and daggers fit for a baron's guard.’
‘And they made off southerly?’ asked Cadfael, pondering this militant company so well found in everything but horses.
‘Southwest,’ amended the young man Martin.
‘And in a mortal hurry by all the signs.’
‘In a hurry to get out of the earl of Leicester's reach,’ Cadfael hazarded.
‘They'd get short shrift from him if he once laid hands on them.
I wonder if these were not some of the horde Geoffrey de Mandeville collected about him, looking for safer pastures to settle in, now the king is master of the Fens again?
They'll be scattering in all directions still, and hunted everywhere.
In Leicester's lands they certainly would not want to linger.’
That raised a murmur of agreement from them all.
No sane malefactor would want to settle and conduct his predatory business in territory controlled by so active and powerful a magnate as Robert Beaumont, earl of Leicester.
He was the younger of the twin Beaumont brothers, sons of the elder Robert who had been one of the most reliable props of old King Henry's firm rule, and they in their turn had been as staunch in support of King Stephen.
The father had died in possession of the earldom of Leicester in England, Beaumont, Brionne and Pontaudemer in Normandy, and the county of Meulan in France, and on his death the elder twin Waleran inherited the Norman and French lands, the younger Robert the English title and honour.
‘He is certainly not the man to tolerate thieves and bandits in his lands,’ said the abbot.
‘He may yet take these thieves before they can escape his writ.
Something may yet be recovered.
More to the purpose at this moment, what has become of your companions, Master James?
You say all of them are living.
Where are they now?’
‘Why, my lord, when we were left alone — and I think if they had not been in such haste to move on they would not have left a man of us alive to tell the tale — we first tended the worst hurt, and took counsel, and decided we must take the news on to Ramsey, and also back here to Shrewsbury.
And Nicol, knowing that by then Sub-Prior Herluin would be in Worcester, said that he would make his way there and tell him what had befallen us.
Roger was to make his way home to Ramsey, and young Payne chose to go on there with him, as he had said he would.
Martin here would have done as much, but that I was none too secure on my feet, and he would not let me undertake the journey home alone.
And here at home I mean to stay, for I've lost my taste for travelling, after that mêlée, I can tell you.’
‘No blame to you,’ agreed the abbot wryly.
‘So by this  time this news of yours should also have reached both Ramsey and Worcester, if there have been no further ambushes on the way, as God forbid!
And Hugh Beringar may already be in Worcester, and will know what has happened.
If anything can be done to trace our cart and the hired horses, well!
If not, at least the most precious lading, the lives of five men, come out of it safely, God be thanked!’
Thus far Cadfael had deferred his own news in favour of the far more urgent word brought back by these battered survivors from the forests of Leicestershire.
Now he thought fit to put in a word.
‘Father Abbot, I'm back from Longner without much gained, for neither of the young men who brought down the timber has anything of note to tell.
But still I feel that one more thing of immense value must have been taken away with that wagon.
I see no other way by which Saint Winifred's reliquary can have left the enclave.’
The abbot gave him a long, penetrating look, and concluded at length: ‘You are in solemn earnest.
And indeed I see the force of what you say.
You have spoken now with everyone who took part in that evening's work?’
‘No, Father, there's yet one more to be seen, a young man from a neighbouring hamlet who came down to help the carters.
But them I have seen, and they do say that this third man was called back into the church by one of the brothers, at the end of the evening, for some last purpose, after which the brother came out with him to thank them all, and bid them goodnight.
They did not see anything being stowed on the wagon for Ramsey.
But  they were busy and not paying attention except to their own work.
It's a vague enough notion, that something unauthorized was then loaded under cover of the dark.
But I entertain it because I see no other.’
‘And you will pursue it?’ said the abbot.
‘I will go again, and find this young man Aldhelm, if you approve.’
‘We must,’ said Radulfus.
‘One of the brothers, you say, called back the young man, and came out afterwards with him.
Could they name him?’
‘No, nor would they be able to know him again.
It was dark, he was cowled against the rain.
And most likely, wholly innocent.
But I'll go the last step of the way, and ask the last man.’
‘We must do what can be done,’ said Radulfus heavily, ‘to recover what has been lost.
If we fail, we fail.
But try we must.’
And to the two returned travellers: ‘Precisely where did this ambush take place?’
‘Close by a village called Ullesthorpe, a few miles from Leicester,’ said Master James of Betton.
The two of them were drooping by then, in reaction from their long and laborious walk home, and sleepy from the wine mulled for them with their supper.
Radulfus knew when to close the conference.
‘Go to your well-earned rest now, and leave all to God and the saints, who have not turned away their faces from us.’
If Hugh and Prior Robert had not been well mounted, and the elderly but resolute former steward of Ramsey  forced to go afoot, they could not have arrived at the cathedral priory of Worcester within a day of each other.
Nicol, since the disastrous encounter near Ullesthorpe, had had five days to make his way lamely across country to reach Sub-Prior Herluin and make his report.
He was a stout-hearted, even an obstinate man, not to be deterred by a few bruises, and not to surrender his charge without a struggle.
If pursuit was possible, Nicol intended to demand it of whatever authority held the writ in these parts.
Hugh and Prior Robert had arrived at the priory late in the evening, paid their respects to the prior, attended Vespers to do reverence to the saints of the foundation, Saints Oswald and Wulstan, and taken Herluin and his attendants into their confidence about the loss, or at the very least the misplacement, of Saint Winifred's reliquary; with a sharp eye, at least on Hugh's part, for the way the news was received.
But he could find no fault with Herluin's reaction, which displayed natural dismay and concern, but not to excess.
Too much exclaiming and protesting would have aroused a degree of doubt as to his sincerity, but Herluin clearly felt that here was nothing worse than some confused stupidity among too many helpers in too much panic and haste, and what was lost would be found as soon as everyone calmed down and halted the hunt for a while to take thought.
It was impressive, too, that he instantly stated his intention of returning at once to Shrewsbury, to help to clarify the confusion, though he seemed to be relying on his natural authority and leadership to produce order out of chaos, rather than having anything practical in mind.
He himself had nothing to contribute.
He had taken no part in the hurried labours within the church, but had held himself aloof with dignity in the abbot's lodging, which was still high and dry.
No, he knew nothing of who had salvaged Saint Winifred.
His last sight of her reliquary had been at morning Mass.
Tutilo, awed and mute, shook his head, still in its aureole of unshorn curls, and opened his amber eyes wide at hearing the disturbing news.
Given leave to speak, he said he had gone into the church to help, and had simply obeyed such orders as were given to him, and he knew nothing of where the saint's coffin might be at this moment.
‘This must not go by default,’ pronounced Herluin at his most majestic.
‘Tomorrow we will ride back with you to Shrewsbury.
She cannot be far.
She must be found.’
‘After Mass tomorrow,’ said Prior Robert, firmly reasserting his own leadership as representing Shrewsbury, ‘we will set out.’
And so they would have done, but for the coming of Nicol.
Their horses were saddled and waiting, their farewells to the prior and brothers already made, and Hugh just reaching for his bridle, when Nicol came trudging sturdily in at the gatehouse, soiled and bruised and hoisting himself along on a staff he had cut for himself in the forest.
Herluin saw him, and uttered a wordless cry, rather of vexation than surprise or alarm, for by this time the steward should have been home in Ramsey, all his booty  safely delivered.
His unexpected appearance here, whatever its cause, boded no good.
‘Nicol!’ pronounced Herluin, suppressing his first exasperation, at this or any disruption of his plans.
‘Man, what are you doing here?
Why are you not back in Ramsey?
I had thought I could have complete trust in you to get your charge safely home.
What has happened?
Where have you left the wagon?
And your fellows, where are they?’
Nicol drew deep breath, and told him.
‘Father, we were set upon in woodland, south of Leicester.
Five of us, and a dozen of them, with cudgels and daggers, and two archers among them.
Horses and wagon were what they wanted, and what they took, for all we could do to stop them.
They were on the run, and in haste, or we should all be dead men.
They had one at least of their number wounded, and they needed to move fast.
They battered us into the bushes, and made off into the forest with the cart and the team and the load, and left us to limp away on foot wherever we would.
And that's the whole tale,’ he said, and shut his mouth with a snap, confronting Herluin with the stony stare of an elder provoked and ready to do battle.
The abbey's wagon gone, a team of horses gone, Longner's cartload of timber gone, worst of all, Ramsey's little chest of treasure for the rebuilding, lost to a company of outlaws along the road!
Prior Robert drew a hissing breath, Sub-Prior Herluin uttered a howl of bitter deprivation, and began to babble indignation into Nicol's set face.
‘Could you do no better than that?
All my work gone to waste!
I thought I could rely on you, that Ramsey could rely on you…’
Hugh laid a restraining hand on the sub-prior's heaving shoulder, and rode somewhat unceremoniously over his lament.
‘Was any man of yours badly hurt?’
‘None past making his way afoot.
As I've made mine,’ said Nicol sturdily, ‘all these miles, to bring word as soon as I might.’
‘And well done,’ said Hugh.
‘God be thanked there was no killing.
And where have they headed, since they let you make for here alone?’
‘Roger and the young mason are gone on together for Ramsey.
And the master carpenter and the other lad turned back for Shrewsbury.
They'll be there by this, if they had no more trouble along the way.’
‘And where was this ambush?
South of Leicester, you said?
Could you lead us there?
But no,’ said Hugh decisively, looking the man over.
An elder, well past fifty, and battered and tired from a dogged and laborious journey on foot.
‘No, you need your rest.
Name me some village close by, and we'll find the traces.
Here are we, and ready for the road.
As well for Leicester as for Shrewsbury.’
‘It was in the forest, not far from Ullesthorpe,’ said Nicol.
‘But they'll be long gone.
I told you, they needed the cart and the horses, for they were running from old pastures gone sour on them, and in the devil's own hurry.’
‘If they needed the wagon and the team so sorely,’ said Hugh, ‘one thing's certain, they'd want no great load of timber to slow them down.
As soon as they were well  clear of you, they'd surely get rid of that dead weight, they'd upend the cart and tip the load.
If your little treasury was well buried among the coppice wood, Father Herluin, we may recover it yet.’
And if something else really was slipped aboard at the last moment, he thought, who knows but we may recover that, too!
Herluin had brightened and gathered his dignity about him wonderfully, at the very thought of regaining what had gone astray.
So had Nicol perceptibly brightened, though rather with the hope of getting his revenge on the devils who had tumbled him from the wagon, and threatened his companions with steel and arrows.
‘You mean to go back there after them?’ he questioned, glittering.
‘Then, my lord, gladly I'll come back with you.
I'll know the place again, and take you there straight.
Father Herluin came with three horses from Shrewsbury.
Let his man make his way back there, and let me have the third horse and bring you the quickest way to Ullesthorpe.
Give me a moment to wet my throat and take a bite, and I'm ready!’
‘You'll fall by the wayside,’ said Hugh, laughing at a vehemence he could well understand.
‘Not I, my lord!
Let me but get my hands on one of that grisly crew, and you'll put me in better fettle than all the rest in the world.
I would not be left out!
This was my charge, and I have a score to settle.
I kept the key safe, Father Herluin, but never had time to toss the coffer into the bushes, before I was flung there myself, winded among the brambles, and scratches enough to show for it.
You would not leave me behind now?’
‘Not for the world!’ said Hugh heartily.
‘I can do with a man of spirit about me.
Go, quickly then, get bread and ale.
We'll leave the Ramsey lad and have you along for guide.’
The reeve of Ullesthorpe was a canny forty-five year old, wiry and spry, and adroit at defending not only himself and his position, but the interests of his village.
Confronted with a party weighted in favour of the clerical, he nevertheless took a thoughtful look at Hugh Beringar, and addressed himself rather to the secular justice.
‘True enough, my lord!
We found the place some days past.
We'd got word of these outlaws passing through the woods, though they never came near the villages, and then this master-carpenter and his fellow came back to us and told us what had befallen them, and we did what we could for them to set them on their way back to Shrewsbury.
I reasoned like you, my lord, that they'd rid themselves of the load, it would only slow them down.
I'll take you to the place.
It's a couple of miles into the forest.’
He added nothing more until he had brought them deep into thick woodland, threaded by a single open ride, where deep wheel-ruts still showed here and there in the moist ground, even after so many days.
The marauders had simply backed the wagon into a relatively open grove, and tipped the stack of wood headlong, raking out the last slim cordwood and dragging the cart away from under them.
It did not surprise Hugh to see that the stack had been scattered abroad from the original untidy pile  dumped thus, and most of the seasoned timber removed, leaving the flattened bushes plain to be seen.
Thrifty villagers had sorted out the best for their own uses, present or future.
Give them time, and the rest of the coppice wood would also find a good home.
The reeve, attendant at Hugh's elbow, eyed him sidelong, and said insinuatingly: ‘You'll not think it ill of good husbandmen to take what God sends and be grateful for it?’
Herluin remarked, but with controlled resignation: ‘This was the property of Ramsey Abbey, nevertheless.’
‘Why, Father, there was but a few of us, those who talked with the lads from Shrewsbury, ever knew that.
The first here were from an assart only cut from the woods a few years back, it was a godsend indeed to them.
Why leave it to go to waste?
They never saw the wagon or the men that brought it here.
And the earl gives us the right to take fallen wood, and this was long felled.’
‘As well mending a roof as Lying here,’ said Hugh, shrugging.
‘Small blame to them.’
The heap of logs, probed and hauled apart days since, had spread over the woodland ride and into the tangle of grass and undergrowth among the trees.
They walked the circuit of it, sifting among the remains, and Nicol, who had strayed a little further afield, suddenly uttered a shout, and plunging among the bushes, caught up and brandished before their eyes the small coffer which had held Herluin's treasury.
Broken apart by force, the lid splintered, the box shed a handful of stones and a drift of dead leaves as he turned it upside down and shook it ruefully.
‘You see?
You see?
They never got the key from me, they never would have got it, but that was no hindrance.
A dagger prising under the lid, close by the lock…
And all that good alms and good will gone to rogues and vagabonds!’
‘I expected no better,’ said Herluin bitterly, and took the broken box in his hands to stare at the damage.
‘Well, we have survived even worse, and shall survive this loss also.
There were times when I feared our house was lost for ever.
This is but a stumble on the way, we shall make good what we have vowed, in spite of all.’
Small chance, however, reflected Hugh, of recovering these particular gifts.
All Shrewsbury's giving, whether from the heart or the conscience, all Donata's surrendered vanities, relinquished without regret, all gone with the fugitive ruffians, how far distant already there was no guessing.
‘So this is all,’ said Prior Robert sadly.
‘My lord…’
The reeve edged closer to Hugh's shoulder and leaned confidingly to his ear.
‘My lord, there was something else found among the logs.
Well hidden underneath it was, or either the rogues would have found it when they tipped the load, or else the first who came to carry off timber would have seen it.
But it so chanced it was covered deep, and came to light only when I was here to see.
I knew when we unwrapped it, it was not for us to meddle with.’
He had all their attention now, every eye was wide and bright upon him, Herluin and Robert irresistibly moved to hoping against hope, but very wary of disappointment, Nicol interested but bewildered, for nothing had been  said to him of the loss of Saint Winifred's reliquary, or the possibility that he might have had it aboard his wagon, and had been robbed of it with all the rest.
Tutilo hovered in the background, keeping himself modestly apart while his betters conferred.
He had even suppressed, as he could do at will, the brightness of his amber eyes.
‘And what was this thing you found?’ asked Hugh cautiously.
‘A coffin, my lord, by its shape.
Not very large, if coffin it really is; whoever lies in it was fine-boned and slender.
Ornamented in silver, very chastely.
I knew it was precious enough to be perilous.
I took it in charge for safety.’
‘And what,’ pursued Prior Robert, beginning to glow with the promise of a triumph, ‘did you do with this coffin?’
‘I had it taken to my lord, since it was found in his territory.
I was risking no man of my village or those round about being charged with stealing a thing of value.
Earl Robert was and is in residence in his manor of Huncote,’ said the reeve, ‘a few miles nearer Leicester.
We carried it to him there, and told him how we found it, and there in his hall it is yet.
You may find it safe enough in his care.’
‘Praise God, who has shown us marvellous mercies!’ breathed Prior Robert in rapture.
‘I do believe we have found the saint we mourned as lost.’
Hugh was visited by a momentary vision of Brother Cadfael's face, if he could have been present to appreciate the irony.
Yet both virgin saint and unrepentant sinner must fall within the range of humanity.
Maybe, after  all, Cadfael had been right to speak so simply of ‘poor Columbanus’.
If only, thought Hugh, between amusement and anxiety, if only the lady has been gracious enough and considerate enough to keep the lid firmly on that reliquary of hers, we may yet come out of this without scandal.
In any case, there was no escaping the next move.
‘Very well so!’ said Hugh philosophically.
‘Then we'll go to Huncote, and have speech with the earl.’
Huncote was a trim and compact village.
There was a thriving mill, and the fields of the demesne were wide and green, the ploughland well tended.
It lay clear of the edge of the forest, closely grouped round the manor and its walled courtyard.
The house was not large, but built of stone, with a squat tower as solid as a castle keep.
Within the pale the strangers entering were observed immediately, and approached with an alertness and efficiency that probably stemmed from the fact that the earl himself was in residence.
Grooms came at once, and briskly, to take the bridles, and a spruce page came bounding down the steps from the hall door to greet the newcomers and discover their business here, but he was waved away by an older steward who had emerged from the stables.
The apparition of three Benedictines, two of them obviously venerable, and attended by two lay guests, one a servitor, the other with an authority equal to the monastic, but clearly secular, produced a welcome at once courteous and cool.
Here every grace of hospitality would be offered to all who came, only warmth  waited on further exchanges.
In a country still torn between two rivals for sovereignty, and plagued by numerous uncommitted lords more interested in carving out kingdoms of their own, wise men observed their hospitable duties and opened their houses to all, but waited to examine credentials before opening their minds.
‘My lord, reverend sirs,’ said the steward, ‘you are very welcome.
I am the steward of my lord Robert Beaumont's manor of Huncote.
How may I serve the Benedictine Order and those who ride in their company?
Have you business here within?’
‘If Earl Robert is within, and will receive us,’ said Hugh, ‘we have indeed business.
We come in the matter of something lost from the abbey of Shrewsbury, and found, as we have learned, here within the earl's woodlands.
A little matter of a saint's reliquary.
Your lord may even find it diverting, as well as enlightening, for he must have been wondering what had been laid on his doorstone.’
‘I am the prior of Shrewsbury,’ said Robert with ceremonious dignity, but was only briefly regarded.
The steward was elderly, experienced and intelligent, and though he was custodian only of one of the minor properties in Leicester's huge and international honour, by the sharpening glint in his eye he was in his lord's confidence, and well acquainted with the mysterious and elaborate coffin so strangely jettisoned in the forest beyond Ullesthorpe.
‘I am King Stephen's sheriff of Shropshire,’ said Hugh, ‘and in pursuit of that same errant saint.
If your lord has  her safe and sound, he is entitled to the prayers of all the brothers of Shrewsbury, and of half Wales into the bargain.’
‘No man's the worse for an extra prayer or two,’ said the steward, visibly thawing.
‘Go within, brothers, and welcome.
Robin here will show you.
We'll see your beasts cared for.’
The boy, perhaps sixteen years old, pert and lively, had waited their pleasure with stretched ears and eyes bright with curiosity when their errand was mentioned.
Some younger son from among Leicester's tenants, placed by a dutiful father where he could readily get advancement.
And by his easy manner, Hugh judged, Leicester was no very hard master for such as met his standards.
This lad bounded up the steps ahead of them, his chin on his shoulder, eyeing them brightly.
‘My lord came down here from the town when he heard of these outlaws passing this way, but never a glimpse of them have we encountered since.
They'll be well out of reach before this.
He'll welcome diversion, if you have so curious a tale to tell.
He left his countess behind in Leicester.’
‘And the reliquary is here?’ demanded Prior Robert, anxious to have his best hopes confirmed.
‘If that is what it is, Father, yes, it's here.’
‘And has suffered no damage?’
‘I think not,’ said the boy, willing to please.
‘But I have not seen it close.
I know the earl admired the silverwork.’
He left them in a panelled solar beyond the hall, and went to inform his master that he had unexpected guests; and no more than five minutes later the door of the room opened upon the lord of half Leicestershire, a good slice of Warwickshire and Northampton, and a large honour in Normandy brought to him by his marriage with the heiress of Breteuil.
It was the first time Hugh had seen him, and he came to the encounter with sharp and wary interest.
Robert Beaumont, earl of Leicester like his father before him, was a man barely a year past forty, squarely built and no more than medium tall, dark of hair and darker of eyes, rich but sombre in his attire, and carrying the habit of command very lightly, not overstressed, for there was no need.
He was clean-shaven, in the Norman manner, leaving open to view a face broad at brow and well provided with strong and shapely bone, a lean jaw, and a full, firm mouth, long-lipped and mobile, and quirking upward at the corners to match a certain incalculable spark in his eye.
The symmetry of his body and the smoothness of his movements were thrown out of balance by the slight bulge that heaved one shoulder out of line with its fellow.
Not a great flaw, but insistently it troubled the eyes of guests coming new to his acquaintance.
‘My lord sheriff, reverend gentlemen,’ said the earl, ‘you come very aptly, if Robin has reported your errand rightly, for I confess I've been tempted to lift the lid on whatever it is they've brought me from Ullesthorpe.
It would have been a pity to break those very handsome seals, I'm glad I held my hand.’
And so am I, thought Hugh fervently, and so will Cadfael be.
The earl's voice was low-pitched and full, pleasing to the ear, and the news he had communicated even more pleasing.
Prior Robert melted and became at once gracious and voluble.
In the presence of a Norman magnate of such power and dignity this other Norman Robert, monastic though he was by choice, harked back to his own heredity, and blossomed as if preening before a mirror.
‘My lord, if I may speak for Shrewsbury, both abbey and town, I must tell you how grateful we are that Saint Winifred fell into such noble hands as yours.
Almost one might feel that she has herself directed matters in miraculous fashion, protecting herself and her devotees even among such perils.’
‘Almost one might, indeed!’ said Earl Robert, and the eloquent and sensitive lips curved into a gradual and thoughtful smile.
‘If the saints can secure at will whatever their own wishes may be, it would seem the lady saw fit to turn to me.
I am honoured beyond my deserts.
Come, now, and see how I have lodged her, and that no harm or insult has been offered her.
I'll show you the way.
You must lodge here tonight at least, and as long as you may wish.
Over supper you shall tell me the whole story, and we shall see what must be done now, to please her.’
His table was lavish, his welcome open and generous, they could hardly have fallen into richer pastures after all these vexations; and yet Hugh continued throughout the meal curiously alert, as though he expected something unforeseen to happen at any moment, and divert events into some wild course at a tangent, just when Prior  Robert, at least, was beginning to believe his troubles over.
It was not so much a feeling of disquiet as of expectation, almost pleasurable anticipation.
Tempting to speculate what could possibly complicate their mission now?
The earl had only a small household with him at Huncote, but even so they were ten at the high table, and all male, since the countess and her women were left behind in Leicester.
Earl Robert kept the two monastic dignitaries one on either side of him, with Hugh at Herluin's other side.
Nicol had betaken himself to his due place among the servants, and Tutilo, silent and self-effacing among such distinguished company, was down at the end among the clerks and chaplains, and wary of opening his mouth even there.
There are times when it is better to be a listener, and a very attentive one, at that.
‘A truly strange story,’ said the earl, having listened with flattering concentration to Prior Robert's eloquent exposition of the whole history of Shrewsbury's tenure of Saint Winifred, from her triumphant translation from Gwytherin to an altar in the abbey, and her inexplicable disappearance during the flood.
‘For it seems that she was removed from her own altar without human agency — or at least you have found none.
And she has already been known, you tell me, to work miracles.
Is it possible,’ wondered the earl, appealing deferentially to Prior Robert's more profound instruction in things holy, ‘that for some beneficent purpose of her own she may have transferred herself miraculously from the place where she was laid?
Can she have seen fit to pursue some errand of  blessing elsewhere?
Or felt some disaffection to the place where she was?’
He had the prior stiffly erect and somewhat pale in the face by this time, though the manner of the questioning was altogether reverent and grave, even deprecating.
‘If I tread too presumptuously into sacred places, reprove me,’ entreated the earl, with the submissive sweetness of a brand-new novice.
Precious little chance of that happening, thought Hugh, listening and observing with a pleasure that recalled to mind some of his earliest and most tentative exchanges with Brother Cadfael, dealing trick for trick and dart for dart, and feeling their way over small battlefields to a lasting friendship.
The prior might possibly suspect that he was being teased, for he was no fool, but he would certainly not challenge or provoke a magnate of Robert Beaumont's stature.
And in any case, the other austere Benedictine had taken the bait.
Herluin's lean countenance had quickened into calculating if cautious eagerness.
‘My lord,’ he said, restraining what could easily have blossomed into a glow of triumph, ‘even a layman may be inspired to speak prophecy.
My brother prior has himself testified to her powers of grace, and says plainly that no man has been found to own that he carried the reliquary.
Is it too much to suppose that Saint Winifred herself moved her relics to the wagon that was bound for Ramsey?
Ramsey, so shamefully plundered and denuded by impious villains?
Where could she be more needed and honoured?
Where do more wonders for a house grossly misused?
For it is now certain that she left Shrewsbury on the cart that was returning with gifts from the  devout to our needy and afflicted abbey.
If her intent was to come there with blessing, dare we contest her wishes?’
Oh, he had them locked antler to antler now, two proud stags with lowered heads and rolling eyes, gathering their sinews for the thrust that should send one of them backing out of the contest.
But the earl insinuated a restraining hand, though without any indication that he had seen the impending clash.
‘I do not presume to make any claim, who am I to read such riddles?
For Shrewsbury certainly brought the lady from Wales, and in Shrewsbury she has done wonders, never renouncing their devotion to her.
I seek guidance, never dare I offer it in such matters.
I mentioned a possibility.
If men had any hand in her movements, what I said falls to the ground, for then all is plain.
But until we know…’
‘We have every reason to believe,’ said Prior Robert, awesome in his silvery indignation, ‘that the saint has made her home with us.
We have never failed in devotion.
Her day has been celebrated most reverently every year, and the day of her translation has been particularly blessed.
Our most dutiful and saintly brother was himself healed of his lameness by her, and has been ever since her particular squire and servant.
I do not believe she would ever leave us of her own will.’
‘Oh, never with any heart to deprive you,’ protested Herluin, ‘but in compassion for a monastic house brought to ruin might she not feel bound to exert herself to deliver?
Trusting to your generosity to respect the need, and add to your alms already given the power and grace  she could bestow?
For certain it is that she did leave your enclave with my men, and with them took the road to Ramsey.
Why so, if she had no wish to depart from you, and none to come and abide with us?’
‘It is not yet proven,’ declared Prior Robert, falling back upon the mere material facts of the case, ‘that men — and sinful men, for if it happened so this was sacrilegious theft!— had no part in her removal from our care.
In Shrewsbury our lord abbot has given orders to seek out all those who came to help us when the river rose into the church.
We do not know what has been uncovered, what testimony given.
There the truth may by now be known.
Here it certainly is not.’
The earl had sat well back from between the bristling champions, absolving himself from all responsibility here except to keep the peace and harmony of his hall.
His countenance was bland, sympathetic to both parties, concerned that both should have justice done to them, and be satisfied.
‘Reverend Fathers,’ he said mildly, ‘as I hear, you intend in any case returning together to Shrewsbury.
What hinders that you should put off all dispute until you are there, and hear all that has been discovered in your absence?
Then all may be made plain.
And if that fails, and there is still no hand of man apparent in the removal, then it will be time to consider a rational judgement.
Not now!
Not yet!’
With guarded relief but without enthusiasm they accepted that, at least as a means of postponing hostilities.
‘True!’ said Prior Robert, though still rather coldly.
‘We cannot anticipate.
They will have done all that can be done to unearth the truth.
Let us wait until we know.’
‘I did pray the saint's help for our plight,’ Herluin persisted, ‘while I was there with you.
It is surely conceivable that she heard and had pity on us…
But you are right, patience is required of us until we hear further on the matter.’
A little mischief in it, Hugh judged, content to be an onlooker and have the best view of the game, but no malice.
He's amusing himself at a dull time of year, and being here without his womenfolk, but he's as adroit at calming the storm as he is at raising it.
Now what more can he do to pass the evening pleasantly, and entertain his guests?
One of them, at any rate, he admitted a shade guiltily, and reminded himself that he had still to get these two ambitious clerics back to Shrewsbury without bloodshed.
‘There is yet a small matter that has escaped notice,’ said the earl almost apologetically.
‘I should be loth to create more difficulties, but I cannot help following a line of thought to its logical end.
If Saint Winifred did indeed conceive and decree her departure with the wagon for Ramsey, and if a saint's plans cannot be disrupted by man, then surely she must also have willed all that happened after…the ambush by outlaws, the theft of the cart and team, the abandonment of the load, and with it, her reliquary, to be found by my tenants, and brought to me here.
All accomplished — does it not seem plain?— to bring her finally where she now rests.
Had she meant to  go to Ramsey, there would have been no ambush, there she would have gone without hindrance.
But she came here to my care.
Impossible to say of the first move, it was her will, and not to extend that to what followed, or reason is gone mad.’
Both his neighbours at table were staring at him in shocked alarm, knocked clean out of words, and that in itself was an achievement.
The earl looked from one to the other with a disarming smile.
‘You see my position.
If the brothers in Shrewsbury have found the rogues or the fools who mislaid the saint in the first place, then there is no contention between any of us.
But if they have not traced any such, then I have a logical claim.
Gentlemen, I would not for the world be judge in a cause in which I am one party among three.
I submit gladly to some more disinterested tribunal.
If you are setting out for Shrewsbury tomorrow, so must Saint Winifred.
And I will bear my part in escorting her, and ride with you.’
Chapter Five
BROTHER CADFAEL had made one journey to the hamlet of Preston in search of the young man Aldhelm, only to find that he was away in the riverside fields of the manor of Upton, busy with the lambing, for the season had been complicated by having to retrieve some of the ewes in haste from the rising water, and the shepherds were working all the hours of the day.
On his second attempt, Cadfael made straight for Upton to enquire where their younger shepherd was to be found, and set out stoutly to tramp the further mile to a fold high and dry above the water-meadows.
Aldhelm got up from the turf on which a new and unsteady lamb was also trying to get to its feet, nuzzled by the quivering ewe.
The shepherd was a loose-limbed fellow all elbows and knees, but quick and deft in movement for all that.
He had a blunt, good-natured face and a thick head of reddish hair.
Haled in to help salvage the church's treasures, he had set to and done whatever was asked of him without curiosity, but there was nothing amiss with his sharp and assured memory, once he  understood what was being asked of him.
‘Yes, Brother, I was there.
I went down to give Gregory and Lambert a hand with the timber, and Brother Richard called us in to help shift things within.
There was another fellow running about there like us, someone from the guesthall, hefting things around off the altars.
He seemed to know his way round, and what was needed.
I just did what they asked of me.’
‘And did any ask of you, towards the end of the evening, to help him hoist a long bundle on to the wagon with the wood?’ asked Cadfael, directly but without much expectation, and shook to the simple answer.
‘Yes, so he did.
He said it was to go with the wagon to Ramsey, and we put it in among the logs, well wedged in.
It was padded safely enough, it wouldn't come to any harm.’
It had come to harm enough, but he was not to know that.
‘The two lads from Longner never noticed it,’ said Cadfael.
‘How could that be?’
‘Why, it was well dark then, and raining, and they were busy shifting the logs in the Longner cart down to the tail, to be easy to heft out and carry across.
They might well have missed noticing.
I never thought to mention it again, it was what the brother wanted, just one more thing to move.
I took it he knew what he was about, and it was no business of ours to be curious about the abbey's affairs.’
It was certainly true that the brother in question had known all too well what he was about, and there was small doubt left as to who he must be, but he could not be accused without witness.
‘What was he like, this brother?
Had you spoken with him before, in the church?’
‘No.
He came running out and took me by the sleeve in the darkness.
It was raining, his cowl was drawn up close.
A Benedictine brother for certain, is all I know.
Not very tall, less than me.
By his voice a young fellow.
What else can I tell you?
I could point him out to you, though, if I see him,’ he said positively.
‘Seen once in the dark, and cowled?
And you could know him again?’
‘So I could, no question.
I went back in with him to hoist this load, and the altar lamp was still bright.
I saw his face close, with the light on it.
To picture a man in words, one's much like another,’ said Aldhelm, ‘but bring me to see him, I'll pick him out from a thousand.’
‘I have found him,’ said Cadfael, reporting the result of his quest in private to Abbot Radulfus, ‘and he says he will know his man again.’
‘He is certain?’
‘He is certain.
And I am persuaded.
He is the only one who saw the monk's face, by the altar lamp as they lifted the reliquary.
That means close and clear, the light falling directly into the cowl.
The others were outside, in the darkness and the rain.
Yes, I think he can speak with certainty.’
‘And he will come?’ asked Radulfus.
‘He will come, but on his own terms.
He has a master, and work to do, and they are still lambing.
While one of his ewes is in trouble he will not budge.
But when I send for him, by the evening, when his day's work is over, he'll come.
It cannot be yet,’ said Cadfael, ‘not until they are back from Worcester.
But the day I send for him, he will come.’
‘Good!’ said Radulfus, but none too happily.
‘Since we have no choice but to pursue it.’
No need to elaborate on why it would be useless to send for the witness yet, it was accepted between them without words.
‘And, Cadfael, even when the day comes, we will not make it known at chapter.
Let no one be forewarned, to go in fear or spread rumours.
Let this be done as sensibly as possible, with the least harm to any, even the guilty.’
‘If she comes back, unharmed, unchanged,’ said Cadfael, ‘this may yet pass without harm or disgrace to any.
She is also to be reckoned with, I have no fears for her.’
And it dawned upon him suddenly how right Hugh had been in saying that he, Cadfael, spoke by instinct of this hollow reliquary, as good as empty, as though it truly contained the wonder whose name it bore.
And how sadly he had missed her, lacking the unworthy symbol she had deigned to make worthy.
Granted this authenticity even for the symbol, she came back the next day, nobly escorted.
Brother Cadfael was just emerging from the door of the infirmary in mid-morning, after replenishing Brother Edmund's stores in the medicine cupboard, when they rode in at the gatehouse before his eyes.
Not simply Hugh, Prior Robert, and the two emissaries from Ramsey with their lay servant, who indeed seemed to be missing, but a company augmented by the addition of two attendant  grooms or squires, whatever their exact status might be, and a compact personage in his prime, who rode unobtrusively at Hugh's side, behind the two priors, and yet dominated the procession without any effort or gesture on his part.
His riding gear was rich but in dark colours, the horse under him was more ornamented in his harness than the rider in his dress, and a very handsome dark roan.
And behind him, on a narrow wheeled carriage drawn by one horse, came Saint Winifred's reliquary, decently nested on embroidered draperies.
It was wonderful to see how the great court filled, as though the word of her return in triumph had been blown in on the wind.
Brother Denis came out from the guesthall, Brother Paul from the schoolroom, with two of his boys peering out from behind his skirts, two novices and two grooms from the stable-yard, and half a dozen brothers from various scattered occupations, all appeared on the scene almost before the porter was out of his lodge in haste to greet Prior Robert, the sheriff and the guests.
Tutilo, riding modestly at the rear of the cortege, slipped down from the saddle and ran to hold Herluin's stirrup, like a courtly page, as his superior descended.
The model novice, a little too assiduous, perhaps, to be quite easy in his mind.
And if what Cadfael suspected was indeed true, he had now good reason to be on his best behaviour.
The missing reliquary, it seemed, was back where it belonged, just as a witness had been found who could and would confirm exactly how it had been made to disappear.
And though Tutilo did not yet know what lay in store for him, nevertheless he could not be  quite sure this apparently joyous return would be the end of it.
Hopeful but anxious, plaiting his fingers for luck, he would be wholly virtuous until the last peril was past, and himself still anonymous and invisible.
He might even pray earnestly to Saint Winifred to protect him, he had the innocent effrontery for it.
Cadfael could not choose but feel some sympathy for one whose dubious but daring enterprise had come full circle, and now threatened him with disgrace and punishment; all the more as Cadfael himself had just been spared a possibly similar exposure.
The lid of the reliquary, with its silver chasing exposed to view, no doubt to be instantly recognizable on entering the court, was still securely sealed down.
No one had tampered with it, no one had viewed the body within.
Cadfael at least could breathe again.
Prior Robert on his own ground had taken charge of all.
The excited brothers raised the reliquary, and bore it away into the church, to its own altar, and Tutilo followed devotedly.
The grooms and novices led away the horses, and wheeled away the light carriage into the grange court for housing.
Robert, Herluin, Hugh and the stranger departed in the direction of the abbot's lodging, where Radulfus had already come out to greet them.
Stranger this new guest might be, certainly Cadfael had never seen him before, but it was no particular problem to work out who he must be, even if that left his presence here as a mystery.
Not far from Leicester the ambush had taken place.
Here was clearly a magnate of considerable power and status, why look further afield for his name?
And Cadfael had not missed the heave of the misshapen shoulder, visible now in this rear view as a distinct hump, though not grave enough to disfigure an otherwise finely proportioned body.
It was well known that the younger Beaumont twin was a marked man.
Robert Bossu they called him, Robert the Hunchback, and reputedly he made no objection to the title.
So what was Robert Bossu doing here?
They had all disappeared into the abbot's hall now, whatever chance had brought him visiting would soon be known.
And what Hugh had to say to Abbot Radulfus would soon be talked over again with Brother Cadfael.
He had only to wait until this conference of sacred and secular powers was over.
Meantime, he reminded himself, since the entire company was now assembled, he had better be about sending off Father Boniface's errand-boy to find Aldhelm at Upton among his sheep, and ask him to come down to the abbey when his work for the day was over, and pick out his shadowy Benedictine from among a number now complete.
There was a silence in Cadfael's workshop in the herb garden, once Hugh had told the full story of Saint Winifred's odyssey, and how, and in what mood, Robert Beaumont had entered the contest to possess her.
‘Is he in earnest?’ asked Cadfael then.
‘Halfway.
He is playing, passing the tedious time while there's virtually no fighting and very little manoeuvring and while he wants none, but is uneasy being still.
Short  of employment, barring a difficult business of protecting his brother's interests here, as Waleran is protecting Robert's over in Normandy, as well as he can, this one enjoys putting the fox among the fowls, especially two such spurred and hackled cockerels as your prior and Ramsey's Herluin.
There's no malice in it,’ said Hugh tolerantly.
‘Should I grudge him his sport?
I've done the like in my time.’
‘But he'll hold to it he has a claim?’
‘As long as it amuses him, and he has nothing better to do.
Good God, they put the notion into his head themselves!
One might almost think, says Robert — our Robert, must I call him?— that she has been directing affairs herself!
Almost one might, says the other Robert, and I saw the seed fall on fertile ground, and there he's tended it ever since.
But never fret about him, he'll never push it to the length of humiliating either of them, let alone Abbot Radulfus, whom he recognizes as his match.’
‘It hardly shows,’ said Cadfael thoughtfully, going off at a surprising tangent.
‘What does?’
‘The hump.
Robert Bossu!
I'd heard the name, who has not?
Robert and Waleran of Beaumont seem to have parted company these last years, twins or no.
The elder has been in Normandy for four years now, Stephen can hardly count him as the staunch supporter he used to be.’
‘Nor does he,’ agreed Hugh dryly.
‘Stephen knows when he's lost a sound man.
More than likely he fully understands the reason, and it can hardly be accounted any man's fault.
The pair of them have lands both here  in England and over in Normandy, and since Geoffrey of Anjou has made himself master of Normandy, on his son's behalf, every man in Stephen's backing fears for his lands over there, and must be tempted to change sides to keep Anjou's favour.
The French and Norman lands matter most to Waleran, who can wonder that he's gone over there and made himself at least acceptable to Geoffrey, rather than risk being dispossessed.
It's more than the lands.
He got the French possessions, the heart of the honour, when their father died, he's count of Meulan, and his line is bound up in the title.
Without Meulan he'd be nameless.
Robert's inheritance was the English lands.
Breteuil came only by marriage, this is where he belongs.
So Waleran goes where his roots are, to keep them safe from being torn up, even if he must do homage to Anjou for the soil they've been firm in for generations.
Where his heart is I am not sure.
He owes allegiance to Geoffrey now, but does as little to aid him and as little to harm Stephen as possible, protecting both his own and his brother's interests there, while Robert does as much for him here.
They both hold off from what action there is.
Small wonder!’ said Hugh.
‘There is also a matter of sheer weariness.
This chaos has gone on too long.’
‘It is never easy,’ said Cadfael sententiously, ‘to serve two masters — even when there are two brothers to share the labour.’
‘There are others with the same anxieties,’ said Hugh.
‘There will be more now, with one cause in the ascendant here and the other there.
But we have a problem of our own here, Hugh, and even if the earl is only diverting  himself, be sure Herluin is not.
If I'd known,’ said Cadfael dubiously, ‘that you were going to bring her back safely, and no great harm done, I might not have been so busy about worrying out how she ever went astray.’
‘I doubt if you'd have had any choice,’ said Hugh with sympathy, ‘and certainly you have none now.’
‘None!
I've sent for the lad from the Upton manor, as I told Radulfus I would, and before Compline he'll be here, and the truth will surely be out.
Every man of us knows now how the reliquary was filched and borne away, it wants only this boy's testimony to give the thief a face and a name.
A small figure and a young voice, says Aldhelm, who was tricked into helping him, and saw his face close.
It hardly needs confirming,’ admitted Cadfael, ‘except that justice must be seen to proceed on absolute certainty.
Herluin is neither small nor young.
And why should any brother of Shrewsbury want to see our best patroness carted away to Ramsey?
Once the method was out, as today it is, who could it be but Tutilo?’
‘A bold lad!’ remarked Hugh, unable to suppress an appreciative grin.
‘He'll be wasted in a cowl.
And do you know, I very much doubt whether Herluin would have raised any objection to a successful theft, but he'll have the youngster's hide now it's proved a failure.’
He rose to leave, stretching limbs still a little stiff from the long ride.
‘I'm away home.
I'm not needed here until this Aldhelm has played his part and pointed the finger at your Tutilo, as I take it you're certain he will before the night's out.
I'd as soon not be here.
If there's a part for me, let it be left until tomorrow.’
Cadfael went out with him only into the herb garden, for he still had work to do here.
Brother Winfrid, big and young and wholesome, was leaning on his spade at the edge of the vegetable patch beyond, and gazing after a diminutive figure that was just scuttling away round the corner of the box hedge towards the great court.
‘What was Brother Jerome doing, lurking around your workshop?’ asked Brother Winfrid, coming to put away his tools when the light began to fail.
‘Was he?’ said Cadfael abstractedly, pounding herbs in a mortar for a linctus.
‘He never showed himself.’
‘No, nor never intended to,’ said Winfrid in his usual forthright fashion.
‘Wanting to know what the sheriff had to say to you, I suppose.
He was some minutes there outside the door, until he heard you stirring to come out, then he was off in a hurry.
I doubt he heard any good of himself.’
‘He can have heard nothing of himself at all,’ said Cadfael contentedly.
‘And nothing that can do him any good, either.’
Rémy of Pertuis had as good as made up his mind to leave that day, but the arrival of the earl of Leicester caused him to think again, and countermand his orders to Bénezet and Daalny to begin packing.
The lame horse was fit and ready for action.
But now might it not be wise to wait a few days, and examine the possibilities suggested by this magnate who had appeared so providentially?
Rémy had no personal knowledge of Ranulf, earl of  Chester, and could not be sure what kind of welcome he would get in the north.
Whereas rumour led him to believe that Robert Beaumont was a cultivated man, likely to appreciate music.
At least he was here, lodged in the same guesthall, dining at the same table.
Why abandon an opportunity present and promising, to go after a distant and unproven one?
So Rémy set out to explore the situation, and laid himself out to please, and his gifts and graces, when he tried, were considerable.
Bénezet had been in his service long enough to understand his own part in the operation in hand without having to be told.
He made himself agreeable to the earl's squires in the stableyard, and kept his ears open for any revealing mentions of Robert Bossu's tastes, temperament and interests, and what he garnered was encouraging.
Such a patron would be a complete protection, a life of comparative luxury, and a very congenial employment.
Bénezet was sauntering back to the guesthall with his gleanings, when he observed Brother Jerome rounding the box hedge from the garden, head down and in a hurry.
Also, it seemed to Bénezet, in some excitement, and in haste to unburden himself to someone about whatever was on his mind.
There was only one person to whom Jerome would be reporting with so much fervour; Bénezet, naturally curious about anything that might serve his turn or redound to his profit, was not averse to picking up a few crumbs of useful information by the way.
He slowed his pace to observe where Jerome went, and followed him without haste into the cloister.
Prior Robert was replacing a book in the aumbry  cupboard at the end of the scriptorium.
Jerome made for him, heavy and urgent with news.
Bénezet slipped into a carrel as near as he could approach unnoticed, and made himself invisible in the shadows.
A convenient time, with the light fading, for all the brothers who were engaged in copying or reading had abandoned their books for the evening, leaving the prior to ensure that everything was decently replaced exactly where it should be.
In the twilit quietness voices carried, and Jerome was excited, and Robert never one to subdue a voice he was fond of hearing.
Crumbs of advantage, Bénezet had found, may be picked up in the most unexpected places.
‘Father Prior,’ said Brother Jerome, between outrage and satisfaction, ‘something has come to my notice that you should know.
It seems that there is one man who helped to carry Saint Winifred's reliquary to the cart for Ramsey, in all innocence, being asked by a habited brother of the Order.
He has said he can recognize the man, and is coming here tonight to make the assay.
Father, why has no word been said to us of this matter?’
‘I do know of it,’ said the prior, and closed the door of the aumbry upon the piety and wisdom within.
‘The lord abbot told me.
It was not made public because that would have been to give warning to the culprit.’
‘But, Father, do you see what this means?
It was the wickedness of men that removed her from our care.
And I have heard a name given already to the impious thief who dared disturb her.
I heard Brother Cadfael name him.
The seeming innocent, the novice from Ramsey, Tutilo.’
‘That was not said to me,’ reflected Robert with slightly  affronted dignity.
‘No doubt because the abbot would not accuse a man until a witness gives proof positive of the felon's guilt.
We have only to wait until tonight, and we shall have that proof.’
‘But, Father, can one believe such wickedness of any man?
What penance can possibly atone?
Surely the lightning stroke of heaven should have fallen upon him and destroyed him in the very deed.’
‘Retribution may be delayed,’ said Prior Robert, and turned to lead the way out from the scriptorium, his agitated shadow at his heels.
‘But it will be certain.
A few hours only, and the illdoer will get his due penalty.’
Brother Jerome's vengeful and unsatisfied mutterings trailed away to the south door, and out into the chill of the evening.
Bénezet let him go, and sat for some moments considering what he had heard, before he rose at leisure, and walked back thoughtfully to the guesthall.
An easy evening awaited him; both he and Daalny were excused all service, for Rémy was to dine with the abbot and the earl, the first fruits of his campaign in search of place and status.
No servant need attend him, and though there might well be music made before the evening ended, a girl singer could not fittingly be a part of the entertainment in the abbot's lodging.
They were both free to do whatever they wished, for once.
‘I have a thing to tell you,’ he said, finding Daalny frowning over the tuning of a rebec under one of the torches in the hall.
‘There's a hunt afoot tonight that I think your Tutilo would be well advised to avoid.’
And he told her what was in the wind.
‘Get the good word to  him if you so please,’ he said amiably, ‘and let him make himself scarce.
It might only postpone the day, but even one day is breathing space, and I fancy he's sharp enough to make up a plausible story, once he knows the odds, or to persuade this witness to a different tale.
Why should I wish the lad any worse harm than he's let himself in for already?’
‘He is not my Tutilo,’ said Daalny.
But she laid down the rebec on her knees, and looked up at Bénezet with a fiercely thoughtful face.
‘This is truth you're telling me?’
‘What else?
You've heard all the to-ing and fro-ing there's been, this is the latter end of it.
And here you are free as a bird, for once, provided you come back to your cage in time.
You do as you please, but I would let him know what's threatening.
And as for me, I'm going to stretch my legs in the town, while I can.
I'll say nothing, and know nothing.’
‘He is not my Tutilo,’ she repeated, almost absently, still pondering.
‘By the way he avoids looking at you, he easily could be, if you wanted him,’ said Bénezet, grinning.
‘But leave him to stew, if that's your humour.’
It was not her humour, and he knew it very well.
Tutilo would be warned of what was in store for him by the end of Vespers, if not before.
Sub-Prior Herluin, on his way to dine with Abbot Radulfus and the distinguished company at his lodging, and pleasantly gratified at the invitation, was confronted in mid-court with a meek petitioner in the shape of Tutilo, all duty and service, asking leave of absence to visit the Lady Donata at Longner.
‘Father, the lady asks that I will go and play to her, as I have done before.
Have I your permission to go?’
Herluin's mind was rather on his forthcoming dinner, and the marshalling of his arguments in the matter of Saint Winifred.
Not a word had been said to him of any untoward suspicions, or of the threat of an eyewitness coming to judgement this very night.
Tutilo got his permission with almost dismissive ease.
He left by the gatehouse, openly, and took the road along the Foregate, in case anyone happened to notice and check that he set off in the appropriate direction.
He was not going far, by no means as far as Longner, but far enough to be absent when the immediate danger threatened.
He was not so simple as to believe that the danger would be over when Aldhelm went home frustrated, but what followed he would have to encounter and parry when it came.
Sufficient unto the day was the evil thereof, and he had considerable confidence in his own ingenuity.
The news worked its way round by devious stages to the ears of Brother Jerome, that the bird he desired with all his narrow might to ensnare had taken flight to a safe distance.
He was sick and sour with rage.
Clearly there was no justice to be had, even from heaven.
The devil was all too efficiently looking after his own.
He must have sickened on his own gall, for he disappeared for the rest of the evening.
It cannot be said that he was missed.
Prior Robert was conscious of his shadow only when he had an errand for him to run, or need of  his obsequious presence to restore a balance when someone had managed to scar the priorial dignity.
Most of the brothers were all too well aware of him, but in his absence relaxed, gave thanks and forgot him; and the novices and schoolboys evaded being in his proximity at all, so far as was possible.
It was not until Compline that his non-appearance provoked wonder, comment and finally uneasiness, for he was unrelenting in observance, whatever else might be said of him.
Sub-Prior Richard, a kindly soul even to those for whom he had no particular liking, grew anxious, and went to look for the stray, and found him on his bed in the dortoir, pallid and shivering, pleading sickness and looking pinched, grey and cold.
Since he was inclined to be dyspeptic at the best of times, no one was greatly surprised, unless perhaps at the severity of this attack.
Brother Cadfael brought him a warming drink, and a draught to settle his stomach, and they left him to sleep it off.
That was the last mild sensation of the evening, for the final one, still to come, certainly could not be described as mild, and occurred somewhat after midnight.
The half-hour after Compline seemed to be declining into total anticlimax.
For the young man from the Upton manor, the anxiously awaited witness who was to uncover truth at last, did not come.
The abbot's guests had dispersed decorously, Rémy and Earl Robert in amicable company to the guesthall, where Bénezet was already returned from his evening in the town, in good time to attend his lord, as the earl's two squires stood ready and waiting for theirs.
Daalny  was shaking out and combing her long black hair in the women's rooms, and listening to the chatter of a merchant's widow from Wem, who had availed herself of a night's lodging here on her way to Wenlock for her daughter's lying-in.
Everything within the walls was preparing for sleep.
But Aldhelm did not come.
And neither did Tutilo return from his visit to the lady of Longner.
The order of the day's observances being immutable, whoever fell ill and whoever defaulted, the bell for Matins sounded in the dortoir as it did every midnight, and the brothers arose and went sleepily down the night stairs into the church.
Cadfael, who could sleep or wake virtually at will, always felt the particular solemnity of the night offices, and the charged vastness of the darkened vault above, where the candlelight ebbed out and died into lofty distances that might or might not stretch into infinity.
The silence, also, had an added dimension of cosmic silence in the midnight hours, and every smallest sound that disrupted the ordained sounds of worship seemed to jar the foundations of the earth.
Such, he thought, in the pause for meditation and prayer between Matins and Lauds, as the faint, brief creak of the hinges of the south door from the cloister.
His hearing was sharper than most, and as yet unmarred by the years; probably few of the others heard it.
Yet someone had come in by that door, very softly, and was now motionless just within it, hesitating to advance into the choir and interrupt the second office of the day.
And in a few moments a voice  from that quarter, low and breathy, joined very softly in the responses.
When they left their stalls at the end of Lauds, and approached the night stairs to return to their beds, a slight, habited figure arose from its knees to confront them, stepping into what light there was very gingerly, but with resigned resolution, like one expecting a bleak welcome, but braced to endure and survive it.
Tutilo's habit shimmered about the shoulders with the soft and soundless rain of Spring, which had begun to fall in mid-evening, his curls were damp and ruffled, and the hand he passed across his forehead to brush them back left a dark smear behind.
His eyes were wide and peering from within a blank shell of shock and his face, where his hand had not soiled it, was very pale.
At sight of him Herluin started forward from Prior Robert's side with a sharp explosive sound of exasperation, anger and bewilderment, but before he could recover his breath and pour out the fiery reproaches he undoubtedly intended to vent, Tutilo had found words, few and trenchant, to forestall all other utterance.
‘Father, I grieve to come so late, but I had no choice.
It was vital I should go first into the town, to the castle, where such news first belongs, and so I did.
Father, on my way back, on the path from the ferry and through the wood, I found a dead man.
Murdered…
Father,’ he said, showing the hand that had soiled his brow, ‘I speak what I know, what was plain even in the pitch dark.
I touched him…his head is pulp!’
Chapter Six
WHEN HE saw his hands in the light he flinched, and held them away from him, to avoid letting them touch any other part of his person or habit, for the right was engrained with drying blood across the palm and between the fingers, and the fingers of the left were dabbled at the tips, as if they had felt at stained clothing.
He would not or could not elaborate on his news until he had washed, twisting hand within hand as though he would scrub off his own defiled skin along with the blood.
When at last he was private in the abbot's parlour with Radulfus, Prior Robert, Herluin, and Brother Cadfael, whose presence Tutilo himself had requested, he launched upon his story baldly enough.
‘I was coming back by the path from the ferry, through the woodland, and where the trees are thickest I stumbled over him.
He was lying with his legs across the path, and I fell on my knees beside him.
It was pitch dark, but a man could follow the path by the pale line of sky between the branches.
But on the ground nothing but blackness.
I felt down beside me, and I knew the round of a knee, and cloth.
I thought he was drunk, but he never made sound or move.
I felt up from thigh to hip, and leaned close where I judged his face to be, but never a breath or a sign of life.
God help me, I put my hand on the ruin of his head, and then I knew he was dead.
And not by any accident!
I felt the splintered bone.’
‘Could you by any means guess who this man must be?’ asked the abbot, his voice level and gentle.
‘No, Father.
It was too dark by far.
There was no way of knowing, without torch or lantern.
And I was knocked clean out of my right wits at first.
But then I thought how this was the sheriff's business, and how the Church is held innocent and apart from all dealings in cases of blood.
So I went on into the town, and told them at the castle, and the lord Beringar has set a guard on the place now until daylight.
What I could tell I have told, and the rest must wait for the light.
And, Father, he asked — the lord sheriff asked — that I should beg you to have Brother Cadfael informed also, and when the morning comes, if you permit, I am to lead him to the place, to meet the sheriff there.
It is why I asked that he might attend here.
And I will willingly show the place tomorrow, and if he has any question to ask me now, I will answer as well as I may.
For he said — Hugh Beringar said — that Brother Cadfael understands wounds, having been many years a man-at-arms.’
He had run himself out of breath and almost out of effort by then, but heaved a great sigh at having got the load from his shoulders.
‘If the place is guarded,’ said Cadfael, meeting the  abbot's questioning eye, ‘whatever it has to tell us can safely be left until daylight.
I think perhaps we should not speculate beforehand.
It might be all too easy to take a wrong path.
I would ask only, Tutilo, at what hour did you leave Longner?’
Tutilo started and shook himself, and took an unexpectedly long moment to think before he answered: ‘It was late, past time for Compline when I started.’
‘And you met no one on the walk back?’
‘Not this side the ferry.’
‘I think,’ said Radulfus, ‘we should wait, and let be until you have viewed the place by daylight, and the unfortunate soul is known.
Enough now!
Go to your bed, Tutilo, and God grant you sleep.
When we rise for Prime, then will be the time to see and consider, before we try to interpret.’
But for all that, thought Cadfael, back in his own bed but with no will to sleep, how many of the five of us, one who spoke and four who listened, will close an eye again tonight?
And of the three of us who knew there was to be a young man on his way down to us by that path during the evening, how many have already made the leap forward to give this nameless victim a name, and begin to see certain reasons why it might be expedient for some if he never reached us?
Radulfus?
He would not miss so plain a possibility, but he could and would refrain from entertaining and proceeding on it until more is known.
Prior Robert?
Well, give him his due, Prior Robert hardly said a word tonight, he will wait to have cause before he accuses any man, but he is intelligent  enough to put all these small nothings together and make of them something.
And I?
It must have been for myself as much as any other that I issued that warning: It might be all too easy to take a wrong path!
And heavens knows, once launched it's all too hard to turn back and look again for the missed trace.
So let us see what we have: Aldhelm — may he be home, forgetful and fast asleep at this moment!— was to come and pick out his man yesterday evening.
The brothers had not been told, only Radulfus, Prior Robert, Hugh and I knew of it, leaving out of consideration Cynric's boy, who runs errands faithfully, but barely understands what he delivers, and forgets his embassage as soon as done and rewarded.
Herluin was not told, and I am sure did not know.
Neither, to the best of my knowledge, did Tutilo.
Yet it is strange that the same evening Tutilo should be sent for to Longner.
Was he so sent for?
That can be confirmed or confuted, there's no problem there.
Say he somehow got to know of Aldhelm's coming, even so by avoiding he could only delay recognition, not prevent it, he would have to reappear in the end.
Yes, but say he reappeared, and Aldhelm never came.
Not just that evening, but never.
Detail by detail built up into a formidable possibility, in which, nevertheless, he did not believe.
Best to put off even thought until he had seen for himself the place where murder had been done, and the victim who had suffered it.
The early morning light, filtering grudgingly between the  almost naked trees and the tangle of underbrush, reached the narrow thread of the path only dimly, a moist brown streak of rotted leaves and occasional outcrops of stone, striped with shadows like the rungs of a ladder where old coppicing had left the trunks spaced and slender.
The sun was not yet clear of the eastward banks of cloud, and the light was colourless and amorphous from the evening's soft rain, but clear enough to show what had brought Tutilo to his knees in the darkness, and yet remained unseen.
The body lay diagonally across the path, as he had said, not quite flat on its face and breast, rather on the right shoulder, but with the right arm flung clear behind, and the left groping wide beside him, clear of the folds of the coarse hooded cloak he wore.
The hood had slipped back from his head when he fell, by the way it lay bunched in his neck.
He had fallen and lain with his right cheek pressed into the wet leaves.
The exposed left side of his head was a dark, misshapen blot of dried blood, a crusted darkness, the ruin on which Tutilo had laid his hand in the night, and sickened with horror.
He looked composed enough now, standing a little apart in the fringe of bushes, staring steadily at what the night had hidden from him, with lids half-lowered over the dulled gold of his eyes, and his mouth shut too tightly, the only betrayal of the effort by which he maintained his stillness and calm.
He had risen very early, from a bed probably sleepless, and led the way to this spot among the thickest of the woodland without a word beyond the whispered morning greeting, and obedient  acknowledgement of any remarks directed at him.
Small wonder, if his own account was truth, smaller still if today he was being forced back to a scene about which he had lied; lied to the law, lied to his superiors in the Order he had chosen of his own will and desire.
Down there, pressed into the earth, the face, or most of it, was intact.
Cadfael kneeled close by the shattered head, and slid a hand gently under the right cheek, to turn the face a little upward to be seen.
‘Can you name him?’ asked Hugh, standing beside him.
The question was directed at Tutilo, and could not be evaded; but there was no attempt at evasion.
Tutilo said at once, in a still and careful voice:
‘I do not know his name.’
Surprising, but almost certainly true; those few moments at the end of a chaotic evening had never called for names.
He had been as anonymous to Aldhelm as Aldhelm had been to him.
‘But you do know the man?’
‘I have seen him,’ said Tutilo.
‘He helped us when the church was flooded.’
‘His name is Aldhelm,’ said Cadfael flatly, and rose from his knees, letting the soiled face sink back gently into the leafmould.
‘He was on his way to us last night, but he never reached us.’
If the boy had not known that before, let it be said now.
He listened and gave no sign.
He had shut himself within, and was not easily going to be drawn out again.
‘Well, let us see what there is to be noted,’ said Hugh shortly, and turned his back upon the slight, submissive  figure standing so warily aside from the event he had himself reported.
‘He was coming down this path from the ferry, and here he was struck down as he passed by.
See how he fell!
Back a yard or more — here where the covert is thick, someone struck him down from behind and to his left — here on the left side of the path, from ambush.’
‘So it seems,’ said Cadfael, and eyed the bushes that encroached halfway across the path.
‘There would be rustling enough from his own passage to cover another man's sudden movement among the branches here.
He fell just as he lies now.
Do you see any sign, Hugh, that he ever moved again?’
For the ground about him, with its padding of last year's thick leaf-fall sodden and trodden into soft pulp, showed no disturbance, but lay moist, dark and flat, unmarked by any convulsions of his feet or arms, or any trampling of an assailant round him.
‘While he lay stunned,’ said Hugh, ‘the work was finished.
No struggle, no defence.’
In a small, muted voice Tutilo ventured, out of the shadowy covert of his cowl: ‘It was raining.’
‘So it was,’ said Cadfael.
‘I had not forgotten.
His hood would be up to cover his head.
This — was done afterwards, as he lay.’
The boy stood motionless still, looking down at the body.
Only the subtle curve of a cheekbone and the lowered eyelids and a lunette of brow showed within the shadows of the cowl.
There were tears hanging on the long, girlish lashes.
‘Brother, may I cover his face?’
‘Not yet,’ said Cadfael.
‘I need to look more closely before we carry him back with us.’
There were two of Hugh's sergeants waiting impassively along the path, with a litter on which to lay him for passage to castle or abbey, according as Hugh should direct.
From their judicious distance they watched in silence, with detached interest.
They had seen violent death before.
‘Do whatever you need,’ said Hugh.
‘Whatever club or staff was used on him is surely gone with the man who used it, but if the poor wretch's corpse can tell us anything, let us discover it before we move him.’
Cadfael kneeled behind the dead man's shoulders, and looked closely at the indented wound, in which white points of bone showed in the centre of the encrusted blood.
The skull was broken just above and behind the left temple, with what looked like a single blow, though of that he could not be sure.
A staff with a heavy rounded handle might have done such damage, but the crater it had made was large indeed, and jagged, not regular.
Cadfael took up carefully the edge of the hood, and rounded it out on his fist.
It was seamed at the back, and running his fingertips the length of the seam he encountered a small patch halfway down that was sticky and stiffening, and withdrew them smeared with drying blood.
Very little blood, surely from the first blow that felled its victim through hood and all.
And this was at the back of the head, only the central seam contaminated, and that only meagrely.
He straightened the folds, and ran his fingers through the dead youth's thick thatch of reddish-brown hair, up from the nape to the rounding at the back  of the head, where that seam had rested, and surely helped to break the force of the blow.
He found a graze that had oozed a small crust of blood into the thick hair, almost dry now.
There was no break there in the skull beneath the skin.
‘It was no very fearful blow that felled him,’ said Cadfael.
‘It cannot have knocked him out of his wits for very long, had that been all.
What was done after, was done quickly, before he could come to himself.
He would never have died of this.
And yet what followed was cold, deliberate and final.
A drunken man in a squabble could have done this.’
‘It did what was required of it,’ said Hugh grimly.
‘Laid him at his enemy's mercy.
No haste!
Time to judge and finish at leisure.’
Cadfael straightened out the coarse folds of the hood, and shook out a few pale feathery fragments from among them.
He rubbed them in his palm, slivers of tindery, rotted wood.
Plenty of that, no doubt, in this overgrown, untended woodland, even after it had been combed for firing by the urchins of the Foregate.
But why here in Aldhelm's hood?
He ran his hands over the shoulders of the cloak, and found no more such minute splinters.
He lifted the edge of the hood, and laid it gently over the shattered head, hiding the face.
Behind him he felt, rather than heard, Tutilo's deep intake of breath, and sensed the quiver that passed through him.
‘Wait a few moments yet.
Let's see if the murderer left any trace behind, if he stood here any length of time waiting for his man.’
For here was certainly the closest  cover on all that path from the ferry down into the Foregate.
The track had, he recalled, two branches, separating as it dropped from the heathy ridge that looked down upon the river.
One branch went down directly to the Horse Fair, the other, this one, cut through to emerge halfway along the Foregate, almost within sight of the abbey gatehouse.
By this one Tutilo must have set out for Longner, and by this one he had returned, only to happen upon this grievous discovery along the way.
If, of course, he had ever been nearer to Longner, that night, than this disastrous place.
Cadfael stepped back to measure again the angle at which the body lay, and the few paces back along the path where the assailant must have been hidden.
Thick cover, bristling with dryish branches and twigs, dead wood among them; he looked for broken ends, and found them.
‘Here!’
He thrust through the screen of growth sidelong, into cramped space between trees, where a thin grass grew, mottled with dead leafage and glistening from the night's rain.
Soft ground, trodden flat by uneasy, shifting feet not so many hours ago.
Nothing else, except a thick dead branch lying tossed under the bushes, and just aside from it, the bleached shape in the grass where it had formerly lain.
Cadfael stooped and picked it up, and the thicker end, broken and dangling, shed a fluttering debris of tindery flakes as he swung it in his hand.
Thick enough and heavy enough, but brittle.
‘Here he waited.
Some time, by the way he's pounded the mould.
And this, this was what he found to his hand.
With this he struck the first blow, and broke it in striking.’
Hugh eyed the branch, and gnawed a thoughtful lip.
‘But not the second blow, surely.
Not with this!
It would have shattered in flinders long before it did that damage.’
‘No, this he threw back into the bushes when it snapped and turned in his hand.
And looked quickly for something more deadly?
For clearly, if ever he trusted to this in the first place, he had come without any weapon.’
Perhaps even, thought Cadfael, prompted a step further, he came without even the intent to kill, since he did not come prepared.
‘Wait!
Let's see what offered.’
For he could not have had to look far for whatever it might be, there had been no time for that.
A few minutes, and Aldhelm would have been stirring and hauling himself to his feet.
Cadfael began to prowl uphill along the edge of the path, probing into the bushes, and then downhill again on the opposite side.
Here and there the limestone that cropped out among the heather and rough grass on the ridge above broke through the grass and mould in stony patches, fretted away occasionally into small scattered boulders, bedded into the turf and moss.
Cadfael turned downhill some yards.
The assailant had hidden on the left of the track, he probed first on that side.
A few paces below where the body lay, and a yard or so into the bushes, there was a patch of free stones, loosely overgrown with grass and lichen, and to all appearance undisturbed for a year or more; until something about the clear outlining of the upper stone made him look closer.
It was not bonded to those below it by the neat filling of soil and small growth that bound all the rest, though it lay aligned precisely to fill the place it had  surely filled for a year or more.
Cadfael stooped and took it in both hands, and lifted it, and it parted from its setting without trailing a blade of grass or a torn edge of moss.
Once already in the night it had been uprooted and replaced.
‘No,’ said Cadfael, low to himself, ‘this I never expected.
That we should find a mind of such devious ways.’
‘This?’ said Hugh, staring closely upon the stone.
It was large and heavy, a weighty double handful, smoothed above by exposure, beneath its dappling of lichen and moss; but when Cadfael turned it over it showed rough and pale, with some jagged edges that were tipped with a dark crust, not yet dried out.
‘That is blood,’ said Hugh with certainty.
‘That is blood,’ said Cadfael.
‘When the thing was done, there was no longer any haste.
He had time to think, and reason.
All cold, cold and deliberate.
He put back the stone as he found it, carefully aligned.
The small, severed roots that had held it he could not repair, but who was to notice them?
Now we have done all we can do here, Hugh.
What remains is to put all together and consider what manner of man this could be.’
‘We may move the poor wretch?’ said Hugh.
‘May I have him home to the abbey?
I would like to look yet again, and more carefully.
I think he lived alone, without family.
We shall confer with his own priest at Upton.
And this stone…’
It was heavy for him, he was glad to set it down for a while.
‘Bring this with him.’
And all this time the boy had stood close by, wordless  himself, but listening to every word spoken around him.
The brief dew on his lashes, that had caught the thin early rays of the risen sun, was dry enough now, his mouth was set in a rigid line.
When Hugh's men had lifted Aldhelm's body on to the litter, and set off down the path with it towards the Foregate, Tutilo fell in behind the sorry little procession like a mourner, and went silently step for step with them, his eyes still upon the shrouded body.
‘He'll not be leaving?’ said Hugh in Cadfael's ear, as they followed.
‘He'll not be leaving.
I will see to that.
He has a hard master to satisfy, and nowhere else to go.’
‘And what do you make of him?’
‘I would not presume to assay,’ said Cadfael.
‘He slips through my fingers.
But time was when I would have said the same of you,’ he added wryly, and took heart at hearing Hugh laugh, if only briefly and softly.
‘I know!
That was mutual.
But see how it turned out in the end.’
‘He came straight to me with the tale,’ said Hugh, reckoning up in a low voice for Cadfael's ear alone.
‘He showed very shaken and shocked, but clear of head.
He had wasted no time, the body was almost warm as life, only no breath in him, so we let all alone until morning.
This lad behaved every way as a man would who had happened unawares on murder.
Only, perhaps, better than most would have managed.’
‘Which may be the measure of his quality,’ said Cadfael firmly, ‘or of his cunning.
As well the one as the other.
And who's to tell?’
‘It is not often,’ said Hugh with a rueful smile, ‘that I  must listen to you as the devil's advocate, where a youngster in trouble is concerned.
Well, keep him in your custody, and we'll take time over either condemning or absolving.’
In the mortuary chapel Aldhelm's body lay on its bier, limbs straightened, body composed, eyes closed, enshrined and indifferent, having told all Cadfael could induce it to tell.
Not all the specks of pallor in the shattered brow had proved to be splinters of bone.
There were enough fragments of limestone and specklings of dust to prove over again the use to which the stone had been put.
A linen cloth was draped over the young man's face.
Across his breast Cadfael and Tutilo confronted each other.
The boy was very pale, and drawn and grey with exhaustion.
Cadfael had kept him with him of design, when Hugh departed to report to Abbot Radulfus what had been found and what had been done.
Mutely Tutilo had fetched and carried, brought water and cloths, fetched candles and lit them, willingly sustaining the presence of death.
Now there was no more to be done, and he was still.
‘You do understand,’ said Cadfael, meeting the tired eyes, dulled gold even in the candlelight, ‘why this man was on his way here?
You do know what he might — what he said he would — be able to tell, when he saw all the brothers of the Order, here in this house?’
Tutilo's lips moved, saying almost soundlessly: ‘Yes, I do know.’
‘You know in what manner Saint Winifred's reliquary was taken away from here.
That is known now to all men.
You know there was a brother of the Order who so contrived her departure and asked Aldhelm to help him.
And that she was meant to reach Ramsey, not to be lost on the way.
Do you think justice will look among the brothers of Shrewsbury, from whom she was stolen?
Or rather at two from the house that stood to gain?
And one in particular?’
Tutilo fronted him with unwavering eyes, but said nothing.
‘And here lies Aldhelm, who could have given that brother a face and a name, beyond any question.
Except that he no longer has a voice with which to speak.
And you were away, along the same road, the road to the ferry, to Preston from which he would be coming, to Longner, where you were bound, when he died.’
Tutilo neither affirmed nor denied.
‘Son,’ said Cadfael, ‘you know, do you not, what will be said?’
‘Yes,’ said Tutilo, unlocking his lips at last, ‘I do know.’
‘It will be said and believed that you lay in wait for Aldhelm and killed him, so that he could never point the finger at you.’
Tutilo made no protest that he had been the one to cry murder, to invoke the law, to unloose the hunt after the murderer.
He averted his eyes for a moment to Aldhelm's covered face, and raised them again to meet Cadfael's eyes squarely.
‘Except,’ he said at last, ‘that it shall not be said.
They shall not be able to say it.
For I will go to  the lord abbot and Father Herluin, and myself tell what I have done.
There shall not need anyone but myself to point the finger at me.
For what I have done I will answer, but not for murder which I have not done.’
‘Child,’ said Cadfael, after a long and thoughtful silence, ‘do not deceive yourself that even that would still every tongue.
There will not be wanting those who will say that you have weighed the odds, knowing yourself already suspect, and of two evils chosen the lesser.
Who would not rather own to theft and deception within the Church's writ, rather than put his neck into the sheriff's noose for murder?
Speak or keep silence, there will be no easy course for you.’
‘No matter!’ said Tutilo.
‘If I deserve penance, let it fall on me.
Whether I pay or go free, whatever the cost, I will not let it be said I killed a decent man to keep him from accusing me.
And if they twist things still to my disgrace in both counts, what more is there I can do?
Brother Cadfael, help me to the lord abbot's presence!
If you ask audience for me, he will hear me.
Ask if Father Herluin may be present also, now, while the sheriff is there.
It cannot wait until chapter tomorrow.’
He had made up his mind, and all at once was on fire to have it done: and for all Cadfael could see, it was his best course.
The truth, if truth could be anticipated from this subtle creature, even in circumstances of desperation, might shed light in more than one direction.
‘If that is truly what you want,’ he said.
‘But beware of defending yourself before you are accused.
Tell what you have to tell, with no exclaiming, and Abbot Radulfus  will listen, that I can promise you.’
He wished he could heartily have said as much for Sub-Prior Herluin.
So, perhaps, Tutilo was wishing, too, for suddenly in the midst of his most solemn determination his set mouth twisted into a wry and apprehensive smile, gone in an instant.
‘Come with me now,’ he said.
In the abbot's parlour Tutilo had a larger audience than Cadfael had bargained for, but welcomed it, or so it seemed, perhaps as leavening further the bleak reception he could expect from Herluin.
Hugh was still there, and it was natural enough that Earl Robert should be called into conference as a matter of courtesy where the law of the land and King Stephen's writ were concerned.
Herluin was there at Tutilo's own request, since there was ultimately no help for it, and Prior Robert was not to be left out where Herluin was admitted.
Better far to confront them all, and let them make of it what they would.
‘Father Abbot…
Father Herluin…my lords…’
He took his stand sturdily, folded his hands, and looked round them all in turn, as at a panel of his judges.
‘I have that to tell you that I should have told before this, since it has to do with the issue that is now in dispute among all here.
It is known that the reliquary of Saint Winifred was taken away on the wagon that was loaded with timber for Ramsey, but no one has shown how this came about.
This thing was my doing.
I avow it.
I moved the reliquary from its altar, after it had been swathed well for safety in moving it to a higher place.
I put a trimmed log in its place, to be taken up by the stair.
And at night I asked  one of the young men who was helping us, one who had come with the carters, to help me load the saint on to the wagon, to go to Ramsey to the aid and succour of our misused house.
This is all the truth.
There was none had any part in it but I. Enquire no further, for I stand here to declare what I have done, and to defend it.’
Herluin had opened his mouth and drawn breath to ride over his presumptuous novice with a torrent of indignant words, but then held his breath even before the abbot had cautioned him with a peremptory hand.
For to revile this troublesome boy at this moment was to damage whatever claim Ramsey had to the stake for which the bold wretch had made so perilous a bid.
What could not a miracle-working saint achieve for the future glory of Ramsey?
And the issue was still very much alive, for here beside him, listening alertly and with a dry little smile, was the earl of Leicester, who, whether in earnest or in mischief, was urging a plea of his own for the same prize.
No, say nothing yet, not until things become clearer.
Leave the options open.
Bow gracefully to Abbot Radulfus's gesture of restraint, and keep your mouth shut.
‘You do right, at least, in confession,’ said Radulfus mildly.
‘As you yourself informed us last night, and the lord sheriff has since confirmed, to our endless regret, and surely to yours, the young man you so beguiled is now dead, here within our walls, and shall be at our charge for the rites due to him.
It would have been better, would it not, if you had spoken earlier, and spared him the journey that was his death?’
Such colour as there was in Tutilo's weary face slowly  drained away to leave him grey and mute.
When he could wring the tight cords of his throat into speech he said in a throttled whisper: ‘Father, it is my shame.
But I could not know!
Even now I do not understand!’
Cadfael considered, when he came to think it out afterwards, that that was the moment when he became certain that Tutilo had not killed, had not ever imagined that his deceit was putting another soul in danger of death.
‘What is done, is done,’ said the abbot neutrally.
‘You speak of defending it.
If you think it defensible, go on.
We will hear you out.’
Tutilo swallowed, and rallied, straightening his shapely shoulders.
‘Father, what I cannot sufficiently justify I can at least explain.
I came here with Father Herluin, grieving for Ramsey's wrongs, and longing to do something great to benefit the restoration of our house.
I heard of the miracles of Saint Winifred, and the many pilgrims and rich gifts she has brought to Shrewsbury, and I dreamed of finding such a patroness to give new life to Ramsey.
I prayed that she would intercede for us, and show us her grace, and it came to me that she heard me, and that she willed to do us good.
It seemed to me, Father, that she inclined to us, and willed to visit us.
And I began to feel it heavy upon me, that I must do her will.’
Colour had come back into his cheeks, burning on the notable bones, a little hectic, a little fevered.
Cadfael watched him and was in doubt.
Had he convinced himself, or could he produce at will this rapture to convince others?
Or, like any fallible human sinner, was he desperately constructing an armour of simplicity about his  devious shiftings?
Sin detected can contrive all manner of veils to cover its nakedness.
‘I planned and did what I have already told you,’ said Tutilo, suddenly brief and dry.
‘I felt that I was doing no wrong.
I believed I was instructed, and faithfully I obeyed.
But bitterly I regret that I needed another man's hands to help me, and he in ignorance.’
‘In innocence,’ said the abbot, ‘to his peril.’
‘I acknowledge it,’ said Tutilo, erect and wide-eyed.
‘I regret it.
God forgive me for it!’
‘In due time,’ said Radulfus with unremitting detachment, ‘so he may.
That is not for us to meddle with.
As for us, we have your story, we have a saint who has made her way back to us by strange ways, and we have those who have been friends to her on that journey, and may well believe, as you believe, that the lady has been in control of her own destiny, and choosing her own friends and her own dependants.
But before ever we come to that issue, we have here a murdered man.
Neither God nor his saints will tolerate murder.
This young man Aldhelm cries to us for justice.
If there is anything you can tell us that may shed light on his death, speak now.’
‘Father,’ said Tutilo, burning into startling whiteness, ‘I pledge you my faith I never did nor never would have done him any harm, nor do I know of any who might need to wish him ill.
It is true he could have told you of me what now I have told you.
It never was matter for such fear to me that I must have tried to silence him.
He helped me!
He helped her!
I would have said yes to him when he pointed at me.
Granted I was a little afraid, I  tried to be secret.
But there are no secrets now.’
‘Yet you are the only man,’ insisted the abbot mercilessly, but without pressing the suggestion to an accusation, ‘who is known to have had reason to fear his coming here with what he could tell.
What you yourself have now chosen to tell us can neither undo that truth, nor absolve you from it.
Until more is known concerning his death, I judge that you must be held in confinement within my custody.
The only charge that can be made against you at this moment is of theft from our house, however that may be read hereafter.
That leaves you within my writ.
I think the lord sheriff may have somewhat to say to that disposition.’
‘I have nothing to object to it,’ said Hugh promptly.
‘I trust him to your charge, Father Abbot.’
Herluin had said not a word for or against.
He was nursing in silence the options left to him, and so far they did not appear to him totally unpromising.
The silly boy might have made potentially disastrous mistakes, but he had preserved the basis of his claim.
The saint had willed it!
How does the incumbent house prove otherwise?
She did set out, only the wickedness of men frustrated her journey.
‘Ask Brother Vitalis to call the porters to take him away,’ said the abbot.
‘And, Brother Cadfael, see him into his cell, and if you will, come back to us.’
Chapter Seven
IT WAS apparent to Cadfael, when he reentered the abbot's parlour, that if battle had not actually been joined, war trumpets were certainly being tuned for the onset.
Radulfus maintained his judicial calm, and the earl's broad brow was suave and benign, though there was no guessing what went on in the highly intelligent mind behind it; but Prior Robert and Sub-Prior Herluin sat very erect, stiff in the spine and with long, refined faces sharpened into steel, studiously not looking straight at each other, but maintaining each a bright gaze on distance, and the appearance of considering with magisterial detachment the situation that confronted them.
‘Setting aside the issue of murder,’ said Herluin, ‘for which as yet we lack any kind of proof, surely his story is to be believed.
This was a holy theft.
He was doing what the saint willed.’
‘I do not find it easy,’ said Abbot Radulfus, with a distinct chill in his voice, ‘to set aside the issue of murder.
It takes precedence of any other matter.
Hugh, what can you say of this boy?
He has told us now what he might  well have feared the dead man could tell us.
That leaves him with no cause to kill.’
‘No,’ said Hugh.
‘He had cause, by his own admission, and we know of no other who had.
It is possible that he did kill, but having killed, took thought to cover what he had done.
Possible…
I say no more than that.
He came straight to us at the castle, and told us how he had found the body, and no question but he was greatly shaken and agitated, as well he might be, guilty or innocent.
Today I must say he has behaved wholly in accordance with innocence, moved, pitying, patient in attendance.
If all that was put on of design, to disguise guilt, then he is beyond his years bold, sharp-witted and devious.
But,’ he added wryly, ‘I have it in mind that so he is, and may very well have had the hardihood to play it so.’
‘But then,’ said Radulfus, thoughtfully frowning, ‘why come to me now, and confess the very thing of which the witness could have accused him?’
‘Because he had not fully realized that suspicion would still follow him, and now it would be suspicion of murder.
In such a case better to accept whatever penalties the Church might impose, however harsh, for theft and deceit, rather than fall into the hands of the secular law,my law,’ said Hugh firmly, ‘where murder is a hanging matter.
If by submitting to the one guilt he could evade all suspicion upon the worse count…he is quite shrewd enough, I fancy, to make the choice and quite durable enough to abide it.
Father Herluin should know him better than we.’
But Cadfael was certain by then that Herluin did not  know his Tutilo at all, probably never had any clear idea what went on in the minds of any of his novices, because he paid no regard to them.
Hugh's prompting, perhaps intentionally, had put him into a difficult position.
He would want to distance himself and Ramsey in horror from any possibility of having harboured a murderer, but while the possibility still remained of profiting by a theft, holy or unholy, he would want to retain the appearance of valuing and believing in the thief.
‘Brother Tutilo has not been in my especial care until this journey,’ he said carefully, ‘but I have always found him truly devoted to our house of Ramsey.
He says that he had his directions in prayer and reverence from the saint, and I have every reason to believe him.
Such saintly inspirations have been known.
It would be presumptuous to flout them.’
‘We are speaking of murder,’ said Radulfus austerely.
‘In all honesty, though I should be loth to say of any man that he is capable of killing, I dare not say of any man that he is wholly incapable of it.
The boy was present on that path, by his own statement and actions, he had, however he might regret the act afterwards, cause to be rid of a man who could accuse him.
That is as far as there is witness against him.
For him it must be said that he went at once to report the death to authority, and then came back to us and again told the same story.
Does it not seem to you that had the guilt been his, he could have come straight home and said never a word, and left it to some other to find the dead and sound the alarm?’
‘We might well have wondered,’ said Prior Robert  flatly, ‘at his state.
The sheriff has said he was in great agitation.
It is not easy to show calm and unshaken before others, after such a deed.’
‘Or after the discovery of such a deed,’ said Hugh fairly.
‘Whatever the truth of it,’ said the earl with assurance, ‘you have him safe in hold, you need only wait, and if he has indeed more and worse to tell, you may get it from the lad himself.
I doubt if he is a hard enough case to brazen it out for long in confinement.
If he adds nothing, after a few weeks, you may take it he has nothing to add.’
That might very well be wisdom, Cadfael thought, listening respectfully.
What could be more debilitating to the young, what harder to bear with constancy, than being shut into a narrow stone cell, under lock and key, with only a narrow cot, a tiny reading desk and a crucifix on the wall for company, and the length of half a dozen stone flags for exercise?
Though Tutilo had entered it, only half an hour ago, with evident relief and pleasure, and even heard the key turned in the lock without a tremor.
The bed was gift enough.
Narrow and hard it might be, but it was large enough for him, and blissfully welcome.
But leave him there alone and snared for as long as ten days, and yes, if he had by then any secrets left, he would confide them all in exchange for the air of the great court, and the music of the Office.
‘I have no time to spend here in waiting,’ said Herluin.
‘My mission is to take back to Ramsey such alms as I have been able to gain, at least by the goodwill of Worcester and Evesham.
And unless some secular charge is made  against Tutilo, I must take him back with me.
If he has offended against Church law or the Rule of the Order, it is for Ramsey to discipline him.
His own abbot must take that charge upon him.
But by the leave of all here, I challenge your view, Father Abbot, that he has committed any offence touching the removal of Saint Winifred's reliquary.
I repeat, this was a holy theft, undertaken in duty and reverence.
The saint herself instructed him.
If it were not so, she would never have allowed it to succeed.’
‘I tremble at crossing swords with you,’ said Robert Bossu in the sweetest and most reasonable of voices, his high shoulder leaned at ease against the panelled wall at his back, ‘but I must observe that she did not allow it to succeed.
The wagon that carried her was waylaid and stolen by vagabonds in the forests of my domain, and in my lands she came to rest.’
‘That intervention was by the malice of evil men,’ said Herluin, roused and fiery of eye.
‘But you have acknowledged that the power of such a saint can and will frustrate the malice of evil men.
If she did not see fit to prevent their actions, it must be because they served her purposes.
She let pass her abduction from Shrewsbury, she let pass the onslaught of outlaws.
In my woodland she came to rest, and to my house she was carried into sanctuary.
By your own reasoning, Father,all this, if any, must have been achieved by her will.’
‘I would remind you both,’ said the abbot gently, ‘that if she has been all this while consulting her own wishes, and imposing them upon us mortals, Saint Winifred is  again on her own altar in our church.
This, then, must be the end at which all this diversion was aiming.
And she is where she desires to be.’
The earl smiled, a smile of extraordinary subtlety and charm.
‘No, Father Abbot, for this last move was different.
She is here again because I, with a claim of my own to advance, and having regard to yet another claim, with strict fairness, brought her back to Shrewsbury, from which she began her controversial odyssey, so that she herself might choose where she wished to rest.
Never did she show any disposition to leave my chapel, where her repose was respected.
Voluntarily I brought her with me.
I do not therefore surrender my claim.
She came to me.
I welcomed her.
If she so please, I will take her home with me, and provide her an altar as rich as yours.’
‘My lord,’ pronounced Prior Robert, stiff with resistance and outrage, ‘your argument will not stand.
As saints may make use even of creatures of illwill for their own purposes, so surely can they with more grace employ goodwill where they find it.
That you brought her here, back to her chosen home, does not give you a better claim than ours, though it does you infinite credit.
Saint Winifred has been happy here seven years and more, and to this house she has returned.
She shall not leave it now.’
‘Yet she made it known to Brother Tutilo,’ retorted Herluin, burning up in his turn, ‘that she has felt compassion towards afflicted Ramsey, and wishes to benefit us in our distress.
You cannot ignore it, she wished to set out and she did set out to come to our aid.’
‘We are all three resolved,’ said the earl, with  aggravating serenity and consideration.
‘Should we not submit the decision to some neutral assessor and abide by his judgement?’
There was a sharp and charged silence.
Then Radulfus said with composed authority: ‘We already have an assessor.
Let Saint Winifred herself declare her will openly.
She was a lady of great scholarship in her later life.
She expounded the Scriptures to her nuns, she will expound them now to her disciples.
At the consecration of every bishop the prognosis for his ministry is taken by laying the Gospels upon his shoulders, and opening it to read the line decreed.
We will take the sortes Biblicae upon the reliquary of the saint, and never doubt but she will make her judgement plain.
Why delegate to any other the choice which is by right hers?’
Out of the longer silence while they all digested this fiat and readjusted to a suggestion so unexpected, the earl said with evident satisfaction — indeed, to Cadfael's ears bordering on glee: ‘Agreed!
There could be no fairer process.
Father Abbot, grant us today and tomorrow to set our minds in order, examine our claims and take thought to pray only for what is due to us.
And the third day let these sortes be taken.
We will present our pleas to the lady herself, and accept whatever verdict she offers us.’
‘Instruct me,’ said Hugh an hour later, in Cadfael's workshop in the herb garden.
‘I am not in the counsels of bishops and archbishops.
Just how is the ordinance of heaven to be interpreted in these sortes Biblicae Radulfus  has in mind?
Oh, certainly I know the common practice of reading the future by opening the Evangel blindly, and laying a finger on the page, but what is this official use of it in consecrating a new bishop?
Too late then, surely, to change him for a better if the word goes against him.’
Cadfael removed a simmering pot from the grid on the side of his brazier, set it aside on the earth floor to cool, and added a couple of turfs to damp down the glow, before straightening his back with some caution, and sitting down beside his friend.
‘I have never been in attendance at such a consecration myself,’ he said.
‘The bishops keep it within the circle.
I marvel how the results ever leak out, but they do.
Or someone makes them up, of course.
Too sharp to be true, I sometimes feel.
But yes, they are taken just as Abbot Radulfus said, and very solemnly, so I'm told.
The book of the Gospels is laid on the shoulders of the newly chosen bishop, and opened at random, and a finger laid on the page —’
‘By whom?’ demanded Hugh, laying his own finger on the fatal flaw.
‘Now that I never thought to ask.
Surely the archbishop or bishop who is officiating.
Though, granted, he could be friend or enemy to the new man.
I trust they play fair, but who knows?
Bad or good, that line is the prognostic for the bishop's future ministry.
Apt enough, sometimes.
The good Bishop Wulstan of Worcester got: ‘Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile.’
Some were not so lucky.
Do you know, Hugh, what the sortes sent to Roger of Salisbury, who fell into Stephen's displeasure  not so many years ago and died disgraced?
‘Bind his hands and feet, and cast him into outer darkness .’’
‘Hard to believe!’ said Hugh, hoisting a sceptical eyebrow.
‘Did not someone think of pinning that on him after his fall?
I wonder what was heaven's response to Henry of Winchester when he achieved the bishopric?
Even I can think of some lines that would come too near the knuckle for his liking.’
‘I believe,’ said Cadfael, ‘it was something from Matthew, concerning the latter days when false prophets would multiply among us.
Something to the effect that if any man should claim: Here is Christ! do not believe him.
But much can be done with the interpretation.’
‘That will be the sticking point this time,’ Hugh said shrewdly, ‘unless the Gospels speak all too plainly, and can't be misread.
Why do you suppose the abbot ever suggested it?
Doubtless it could be arranged to give the right answers.
But not, I suspect, with Radulfus in charge.
Is he so sure of heaven's justice?’
Cadfael had already been considering the same question, and could only conclude that the abbot had indeed total faith that the Gospels would justify Shrewsbury in possession of its saint.
He never ceased to wonder at the irony of expecting miracles from a reliquary in which her bones had once lain for only three days and nights, before being returned reverently to her native Welsh earth; and even more to be wondered at, the infinite mercy that had transmitted grace through all those miles between, forgiven the presence of a sorry human sinner in the coffin she had quitted, and let the radiance of miracle  remain invisibly about her altar, unpredictable, accessible, a shade wanton in where it gave and where it denied, as the stuff of miracles is liable to be, at least to the human view.
She was not here, had never been here, never in what remained of her fragile flesh; yet she had certainly consented to let her essence be brought here, and manifested her presence with startling mercies.
‘Yes,’ said Cadfael, ‘I think he trusts Winifred to see right done.
I think he knows that she never really left us, and never will.’
Cadfael came back to his workshop after supper, to make his final round for the night, damp down his brazier to burn slowly until morning, and make sure all his jars were covered and all his bottles and flasks stoppered securely.
He was expecting no visitors at this hour, and swung about in surprise when the door behind him was opened softly, almost stealthily, and the girl Daalny came in.
The yellow glow from his little oil lamp showed her in unusual array, her black hair braided in a red ribbon, with curls artfully breaking free around her temples, her gown deepest and brightest blue like her eyes, and a girdle of gold braid round her hips.
She was very quick; she caught the glance that swept over her from head to foot, and laughed.
‘My finery for when he entertains.
I have been singing for his lordship of Leicester.
Now they are talking intimate possibilities, so I slipped away.
I shall not be missed now.
I think Rémy will be riding back to Leicester with Robert Bossu, if he plays his cards cleverly.
And I told  you, he is a good musician.
Leicester would not be cheated.’
‘Is he in need of my medicines again?’ asked Cadfael practically.
‘No.
Nor am I.’ She was restless, moving uneasily about the hut as once before, curious but preoccupied, and slow to come to what had brought her on this errand.
‘Bénezet is saying that Tutilo is taken for murder.
He says Tutilo killed the man he tricked into helping him to steal away your saint.
That cannot be true,’ she said with assured authority.
‘There is no harm and no violence in Tutilo.
He dreams.
He does not do .’
‘He did more than dream when he purloined our saint,’ Cadfael pointed out reasonably.
‘He dreamed that before he did it.
Oh, yes, he might thieve, that's a different matter.
He longed to give his monastery a wonderful gift, to fulfil his visions and be valued and praised.
I doubt if he would steal for himself, but for Ramsey, yes, surely he would.
He was even beginning to dream of freeing me from my slavery,’ she said tolerantly, and smiled with the resigned amusement of one experienced beyond young Tutilo's innocent understanding.
‘But now you have him somewhere under lock and key, and with nothing good to look forward to, whatever follows.
If your saint is to remain here now, then even if Tutilo escapes the sheriff's law, if Herluin takes him back to Ramsey they'll make him pay through his skin for what he attempted and failed to bring to success.
They'll starve and flay him.
And if it goes the other way, and he's called guilty of murder, then, worse, he'll hang.’
She had arrived, finally, at what she really wanted to know: ‘Where have you put him?
I know he's a prisoner.’
‘He is in the first penitentiary cell, close to the passage to the infirmary,’ said Cadfael.
‘There are but two, we have few offenders in the general way of things.
At least the locked door designed to keep him in also keeps his enemies out, if he can be said to have any enemies.
I looked in on him not half an hour ago, and he is fast asleep, and by the look of him he'll sleep until past Prime tomorrow.’
‘Because he has nothing on his conscience,’ Daalny snapped triumphantly, ‘just as I said.’
‘I would not say he has always told us all the truth,’ said Cadfael mildly, ‘if that's a matter for his conscience.
But I don't grudge him his rest, poor imp, he needs it.’
She shrugged that off lightly, pouting long lips.
‘Of course he is a very good liar, that's part of his fantasies.
You would have to be very sure of him and of yourself to know when he's lying, and when he's telling the truth.
One knows another!’ she agreed defiantly, meeting Cadfael's quizzical look.
‘I've had to be a good liar myself to keep my head above water all this time.
So has he.
But do murder?
No, that's far out of his scope.’
And still she did not go, but hovered, touching with long fingers along his shelves of vessels, reaching up to rustle the hanging bunches of herbs overhead, keeping only her profile towards him.
There was more she wanted to know, but hesitated how to ask, or better, how to find out what she needed without asking.
‘They will feed him, will they not?
You cannot starve  a man.
Who will look after him?
Is it you?’
‘No,’ said Cadfael patiently.
‘The porters will take him his food.
But I can visit him.
Can, and will.
Girl, if you wish him well, leave him where he is.’
‘Small choice I have!’ said Daalny bitterly.
Not, however, quite bitterly enough, Cadfael thought.
Rather to present the appearance of resignation than to accept it.
She was beginning to have dreams of her own and hers would proceed to action.
She had only to watch the porter's moves next day to learn the times when he visited his charge, and espy where the two keys of the penal cells hung side by side in the gatehouse.
And Wales was not far, and in any princely llys in that country, great or small, such a voice as Tutilo's, such a deft hand on strings, would easily find shelter.
But to go with the slur of murder still upon him, and always the threat of pursuit and capture?
No, better far sit it out here and shame the devil.
For Cadfael was certain that Tutilo had never done violence to any man, and must not be marked with that obloquy for life.
Still Daalny lingered, as if minded to say or ask something more, her thin oval face sharply alert and her eyes half-veiled but very bright within the long dark lashes.
Then she turned and departed very quietly.
From the threshold she said: ‘Goodnight, Brother!’ without turning her head, and closed the door behind her.
He gave little thought to it then, reasoning that she was not in such grave earnest that she would actually attempt to turn her indignant dream into action.
But he did reconsider  next day, when he saw her watching the passage of the porter from the refectory before noon, and following him with her eyes as he turned in between infirmary and schoolroom, where the two small stony cells were built into the angle of the wall, close to the wicket that led through to the mill and the pond.
When he was out of sight she crossed the great court to the gatehouse, passed by the open door apparently without a glance, and stood for some minutes in the gateway, looking along the Foregate, before turning back towards the guesthouse.
The board that held the keys in the porter's charge hung just within the doorway, and she had sharp enough eyes to pick out the nail that was empty, and the fellow to the absent key close beside it.
Alike in size and general appearance, but not in the guards that operated them.
And even this unobtrusive surveillance might be only a part of her fantasy.
She might never try to turn it into reality.
All the same, Cadfael had a word with the porter before evening.
She would not move until dusk or even darkness; no need to observe the passage of Tutilo's supper, she knew now which key she needed.
All that was necessary was for the porter to replace it on the wrong nail before going to Compline, and leave her its ineffective twin.
He did not keep a watch on her; there was no necessity, and in his own mind he was almost convinced that nothing would happen.
Her own position was so vulnerable that she would not venture.
So the day passed normally, with the usual ritual of work and reading, study and prayer punctuated by the regular round of the hours.
Cadfael  went about his work all the more assiduously because a part of his mind was elsewhere, and he felt its absence as guilt, even though his concern was with a serious matter of justice, guilt and innocence.
Tutilo must somehow be extricated from such opprobrium as he had not earned, no matter what penalties he might deserve for his real offences.
Here in the enclave, imprisonment was also safety from any secular threat; the Church would look after its own, even its delinquents.
Once outside, unless cleared of all suspicion, he would be a fugitive, liable to all the rigours of the law, and the very act of flight would be evidence against him.
No, here he must remain until he could come forth vindicated.
It was almost time for Compline when Cadfael came from the gardens after his last round of the evening, and saw horsemen riding in at the gate.
Sulien Blount, on a piebald gelding, leading a brown cob on a rein, saddled ready for riding, and after him two grooms in attendance.
At this hour, in twilight, an unexpected invasion.
Cadfael went to meet them as Sulien lighted down to speak hurriedly to the porter.
Only some matter of great urgency could have brought messengers from Longner so late.
‘Sulien, what is it?
What brings you here at this hour?’
Sulien swung round to him gratefully.
‘Cadfael, I have a request to make of the abbot.
Or we may need the good word of this sub-prior from Ramsey, no less…
My mother asks for that young musician of his, Tutilo, the one who has played and sung to her before, and helped her to sleep.
She took kindly to him, and he to her.
This time it will be a long sleep, Cadfael.
She can't  last the night through.
And there's something she wants and needs to do…
I have not questioned.
Neither would you, if you could see her…’
‘The lad you want is under lock and key,’ said Cadfael, dismayed.
‘He's under suspicion of felonies since the lady sent for him, two nights ago.
Is she so near her end?
The abbot can scarcely let him out to her except with guarantees for his return.’
‘I know it,’ said Sulien.
‘Hugh Beringar has been with us, I know how things stand.
But under escort…
You see we'll keep good hold of him, and bring him back to you bound, if need be.
At least ask!
Tell Radulfus it is her last request of him.
Death's mercy has held off all too long, but now I swear to you this is ending.
He knows all her story, he'll listen!’
‘Wait,’ said Cadfael, ‘and I will go and ask.’
‘But, Cadfael…two nights ago?
No, we never sent for him two nights ago.’
Well, there was no great surprise there.
The possibility had been at the back of Cadfael's mind for some time.
No, it had been too apt, too opportune.
He had found out what awaited him, and removed himself from the scene long enough, he had hoped, to escape the judgement.
It made no difference now.
‘No, no matter, that's understood,’ he said.
‘Wait here for me!’
Abbot Radulfus was alone in his panelled parlour.
He listened to this late embassage with drawn brows, and eyes looking inward.
And having heard, he said sombrely: ‘It is high time for her.
How can she be denied?
You say they have guards enough to keep him safe?
Yes, let him go.’
‘And Father Herluin?
Should I ask his leave also?’
‘No.
Tutilo is within my walls and in my charge.
I give him leave.
Go yourself, Cadfael, and release him to them.
If time is so short for her, waste none of it.’
Cadfael returned in haste to the gatehouse.
‘He will come.
We have the abbot's leave.
Wait, and I'll bring the boy.’
It scarcely surprised him to find, when he plucked the key from its nail in the gatehouse, that the nail beside it was also vacant.
Everything was happening now with a distant, dreamlike certainty.
Daalny had acted, after all; she must have taken the second key during Vespers, from the nail where at noon she had watched the porter hang the first one, but she had had to wait for near-darkness before using it.
Now would be her favoured time, now when the brothers would be gathering in the church for Compline.
Cadfael left the messengers from Longner waiting uneasily within the gate, and went hurrying round the corner of the schoolroom to the penitential cells beyond, where deeper shadows were already filling the narrow passage to the wicket in the enclave wall, and the mill and the pool beyond.
And she was there.
He was aware of her at once, though she was only a slender additional shadow pressed close within the deep doorway of the cell.
He heard the key grating ineffectively in the wards of the lock it did not fit, and her vexed, angry breathing as she wrestled to make it enter where it would not go.
He heard her stamp her foot in frustrated rage, and grit her teeth, too intent to become aware of his approach until he reached an arm to put her aside, quite gently.
‘No use, child!’ he said.
‘Let me!’
She uttered a muted cry of despair, and plucked herself furiously backward out of his grasp.
There was no sound from within the cell, though the prisoner's little lamp was lighted, its faint glow showed at the high, barred window.
‘Wait, now, wait!’ said Cadfael.
‘You have a message to deliver here, and so have I. Let's be about it.’
He stooped to pick up the wrong key, which had been jerked out of the lock and out of her hand when she started away.
‘Come, and I'll let you in.’
The right key turned sweetly in the heavy lock, and Cadfael opened the door.
Tutilo was standing fronting them, erect and rigid, his face a narrow, pale flame, his amber eyes wide and wild.
He had known nothing of her plans, he did not know now what to expect, why this confining door should ever have been opened now, at this end of the day, after all permitted visits were over.
‘Say what you came to say to him,’ said Cadfael.
‘But briefly.
Waste no time, for I have none to waste, and neither has he.’
Daalny stood tense and at a loss for one moment, before she flung herself bodily into the open doorway, as though she feared the door might be slammed again before she could prevent, though Cadfael made no move.
Tutilo stood staring in bewilderment from one of them to the other, without understanding, almost without recognition.
‘Tutilo,’ she said, low-voiced and urgent, ‘come away now.
Through the wicket here, and you're free.
No one will see you, once outside the walls.
They're all at Compline.
Go, quickly, while there's time.
Go west into  Wales.
Don't wait here to be made a scapegoat, go, now…quickly!’
Tutilo came to life with a shudder and a start, golden flames kindling in his eyes.
‘Free?
What have you done?
Daalny, they'll only turn on you…’
He turned to stare at Cadfael, braced and quivering, unsure whether this was friend or enemy facing him.
‘I do not understand!’
‘That is what she came to say to you,’ said Cadfael.
‘I have a message for you, too.
Sulien Blount is here with a horse for you, and begs that you will come to his mother, now, at once, for the Lady Donata is dying, and is asking to see you again, and hear you, before she dies.’
Tutilo stiffened into marble stillness.
The yellow flames darkened and softened into the pure glow of a steady fire.
His lips moved, saying her name silently: ‘Donata?’
‘Go, now!’
Daalny ordered, past anger now that the contest was joined and could not be evaded.
‘I have dared this for you, how dare you now cast it in my face?
Go, while there's time.
He is one and we are two.
He cannot prevent!’
‘I would not prevent,’ said Cadfael.
‘The choice is his to make.’
‘Dying?’ said Tutilo, finding a voice clear, quiet and grieving.
‘Truly, she is dying?’
‘And asking for you,’ said Cadfael.
‘As you said she did two nights ago.
But tonight it is true, and tonight will be the last time.’
‘You have heard,’ said Daalny, smouldering but still.
‘The door is open.
He says he will not prevent.
Choose, then!
I have done.’
Tutilo did not seem to hear her.
‘I used her!’ he said.
lamentably shaken.
And to Cadfael he said doubtfully: ‘And Herluin lets me go?’
‘Not Herluin, but the abbot lets you go.
On your honour to return, and under escort.’
Tutilo took Daalny suddenly between his hands, with grieving gentleness, and moved her aside from the doorway.
He raised a hand with abrupt, convulsive passion and stroked her cheek, long fingers smoothing eloquently from temple to chin in a gesture of helpless apology.
‘She wants me,’ he said softly.
‘I must go to her.’
Chapter Eight
DAALNY HAD discarded at once her anger and her pleading as soon as the choice was made, and made in such a fashion that she knew it could not be changed.
She followed to the corner of the schoolroom, and there stood watching in silence as Tutilo mounted, and the little cavalcade filed out at the gate and turned along the Foregate.
The broader track from the Horse Fair was better for riding; he would not have to pass by on the narrow path where he had stumbled over Aldhelm's body.
The bell for Compline rang, the time she had set herself for hounding him out at the wicket, into a world he was, perhaps, already beginning to regret surrendering, but which he might have found none too hospitable to a runaway Benedictine novice.
Better, at all costs, however, or so she had reasoned, to put twenty miles and a border between him and a hanging.
Now she stood thoughtful, with the chime of the bell in her ears, and wondered.
And when Cadfael came slowly back to her across the empty court, she stood in his way great-eyed, fronting him gravely as if she would penetrate into the  most remote recesses of his mind.
‘You do not believe it of him, either,’ she said with certainty.
‘You know he never harmed this poor shepherd lad.
Would you really have stood by and let him go free?’
‘If he had so chosen,’ said Cadfael, ‘yes.
But I knew he would not.
The choice was his.
He made it.
And now I am going to Compline.’
‘I'll wait in your workshop,’ said Daalny.
‘I must talk to you.
Now that I'm sure, now I will tell you everything I know.
Even if none of it is proof of anything, yet you may see something there that I have not seen.
He has need of more wits than mine, and two who will stand by him is better than one.’
‘I wonder, now,’ said Cadfael, studying her thin, bright, resolute face, ‘whether you would be wanting that young man for yourself, or is this pure disinterested kindness?’
She looked at him, and slowly smiled.
‘Well, I'll come,’ he said.
‘I need a second wit, too.
If it's cold within, you may use the bellows on my brazier.
I have turfs enough there to damp it down again before we leave it.’
In the close, timber-scented air of the hut, with the herbs rustling overhead in the rising warmth from the brazier, she sat leaning forward to the glow, the light gilding her high cheekbones and the broad sweep of brow beneath the curling black hair.
‘You know now,’ she said, ‘that he was not sent for to Longner that night.
It was a tale that could be believed, but what he wanted was to have a reason to be somewhere else, not to be here when the shepherd came.
That would  not have been the end of it, but it would have put off the worst, and Tutilo seldom looks beyond the day.
If he could have evaded meeting the poor man for even a few days, this squabble over the saint's bones would have been settled, one way or another, and Herluin would have been off on his travels, and taken Tutilo with him.
Not that that promises him much of a life,’ she added, jutting a doubtful lip, ‘now he's getting over his saintliness.
If the biblical fates go against him, Herluin will take all the vexation and shame out on Tutilo, with usury.
You know it as well as I do.
These monastics, they are what they are born, only with a vengeance.
If they come into the world hard and cold, they end harder and colder, if they come generous and sweet, they grow ever sweeter and more generous.
All one or all the other.
And just when Tutilo is beginning to wake up to where he belongs, and what he has it in him to be,’ she said vehemently.
‘Well, so it was.
He lied about Longner to be out of here all the evening long.
Now he owes her a debt, and goes to pay it.’
‘There is more than a debt in it,’ said Cadfael.
‘That lady tamed him the first time he set eyes on her.
He would have gone to her no matter what lure you could have put in the other scale.
And what you are telling me is that he knew very well Aldhelm was to come here that night.
How did he know?
It never was made known to the brothers.
Only the abbot and I knew, though he may have felt that he must tell Prior Robert.’
‘He knew,’ she said simply, ‘because I told him.’
‘And how did you know?’
She looked up sharply, stung into alert attention.
‘Yes, it's true, few people knew.
It was quite by chance.
Bénezet overheard Prior Robert and Brother Jerome talking about it, and he came and told me.
He knew I should warn Tutilo, I think he meant me to.
He knew,’ said Daalny, ‘that I liked Tutilo.’
The simplest and most temperate words are the best to express complex and intemperate feelings.
She had said more than she knew.
‘And he?’ said Cadfael with careful detachment.
But she was not so simple.
Women never are, and she was a woman who had experienced more of life than her years would contain.
‘He hardly knows what he feels,’ she said, ‘for me or for anything.
The wind blows him.
He sees a splendid dream, and runs headlong.
He even persuades himself of the splendour.
The monastic dream is fading now.
I know it has splendour, but not for him.
And he is not the man to go with it for the peace and the quiet bliss.’
‘Tell me, then,’ said Cadfael mildly, ‘what happened that night, after he asked and got leave to go to Longner.’
‘I would have told it at once,’ she said ruefully, ‘but that it would not have helped him.
For past all doubt he was on that path, he did find the poor soul dead, he did run to the castle, like an honest man, and tell the sheriff what he had found.
What I can tell does not change that.
But if you can find a grain of good wheat in it, for God's sake pick it out and show it to me, for I have overlooked
‘Tell me,’ said Cadfael.
‘We made it up between us,’ she said, ‘and it was the first time ever we two met outside these walls.
He went out and took the path that leads up over the ridge to the ferry.
I slipped out through the double gates of the burial ground to the Horse Fair, and we crept into the loft over the stable there.
The wicket in the main doors was still unlocked then, after they brought the horses back after the flood.
It was more than a week before the stable-yard here had dried out.
And that is where we stayed together, until we heard the Compline bell.
By that time, we thought, he must have been and gone again.
So late, and the night dark.’
‘And raining,’ Cadfael reminded her.
‘That, too.
Not a night to linger on the road.
We thought he would be off home, and none too keen to make another wasted journey.’
‘And what did you do all that time?’ asked Cadfael.
She smiled ruefully.
‘We talked.
We sat together in the hay to keep warm, and talked.
Of his vocation freely entered into, and my being born into slavery with no choice at all, and how the two came to be much alike in the end,’ she said hardly.
‘I was born into the trap, he walked into it in avoiding another kind of servitude, with his eyes open, but not looking where he was going.
And now with his own hands and feet tied he has great notions of delivering me.’
‘As you offered him his freedom tonight.
Well, and then?
You heard the Compline bell, and thought it safe to return.
Then how came he alone on the path from the ferry?’
‘We dared not come back together.
He might be seen returning, and it was needful he should come by the way he would have taken to Longner.
I slipped in by the cemetery gate, as I left, and he went up through the trees to the path by which he had made his way to join me.
It would not have done to come together.
He has forsworn women,’ she said with a bitter smile, ‘and I must have no dealings with men.’
‘He has not yet taken final vows,’ said Cadfael.
‘A pity he went alone, however.
If two together had happened upon a dead man, they could have spoken for each other.’
‘Us two?’ she said, staring, and laughed briefly.
‘They would not have believed us…a bondwoman and a novice near his final vows out in the night and fresh from a romp in the hay?
They would have said we compounded together to kill the man.
And now, I suppose,’ she said, cooling from bitterness into a composed sadness, ‘I have told you everything, and told you nothing.
But it is the whole truth.
A good liar and a bold thief he may be, but on most counts Tutilo is as innocent as a babe.
We even said the night prayers together when the bell rang.
Who's to believe that?’
Cadfael believed it, but could imagine Herluin's face if ever the claim had been made to him.
‘You have told me, at least,’ he said, musing, ‘that there were more people knew Aldhelm would be coming down that path than just the few of us, as it began.
If Bénezet heard Jerome baying his knowledge abroad, how many more, I wonder, learned of it before night?
Prior Robert can be discreet, but Jerome?…
I doubt it.
And might not  Bénezet have passed on all his gleanings to Rémy, as he did to you?
Whatever the bodyservant picks up may be grist to his master's mill.
And what Rémy hears may very well be talked of with the patron he's courting.
Oh, no, I would not say this hour had been altogether wasted.
It means I have much thinking to do.
Go to your bed now, child, and leave troubling for this while.’
‘And if Tutilo never comes back from Longner?’ she asked, wavering between hope and dread.
‘Never give a thought to that,’ said Cadfael.
‘He will come back.’
They brought Tutilo back well before Prime, in the pearly light of a clear, still dawn.
March had come in more lamb than lion, there were windflowers in the woods, and the first primroses, unburned by frost, undashed and unmired by further rain, were just opening.
The two Longner men who rode one on either side their borrowed minstrel brought him as far as the gatehouse, waiting in silence as he dismounted.
The farewells they made to him, as they took his pony's rein and made to turn back for home, were quiet and constrained, but clearly friendly.
The elder of the two leaned down from the saddle to clap him amiably on the shoulder, and said a word or two in his ear, before they trotted away along the Foregate towards the Horse Fair.
Cadfael had been awake and afield more than an hour by then, for want of a quiet mind, and had filled in the time by ranging along the bushy edges of his peasefields and the shore of the mill pond to gather the white  blossoms of the blackthorn, just out of the bud and at their best for infusing, to make a gentle purge for the old men in the infirmary, who could no longer take the strenuous exercise that had formerly kept their bodies in good trim.
A very fine plant, the blackthorn, good for almost anything that ailed a man's insides, providing bud and flower and bitter black fruit were all taken at their best.
Good in the hedges, too, for keeping cattle and sheep out of planted places.
From time to time he broke off his labours to return to the great court to look out for Tutilo returning.
He had a full scrip of the small white flowers when he made the journey for the seventh time, and saw the three riders pace in at the gatehouse, and stood unobserved to watch Tutilo dismount, part amicably from his guards, and come wearily towards the gatehouse door, as if he would himself take the key and deliver himself dutifully back to his captivity.
He walked a little unsteadily, and with his fair crest drooping over something he cradled in his arms.
Once he stumbled on the cobbles.
The light, clearing and brightening to the pure pale gold of primroses where its slanting rays could reach, still left the gatehouse and the court within the gates in shadow, and Tutilo kept his eyes on the cobbles and trod carefully, as though he could not see his way clearly.
Cadfael went to meet him, and the porter, who had heard the stir of arrival and come out into the doorway of his lodge, halted on the threshold, and left it to Cadfael as an elder of the house to take charge of the returned prisoner.
Tutilo did not look up until they were very close, and then blinked and peered as though he had difficulty in recognizing even a well-known face.
His eyes were red-rimmed, their gilded brightness dulled from a sleepless night, and perhaps also from weeping.
The burden he carried with such curious tenderness was a drawstring bag of soft leather, with some rigid shape within it, that filled his arms and was held jealously to his heart, the anchoring strings around one wrist for safety, as though he went in dread of loss.
He stared over his treasure at Cadfael, and small, wary sparks kindled in his eyes, and flared into anxiety and pain in an instant.
In a flat, chill voice he said: ‘She is dead.
Never a quiver or a moan.
I thought I had sung her to sleep.
I went on…silence might have disturbed her rest…’
‘You did well,’ said Cadfael.
‘She has waited a long time for rest.
Now nothing can disturb it.’
‘I started back as soon afterwards as seemed right.
I did not want to leave her without saying goodbye fairly.
She was kind to me.’
He did not mean as mistress to servant or patroness to protege.
There had been another manner of kindness between them, beneficent to both.
‘I was afraid you might think I was not coming back.
But the priest said she could not live till morning, so I could not leave her.’
‘There was no haste,’ said Cadfael.
‘I knew you would come.
Are you hungry?
Come within the lodge, and sit a while, and we'll find you food and drink.’
‘No…
They have fed me.
They would have found me a bed, but it was not in the bargain that I should  linger after I was no longer needed.
I kept to terms.’
He was racked by a sudden jaw-splitting bout of yawning that brought water to his eyes.
‘I need my bed now,’ he owned, shivering.
The only bed he could claim at this point was in his penitential cell, but he went to it eagerly, glad to have a locked door between himself and the world.
Cadfael took the key from the porter, who hovered with slightly anxious sympathy, and was relieved to see a delinquent for whom he might be held responsible returning docilely to his prison.
Cadfael shepherded his charge within, and watched him subside gratefully on to the narrow cot, and sit there mute for a moment, laying his burden down beside him with a kind of caressing gentleness.
‘Stay a little while,’ said the boy at length.
‘You knew her well.
I came late.
How was it she had heart even to look at me, as tormented as she was?’
He wanted no answer, and in any case there could be none.
But why should not one dying too soon for her years and too late by far for her comfort take pleasure in the sudden visitation of youth and freshness and beauty, however flawed, and all the more for its vulnerability and helplessness in a world none too kind to the weak.
‘You gave her intense pleasure.
What she has known most intimately these last years has been intense pain.
I think she saw you very clearly, better than some who live side by side with you and might as well be blind.
Better, perhaps, than you see yourself.’
‘My sight is as sharp as it need be,’ said Tutilo.
‘I know what I am.
No one need be an angel to sing like one.
There's no virtue in it.
They had brought the harp into her bedchamber for me, all freshly strung.
I thought it might be loud for her, there between close walls, but it was her wish.
Did you know her, Cadfael, when she was younger, and hale, and beautiful?
I played for a while, and then I stole up to look at her, because she was so still I thought she had fallen asleep, but her eyes were wide open, and there was colour, all rosy, high on her cheeks.
She did not look so gaunt and old, and her lips were red and full, and curved, like a smile but not quite a smile.
I knew she knew me, though she never spoke word, never, night-long.
I sang to her, some of the hymns to the Virgin, and then, I don't know why, but there was no one to tell me do, or don't, and it was the way I felt her taking me, all still as she was, and growing younger because there was no pain left…
I sang love songs.
And she was glad.
I had only to look at her, and I knew she was glad.
And sometimes the young lord's wife stole in and sat to listen, and brought me to drink, and sometimes the lady the younger brother is to marry.
Their priest had already shriven her clean.
In the small hours, around three o'clock, she must have died, but I didn't know…
I thought she had truly fallen asleep, until the young one stole up and told me.’
‘Truly she had fallen asleep,’ said Cadfael.
‘And if your singing went with her through the dark, she had a good passage.
There's nothing here for grieving.
She has waited patiently for this ending.’
‘It was not that broke me,’ said Tutilo simply.
‘But see what followed.
See what I brought away with me.’
He drew open the neck of the leather bag that lay beside him, and reached inside to withdraw with loving care that same psaltery he had once played in Donata's bedchamber, polished sounding-board and stretched strings shining like new.
A broken key had been replaced by one newly cut, and it was triple-strung with new gut strings.
He laid it beside him, and stroked across the strings, conjuring forth a shimmer of silvery sound.
‘She gave it to me.
After she was dead, after we had said the prayers for her, her son, the young one, brought it to me, all newly furbished like this, and said it was her wish that I should have it, for a musician without an instrument is a warrior without weapon or armour.
He told me all that she had to say when she left it in trust for me.
She said a troubadour needs only three things, an instrument, a horse, and a lady love, and the first she desired to give me, and the other two I must find for myself.
She had even had new quills cut for me, and some to spare.’
His voice had grown hushed and childish with wonder and his eyes filled, looking back to record this playful divination which might yet predict a future far removed from the cloister, which in any case was already losing its visionary charm for him.
She might well be right.
She had warmed to him not as a spiritual being, but as vigorous young flesh and blood, full of untested potentialities.
And dying men, and perhaps even more, dying women, had been formidable oracles at times.
Distantly from the dortoir, across the court, the bell sounded for Prime.
Cadfael picked up the psaltery with  due respect, and laid it safely aside on the little prayer-desk.
‘I must go.
And you, if you'll take advice, will sleep, and put everything else clean out of mind, while we go try the sortes Biblicae .
You've done well by the lady, and she has done well by you.
With her grace, and a few prayers the rest of us may find for you, you can hardly go unblessed.’
‘Oh, yes,’ said Tutilo, his tired eyes dilating.
‘That is today, is it not?
I had forgotten.’
The momentary shadow touched but could not intimidate him; he had gone somewhat beyond fear for himself.
‘And now you can forget it again,’ said Cadfael firmly.
‘You of all people should have faith in the saint you set such store by.
Lie down and sleep through all, and believe in Saint Winifred.
Do you not think she must be up in arms by this time, at being treated like a bone between three dogs?
And if she could tell you her mind privately some while ago, do you suppose she cannot make it very plain to us in public today?
Sleep the morning through, and let her dispose of all of us.’
In the half-hour between chapter and High Mass, when Cadfael was busy sorting his harvest of blackthorn blossoms in his workshop, discarding occasional spines and fragments of wiry dark twigs, Hugh came in to share the gleanings of his own labours.
They were meagre enough, but at least the ferryman had been able to supply one scrap of information that might yet be useful.
‘He never went near Longner that night.
He never  crossed the river.
You know that, I think?
No, but the other poor wretch did, and the ferryman remembers when.
It seems the parish priest at Upton has a servant who visits his brother's family in Preston once a week, and that night this fellow walked the road from Upton to Preston along with Aldhelm, who works at the demesne, and lives in the neighbouring village.
A shepherd can never be sure at what hour he'll be done for the day, but the priest's man leaves Upton as soon as Vespers is over, and so he did this time.
He says it must have been a little before the sixth hour when Aldhelm parted from him at Preston to go on to the ferry.
From there, the crossing and the distance he had covered on that path, to the place where he was found, would take him no more than half an hour — less, if he was a brisk walker, and it was raining, he'd be no longer than he need out in it.
It seems to me that he was waylaid and killed round about a quarter or half of the hour past six.
Hardly later.
Now if your lad could tell us just where he was, while he was supposed to be at Longner, and better still, bring us a witness to confirm it, that would go far to get him out of the mire.’
Cadfael turned to give him a long, thoughtful look, and a few white petals that had floated and lodged in the rough cloth of his sleeve caught the stirring of air from the door, and floated free again, riding the draught into the pale, bright sunlight.
‘Hugh, if what you say is true, then I hope something good may come of it.
For though I doubt if he's ready to own to it yet, I know of another who can and will testify that the two of them were together until the bell sounded for Compline, which  would be the better part of an hour later than you have in mind, and a quarter of an hour's walk from the place, into the bargain.
But since it suits ill with his vocation, and perhaps bodes no good to — the other one — neither of them may be anxious to say it openly for all to hear.
In your ear, with a little persuasion, they might both whisper it.’
‘Where is the boy now?’ asked Hugh, considering.
‘Fast in his penitentiary?’
‘And fast asleep, I trust.
You were not at Longner last night, Hugh?
No, or he would have said so.
Then probably you have not heard that he was sent for last night just before Compline, to go to Donata, at her express wish.
And Radulfus gave him leave, under escort.
She died, Hugh.
God and the saints remembered her at last.’
‘No,’ said Hugh, ‘that I did not know.’
He sat silent for a long moment, recollecting how the past few years had dealt with Donata Blount and her family.
Nothing there for grieving, no, rather for gratitude and thanksgiving.
‘No doubt the news will be waiting for me around the garrison by now,’ he said.
‘And she asked for Tutilo?’
‘You find that strange?’
Cadfael asked mildly.
‘It disappoints me when human creatures fail to provide something strange.
No, all that's strange about this is that those two ever came to touch hands at any point.
A man would have said that two such were never likely in this world to come within sight, let alone touch, of each other.
Once met, yes, all things were possible.
And she is dead.
In his presence?’
‘He thought he had sung her to sleep,’ said Cadfael.
‘So he had.
He had grown fond, and so had she.
Where there's nothing at stake there's no barrier, either.
Nothing to join, so nothing to divide them.
And he has come home this morning worn out with experience, all grief and all wonder, because she gave him the psaltery on which he played to her, and sent him a message straight out of the jongleurs’ romances.
He went back to his cell gladly, and I hope he'll sleep until all this business we have in hand after Mass is finished and done.
And God and Saint Winifred send us a good ending!’
‘Ah, that!’ said Hugh, and smiled somewhat cryptically.
‘Is not this sortes a rather dangerous way of deciding an issue?
It seems to me it would not be at all difficult to cheat.
There was a time, by your own account, when you cheated — in a good cause, of course!’
‘I cheated to prevent a theft, not to achieve one,’ said Cadfael.
‘I never cheated Saint Winifred, nor will she suffer cheating now.
She won't charge me with more than my due, nor will she let that lad pay for a death I'm sure he does not owe.
She knows what we need and what we deserve.
She'll see wrongs righted and quarrels reconciled, in her own good time.’
‘And without any aid from me,’ Hugh concluded, and rose, laughing.
‘I'll be off and leave you to it, I'd as lief be elsewhere while your monastics fight it out.
But afterwards, when he wakes — poor rogue, I wouldn't disturb him!— we must have words with your songbird.’
Cadfael went into the church before High Mass, uneasy for all his declarations of faith, and guiltily penitent over  his uneasiness, a double contortion of the mind.
In any case there was no time left to make his infusion before the assay: he left his blackthorn blossoms, cleansed of all thorns and husks, waiting in a clean vessel for his return, and covered from any floating particles of dust by a linen cloth.
A few petals still clung about his sleeves, caught in the rough weave.
He had others in his grizzled russet tonsure, dropped from the higher branches as the wind stirred them.
Distantly this springtime snow stirred his memory of other Springs, and later blossom, like but unlike this, when the hawthorns came into heady, drunken sweetness, drowning the senses.
Four or five weeks more, and that greater snow would blanch the hedgerows.
The smell of growth and greenness was already in the air, elusive but constant, like the secret rippling of water, the whispering water of February, now almost hushed into silence.
By instinct rather than design he found himself at Saint Winifred's altar, and kneeled to approach her, his creaky knees settling gingerly on the lowest step of her elevated place.
He offered no words, though he thought words within, in the Welsh tongue, which had been native to her as it was to him.
Where she belonged and wished to be, she would direct.
What he asked was guidance in the matter of a young man's death, a clean young man who handled lambs with gentleness and care, as lambs of God, and never deserved to be done to death suddenly before his time, however the love of God might have set a secure hand under him as he fell, and lifted him into light.
And another young man suspect of a thing far out of his scope, who must not die a similarly unjust death.
What he never doubted was that she was listening.
She would not turn her back on an appellant.
But in what mood she would be listening was not so certain, considering everything that had happened.
Cadfael hoped and thought his prayers towards her in resigned humility, but always in good north Welsh, the Welsh of Gwynedd.
She might be indignant; she would still be just.
When he rose from his knees, helping himself up by the rim of her altar, newly draped in celebration of her return, and expectation of her continued residence, he did not at once leave her.
The quiet here was at once grateful and ominous, like the hush before battle.
And the Gospels, not the great illuminated book, but a smaller and stouter one, calculated to resist too crafty fingers by its less use and lighter pages, already lay on the silver-chased reliquary, centrally placed with accurate and reverent precision.
He let his hand rest on it, and summed up all his prayers for guidance and enlightenment into the touch of his fingers, and suddenly he was resolved to open it.
Girl, now show me my way, for I have a child to care for.
A liar and a thief and a rogue, but what this world has made him, and sweet as he can be false.
And not a murderer, whatever else you may know him to be.
I doubt he ever harmed a soul in his twenty or so years.
Say me a word, one enlightening word, to let him out of this cage.
The book of the fates was already there before him.
Almost without conscious thought he laid both hands upon it, raised it, and opened it.
He closed his eyes as  he set it down on its place, flattening it open under his left hand, and laid the index finger of his right hand upon the exposed page.
Aware abruptly of what he had done, he held very still, not shifting a finger, above all not that index finger, as he opened his eyes, and looked where it pointed.
He was in the Apostle Matthew, Chapter 10, and the fervent finger, pressing so hard it dimpled the leaf, rested on Verse 21.
Cadfael had learned his Latin late, but this was simple enough:
‘…and the brother shall deliver up the brother to death.’
He stood gazing at the words, and at first they made no sense to him, apart from the ominous mention of death, and death of intent, not the quiet closing of a life like Donata's passing.
The brother shall deliver up the brother to death…
It was a part of the prophecy of disintegration and chaos to be expected in the latter days; within that context it was but one detail in a large picture, but here it was all, it was an answer.
To one long years a member of a brotherhood the wording was significant.
Not a stranger, not an enemy, but a brother betraying a brother.
And suddenly he was visited by a brief vision of a young man hurrying down a narrow woodland path on a dark night, in drizzling rain, a dun-coloured cloak on him, its hood drawn close over his head.
The shape passed by, and was no more than a shape, dimly descried under the faint tempering of the darkness the thread of sky made  between the trees: but the shape was familiar, a hooded man shrouded in voluminous cloth.
Or a cowled man in a black habit?
In such conditions, where would the difference be?
It was as if a door had opened before him into a dim but positive light.
A brother delivered to death…
How if that were true, how if another victim had been intended, not Aldhelm?
No one but Tutilo had had known cause to fear Aldhelm's witness, and Tutilo, though abroad from the enclave that night, firmly denied any attack upon the young man, and small points were emerging to bear out his testimony.
And Tutilo was indeed a brother, and at large that night, and expected to be upon that path.
And in build, and in age, yes, striding along to get out of the rain the sooner, he might well be close enough to the shape Aldhelm would present, to an assassin waiting.
A brother delivered up to death indeed, if another man had not taken that road before him.
But what of the other, that one who had planned the death?
If the meaning of this oracle was as it seemed, the word ‘brother’ had surely a double monastic significance.
A brother of this house, or at least of the Benedictine Order.
Cadfael knew of none besides Tutilo who had been out of the enclave that night, but a man intending such a deed would hardly publish his intent or let anyone know of his absence.
Someone within the Order who hated Tutilo enough to attempt his murder?
Prior Robert might not have been very greatly grieved if Tutilo had been made to pay for his outrageous offence with his skin, but Prior  Robert had been at dinner with the abbot and several other witnesses that night, and in any case could hardly be imagined as lurking in wet woods to strike down the delinquent with his own elegant hands.
Herluin might hold it against the boy that he had disgraced Ramsey not so much by attempting theft, but by making a botch of it, but Herluin had also been of the abbot's party.
And yet the oracle had lodged in Cadfael's mind like a thorn from the blackthorn bushes, and would not be dislodged.
He went to his stall with the words echoing and reechoing in his inward ear: ‘and the brother shall deliver up the brother to death’.
It took all his willpower and concentration to banish the sound of it, and fix heart and soul on the celebration of the Mass.
Chapter Nine
AT THE end of Mass, when the children had been dismissed to their schooling with Brother Paul, and only the choir monks were left as awed witnesses, Abbot Radulfus offered a brief and practical prayer for divine guidance, and approached Saint Winifred's altar.
‘With respect,’ said Earl Robert, standing courteously aloof, and in the mildest and most reasonable of voices, ‘how should we determine who should be first to try the fates?
Is there some rule we ought to follow?’
‘We are here to ask,’ said the abbot simply.
‘Let us ask from beginning to end, from contention to resolution, and advance no plea or reservation of our own.
We agreed.
Keep to that.
Of the order of procedure I will ask, and beyond that I leave Shrewsbury's cause to Prior Robert, who made the journey to Wales to find Saint Winifred, and brought her relics here.
If any one of you has anything to object, name whom you will.
Father Boniface would not refuse to do us this service, if you require it.’
No one had any observation to make, until Robert  Bossu took it upon himself, very amiably, to give voice to a consent otherwise expressed in silence.
‘Father Abbot, do you proceed, and we are all content.’
Radulfus mounted the three shallow steps, and with both hands opened the Gospels, his eyes fixed above, upon the cross, so that he might not calculate where, on the exposed page, his finger should rest.
‘Come close,’ he said, ‘and confirm for yourselves that there is no deceit.
See the words, that what I read aloud to you is what the sortes have sent me.’
Herluin without hesitation came hungrily to peer.
Earl Robert stood tranquilly where he was, and bowed away the necessity for any such confirmation.
Abbot Radulfus looked down to where his index finger rested, and reported without emotion: ‘I am in the Gospel of Saint Matthew, the twentieth chapter.
And the line reads: ‘The last shall be first, and the first last.’’
No arguing with that, thought Cadfael, looking on with some anxiety from his retired place.
If anything, it was rather suspicious that the first assay should produce an answer so apt; the prognostics of bishops were often known to be ambiguous in the extreme.
Had this been anyone but Radulfus testing the waters, Radulfus in his inflexible uprightness, a man might almost have suspected…
But that was to limit or doubt the range of the saint's power.
She who could call a lame youth to her and support him with her invisible grace while he laid down his crutches on the steps of her altar, why doubt that she could turn the leaves of a Gospel, and guide a faithful finger to the words her will required?
‘It would seem,’ said Earl Robert, after a moment of courteous silence in deference to any other who might wish to speak, ‘that as the last comer, this verdict sends me first into the lists.
Is that your reading, Father?’
‘The meaning seems plain enough,’ said Radulfus; carefully he closed the Gospels, aligned the book scrupulously central upon the reliquary, and descended the steps to stand well aside.
‘Proceed, my lord.’
‘God and Saint Winifred dispose!’ said the earl, and mounted without haste, to stand for a moment motionless, before turning the book, with slow, hieratic gestures that could be clearly seen by all, upon its spine between his long, muscular hands, thumbs meeting to part the pages.
Opening it fully, he flattened both palms for a moment upon the chosen pages, and then let his finger hover a moment again before touching.
He had neither glanced down nor passed a fingertip over the edges of the leaves, to determine how far advanced in the book his page might be.
There are ways of trying to manipulate even the sortes Biblicae , but he had meticulously and demonstratively avoided them.
He never was in earnest, Cadfael reflected with certainty, and it would spoil his sport to use contrivance.
His interest is in pricking Prior Robert and Sub-Prior Herluin into bristling at each other with wattles glowing scarlet and throats gobbling rage.
The earl read aloud, translating into the vernacular as fluently as any cleric: Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me; and where I am, thither ye cannot come.’'
He looked up, musing.
‘It is John, the seventh chapter and the fifty-fourth verse.
Father Abbot, here is a strange  saying, for she came to me when I was not seeking her at all, when I knew nothing of her.
It was she found me.
And here surely is a hard riddle to read, that where she is I cannot come, for here indeed she is, and here am I beside her.
How do you decypher this?’
Cadfael could have told him, but kept his mouth very firmly closed, though it would have been interesting to answer the query, and hear how this subtle man would respond.
It was even tempting, for here was a man who would have appreciated every irony.
Robert Bossu had pursued the dispute here to Shrewsbury in search of diversion in a time of frustration and inaction, a pity he must be denied the best of the joke that was so much more than merely a joke.
That would still have to be shared only with Hugh, who knew the best and the worst of his friend Cadfael.
No, there was one more who knew everything.
Surely Saint Winifred sometimes remembered and smiled, in her tranquil sleep in Gwytherin, even laughed when she roused to extend the sunrays of her grace to lift up a lame boy here in Shrewsbury.
And in a way this answer, like the first, was astonishingly appropriate, brandishing a secret truth and a paradox before a man who would have appreciated it to the full, but could not be let into the secret.
If his will was to tantalize and bewilder, why should not she take her own gentle revenge?
‘I am in the same case as you,’ said the abbot, and smiled.
‘I listen and labour to understand.
It may be that we must wait until all has been answered before hoping for enlightenment.
Shall we proceed, and wait for revelation?’
‘Willingly!’ said the earl, and turned to descend the three steps, the skirts of his crimson surcoat swirling around him.
From this angle, stepping down with the altar candles behind him, his high shoulder and the bulge behind it scarcely broke the symmetry of a body beautifully compact and admirably handled.
He withdrew at once to a gracious distance, not to disturb in any way the privacy and composure of the next contender, and his two young squires, well trained to be equally unobtrusive in attendance, drew in silently at either shoulder.
If he plays games to while away the tedious time, thought Cadfael, he plays them by noble rules, even those he makes up as he goes.
Hugh liked him from the first; and so do I like him, I like him very well.
And it entered his mind uninvited to wonder about the strangeness of human relationships.
What has such a man as this, he marvelled, to do with our loud, headlong, candid Stephen, who charges at events like a stamping bull?
For that matter, now that I see them for this moment so clearly, what has Hugh to do with the king, either?
Must not all such thinking souls be growing hideously weary with this long contention that makes no progress, that wastes men and harvests and the very wellbeing of the land?
Weary not only with Stephen, but also, perhaps even more, with this lady who sinks her teeth into empire and will not let go.
Somewhere there must be an inheritor of more promise, a hint before sunrise of a sun fit to disperse doubts like morning mists, and dazzle out of our vision both king and empress, with all the confusion, chaos and waste they have visited upon this land.
‘Father Herluin,’ said Radulfus, ‘will you assay?’
Herluin advanced upon the altar very slowly, as though these few paces, and the climbing of the three steps, must be utilized to the full for prayer, and passionate concentration on this single effort which would make or break for him a dear ambition.
In his long, pale lantern face his eyes burned darkly, like half-consumed embers.
For all his eagerness, when he came to the testing time he hesitated to touch, and two or three times poised his hands over the book, only to withdraw them again from contact.
An interesting study, this, of the varying techniques with which different men approached the moment of truth.
Robert Bossu had stood the book briskly on edge between his flattened palms, parted the leaves with both thumbs, opened them fully, and poised a finger wherever chance guided it.
Herluin, when finally he did touch, touched as if the vellum might burn him, timidly and convulsively, and even when he had the book open, for better or worse, agonized a few moments over where to choose on the page, shifting from recto to verso and back again before settling.
Once committed, he drew breath hard, and stooped nearsightedly to see what fate had granted him.
And swallowed, and was silent.
‘Read!’
Radulfus prompted him delicately.
There was no help for it.
His voice grated, but he spoke out clearly, perhaps even a little louder than was natural because it cost him such an effort to get it out at all.
‘It is the thirteenth chapter of Luke, the twenty-seventh verse.
‘I tell you, I know you not, whence you came.
Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity…’'
He lifted his head, his face grey with outrage, and firmly closed  the book before he looked round at all the carefully respectful countenances ringing him round like the pales of a fence, a barrier through which he found the only dignified way, at someone else's expense.
‘I have been shamefully beguiled and deceived.
She shows me my fault, that ever I trusted a liar and thief.
It was not with her will, not at her command, that Brother Tutilo — dare I even call him Brother still?— stole her away, and worse, in the blackness of his offence brought another innocent soul into sin, if not to his death.
His crime is blasphemy no less than theft, for from the beginning he lied impiously, saying he had his revelation from the saint, and he has covered his offence ever since with lie after lie.
Now she has clearly given me to know his villainy, and shown that all this wandering since her abduction she has indeed herself devised, to return to this place from which she was taken.
Father Abbot, I withdraw with grief and humility.
Such pity as she well may have felt for Ramsey in its distress, he has traduced and despoiled, and here we have no rights.
I acknowledge it with tears, and pray her pardon!’
For himself!
Certainly not for that hapless lad sleeping in a narrow stone cell at this moment.
Small pardon there would be for him if Herluin had his way.
Every pang of this humiliation would be visited upon Tutilo, as every particle of guilt was being visited upon him now, the more successfully to extricate Herluin, innocent and devout, only wickedly deceived, with nothing to repent but his too profound faith.
‘Wait!’ said Abbot Radulfus.
‘Make no judgements yet.
It is possible to deceive oneself, no less than others.
In the first anger no man should be condemned.
And the saint has not yet spoken to us of Shrewsbury.’
Only too true, reflected Cadfael, for she may well have some strictures to level at us, no less than at Ramsey.
How if she chooses this moment and this audience to make it known that she visits us only out of pure charity, that what lies in her handsome reliquary is in reality the body of the young man who committed murder to secure her for Shrewsbury, and himself died by accident, in circumstances that made it vital he should vanish?
A worse offence than Tutilo committed in a similar cause, to win her for Ramsey.
In laying her reverently back in the grave from which he had taken her, and sealing the murderer in her abandoned coffin, Cadfael had been and still was convinced that he did her will, and restored her to the resting-place she desired.
But was it not possible that Tutilo had believed just as sincerely?
The one venture the saint had just condemned.
Now to put the other to the test!
Lucky for Prior Robert that this moment at least he approached in absolute innocence.
But I, thought Cadfael, on thorns, may be about to pay in full for all my sins.
Well, it was fair!
Prior Robert may have had some qualms concerning his own worthiness, though that was a weakness to which he seldom succumbed.
He ascended the steps of the altar very solemnly, and joined his hands before his face for a final convulsive moment of prayer, his eyes closed.
Indeed, he kept them closed as he opened the Gospels, and planted his long index finger blindly upon the page.
By the length of the pause that followed, before he opened his eyes and looked dazedly down to see what fate had granted him, he went in some devout fear of his deserving.
Who would ever have expected the pillar of the house to shake?
The balance was instantly restored.
Robert erected his impressive silvery head, and a wave of triumphant colour swept up from his long throat and flushed his cheeks.
In a voice hesitant between exultation and awe he read out: ‘Saint John, the fifteenth chapter and the sixteenth verse: ‘Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.’’
All round the assembly of brothers waiting and watching with held breath, the great shudder and sigh passed like a gust of wind, or the surging of a wave up the shore, and then, like the shattering of the wave in spray, disintegrated into a whispering, stirring murmur as they shifted, nudged one another, shook with relief and a suggestion of hysterical emotion between laughter and tears.
Abbot Radulfus stiffened instantly into rigid authority, and lifted a sobering hand to still the incipient storm.
‘Silence!
Respect this holy place, and abide all fates with composure, as mankind should.
Father Prior, come down to us now.
All that was needful has been done.’
Prior Robert was still so blind that he almost stumbled on the steps, but recovered himself with aristocratic dignity and by the time he reached the tiles of the floor was his complacent official self again.
Whether the experience of religious dread had left any permanent effect would  have to be left to the test of time.
Cadfael thought, probably not.
It had left at any rate a forcible temporary effect upon his own more cautious but equally human complacency.
For a while he would be treading very softly, for awe of this little Welsh saint's indignation and forbearance.
‘Father,’ said Prior Robert, his voice again all measured and mellifluous resonance, ‘I have delivered faithfully the lot committed to me.
Now these fates can be interpreted.’
Oh, yes, he was himself again, he would be trailing this glory after him for as long as it still shed lustre.
But at least for those few moments he had shown as human, like other men.
No one who had seen would quite forget it.
‘Father Abbot,’ said the earl handsomely, ‘I withdraw all claim.
I surrender even the question as to how I can be standing here in her virgin company, and still be told that where she is I may never come.
Though I confess there is probably a story there that I should very much like to hear.’
Yes, he was very quick, as Cadfael had realized, paradox was pleasure to him.
‘The field is yours, out and out,’ said Robert Bossu heartily.
‘Clearly this blessed lady has brought herself home again without aid from me or anyone.
I give you joy of her!
And I would not for the world meddle with her plans, though I am proud that she has consented on the way to visit me for a while.
With your leave, I will make an offering by way of acknowledgement.’
‘I think,’ said Radulfus, ‘that Saint Winifred might be pleased if you think fit to make your offering, in her honour, to the abbey of Ramsey.
We are all brothers of  one Order.
And even if she has been put out by human errors and offences, I am sure she will not hold that against a brother-house in distress.’
They were both of them talking in these high and ceremonious terms, Cadfael suspected, in order to smooth away the first sore moments, and give Sub-Prior Herluin time to master his chagrin, and achieve a graceful retreat.
He had swallowed the worst of his gall, although with a gulp that almost choked him.
He was capable of acknowledging defeat with decent civility.
But nothing, nothing would soften his mind now against that hapless youngster held safely under lock and key to await his penance.
‘I feel shame,’ said Herluin tightly, ‘for myself and for my abbey, that we have nourished and sheltered and trusted in a very false aspirant to brotherhood.
My abbey I dare excuse.
Myself I cannot.
Surely I should have been better armed against the deceits of the devil.
Blind and foolish I confess myself, but I never willed evil against this house, and I abase myself in acknowledgement of the wrong done, and ask forgiveness.
His lordship of Leicester has spoken also for me.
The field is yours, Father Abbot.
Receive all its honour and all its spoils.’
There are ways of abasing oneself — though Prior Robert would perhaps have managed them with better grace had things gone otherwise!— as a means of exalting oneself.
Those two were well matched, though Robert, being somewhat more nobly born, had the more complete mastery, and perhaps rather less burning malice when bested.
‘If all are content,’ said Radulfus, finding these  exchanges growing not merely burdensome, but long-winded, ‘I would desire to close this assembly with prayer, and so disperse.’
They were still on their knees after the last Amen, when a sudden gust of wind arose, blowing past the nave altar and into the choir, as though from the south door, though there had been no sound of the latch lifting or the door creaking.
Everyone felt it, and the air being still pregnant with prophecy and contention, everyone started and pricked attentive ears, and several opened their eyes to look round towards the source of this abrupt wind from the outer world.
Brother Rhun, Saint Winifred's devoted cavalier, turned his beautiful head instantly to look towards her altar, his first jealous care being always for her service and worship.
High and clear through the silence he cried aloud: ‘Father, look to the altar!
The pages of the Gospels are turning!’
Prior Robert, descending from his high place still blinded, with his triumph swirling about him in clouds of glory, had left the Gospels open where his victory had been written, Saint John, the last of the evangelists, far on in the volume.
All eyes opened now to stare, and indeed the pages of the book were turning back, slowly, hesitantly, lingering erect only to slide onward, sometimes a single leaf, sometimes a stronger breath riffling several over together, almost as though fingers lifted and guided them, even fluttered them past in haste.
The Gospels were turning back, out of John into Luke, out of Luke into Mark…and beyond…
They were all  watching in fascination, hardly noticing, hardly understanding, that the abrupt wind from the south door had fallen into total stillness, and still, leaf by leaf now and slowly and deliberately, the leaves kept turning.
They rose, they hung almost still, and gradually they declined and were flattened into the bulk of the later books of the Evangel.
For by now they must be in Matthew.
And now the pace slowed, leaf by leaf rose, quivered erect, and slowly descended.
The last to turn settled lightly, not quite flat to its fellows, but then lay still, not a breath left of the wind that had fluttered the pages.
For some moments no one stirred.
Then Abbot Radulfus rose and went to the altar.
What spontaneous air had written must be of more than natural significance.
He did not touch, but stood looking down at the page.
‘Come, some of you.
Let there be witnesses more than myself.’
Prior Robert was at the foot of the steps in a moment, tall enough to see and read without mounting.
Cadfael came close on the other side.
Herluin held off, too deeply sunk in his own turmoil of mind to be much concerned about further wonders, but the earl drew close in candid curiosity, craning to see the spread pages.
On the left side the leaf rose a little, gently swaying from its own tensions, for there was now no breath of wind.
The right-hand page lay still, and in the spine a few white petals lay, and a single hard bud of blackthorn, the white blossom just breaking out of the dark husk.
‘I have not touched,’ said Radulfus, ‘for this is no  asking of mine or any here.
I take the omen as grace.
And I accept this bud as the finger of truth thus manifested.
It points me to the verse numbered twenty-one, and the line is: ‘And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death.’’
There was a long, awed silence.
Prior Robert put out a reverent hand to touch the tiny drift of loose petals, and the one bursting bud that had lodged in the spine.
‘Father Abbot, you were not with us in Gwytherin, or you would recognize this wonder.
When the blessed saint visited us in the church there, as before in vision, she came with showers of may-blossom.
The season is not yet ripe for the hawthorn flowers, but these…these she sends in their place, again the whiteness of her purity.
It is a direct sign from Saint Winifred.
What she confides to us we are bound by our office to heed.’
A stir and a murmur passed round the watching brothers, and softly they drew in more closely about the wonder.
Somewhere among them someone drew breath sharp and painful as a sob, hurriedly suppressed.
‘It is a matter of interpretation,’ said Radulfus gravely.
‘How are we to understand such an oracle?’
‘It speaks of death,’ said the earl practically.
‘And there has been a death.
The threat of it, as I understand, hangs over a young man of your Order.
The shadow over all.
This oracle speaks of a brother as the instrument of death, which fits with the case as it is yet known.
But it speaks also of a brother as the victim.
The victim was not a brother.
How is this to be understood?’
‘If she has indeed pointed the way,’ said the abbot firmly, ‘we cannot but follow it.
‘Brother’ she says, and if we believe her word, a brother it was whose death was planned by a brother.
The meaning that word has within these walls the saint knows as well as we.
If any man among you has a thought to share upon this most urgent matter, speak now.’
Into the uneasy silence, while brother looked most earnestly at brother, and wondered, and sought or evaded the eyes of his neighbours, Brother Cadfael said: ‘Brother Abbot, I have thoughts to share that never visited me until this morning, but are become very relevant now.
The night of this murder was dark, not only as to the hour, but also the weather, for cloud was low, and there was a drizzling rain.
The place where Aldhelm's body was found is within close woodland, untended, on a narrow path, where the only light would come from the open sky above the track.
Enough to show a shape, an outline, to a man waiting, and with eyes accustomed to the dark.
And the shape Aldhelm would present was that of a man young by his step and pace, in a dun-coloured cloak wrapped about him against the rain, and with the pointed hood drawn up over his head.
Father, how is that to be distinguished, in such conditions, from a Benedictine brother in dark habit and cowl, if he be young and stepping out briskly to get out of the rain?’
‘If I read you rightly,’ said Radulfus, having searched Cadfael's face, and found it in very grave earnest, ‘you are saying that the young man was attacked in mistake for a Benedictine brother.’
‘It accords with what is written here in the fates,’ said Cadfael.
‘And with the night's obscurity, I grant you.
Are you further suggesting that the intended quarry was Brother Tutilo?
That he was not the hunter, but the hunted?’
‘Father, that thought is in my mind.
In build and years the two matched well enough.
And as all men know, he was out of the enclave that night, with leave, though leave he got by deceit.
It was known on what path he would be returning — or at least, according to what he had led us all to believe.
And, Father, be it admitted, he had done much to raise up enemies to himself in this house.’
‘Brother turning upon brother…’ said the abbot heavily.
‘Well, we are fallible men like the rest of mankind, and hatred and evil are not out of our scope.
But, then, how to account for this second and deadly brother?
There was no other out of the enclave upon any errand that night.’
‘None that we know of.
But it is not difficult,’ said Cadfael, ‘to become unnoticed for a while.
There are ways in and out for any who are determined to pass.’
The abbot met his eyes without a smile; he was always in command of his countenance.
For all that, there was not much that went on in this household that Radulfus did not know.
There had been times when Cadfael had both departed and returned by night, without passing the gatehouse, on urgent matters in which he found justification for absence.
Of the instruments of good works listed in the Rule of Saint Benedict, second only to the  love of God came the love of humankind, and Cadfael reverenced the Rule above the detailed and meticulous rules.
‘No doubt you speak out of long experience,’ said the abbot.
‘Certainly that is true.
However, we know of no such defector on that night.
Unless you have knowledge that I have not?’
‘No, Father, I have none.’
‘If I may venture,’ said Earl Robert deprecatingly, ‘why should not the oracle that has spoken of two brothers be asked to send us a further sign?
We are surely required to follow this trail as best we can.
A name might be too much to ask, but there are other ways, as this blessed lady has shown us, of making all things plain.’
Gradually, almost stealthily, all the brothers had crept out of their stalls, and gathered in a circle about this altar and the group debating at its foot.
They did not draw too close, but hovered within earshot of all that was said.
And somewhere among them, not readily to be located, there was a centre of desperate but controlled unease, a disquiet that caused the air within the choir to quake, with a rapid vibration of disquiet and dread, like a heartbeat driven into the fluttering panic of a bird's wings.
Cadfael felt it, but thought it no more than the tension of the sortes .
And that was enough.
He himself was beginning to ache as though stretched on the rack, with the worst still to come.
It was high time to end this, and release all these overcharged souls into the moist, chilly, healing air of early March.
‘If in some sort the brothers all stand accused by this  present word,’ said Earl Robert helpfully, ‘it is they, the humbler children of the household, who have the best right to ask for a name.
If you see fit, Father Abbot, let one of them appeal for a judgement.
How else can all the rest be vindicated?
Justice is surely due to the innocent, by even stronger right than retribution to the guilty.’
If he was still amusing himself, thought Cadfael, he was doing it with the eloquent dignity of archbishops and all the king's judges.
In jest or earnest, such a man would not wish to leave this human and more than human mystery unresolved.
He would thrust and persuade it as far as he could towards an ending.
And he had a willing listener in Prior Robert, his namesake.
Now that the prior was assured of retaining his saint, together with all the lustre accruing to him as her discoverer and translator, he wanted everything tidied up and ended, and these troublesome visitors from Ramsey off his premises, before they contrived some further mischief.
‘Father,’ he said insinuatingly, ‘that is fair and just.
May we do so?’
‘Very well,’ said Radulfus.
‘In your hands!’
The prior turned to cast a sweeping glance over the silent array of monks, watching him wide-eyed in anticipation and awe.
The name he called was the inevitable name.
He even frowned at having to look for his acolyte.
‘Brother Jerome, I bid you undertake this testing on behalf of all.
Come forth and make this assay.’
And indeed, where was Brother Jerome, and why had no word been heard from him and nothing seen of him all this time?
When, until now, had he ever been far from  the skirts of Prior Robert's habit, attendant with ready flattery and obsequious assent to every word that fell from his patron's lips.
Now that Cadfael came to think of it, less than usual had been seen and heard of Jerome for the past few days, ever since the evening when he had been discovered on his bed, quaking and sick with bellyaches and headaches, and been soothed to sleep by Cadfael's stomachics and syrups.
A furtive swirl of movement troubled the rear ranks of the assembled household, and cast up Brother Jerome from his unaccustomed retirement, emerging through the ranks without eagerness, almost reluctantly.
He shuffled forward with bent head and arms folded tightly about his body as if he felt a mortal chill enclosing him.
His face was greyish and pinched, his eyes, when he raised them, inflamed.
He looked ill and wizened.
I should have made a point of following up his sickness, thought Cadfael, touched, but I thought he, of all people, would make good sure he got all the treatment he needed.
That was all that he had in mind, as Prior Robert, bewildered and displeased by what seemed to him very grudging acceptance of a duty that should have conveyed honour upon the recipient, waved Jerome imperiously to the altar.
‘Come, we are waiting.
Open prayerfully.’
The abbot had gently brushed the petals of blackthorn from the spine, and closed the Gospels.
He stood aside to make way for Jerome to mount.
Jerome crept to the foot of the steps, and there halted, baulked, rather, like a startled horse, drew hard breath  and assayed to mount, and then suddenly threw up his arms to cover his face, fell on his knees with a lamentable, choking cry, and bowed himself against the stone of the steps.
From under the hunched shoulders and clutching arms a broken voice emerged in a stammering howl a stray dog might have launched into the night after company in its loneliness.
‘I dare not…
I dare not…
She would strike me dead if I dared…
No need, I submit myself, I own my terrible sin!
I went out after the thief, I waited for him to return, and God pity me, I killed that innocent man!’
Chapter Ten
IN THE horrified hush that followed, Prior Robert, guiding hand still uplifted and stricken motionless, was momentarily turned to stone, his face a mask of utter incredulity.
That a creature of his should fall into mortal sin, and that of a violent kind, was astonishment enough, but that this pliable mortal should ever undertake personal action of any kind came as an even greater shock.
And so it did to Brother Cadfael, though for him it was equally a shock of enlightenment.
This poor soul, pallid and puffy on his bed after desperate vomiting, sick and quiet and unregarded ever since, spent and ulcered mind and spirit by what he had so mistakenly undertaken, Jerome was for the first time wholly pitiful.
Brother Rhun, youngest and freshest and the flower of the flock, went after his nature, asking no leave, and kneeled beside Jerome, circling his quaking shoulders with an embracing arm, and lifting the hapless penitent closer into his hold before he looked up confidently into the abbot's face.
‘Father, whatever else, he is ill.
Suffer me to stay!’
‘Do after your kind,’ said Radulfus, looking down at the pair with a face almost as blanched as the prior's, ‘and so must I. Jerome,’he said, with absolute and steely authority, ‘look up and face me.’
Too late now to withdraw this confession into privacy, even had that been the abbot's inclination, for it had been spoken out before all the brothers, and as members of a body they had the right to share in the cure of all that here was curable.
They stood their ground, mute and attentive, though they came no nearer.
The half-circle had spread almost into a circle.
Jerome had listened, and was a little calmed by the tone.
The voice of command roused him to make an effort.
He had shed the first and worst load, and as soon as he lifted his head and made to rise on his knees, Rhun's arm lifted and sustained him.
A distorted face appeared, and gradually congealed into human lineaments.
‘Father, I obey,’ said Jerome.
‘I want confession.
I want penance.
I have sinned most grievously.’
‘Penance in confession,’ said the abbot, ‘is the beginning of wisdom.
Whatever grace can do, it cannot follow denial.
Tell us what it is you did, and how it befell.’
The lame recital went on for some time, while Jerome, piteously small and shrunken and wretched, kneeled in Rhun's supple, generous arm, with that radiant, silent face beside him, to point searing differences.
The scope of humanity is terrifyingly wide.
‘Father, when it became known that Saint Winifred's relics had been loaded with the timber for Ramsey, when there was no longer any doubt of how it came there — for  we knew, every man of us, that there was none, for who else could it have been?— then I was burning with anger against the thief who had dared such sacrilege against her, and such a gross offence against our house.
And when I heard that he had asked and been given leave to go forth to Longner that night, I feared he meant to escape us, either by absence, or even by flight, having seen justice might overtake him yet.
I could not bear it that he should go free.
I confess it, I hated him!
But, Father, I never meant to kill, when I slipped out alone, and went to wait for him on the path by which I knew he must return.
I never intended violence.
I hardly know what I meant to do — confront him, accuse him, bring it home to him that hellfire awaited him at the reckoning if he did not confess his sin and pay the price of it now.’
He paused to draw painful breath, and the abbot asked: ‘You went empty-handed?’
A pertinent question, though Jerome in his throes failed to understand it.
‘Surely, Father!
What should I want to take with me?’
‘No matter!
Go on.’
‘Father, what more can there be?
I thought, when I heard him coming down through the bushes, it could be no one but Tutilo.
I never knew by what road the other man would come; for all I knew he had already been, and gone again, and all in vain, as the thief intended.
And this one — So jauntily he came, striding along in the dark, whistling profane songs.
Offence piled upon offence, so lightly to take everything mortal…
I could not endure it.
I picked up a fallen branch, and as he passed I struck him on the head.
I struck him down,’ moaned Jerome, ‘and he fell across the path, and the cowl fell back from his head.
He never moved hand again!
I went close, I kneeled, and I saw his face then.
Even in the dark I saw enough.
This was not my enemy, not the saint's enemy, not the thief!
And I had killed him!
I fled him then…
Sick and shaking, I fled him and hid myself, but every moment since he has pursued me.
I confess my grievous sin, I repent it bitterly, I lament the day and the hour ever I raised hand against an innocent man.
But I am his murderer!’
He bowed himself forward into his arms and hid his face.
Muted sounds emerged between his tearing sobs, but no more articulate words.
And Cadfael, who had opened his mouth to continue the story where this miserable avenger had left it, as quickly closed his lips again upon silence.
Jerome had surely told all he knew, and if the burden he was carrying was even more than his due, yet he could be left to carry it a while longer.
‘Brother shall deliver up brother to death’ could be said to be true of Jerome, for if he had not killed he had indeed delivered Aldhelm to his death.
But if what had followed was also the work of a brother, then the murderer might be present here.
Let well alone!
Let him go away content, satisfied that this solution offered in terrible good faith by Jerome had been accepted without question by all, and that he himself was quite secure.
Men who believe themselves out of all danger may grow careless, and make some foolish move that can betray them.
In private, yes, for the abbot's ear alone, truth must be told.
Jerome had done foully, but not so foully as he himself and all here  believed.
Let him pay his dues in full, but not for someone else's colder, viler crime.
‘This is a very sombre and terrible avowal,’ said Abbot Radulfus, slowly and heavily, ‘not easily to be understood or assessed, impossible, alas, to remedy.
I require, and surely so do all here, time for much prayer and most earnest thought, before I can begin to do right or justice as due.
Moreover, this is a matter outside my writ, for it is murder, and the king's justice has the right to knowledge, if not immediately to possession, of the person of a confessed murderer.’
Jerome was past all resistance, whatever might have been urged or practised against him.
Emptied and drained, he submitted to all.
The disquiet and consternation he had set up among the brothers would go on echoing and re-echoing for some time, while he who had caused it had recoiled into numbness and exhaustion.
‘Father,’ he said meekly, ‘I welcome whatever penance may be laid upon me.
I want no light absolution.
My will is to pay in full for all my sins.’
Of his extreme misery at this moment there could be no doubt.
When Rhun in his kindness lent an arm to raise him from his knees, he hung heavily still, clinging to his desperate humility.
‘Father, let me go from here.
Let me be desolate and hidden from men's eyes…’
‘Solitude you shall have,’ said the abbot, ‘but I forbid despair.
It is too soon for counsel or judgement, but never too soon or too late for prayer, if penitence is truly felt.’
And to the prior he said, without taking his eyes from  the broken creature on the tiles of the floor, like a crushed and crumpled bird: ‘Take him in charge.
See him lodged.
And now go, all of you, take comfort and pursue your duties.
At all times, in all circumstances, our vows are still binding.’
Prior Robert, still stonily silent and shocked out of his normal studied dignity, led away his shattered clerk to the second of the two penitentiary cells; and it was the first time, as far as Cadfael could recall, that the two had ever been occupied at the same time.
Sub-Prior Richard, decent, comfortable, placid man, marshalled the other ranks out to their ordinary labours, and to the refectory shortly afterwards for dinner, and by his own mildly stupid calm had calmed his flock into a perfectly normal appetite by the time they went to wash their hands before the meal.
Herluin had sensibly refrained from playing any part in the affair, once it turned towards the partial restoration of Ramsey's credit and the grievous embarrassment of Shrewsbury.
He would welcome the earl's promised offering gladly, and withdraw in good order to his own monastery, though what he would visit on Tutilo when he got him safely back there might be dreadful to think of.
He was not a man to forget and forgive.
As for the withdrawal from the battlefield of Robert Bossu, that restless, conscientious, subtle and efficient man, it was a model of consideration and tact, as always, with a quiet word to Abbot Radulfus, and a sharp glance at his two squires, who understood him at the lift of an  eyebrow or the flash of a smile.
He knew when to make use of his status, and when and how to temper its brilliance and make himself unobtrusive among a multitude.
Brother Cadfael waited his opportunity to draw close to the abbot's shoulder as he left the choir.
‘Father, a word!
There is more to be added to this story, though not publicly, perhaps, not yet.’
‘He has not lied, as well as murdered?’ said the abbot, without turning his head.
His voice was grim, but pitched no further than Cadfael's ear.
‘Neither the one nor the other, Father, if what I believe is true.
He has told all he knows, and all he thinks he knows, and I am sure he has kept nothing back.
But there are things he does not know, and the knowledge will somewhat better a case which even so is still black enough.
Give me audience alone, and then judge what should be done.’
Radulfus had halted in mid-stride, though still not looking round.
He watched the last of the brothers slip away still awed and silent through the cloister, and followed with a glance the swirl of Robert Bossu's crimson skirts as he crossed the court with his two attendants at his heels.
‘You say we have as yet only heard the half — and the worse half of all that is to be told?
The young man is coffined decently, his own priest takes him hence today to Upton, for burial among his people.
I would not wish to delay his departure.’
‘There is no need,’ said Cadfael.
‘He has told me all he had to tell.
I would not for the world keep him from  his rest.
But what I have to add, though I had the proofs of it from his body, and from the place where he was found, I have but now understood clearly.
All that I saw was seen also by Hugh Beringar, but after what has come to light this morning these details fall into place.’
‘In that case,’ said Radulfus, after some thought, ‘before we go further, I think Hugh should join us.
I need his counsel, as he may need yours and mine both.
The thing happened beyond our walls, and is not within my jurisdiction, though the offender may be.
Church and State must respect and assist each other, even in these fractured and sorry times.
For if we are two, justice should be one.
Cadfael, will you go into the town, and ask Hugh to come into conference here this afternoon?
Then we will hear all that you may have to tell.’
‘Very willingly I will go,’ said Cadfael.
‘And how,’ demanded Hugh over his midday table, ‘are we to take this chapter of wonders you've been unfolding this morning?
Am I to believe in it, that every response should come so neatly, as if you had been through the Gospels and marked all the places to trap each enquirer?
Are you sure you did not?’
Cadfael shook his head decisively.
‘I do not meddle with my saint.
I played fair, and so, I swear, did they all, for there was no mark, no leaf notched for a guide, when I handled the book before any other came near.
I opened it, and I got my answer, and it set me thinking afresh and seeing clearly where I had formerly been blind.
And how to account for it I do not know, unless indeed it was she who spoke.’
‘And all the oracles that followed?
Ramsey not only rejected but denounced…
That came a little hard on Herluin, surely!
And with Earl Robert the saint condescended to tease him with a paradox!
Well, I won't say but that was fair enough, a pity he has not the key he needs to read it, it would give him pleasure.
And then, to Shrewsbury —‘Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you.’
I take that as a warning rather than an acknowledgement.
She chose you, and she can as well abandon you if she chooses, and you had better be on your guard in future, for she won't put up with another such turmoil upsetting her established rule.
Meant especially for Prior Robert, I should hazard, who indeed thinks he chose her and ranks as her proprietor.
I hope he took the allusion?’
‘I doubt it,’ said Cadfael.
‘He wore it like a halo.’
‘And then finally, Cadfael, for the leaves to turn of themselves, and open again at that same place.
Too many miracles for one morning!’
‘Miracles,’ said Cadfael somewhat sententiously, ‘may be simply divine manipulation of ordinary circumstances.
Why not?
For as to the last oracle, the Gospels had been left open, and there was a wind blew through from the south doorway and ruffled the pages over, turning back from John to Matthew.
It's true that no one came in, but I think someone must have lifted the latch and set the door ajar, and then after all drawn back and closed it again, hearing the voices within and not wanting to interrupt.
No mistake about the wind, everyone felt it.
And then, you see, it halted where it did because there were some petals and fragments from the blackthorn I had  been handling fallen into the spine there, shaken out of my sleeve or my hair when I closed the book.
Such a slight obstruction was not enough to affect the taking of the sortes , when they were opening the book with ceremony, both hands parting the leaves and a finger pointing the line.
But when the wind turned the leaves, the blackthorn flowers were enough to arrest the movement at that place.
Yet even so, dare we call that chance?
And now that I come to think back,’ said Cadfael, shaking his head between doubt and conviction, ‘that wind that blew in was gone before ever the page settled.
I watched the last one turn, slowly, halting before it was smoothed down.
The air above the altar was quite still.
The candles were stark erect, never a tremor.’
Aline had sat throughout this colloquy listening attentively to every word, but contributing none of her own.
There was about her something distant and mysterious, Cadfael thought, as if a part of her being was charmed away into some private and pleasant place, even while her blue eyes dwelt upon her husband and his friend with sharp intelligence, following the argument back and forth with a kind of indulgent and amused affection, appropriate to a matriarch watching her children.
‘My lady,’ said Hugh, catching her eye and breaking into a resigned grin, ‘my lady, as usual, is making fun of both of us.’
‘No,’ said Aline, suddenly serious, ‘it is only that the step from perfectly ordinary things into the miraculous seems to me so small, almost accidental, that I wonder why it astonishes you at all, or why you trouble to reason  about it.
If it were reasonable it could not be miraculous, could it?’
In the abbot's parlour they found not only Radulfus, but Robert of Leicester waiting for them.
As soon as the civil greetings were over the earl with his nicely judged courtesy made to withdraw.
‘You have business here which is out of my writ and competence, and I would not wish to complicate the affair for you.
The lord abbot here has been good enough to admit me to his confidence so far as is appropriate, since I was a witness of what happened this morning, but now you have cause to enquire further, as I understand.
I have lost my small claim to the saint,’ said Robert Bossu, with a flashing smile and a shrug of his high shoulder, ‘and should be about taking my leave here.’
‘My lord,’ said Hugh heartily, ‘the king's peace, such as it is and as we manage to maintain it, is very much your business, and your experience in it is longer than mine.
If the lord abbot agrees, I hope you will stay and give us the benefit of your judgement.
There's matter to assess concerning murder.
Every man's business, having a life to keep or lose.’
‘Stay with us!’ said Radulfus.
‘Hugh is right, we need all the good counsel we can get.’
‘And I have as much human curiosity in me as the next man,’ owned the earl, and willingly sat down again.
‘The abbot tells me there is more to add to what we witnessed here this morning.
I take it, sir, you have been informed, as far as the tale yet carries us?’
‘Cadfael has told me,’ said Hugh, ‘how the sortes went, and of Brother Jerome's confession.
He assures me we both, from what he and I saw on the spot, can go beyond what Jerome himself knows.’
Cadfael settled himself beside Hugh on the cushioned bench against the abbot's dark panelling.
Outside the window the light was still full and clear, for the days were drawing out.
Spring was not far away when the spiny mounds of blackthorn along the headlands of the fields turned from black to white, like drifts of snow.
‘Brother Jerome has told truth, the whole truth as he knows it, but it is not the whole.
You saw him, he was in no case and no mind to hold anything back, nor has he done so.
Recall, Father, what he said, how he stood and waited.
So he did, we found the place, just withdrawn into the bushes by the path, where he had trampled uneasily and flattened the grass.
How he snatched up a fallen branch, when the young man came down the path, and struck him with it, and he fell senseless, and the hood fell back from his head.
All true, we found — Hugh will bear me out — the branch lying where he had cast it aside.
It was partly rotten, and had broken when he struck with it, but it was sound enough and heavy enough to stun.
And the body lay as Jerome described, across the path, the hood fallen from his head and face.
And Jerome says that on realizing what he had done, and believing that what he had done was murder, he fled, back here into hiding.
So he did, and sick indeed he was, for Brother Richard found him grey and shaking on his bed, when he failed to attend at Compline.
But he never said word but  that he was ill, as plainly he was, and I gave him medicine.
In confession now he has spoken of but one blow, and I am convinced he struck but once.’
‘Certainly,’ said Radulfus, thoughtfully frowning, ‘he said no word of any further assault.
I do not think he was holding anything back.’
‘No, Father, neither do I. He has gone creeping about us like a very sick man since that night, in horror of his own act.
Now that one blow is borne out by the examination I made of Aldhelm's head.
At the back it was stained with a little blood, and in the rough texture of the wool I found fragments of tinder from the broken branch.
The blow to the back of his head might lay him senseless a short while, but certainly had not broken his skull, and could not have killed him.
Hugh, what do you say?’
‘I say his head would have ached fiercely after it,’ said Hugh at once, ‘but nothing worse.
More, it would not have left him out of his wits above a quarter of an hour at the longest.
The worst Jerome could do, perhaps, but not enough to do his quarry much harm.’
‘So I say also.
And he says he struck, looked close and knew his error, and fled the place.
And I believe him.’
‘I doubt he had the hardihood left to lie,’ said the earl.
‘No very bold villain at the best of times, I should judge, and greatly in awe of the Gospel verdict today.
Yet he was sure he had killed.’
‘He fled in that terror,’ said Cadfael, ‘and the next he heard was that Tutilo had found the man dead, and so reported him.
What else should Jerome think?’
‘And in spite of doubts,’ the abbot reminded them wryly, ‘should not we still be thinking the same?
He who had begun so terrible an undertaking, how can we be sure he did not, after all, stay and finish it?’
‘We cannot be sure.
Not absolutely sure.
Not until we are sure of everything, and every detail is in the open.
But I think he has told us truly, so far as he knows truth.
For what followed was very different.
Hugh will remember, and bear out all I have to tell.’
‘I remember all too well,’ said Hugh.
‘A few paces lower down the path we found a pile of stones, long grown in there with mosses and lichens.
There is limestone cropping out on the ridge above, and in places it breaks through the thin ground cover even among the trees below.
In this heap the upper stone, though it was fitted carefully back into its bed, showed the sealing growths of moss disturbed and broken.
Heavy, a double handful when I raised it.
On the rough underside there was blood.
Quite hidden when the stone was in place, but present.
We brought the stone back with us to examine more closely.
It was certainly the instrument of death.
As Aldhelm's blood was blackening on the stone, so fragments of lichen and stone-dust were embedded in Aldhelm's wounds.
His head was crushed, and the stone coldly fitted back into its mound.
Unless a man looked close, it appeared undisturbed.
In a week or so weather and growth would have sealed up again all the raw edges that betrayed its use.
I ask myself, is this something of which Jerome could be capable?
To wrench up a heavy stone, batter in the head of a man lying senseless, and  then fit the stone coolly back into its former place?
I marvel he ever steeled himself to hit hard enough to stun, and to break the branch in the blow, even though it was partly rotted.
Remember that he says he then, in his fright at what he had done, went to peer at his victim, and found that he had struck down the wrong man.
With Aldhelm he had no quarrel.
And recollect, too, that no one had seen him, no one then knew he had ever left the enclave.
He did what any timorous man in a panic would do, ran away and hid himself within the community, where he was known and respected, and no one would ever guess he had attempted such a deed.’
‘So you are saying plainly,’ said Earl Robert, attentive and still, ‘that there were two murderers, at least in intent, and this wretched brother, once he knew he had struck down the wrong man, had no reason in the world to wish him further harm.’
‘That is what I believe,’ said Cadfael.
‘And you, my lord sheriff?’
‘By all I know of Jerome,’ said Hugh, ‘that is how I read it.’
‘Then, by the same token,’ said the earl, ‘you are saying that the man who finished the work was one who did have cause to want Aldhelm removed from the world, before he ever reached the abbey gatehouse.
Not Tutilo, but Aldhelm.
This one did know his man, and made sure he should never arrive.
For the shepherd's hood fell back when he fell.
This time there was no mistake made, he was known, and killed not for another, but for himself.’
There was a brief, deep silence, while they looked  at one another and weighed possibilities.
Then Abbot Radulfus said slowly: ‘It is logical.
The face was then exposed to view, though Jerome had to kneel and look closely, for the night was dark.
But if he could distinguish and recognize, so could the other.’
‘There is another point,’ said Hugh.
‘I doubt if Aldhelm would have lain helpless for more than a quarter of an hour from that blow on the head.
Whoever killed him, killed him within that time, for he had not stirred.
There was no sign of movement.
If his body jerked when he was struck again, and fatally, it was no more than an instant's convulsion.
The murderer must have been close.
Perhaps he witnessed the first assault.
Certainly he was on the spot within a very short time.’
And he asked sharply: ‘Father, have you released Tutilo?’
‘Not yet,’ said Radulfus, unsurprised.
Hugh's meaning was plain enough.
‘Perhaps there should be no haste.
You are right to remind us.
Tutilo came down that same path and found the dead man.
Unless — unless at that time he was still living.
Yes, it could still have been Tutilo who finished what Jerome had begun.’
‘He told me,’ said Hugh, ‘as I think he told you, that he did not know in the darkness who the dead man might be.
If the murderer had been before him, that would be truth.
Even by daylight we could not tell who he was until Cadfael turned up the whole side of his face to the light.
He told you, Father Abbot, how he put his hand upon the shattered left side of the dead man's head.
All that, everything about him, his bearing, his voice, the cold of horror that was on him, for he shook as he spoke  of it, all rang true to me.
And yet it may still be true that he came within minutes of Jerome's flight, found the man only stunned, stooped close and knew him, for then knowing was possible, and killed him, and only then took thought how to escape suspicion, and came running into the town, to me.’
‘Neither of the pair of them looks a likely case,’ said the earl consideringly, ‘to crush another man's head with a stone, though there's no saying what any man may do in extremes.
But then to have the wit and the cold blood to fit the stone back and cover the traces — that could be out of reach of most of us.
Well, you have them both under guard, there's no haste.’
‘There is a matter of timing,’ said Cadfael.
‘You told me, Hugh, what the priest's man of Upton said, how he parted from Aldhelm at Preston, while Aldhelm went on to the ferry.’
‘At about six they separated,’ Hugh confirmed positively.
‘From there, ferry and all, to the place where he was ambushed, would take him at the most half an hour.
The ferryman speaks to the same effect.
By half past six at the latest he reached the place where he died.
If you can show me plainly where Tutilo was until past that hour, we may strike him from the roll and forget him.’
